

ONLINE LIBRARY OF LIBERTY


A collection of scholarly works about individual liberty and free
markets. A project of Liberty Fund, Inc.



JOHN STUART MILL, _ON LIBERTY AND THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN (1879 ED.)_ [1859]


Edition used:

John Stuart Mill, _On Liberty and The Subjection of Women_ (New York:
Henry Holt and Co. 1879). http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/347

About this Title:

This is an interesting edition from 1879 which combines _On Liberty_
(1859) and _The Subjection of Women_ (1869), which were originally
published separately, in a single edition. Mill had been somewhat coy
about publishing _The Subjection of Women_ during his lifetime because
he feared the condemnation of his peers for daring to apply the general
notions of individual liberty which he had clearly spelled out in _On
Liberty_ to the particular case of women. So he withheld publication
until just before his death. It was left to an enterprising publisher
after the author’s death to recognize the connection between the two
works and to combine them in a new edition. This was something which was
not done again until the 1970s when the significance of Mill’s writings
on women were again appreciated.

Copyright information:

The text is in the public domain.

Fair use statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty
Fund, Inc. Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section
above, this material may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

Table of Contents:

-   ON LIBERTY
-   CONTENTS.
-   CHAPTER I.: introductory.
-   CHAPTER II.: of the liberty of thought and discussion.
-   CHAPTER III.: of individuality, as one of the elements of
    well-being.
-   CHAPTER IV.: of the limits to the authority of society over the
    individual.
-   CHAPTER V.: applications.
-   THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN.
-   CHAPTER I.
-   CHAPTER II.
-   CHAPTER III.
-   CHAPTER IV.
-   PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT CO.

Edition: current; Page: [none]
uniform library edition of the miscellaneous works of john stuart mill.

Tinted and laid paper, 8vo, $2.50 per vol. (except vol. cii Comte.)

Three Essays on Religion. 1 vol.

The Autobiography. 1 vol.

Dissertations and Discussions. 5 vols.

Considerations on Representative Government. 1 vol.

Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy. 2 vols.

On Liberty; The Subjection of Women. Both in 1 vol.

Comte’s Positive Philosophy. 1 vol. $1.50.

cheap editions.

Principles of Political Economy. 12mo, $2.50.

The Subjection of Women. 12mo, plain, $1.25.

memorial volume.

John Stuart Mill: His Life and Works.

Twelve sketches, as follows: His Life, by J. R. Fox Bourne; His Career
in the India House, by W. T. Thornton; His Moral Character, by Herbert
Spencer; His Botanical Studies, by Henry Turner; His Place as a Critic,
by W. Minto; His Work in Philosophy, by J. H. Levy; His Studies in
Morals and Jurisprudence, by W. A. Hunter; His Work in Political
Economy, by J. E. Cairnes; His Influence at the Universities, by Henry
Fawcett; His Influence as a Practical Politician, by Mrs. Fawcett; His
Relation to Positivism, by Frederic Harrison; His Position as a
Philosopher, by W. A. Hunter. 16mo, price, $1.00.

HENRY HOLT & CO., Publishers, N. Y.

Edition: current; Page: [none]
ON LIBERTY

THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN

by JOHN STUART MILL

NEW YORK

HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

1879

Edition: current; Page: [none] Edition: current; Page: [1]


ON LIBERTY

Edition: current; Page: [2] Edition: current; Page: [3]
The grand, leading principle, towards which every argument; unfolded in
these pages directly converges, is the absolute and essential importance
of human development in its richest diversity.

— Wilhelm von Humboldt: Sphere and Duties of Government.

Edition: current; Page: [4] Edition: current; Page: [5]
TO the beloved and deplored memory of her who was the inspirer, and in
part the author, of all that is best in my writings — the friend and
wife whose exalted sense of truth and right was my strongest incitement,
and whose approbation was my chief reward — I dedicate this volume. Like
all that I have written for many years, it belongs as much to her as to
me; but the work as it stands has had, in a very insufficient degree,
the inestimable advantage of her revision; some of the most important
portions having been reserved for a more careful reëxamination, which
they are now never destined to receive. Were I but capable of
interpreting to the world one half the great thoughts and noble feelings
which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of a greater
benefit to it, than is ever likely to arise from anything that I can
write, unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled wisdom.

Edition: current; Page: [6] Edition: current; Page: [7]


CONTENTS.

-   

    CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . page 9
-   

    CHAPTER II. OF THE LIBERTY OF THOUGHT AND DISCUSSION 33
-   

    CHAPTER III. OF INDIVIDUALITY, AS ONE OF THE ELEMENTS OF WELL-BEING
    . . . . . . . . . . . 100
-   

    CHAPTER IV. OF THE LIMITS TO THE AUTHORITY OF SOCIETY OVER THE
    INDIVIDUAL . . . . . . . . 133
-   

    CHAPTER V. APPLICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . 166

Edition: current; Page: [8] Edition: current; Page: [9]


CHAPTER I.: introductory.

THE subject of this Essay is not the so-called Liberty of the Will, so
unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of Philosophical
Necessity; but Civil, or Social Liberty: the nature and limits of the
power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the
individual. A question seldom stated, and hardly ever discussed, in
general terms, but which profoundly influences the practical
controversies of the age by its latent presence, and is likely soon to
make itself recognized as the vital question of the future. It is so far
from being new, that, in a certain sense, it has divided mankind, almost
from the remotest ages, but in the stage of progress into which the more
civilized portions of the species have now entered, it presents itself
under new conditions, and requires a different and more fundamental
treatment.

The struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous
feature in the portions of history with which we are earliest Edition:
current; Page: [10]familiar, particularly in that of Greece, Rome, and
England. But in old times this contest was between subjects, or some
classes of subjects, and the government. By liberty, was meant
protection against the tyranny of the political rulers. The rulers were
conceived (except in some of the popular governments of Greece) as in a
necessarily antagonistic position to the people whom they ruled. They
consisted of a governing One, or a governing tribe or caste, who derived
their authority from inheritance or conquest; who, at all events, did
not hold it at the pleasure of the governed, and whose supremacy men did
not venture, perhaps did not desire, to contest, whatever precautions
might be taken against its oppressive exercise. Their power was regarded
as necessary, but also as highly dangerous; as a weapon which they would
attempt to use against their subjects, no less than against external
enemies. To prevent the weaker members of the community from being
preyed upon by innumerable vultures, it was needful that there should be
an animal of prey stronger than the rest, commissioned to keep them
down. But as the king of the vultures would be no less bent upon preying
on the flock than any of the minor harpies, it was indispensable to be
in a perpetual attitude of defence against his beak and claws. The aim,
therefore, of patriots, was to set limits to the power which the ruler
should be suffered to exercise over Edition: current; Page: [11]the
community; and this limitation was what they meant by liberty. It was
attempted in two ways. First, by obtaining a recognition of certain
immunities, called political liberties or rights, which it was to be
regarded as a breach of duty in the ruler to infringe, and which, if he
did infringe, specific resistance, or general rebellion, was held to be
justifiable. A second, and generally a later expedient, was the
establishment of constitutional checks; by which the consent of the
community, or of a body of some sort supposed to represent its
interests, was made a necessary condition to some of the more important
acts of the governing power. To the first of these modes of limitation,
the ruling power, in most European countries, was compelled, more or
less, to submit. It was not so with the second; and to attain this, or
when already in some degree possessed, to attain it more completely,
became everywhere the principal object of the lovers of liberty. And so
long as mankind were content to combat one enemy by an other, and to be
ruled by a master, on condition of being guaranteed more or less
efficaciously against his tyranny, they did not carry their aspirations
beyond this point.

A time, however, came, in the progress of human affairs, when men ceased
to think it a necessity of nature that their governors should be an
independent power, opposed in interest to themselves. It appeared to
them much better Edition: current; Page: [12]that the various
magistrates of the State should be their tenants or delegates, revocable
at their pleasure. In that way alone, it seemed, could they have
complete security that the powers of government would never be abused to
their disadvantage. By degrees, this new demand for elective and
temporary rulers became the prominent object of the exertions of the
popular party, wherever any such party existed; and superseded, to a
considerable extent, the previous efforts to limit the power of rulers.
As the struggle proceeded for making the ruling power emanate from the
periodical choice of the ruled, some persons began to think that too
much importance had been attached to the limitation of the power itself.
That (it might seem) was a resource against rulers whose interests were
habitually opposed to those of the people. What was now wanted was, that
the rulers should be identified with the people; that their interest and
will should be the interest and will of the nation. The nation did not
need to be protected against its own will. There was no fear of its
tyrannizing over itself. Let the rulers be effectually responsible to
it, promptly removable by it, and it could afford to trust them with
power of which it could itself dictate the use to be made. Their power
was but the nation’s own power, concentrated, and in a form convenient
for exercise. This mode of thought, or rather perhaps of feeling, was
Edition: current; Page: [13]common among the last generation of European
liberalism, in the Continental section of which, it still apparently
predominates. Those who admit any limit to what a government may do,
except in the case of such governments as they think ought not to exist,
stand out as brilliant exceptions among the political thinkers of the
Continent. A similar tone of sentiment might by this time have been
prevalent in our own country, if the circumstances which for a time
encouraged it had continued unaltered.

But, in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons,
success discloses faults and infirmities which failure might have
concealed from observation. The notion, that the people have no need to
limit their power over themselves, might seem axiomatic, when popular
government was a thing only dreamed about, or read of as having existed
at some distant period of the past. Neither was that notion necessarily
disturbed by such temporary aberrations as those of the French
Revolution, the worst of which were the work of an usurping few, and
which, in any case, belonged, not to the permanent working of popular
institutions, but to a sudden and convulsive outbreak against
monarchical and aristocratic despotism. In time, however, a democratic
republic came to occupy a large portion of the earth’s surface, and made
itself felt as one of the most powerful members of the community of
Edition: current; Page: [14]nations; and elective and responsible
government became subject to the observations and criticisms which wait
upon a great existing fact. It was now perceived that such phrases as
“self-government,” and “the power of the people over themselves,” do not
express the true state of the case. The “people” who exercise the power,
are not always the same people with those over whom it is exercised, and
the “self-government” spoken of, is not the government of each by
himself, but of each by all the rest. The will of the people, moreover,
practically means, the will of the most numerous or the most active part
of the people; the majority, or those who succeed in making themselves
accepted as the majority: the people, consequently, may desire to
oppress a part of their number; and precautions are as much needed
against this, as against any other abuse of power. The limitation,
therefore, of the power of government over individuals, loses none of
its importance when the holders of power are regularly accountable to
the community, that is, to the strongest party therein. This view of
things, recommending itself equally to the intelligence of thinkers and
to the inclination of those important classes in European society to
whose real or supposed interests democracy is adverse, has had no
difficulty in establishing itself; and in political speculations “the
tyranny of the majority” is now generally included among the evils
against which society requires to be on its guard.

Edition: current; Page: [15]
Like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first, and is
still vulgarly, held in dread, chiefly as operating through the acts of
the public authorities. But reflecting persons perceived that when
society is itself the tyrant — society collectively, over the separate
individuals who compose it — its means of tyrannizing are not restricted
to the acts which it may do by the hands of its political functionaries.
Society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong
mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which
it ought not to meddle, it practises a social tyranny more formidable
than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually
upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape,
penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the
soul itself. Protection, therefore, against the tyranny of the
magistrate is not enough; there needs protection also against the
tyranny of the prevailing opinion and feeling; against the tendency of
society to impose, by other means than civil penalties, its own ideas
and practices as rules of conduct on those who dissent from them; to
fetter the development, and, if possible, prevent the formation, of any
individuality not in harmony with its ways, and compel all characters to
fashion themselves upon the model of its own. There is a limit to the
legitimate interference of collective opinion with individual
independence; and to find Edition: current; Page: [16]that limit, and
maintain it against encroachment, is as indispensable to a good
condition of human affairs, as protection against political despotism.

But though this proposition is not likely to be contested in general
terms, the practical question, where to place the limit — how to make
the fitting adjustment between individual independence and social
control — is a subject on which nearly everything remains to be done.
All that makes existence valuable to any one, depends on the enforcement
of restraints upon the actions of other people. Some rules of conduct,
therefore, must be imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on
many things which are not fit subjects for the operation of law. What
these rules should be, is the principal question in human affairs; but
if we except a few of the most obvious cases, it is one of those which
least progress has been made in resolving. No two ages, and scarcely any
two countries, have decided it alike; and the decision of one age or
country is a wonder to another. Yet the people of any given age and
country no more suspect any difficulty in it, than if it were a subject
on which mankind had always been agreed. The rules which obtain among
themselves appear to them self-evident and self-justifying. This all but
universal illusion is one of the examples of the magical influence of
custom, which is not only, as the proverb says, Edition: current; Page:
[17]a second nature, but is continually mistaken for the first. The
effect of custom, in preventing any misgiving respecting the rules of
conduct which mankind impose on one another, is all the more complete
because the subject is one on which it is not generally considered
necessary that reasons should be given, either by one person to others,
or by each to himself. People are accustomed to believe, and have been
encouraged in the belief by some who aspire to the character of
philosophers, that their feelings, on subjects of this nature, are
better than reasons, and render reasons unnecessary. The practical
principle which guides them to their opinions on the regulation of human
conduct, is the feeling in each person’s mind that everybody should be
required to act as he, and those with whom he sympathizes, would like
them to act. No one, indeed, acknowledges to himself that his standard
of judgment is his own liking; but an opinion on a point of conduct, not
supported by reasons, can only count as one person’s preference; and if
the reasons, when given, are a mere appeal to a similar preference felt
by other people, it is still only many people’s liking instead of one.
To an ordinary man, however, his own preference, thus supported, is not
only a perfectly satisfactory reason, but the only one he generally has
for any of his notions of morality, taste, or propriety, which are not
expressly written in his religious creed; and his chief guide in the
interpretation even of that. Men’s Edition: current; Page: [18]opinions,
accordingly, on what is laudable or blameable, are affected by all the
multifarious causes which influence their wishes in regard to the
conduct of others, and which are as numerous as those which determine
their wishes on any other subject. Sometimes their reason — at other
times their prejudices or superstitions: often their social affections,
not seldom their antisocial ones, their envy or jealousy, their
arrogance or contemptuousness: but most commonly, their desires or fears
for themselves — their legitimate or illegitimate self-interest.
Wherever there is an ascendant class, a large portion of the morality of
the country emanates from its class interests, and its feelings of class
superiority. The morality between Spartans and Helots, between planters
and negroes, between princes and subjects, between nobles and roturiers,
between men and women, has been for the most part the creation of these
class interests and feelings: and the sentiments thus generated, react
in turn upon the moral feelings of the members of the ascendant class,
in their relations among themselves. Where, on the other hand, a class,
formerly ascendant, has lost its ascendency, or where its ascendency is
unpopular, the prevailing moral sentiments frequently bear the impress
of an impatient dislike of superiority Another grand determining
principle of the rules of conduct, both in act and forbearance which
have been enforced by law or opinion, has Edition: current; Page:
[19]been the servility of mankind towards the supposed preferences or
aversions of their temporal masters, or of their gods. This servility,
though essentially selfish, is not hypocrisy; it gives rise to perfectly
genuine sentiments of abhorrence; it made men burn magicians and
heretics. Among so many baser influences, the general and obvious
interests of society have of course had a share, and a large one, in the
direction of the moral sentiments: less, however, as a matter of reason,
and on their own account, than as a consequence of the sympathies and
antipathies which grew out of them: and sympathies and antipathies which
had little or nothing to do with the interests of society, have made
themselves felt in the establishment of moralities with quite as great
force.

The likings and dislikings of society, or of some powerful portion of
it, are thus the main thing which has practically determined the rules
laid down for general observance, under the penalties of law or opinion.
And in general, those who have been in advance of society in thought and
feeling, have left this condition of things unassailed in principle,
however they may have come into conflict with it in some of its details.
They have occupied themselves rather in inquiring what things society
ought to like or dislike, than in questioning whether its likings or
dislikings should be a law to individuals. They preferred endeavoring to
alter the feelings of mankind Edition: current; Page: [20]on the
particular points on which they were themselves heretical, rather than
make common cause in defence of freedom, with heretics generally. The
only case in which the higher ground has been taken on principle and
maintained with consistency, by any but an individual here and there, is
that of religious belief: a case instructive in many ways, and not least
so as forming a most striking instance of the fallibility of what is
called the moral sense: for the odium theologicum, in a sincere bigot,
is one of the most unequivocal cases of moral feeling. Those who first
broke the yoke of what called itself the Universal Church, were in
general as little willing to permit difference of religious opinion as
that church itself. But when the heat of the conflict was over, without
giving a complete victory to any party, and each church or sect was
reduced to limit its hopes to retaining possession of the ground it
already occupied; minorities, seeing that they had no chance of becoming
majorities, were under the necessity of pleading to those whom they
could not convert, for permission to differ. It is accordingly on this
battle-field, almost solely, that the rights of the individual against
society have been asserted on broad grounds of principle, and the claim
of society to exercise authority over dissentients openly controverted.
The great writers to whom the world owes what religious liberty it
possesses, have mostly asserted Edition: current; Page: [21]freedom of
conscience as an indefeasible right, and denied absolutely that a human
being is accountable to others for his religious belief Yet so natural
to mankind is intolerance in whatever they really care about, that
religious freedom has hardly anywhere been practically realized, except
where religious indifference, which dislikes to have its peace disturbed
by theological quarrels, has added its weight to the scale. In the minds
of almost all religious persons, even in the most tolerant countries,
the duty of toleration is admitted with tacit reserves. One person will
bear with dissent in matters of church government, but not of dogma;
another can tolerate everybody, short of a Papist or an Unitarian;
another, every one who believes in revealed religion; a few extend their
charity a little further, but stop at the belief in a God and in a
future state. Wherever the sentiment of the majority is still genuine
and intense, it is found to have abated little of its claim to be
obeyed.

In England, from the peculiar circumstances of our political history,
though the yoke of opinion is perhaps heavier, that of law is lighter,
than in most other countries of Europe; and there is considerable
jealousy of direct interference, by the legislative or the executive
power with private conduct; not so much from any just regard for the
independence of the individual, as from the still subsisting habit of
looking on the government as representing an Edition: current; Page:
[22]opposite interest to the public. The majority have not yet learnt to
feel the power of the government their power, or its opinions their
opinions. When they do so, individual liberty will probably be as much
exposed to invasion from the government, as it already is from public
opinion. But, as yet, there is a considerable amount of feeling ready to
be called forth against any attempt of the law to control individuals in
things in which they have not hitherto been accustomed to be controlled
by it; and this with very little discrimination as to whether the matter
is, or is not, within the legitimate sphere of legal control; insomuch
that the feeling, highly salutary on the whole, is perhaps quite as
often misplaced as well grounded in the particular instances of its
application. There is, in fact, no recognized principle by which the
propriety or impropriety of government interference is customarily
tested. People decide according to their personal preferences. Some,
whenever they see any good to be done, or evil to be remedied, would
willingly instigate the government to undertake the business; while
others prefer to bear almost any amount of social evil, rather than add
one to the departments of human interests amenable to governmental
control. And men range themselves on one or the other side in any
particular case, according to this general direction of their
sentiments; or according to the degree of interest which they feel in
the particular Edition: current; Page: [23]thing which it is proposed
that the government should do; or according to the belief they entertain
that the government would, or would not, do it in the manner they
prefer; but very rarely on account of any opinion to which they
consistently adhere, as to what things are fit to be done by a
government. And it seems to me that, in consequence of this absence of
rule or principle, one side is at present as often wrong as the other;
the interference of government is, with about equal frequency,
improperly invoked and improperly condemned.

The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as
entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the
individual in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means used
be physical force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion
of public opinion. That principle is, that the sole end for which
mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with
the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That
the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any
member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to
others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient
warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it
will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier,
because, in the opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even
right Edition: current; Page: [24]These are good reasons for
remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him, or persuading him or
entreating him, but not for compelling him, or visiting him with any
evil, in case he do other wise. To justify that, the conduct from which
it is desired to deter him must be calculated to produce evil to some
one else. The only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is
amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which
merely concerns himself, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over
himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.

It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine is meant to
apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties. We are
not speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the
law may fix as that of manhood or womanhood. Those who are still in a
state to require being taken care of by others, must be protected
against their own actions as well as against external injury. For the
same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of
society in which the race itself may be considered as in its nonage. The
early difficulties in the way of spontaneous progress are so great, that
there is seldom any choice of means for overcoming them; and a ruler
full of the spirit of improvement is warranted in the use of any
expedients that will attain an end, perhaps otherwise unattainable.
Despotism is a legitimate mode of Edition: current; Page: [25]government
in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and
the means justified by actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a
principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the
time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and
equal discussion. Until then, there is nothing for them but implicit
obedience to an Akbar or a Charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to
find one. But as soon as mankind have attained the capacity of being
guided to their own improvement by conviction or persuasion (a period
long since reached in all nations with whom we need here concern
ourselves), compulsion, either in the direct form or in that of pains
and penalties for non-compliance, is no longer admissible as a means to
their own good, and justifiable only for the security of others.

It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived
to my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent
of utility. I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical
questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the
permanent interests of man as a progressive being. Those interests, I
contend, authorize the subjection of individual spontaneity to external
control, only in respect to those actions of each, which concern the
interest of other people. If any one does an act hurtful to others,
there is a primâ facie case for Edition: current; Page: [26]punishing
him, by law, or, where legal penalties are not safely applicable, by
general disapprobation. There are also many positive acts for the
benefit of others, which he may rightfully be compelled to perform; such
as, to give evidence in a court of justice; to bear his fair share in
the common defence, or in any other joint work necessary to the interest
of the society of which he enjoys the protection; and to perform certain
acts of individual beneficence, such as saving a fellow creature’s life,
or interposing to protect the defenceless against ill-usage, things
which whenever it is obviously a man’s duty to do, he may rightfully be
made responsible to society for not doing A person may cause evil to
others not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in either case
he is justly accountable to them for the injury. The latter case, it is
true, requires a much more cautious exercise of compulsion than the
former. To make any one answerable for doing evil to others, is the
rule; to make him answerable for not preventing evil, is, comparatively
speaking, the exception. Yet there are many cases clear enough and grave
enough to justify that exception. In all things which regard the
external relations of the individual, he is de jure amenable to those
whose interests are concerned, and if need be, to society as their
protector. There are often good reasons for not holding him to the
responsibility; but these reasons must arise from Edition: current;
Page: [27]the special expediencies of the case: either because it is a
kind of case in which he is on the whole likely to act better, when left
to his own discretion, than when controlled in any way in which society
have it in their power to control him; or because the attempt to
exercise control would produce other evils, greater than those which it
would prevent. When such reasons as these preclude the enforcement of
responsibility, the conscience of the agent himself should step into the
vacant judgment-seat, and protect those interests of others which have
no external protection; judging himself all the more rigidly, because
the case does not admit of his being made accountable to the judgment of
his fellow-creatures.

But there is a sphere of action in which society, as distinguished from
the individual, has, if any, only an indirect interest; comprehending
all that portion of a person’s life and conduct which affects only
himself, or, if it also affects others, only with their free, voluntary,
and undeceived consent and participation. When I say only himself, I
mean directly, and in the first instance: for whatever affects himself,
may affect others through himself; and the objection which may be
grounded on this contingency, will receive consideration in the sequel.
This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises,
first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of
conscience, in the most comprehensive Edition: current; Page: [28]sense;
liberty of thought and feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and
sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative, scientific, moral,
or theological. The liberty of expressing and publishing opinions may
seem to fall under a different principle, since it belongs to that part
of the conduct of an individual which concerns other people; but, being
almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, and
resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable
from it. Secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and
pursuits; of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of
doing as we like, subject to such consequences as may follow; without
impediment from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not
harm them, even though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse,
or wrong. Thirdly, from this liberty of each individual, follows the
liberty, within the same limits, of combination among individuals;
freedom to unite, for any purpose not involving harm to others: the
persons combining being supposed to be of full age, and not forced or
deceived.

No society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected, is
free, whatever may be its form of government; and none is completely
free in which they do not exist absolute and unqualified. The only
freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our
own way, so long as we do not Edition: current; Page: [29]attempt to
deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it. Each is
the proper guardian of his own health, whether bodily, or mental and
spiritual. Mankind are greater gainers by suffering each other to live
as seems good to themselves, than by compelling each to live as seems
good to the rest.

Though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may have
the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly
opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice.
Society has expended fully as much effort in the attempt (according to
its lights) to compel people to conform to its notions of personal, as
of social excellence. The ancient commonwealths thought themselves
entitled to practise, and the ancient philosophers countenanced, the
regulation of every part of private conduct by public authority, on the
ground that the State had a deep interest in the whole bodily and mental
discipline of every one of its citizens; a mode of thinking which may
have been admissible in small republics surrounded by powerful enemies,
in constant peril of being subverted by foreign attack or internal
commotion, and to which even a short interval of relaxed energy and
self-command might so easily be fatal, that they could not afford to
wait for the salutary permanent effects of freedom. In the modern world,
the greater size of political communities, and above all, the Edition:
current; Page: [30]separation between the spiritual and temporal
authority (which placed the direction of men’s consciences in other
hands than those which controlled their worldly affairs), prevented so
great an interference by law in the details of private life; but the
engines of moral repression have been wielded more strenuously against
divergence from the reigning opinion in self-regarding, than even in
social matters; religion, the most powerful of the elements which have
entered into the formation of moral feeling, having almost always been
governed either by the ambition of a hierarchy, seeking control over
every department of human conduct, or by the spirit of Puritanism. And
some of those modern reformers who have placed themselves in strongest
opposition to the religions of the past, have been noway behind either
churches or sects in their assertion of the right of spiritual
domination: M. Comte, in particular, whose social system, as unfolded in
his Traité de Politique Positive, aims at establishing (though by moral
more than by legal appliances) a despotism of society over the
individual, surpassing anything contemplated in the political ideal of
the most rigid disciplinarian among the ancient philosophers.

Apart from the peculiar tenets of individual thinkers, there is also in
the world at large an increasing inclination to stretch unduly the
powers of society over the individual, both by Edition: current; Page:
[31]the force of opinion and even by that of legislation: and as the
tendency of all the changes taking place in the world is to strengthen
society, and diminish the power of the individual, this encroachment is
not one of the evils which tend spontaneously to disappear, but, on the
contrary, to grow more and more formidable. The disposition of mankind,
whether as rulers or as fellow-citizens, to impose their own opinions
and inclinations as a rule of conduct on others, is so energetically
supported by some of the best and by some of the worst feelings incident
to human nature, that it is hardly ever kept under restraint by anything
but want of power; and as the power is not declining, but growing,
unless a strong barrier of moral conviction can be raised against the
mischief, we must expect, in the present circumstances of the world, to
see it increase.

It will be convenient for the argument, if, instead of at once entering
upon the general thesis, we confine ourselves in the first instance to a
single branch of it, on which the principle here stated is, if not
fully, yet to a certain point, recognized by the current opinions. This
one branch is the Liberty of Thought: from which it is impossible to
separate the cognate liberty of speaking and of writing. Although these
liberties, to some considerable amount, form part of the political
morality of all countries which profess religious toleration and free
institutions, the grounds, both philosophical Edition: current; Page:
[32]and practical, on which they rest, are perhaps not so familiar to
the general mind, nor so thoroughly appreciated by many even of the
leaders of opinion, as might have been expected. Those grounds, when
rightly understood, are of much wider application than to only one
division of the subject, and a thorough consideration of this part of
the question will be found the best introduction to the remainder. Those
to whom nothing which I am about to say will be new, may therefore, I
hope, excuse me, if on a subject which for now three centuries has been
so often discussed, I venture on one discussion more.

Edition: current; Page: [33]


CHAPTER II.: of the liberty of thought and discussion.

THE time, it is to be hoped, is gone by when any defence would be
necessary of the “liberty of the press” as one of the securities against
corrupt or tyrannical government. No argument, we may suppose, can now
be needed, against permitting a legislature or an executive, not
identified in interest with the people, to prescribe opinions to them,
and determine what doctrines or what arguments they shall be allowed to
hear. This aspect of the question, besides, has been so often and so
triumphantly enforced by preceding writers, that it needs not be
specially insisted on in this place. Though the law of England, on the
subject of the press, is as servile to this day as it was in the time of
the Tudors, there is little danger of its being actually put in force
against political discussion, except during some temporary panic, when
fear of insurrection drives ministers and judges from their propriety;*
and, speaking generally, it is not, in Edition: current; Page:
[34]constitutional countries, to be apprehended, that the government,
whether completely responsible to the people or not, will often attempt
to control the expression of opinion, except when in doing so it makes
itself the organ of the general intolerance of the public. Let us
suppose, therefore, that the government is entirely at one with the
people, and never thinks of exerting any power of coercion unless in
agreement with what it conceives to be Edition: current; Page: [35]their
voice. But I deny the right of the people to exercise such coercion,
either by themselves or by their government. The power itself is
illegitimate. The best government has no more title to it than the
worst. It is as noxious, or more noxious, when exerted in accordance
with public opinion, than when in opposition to it. If all mankind minus
one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the contrary
opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one
person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing
mankind. Were an opinion a personal possession of no value except to the
owner; if to be obstructed in the enjoyment of it were simply a private
injury, it would make some difference whether the injury was inflicted
only on a few persons or on many. But the peculiar evil of silencing the
expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race;
posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the
opinion, still more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right,
they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth: if
wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer
perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision
with error.

It is necessary to consider separately these two hypotheses, each of
which has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it. We can
never be sure that the opinion we are Edition: current; Page:
[36]endeavoring to stifle is a false opinion; and if we were sure,
stifling it would be an evil still.

First: the opinion which it is attempted to suppress by authority may
possibly be true. Those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its
truth; but they are not infallible. They have no authority to decide the
question for all mankind, and exclude every other person from the means
of judging. To refuse a hearing to an opinion, because they are sure
that it is false, is to assume that their certainty is the same thing as
absolute certainty. All silencing of discussion is an assumption of
infallibility. Its condemnation may be allowed to rest on this common
argument, not the worse for being common.

Unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact of their
fallibility is far from carrying the weight in their practical judgment,
which is always allowed to it in theory; for while every one well knows
himself to be fallible, few think it necessary to take any precautions
against their own fallibility, or admit the supposition that any
opinion, of which they feel very certain, may be one of the examples of
the error to which they acknowledge themselves to be liable. Absolute
princes, or others who are accustomed to unlimited deference, usually
feel this complete confidence in their own opinions on nearly all
subjects. People more happily situated, who Edition: current; Page:
[37]sometimes hear their opinions disputed, and are not wholly unused to
be set right when they are wrong, place the same unbounded reliance only
on such of their opinions as are shared by all who surround them, or to
whom they habitually defer: for in proportion to a man’s want of
confidence in his own solitary judgment, does he usually repose, with
implicit trust, on the infallibilty of “the world” in general. And the
world, to each individual, means the part of it with which he comes in
contact; his party, his sect, his church, his class of society: the man
may be called, by comparison, almost liberal and large-minded to whom it
means anything so comprehensive as his own country or his own age. Nor
is his faith in this collective authority at all shaken by his being
aware that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes, and parties
have thought, and even now think, the exact reverse. He devolves upon
his own world the responsibility of being in the right against the
dissentient worlds of other people; and it never troubles him that mere
accident has decided which of these numerous worlds is the object of his
reliance, and that the same causes which make him a Churchman in London,
would have made him a Buddhist or a Confucian in Pekin. Yet it is as
evident in itself, as any amount of argument can make it, that ages are
no more infallible than individuals; every age having held many opinions
which subsequent Edition: current; Page: [38]ages have deemed not only
false but absurd; and it is as certain that many opinions, now general,
will be rejected by future ages, as it is that many, once general, are
rejected by the present.

The objection likely to be made to this argument, would probably take
some such form as the following. There is no greater assumption of
infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error, than in any other
thing which is done by public authority on its own judgment and
responsibility. Judgment is given to men that they may use it. Because
it may be used erroneously, are men to be told that they ought not to
use it at all? To prohibit what they think pernicious, is not claiming
exemption from error, but fulfilling the duty incumbent on them,
although fallible, of acting on their conscientious conviction. If we
were never to act on our opinions, because those opinions may be wrong,
we should leave all our interests uncared for, and all our duties
unperformed. An objection which applies to all conduct, can be no valid
objection to any conduct in particular. It is the duty of governments,
and of individuals, to form the truest opinions they can; to form them
carefully, and never impose them upon others unless they are quite sure
of being right. But when they are sure (such reasoners may say), it is
not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from acting on their
opinions, and allow doctrines which they honestly Edition: current;
Page: [39]think dangerous to the welfare of mankind, either in this life
or in another, to be scattered abroad without restraint, because other
people, in less enlightened times, have persecuted opinions now believed
to be true. Let us take care, it may be said, not to make the same
mistake: but governments and nations have made mistakes in other things,
which are not denied to be fit subjects for the exercise of authority:
they have laid on bad taxes, made unjust wars. Ought we therefore to lay
on no taxes, and, under whatever provocation, make no wars? Men, and
governments, must act to the best of their ability. There is no such
thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance sufficient for the
purposes of human life. We may, and must, assume our opinion to be true
for the guidance of our own conduct: and it is assuming no more when we
forbid bad men to pervert society by the propagation of opinions which
we regard as false and pernicious.

I answer, that it is assuming very much more. There is the greatest
difference between presuming an opinion to be true, because, with every
opportunity for contesting it, it has not been refuted, and assuming its
truth for the purpose of not permitting its refutation. Complete liberty
of contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the very condition which
justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no
other terms Edition: current; Page: [40]can a being with human faculties
have any rational assurance of being right.

When we consider either the history of opinion, or the ordinary conduct
of human life, to what is it to be ascribed that the one and the other
are no worse than they are? Not certainly to the inherent force of the
human understanding; for, on any matter not self-evident, there are
ninety-nine persons totally incapable of judging of it, for one who is
capable; and the capacity of the hundredth person is only comparative;
for the majority of the eminent men of every past generation held many
opinions now known to be erroneous, and did or approved numerous things
which no one will now justify. Why is it, then, that there is on the
whole a preponderance among mankind of rational opinions and rational
conduct? If there really is this preponderance — which there must be,
unless human affairs are, and have always been, in an almost desperate
state — it is owing to a quality of the human mind, the source of
everything respectable in man either as an intellectual or as a moral
being, namely, that his errors are corrigible. He is capable of
rectifying his mistakes, by discussion and experience. Not by experience
alone There must be discussion, to show how experience is to be
interpreted. Wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and
argument: but facts and arguments, to produce any effect on the mind,
must be brought before Edition: current; Page: [41]it. Very few facts
are able to tell their own story, without comments to bring out their
meaning. The whole strength and value, then, of human judgment,
depending on the one property, that it can be set right when it is
wrong, reliance can be placed on it only when the means of setting it
right are kept constantly at hand. In the case of any person whose
judgment is really deserving of confidence, how has it become so?
Because he has kept his mind open to criticism of his opinions and
conduct. Because it has been his practice to listen to all that could be
said against him; to profit by as much of it as was just, and expound to
himself, and upon occasion to others, the fallacy of what was
fallacious. Because he has felt, that the only way in which a human
being can make some approach to knowing the whole of a subject, is by
hearing what can be said about it by persons of every variety of
opinion, and studying all modes in which it can be looked at by every
character of mind. No wise man ever acquired his wisdom in any mode but
this; nor is it in the nature of human intellect to become wise in any
other manner. The steady habit of correcting and completing his own
opinion by collating it with those of others, so far from causing doubt
and hesitation in carrying it into practice, is the only stable
foundation for a just reliance on it: for, being cognizant of all that
can, at least obviously, be said against him, and having Edition:
current; Page: [42]taken up his position against all gainsayers knowing
that he has sought for objections and difficulties, instead of avoiding
them, and has shut out no light which can be thrown upon the subject
from any quarter — he has a right to think his judgment better than that
of any person, or any multitude, who have not gone through a similar
process.

It is not too much to require that what the wisest of mankind, those who
are best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary to warrant
their relying on it, should be submitted to by that miscellaneous
collection of a few wise and many foolish individuals, called the
public. The most intolerant of churches, the Roman Catholic Church, even
at the canonization of a saint, admits, and listens patiently to, a
“devil’s advocate.” The holiest of men, it appears, cannot be admitted
to posthumous honors, until all that the devil could say against him is
known and weighed. If even the Newtonian philosophy were not permitted
to be questioned, mankind could not feel as complete assurance of its
truth as they now do. The beliefs which we have most warrant for, have
no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the whole world to
prove them unfounded. If the challenge is not accepted, or is accepted
and the attempt fails, we are far enough from certainty still; but we
have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we
have neglected nothing Edition: current; Page: [43]that could give the
truth a chance of reaching us: if the lists are kept open, we may hope
that if there be a better truth, it will be found when the human mind is
capable of receiving it; and in the mean time we may rely on having
attained such approach to truth, as is possible in our own day. This is
the amount of certainty attainable by a fallible being, and this the
sole way of attaining it.

Strange it is, that men should admit the validity of the arguments for
free discussion, but object to their being “pushed to an extreme;” not
seeing that unless the reasons are good for an extreme case, they are
not good for any case. Strange that they should imagine that they are
not assuming infallibility, when they acknowledge that there should be
free discussion on all subjects which can possibly be doubtful, but
think that some particular principle or doctrine should be forbidden to
be questioned because it is so certain, that is, because they are
certain that it is certain. To call any proposition certain, while there
is any one who would deny its certainty if permitted, but who is not
permitted, is to assume that we ourselves, and those who agree with us,
are the judges of certainty, and judges without hearing the other side.

In the present age — which has been described as “destitute of faith,
but terrified at scepticism,” — in which people feel sure, not so much
that their opinions are true, as that Edition: current; Page: [44]they
should not know what to do without them — the claims of an opinion to be
protected from public attack are rested not so much on its truth, as on
its importance to society. There are, it is alleged, certain beliefs, so
useful, not to say indispensable to well-being, that it is as much the
duty of governments to uphold those beliefs, as to protect any other of
the interests of society. In a case of such necessity, and so directly
in the line of their duty, something less than infallibility may, it is
maintained, warrant, and even bind, governments, to act on their own
opinion, confirmed by the general opinion of mankind. It is also often
argued, and still oftener thought, that none but bad men would desire to
weaken these salutary beliefs; and there can be nothing wrong, it is
thought, in restraining bad men, and prohibiting what only such men
would wish to practise. This mode of thinking makes the justification of
restraints on discussion not a question of the truth of doctrines, but
of their usefulness; and flatters itself by that means to escape the
responsibility of claiming to be an infallible judge of opinions. But
those who thus satisfy themselves, do not perceive that the assumption
of infallibility is merely shifted from one point to another. The
usefulness of an opinion is itself matter of opinion: as disputable, as
open to discussion and requiring discussion as much, as the opinion
itself. There is the same need of an infallible Edition: current; Page:
[45]judge of opinions to decide an opinion to be noxious, as to decide
it to be false, unless the opinion condemned has full opportunity of
defending itself. And it will not do to say that the heretic may be
allowed to maintain the utility or harmlessness of his opinion, though
forbidden to maintain its truth. The truth of an opinion is part of its
utility. If we would know whether or not it is desirable that a
proposition should be believed, is it possible to exclude the
consideration of whether or not it is true? In the opinion, not of bad
men, but of the best men, no belief which is contrary to truth can be
really useful: and can you prevent such men from urging that plea, when
they are charged with culpability for denying some doctrine which they
are told is useful, but which they believe to be false? Those who are on
the side of received opinions, never fail to take all possible advantage
of this plea; you do not find them handling the question of utility as
if it could be completely abstracted from that of truth: on the
contrary, it is, above all, because their doctrine is “the truth,” that
the knowledge or the belief of it is held to be so indispensable. There
can be no fair discussion of the question of usefulness, when an
argument so vital may be employed on one side, but not on the other. And
in point of fact, when law or public feeling do not permit the truth of
an opinion to be disputed, they are just as little tolerant of a
Edition: current; Page: [46]denial of its usefulness. The utmost they
allow is an extenuation of its absolute necessity, or of the positive
guilt of rejecting it.

In order more fully to illustrate the mischief of denying a hearing to
opinions because we, in our own judgment, have condemned them, it will
be desirable to fix down the discussion to a concrete case; and I
choose, by preference, the cases which are least favorable to me — in
which the argument against freedom of opinion, both on the score of
truth and on that of utility, is considered the strongest. Let the
opinions impugned be the belief in a God and in a future state, or any
of the commonly received doctrines of morality. To fight the battle on
such ground, gives a great advantage to an unfair antagonist; since he
will be sure to say (and many who have no desire to be unfair will say
it internally), Are these the doctrines which you do not deem
sufficiently certain to be taken under the protection of law? Is the
belief in a God one of the opinions, to feel sure of which, you hold to
be assuming infallibility? But I must be permitted to observe, that it
is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call
an as sumption of infallibility. It is the undertaking to decide that
question for others, without allowing them to hear what can be said on
the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the
less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. How
Edition: current; Page: [47]ever positive any one’s persuasion may be,
not only of the falsity, but of the pernicious consequences — not only
of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I
altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of an opinion; yet if, in
pursuance of that private judgment, though backed by the public judgment
of his country or his cotemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being
heard in its defence, he assumes infallibility. And so far from the
assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the
opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in
which it is most fatal. These are exactly the occasions on which the men
of one generation commit those dreadful mistakes, which excite the
astonishment and horror of posterity. It is among such that we find the
instances memorable in history, when the arm of the law has been
employed to root out the best men and the noblest doctrines; with
deplorable success as to the men, though some of the doctrines have
survived to be (as if in mockery) invoked, in defence of similar conduct
towards those who dissent from them, or from their received
interpretation.

Mankind can hardly be too often reminded, that there was once a man
named Socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public
opinion of his time, there took place a memorable collision. Born in an
age and country abounding in individual greatness, this man Edition:
current; Page: [48]has been handed down to us by those who best knew
both him and the age, as the most virtuous man in it; while we know him
as the head and prototype of all subsequent teachers of virtue, the
source equally of the lofty inspiration of Plato and the judicious
utilitarianism of Aristotle, “i maëstri di color che sanno,” the two
headsprings of ethical as of all other philosophy. This acknowledged
master of all the eminent thinkers who have since lived — whose fame,
still growing after more than two thousand years, all but outweighs the
whole remainder of the names which make his native city illustrious —
was put to death by his countrymen, after a judicial conviction, for
impiety and immorality. Impiety, in denying the gods recognized by the
State; indeed his accuser asserted (see the “Apologia”) that he believed
in no gods at all. Immorality, in being, by his doctrines and
instructions, a “corruptor of youth.” Of these charges the tribunal,
there is every ground for believing, honestly found him guilty, and
condemned the man who probably of all then born had deserved best of
mankind, to be put to death as a criminal.

To pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity, the
mention of which, after the condemnation of Socrates, would not be an
anti-climax: the event which took place on Calvary rather more than
eighteen hundred years ago. The man who left on the memory Edition:
current; Page: [49]of those who witnessed his life and conversation,
such an impression of his moral grandeur, that eighteen subsequent
centuries have done homage to him as the Almighty in person, was
ignominiously put to death, as what? As a blasphemer. Men did not merely
mistake their benefactor; they mistook him for the exact contrary of
what he was, and treated him as that prodigy of impiety, which they
themselves are now held to be, for their treatment of him. The feelings
with which mankind now regard these lamentable transactions, especially
the later of the two, render them extremely un just in their judgment of
the unhappy actors These were, to all appearance, not bad men — not
worse than men commonly are, but rather the contrary; men who possessed
in a full, or somewhat more than a full measure, the religious, moral,
and patriotic feelings of their time and people: the very kind of men
who, in all times, our own included, have every chance of passing
through life blameless and respected. The high-priest who rent his
garments when the words were pronounced, which, according to all the
ideas of his country, constituted the blackest guilt, was in all
probability quite as sincere in his horror and indignation, as the
generality of respectable and pious men now are in the religious and
moral sentiments they profess; and most of those who now shudder at his
conduct, if they had lived in his time, and been born Jews, would have
acted precisely Edition: current; Page: [50]as he did. Orthodox
Christians who are tempted to think that those who stoned to death the
first martyrs must have been worse men than they themselves are, ought
to remember that one of those persecutors was Saint Paul.

Let us add one more example, the most striking of all, if the
impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of him
who falls into it. If ever any one, possessed of power, had grounds for
thinking himself the best and most enlightened among his cotemporaries,
it was the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Absolute monarch of the whole
civilized world, he preserved through life not only the most unblemished
justice, but what was less to be expected from his Stoical breeding, the
tenderest heart. The few failings which are attributed to him, were all
on the side of indulgence: while his writings, the highest ethical
product of the ancient mind, differ scarcely perceptibly, if they differ
at all, from the most characteristic teachings of Christ. This man, a
better Christian in all but the dogmatic sense of the word, than almost
any of the ostensibly Christian sovereigns who have since reigned,
persecuted Christianity. Placed at the summit of all the previous
attainments of humanity, with an open, unfettered intellect, and a
character which led him of himself to embody in his moral writings the
Christian ideal, he yet failed to see that Christianity was to be a good
and not an evil to the world, with Edition: current; Page: [51]his
duties to which he was so deeply penetrated. Existing society he knew to
be in a deplorable state. But such as it was, he saw or thought he saw,
that it was held together and prevented from being worse, by belief and
reverence of the received divinities. As a ruler of mankind, he deemed
it his duty not to suffer society to fall in pieces; and saw not how, if
its existing ties were removed, any others could be formed which could
again knit it together. The new religion openly aimed at dissolving
these ties: unless, therefore, it was his duty to adopt that religion,
it seemed to be his duty to put it down. Inasmuch then as the theology
of Christianity did not appear to him true or of divine origin; inasmuch
as this strange history of a crucified God was not credible to him, and
a system which purported to rest entirely upon a foundation to him so
wholly unbelievable, could not be foreseen by him to be that renovating
agency which, after all abatements, it has in fact proved to be; the
gentlest and most amiable of philosophers and rulers, under a solemn
sense of duty, authorized the persecution of Christianity. To my mind
this is one of the most tragical facts in all history. It is a bitter
thought, how different a thing the Christianity of the world might have
been, if the Christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the
empire under the auspices of Marcus Aurelius instead of those of
Constantine. But it would be equally unjust to him Edition: current;
Page: [52]and false to truth, to deny, that no one plea which can be
urged for punishing anti-Christian teaching, was wanting to Marcus
Aurelius for punishing, as he did, the propagation of Christianity. No
Christian more firmly believes that Atheism is false, and tends to the
dissolution of society, than Marcus Aurelius believed the same things of
Christianity; he who, of all men then living, might have been thought
the most capable of appreciating it. Unless any one who approves of
punishment for the promulgation of opinions, flatters himself that he is
a wiser and better man than Marcus Aurelius — more deeply versed in the
wisdom of his time, more elevated in his intellect above it — more
earnest in his search for truth, or more single-minded in his devotion
to it when found; — let him abstain from that assumption of the joint
infallibility of himself and the multitude, which the great Antoninus
made with so unfortunate a result.

Aware of the impossibility of defending the use of punishment for
restraining irreligious opinions, by any argument which will not justify
Marcus Antoninus, the enemies of religious freedom, when hard pressed,
occasionally accept this consequence, and say, with Dr. Johnson, that
the persecutors of Christianity were in the right; that persecution is
an ordeal through which truth ought to pass, and always passes
successfully, legal penalties being, in the end, powerless against
truth, though sometimes Edition: current; Page: [53]beneficially
effective against mischievous errors. This is a form of the argument for
religious intolerance, sufficiently remarkable not to be passed without
notice.

A theory which maintains that truth may justifiably be persecuted
because persecution cannot possibly do it any harm, cannot be charged
with being intentionally hostile to the reception of new truths; but we
cannot commend the generosity of its dealing with the persons to whom
mankind are indebted for them. To discover to the world something which
deeply concerns it, and of which it was previously ignorant; to prove to
it that it had been mistaken on some vital point of temporal or
spiritual interest, is as important a service as a human being can
render to his fellow-creatures, and in certain cases, as in those of the
early Christians and of the Reformers, those who think with Dr. Johnson
believe it to have been the most precious gift which could be bestowed
on mankind. That the authors of such splendid benefits should be
requited by martyrdom; that their reward should be to be dealt with as
the vilest of criminals, is not, upon this theory, a deplorable error
and misfortune, for which humanity should mourn in sackcloth and ashes,
but the normal and justifiable state of things. The propounder of a new
truth according to this doctrine, should stand, as stood, in the
legislation of the Locrians, the proposer of a new law, with a halter
round his Edition: current; Page: [54]neck, to be instantly tightened if
the public assembly did not, on hearing his reasons, then and there
adopt his proposition. People who defend this mode of treating
benefactors, cannot be supposed to set much value on the benefit; and I
believe this view of the subject is mostly confined to the sort of
persons who think that new truths may have been desirable once, but that
we have had enough of them now.

But, indeed, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution, is
one of those pleasant falsehoods which men repeat after one another till
they pass into commonplaces, but which all experience refutes. History
teems with instances of truth put down by persecution. If not suppressed
forever, it may be thrown back for centuries. To speak only of religious
opinions: the Reformation broke out at least twenty times before Luther,
and was put down. Arnold of Brescia was put down Fra Dolcino was put
down. Savonarola was put down. The Albigeois were put down. The Vaudois
were put down. The Lollards were put down. The Hussites were put down.
Even after the era of Luther, wherever persecution was persisted in, it
was successful. In Spain, Italy, Flanders, the Austrian empire,
Protestanism was rooted out; and, most likely, would have been so in
England, had Queen Mary lived, or Queen Elizabeth died. Persecution has
always succeeded, save where the Edition: current; Page: [55]heretics
were too strong a party to be effectually persecuted. No reasonable
person can doubt that Christianity might have been extirpated in the
Roman empire. It spread, and became predominant, because the
persecutions were only occasional, lasting but a short time, and
separated by long intervals of almost undisturbed propagandism. It is a
piece of idle sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any
inherent power denied to error, of prevailing against the dungeon and
the stake. Men are not more zealous for truth than they often are for
error, and a sufficient application of legal or even of social penalties
will generally succeed in stopping the propagation of either. The real
advantage which truth has, consists in this, that when an opinion is
true, it may be extinguished once, twice, or many times, but in the
course of ages there will generally be found persons to rediscover it,
until some one of its reappearances falls on a time when from favorable
circumstances it escapes persecution until it has made such head as to
withstand all subsequent attempts to suppress it.

It will be said, that we do not now put to death the introducers of new
opinions: we are not like our fathers who slew the prophets, we even
build sepulchres to them. It is true we no longer put heretics to death;
and the amount of penal infliction which modern feeling would probably
tolerate, even against the most obnoxious opinions, is not sufficient to
Edition: current; Page: [56]extirpate them. But let us not flatter
ourselves that we are yet free from the stain even of legal persecution.
Penalties for opinion, or at least for its expression, still exist by
law; and their enforcement is not, even in these times, so unexampled as
to make it at all incredible that they may some day be revived in full
force. In the year 1857, at the summer assizes of the county of
Cornwall, an unfortunate man,* said to be of unexceptionable conduct in
all relations of life, was sentenced to twenty-one months imprisonment,
for uttering, and writing on a gate, some offensive words concerning
Christianity. Within a month of the same time, at the Old Bailey, two
persons, on two separate occasions,† were rejected as jurymen, and one
of them grossly insulted by the judge and by one of the counsel, because
they honestly declared that they had no theological belief; and a third,
a foreigner,‡ for the same reason, was denied justice against a thief.
This refusal of redress took place in virtue of the legal doctrine, that
no person can be allowed to give evidence in a court of justice, who
does not profess belief in a God (any god is sufficient) and in a future
state; which is equivalent to declaring such persons to be outlaws,
Edition: current; Page: [57]excluded from the protection of the
tribunals; who may not only be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if no
one but themselves, or persons of similar opinions, be present but any
one else may be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if the proof of the
fact depends on their evidence. The assumption on which this is
grounded, is that the oath is worthless, of a person who does not
believe in a future state; a proposition which betokens much ignorance
of history in those who assent to it (since it is historically true that
a large proportion of infidels in all ages have been persons of
distinguished integrity and honor); and would be maintained by no one
who had the smallest conception how many of the persons in greatest
repute with the world, both for virtues and for attainments, are well
known, at least to their intimates, to be unbelievers. The rule,
besides, is suicidal, and cuts away its own foundation. Under pretence
that atheists must be liars, it admits the testimony of all atheists who
are willing to lie, and rejects only those who brave the obloquy of
publicly confessing a detested creed rather than affirm a falsehood. A
rule thus self-convicted of absurdity so far as regards its professed
purpose, can be kept in force only as a badge of hatred, a relic of
persecution; a persecution, too, having the peculiarity, that the
qualification for undergoing it, is the being clearly proved not to
deserve it. The rule, and the theory it implies, are hardly Edition:
current; Page: [58]less insulting to believers than to infidels. For if
he who does not believe in a future state necessarily lies, it follows
that they who do believe are only prevented from lying, if prevented
they are, by the fear of hell. We will not do the authors and abettors
of the rule the injury of supposing, that the conception which they have
formed of Christian virtue is drawn from their own consciousness.

These, indeed, are but rags and remnants of persecution, and may be
thought to be not so much an indication of the wish to persecute, as an
example of that very frequent infirmity of English minds, which makes
them take a preposterous pleasure in the assertion of a bad principle,
when they are no longer bad enough to desire to carry it really into
practice. But unhappily there is no security in the state of the public
mind, that the suspension of worse forms of legal persecution, which has
lasted for about the space of a generation, will continue. In this age
the quiet surface of routine is as often ruffled by attempts to
resuscitate past evils, as to introduce new benefits. What is boasted of
at the present time as the revival of religion, is always, in narrow and
uncultivated minds, at least as much the revival of bigotry; and where
there is the strong permanent leaven of intolerance in the feelings of a
people, which at all times abides in the middle classes of this country,
it needs but little to provoke them into actively persecuting those
Edition: current; Page: [59]whom they have never ceased to think proper
objects of persecution.* For it is this — it is the opinions men
entertain, and the feelings they cherish, respecting those who disown
the beliefs they deem important, which makes this country not a place of
mental freedom. For a long time past, the chief mischief of the legal
penalties is that they strengthen the social stigma. It is that stigma
which is really effective, and so effective is it, that the profession
of opinions which are under the ban of society Edition: current; Page:
[60]is much less common in England, than is, in many other countries,
the avowal of those which incur risk of judicial punishment. In respect
to all persons but those whose pecuniary circumstances make them
independent of the good will of other people, opinion, on this subject,
is as efficacious as law; men might as well be imprisoned, as excluded
from the means of earning their bread. Those whose bread is already
secured, and who desire no favors from men in power, or from bodies of
men, or from the public, have nothing to fear from the open avowal of
any opinions, but to be ill-thought of and ill-spoken of, and this it
ought not to require a very heroic mould to enable them to bear. There
is no room for any appeal ad misericordiam in behalf of such persons.
But though we do not now inflict so much evil on those who think
differently from us, as it was formerly our custom to do, it may be that
we do ourselves as much evil as ever by our treatment of them. Socrates
was put to death, but the Socratic philosophy rose like the sun in
heaven, and spread its illumination over the whole intellectual
firmament. Christians were cast to the lions, but the Christian Church
grew up a stately and spreading tree, overtopping the older and less
vigorous growths, and stifling them by its shade. Our merely social
intolerance, kills no one, roots out no opinions, but induces men to
disguise them, or to abstain Edition: current; Page: [61]from any active
effort for their diffusion. With us, heretical opinions do not
perceptibly gain, or even lose, ground in each decade or generation;
they never blaze out far and wide, but continue to smoulder in the
narrow circles of thinking and studious persons among whom they
originate, without ever lighting up the general affairs of mankind with
either a true or a deceptive light. And thus is kept up a state of
things very satisfactory to some minds, because, without the unpleasant
process of fining or imprisoning anybody, it maintains all prevailing
opinions outwardly undisturbed, while it does not absolutely interdict
the exercise of reason by dissentients afflicted with the malady of
thought. A convenient plan for having peace in the intellectual world,
and keeping all things going on therein very much as they do already.
But the price paid for this sort of intellectual pacification, is the
sacrifice of the entire moral courage of the human mind. A state of
things in which a large portion of the most active and inquiring
intellects find it advisable to keep the genuine principles and grounds
of their convictions within their own breasts, and attempt, in what they
address to the public, to fit as much as they can of their own
conclusions to premises which they have internally renounced, cannot
send forth the open, fearless characters, and logical, consistent
intellects who once adorned the thinking world. The sort of men who can
Edition: current; Page: [62]be looked for under it, are either mere
conformers to commonplace, or time-servers for truth whose arguments on
all great subjects are meant for their hearers, and are not those which
have convinced themselves. Those who avoid this alternative, do so by
narrowing their thoughts and interest to things which can be spoken of
without venturing within the region of principles, that is, to small
practical matters, which would come right of themselves, if but the
minds of mankind were strengthened and enlarged, and which will never be
made effectually right until then; while that which would strengthen and
enlarge men’s minds, free and daring speculation on the highest
subjects, is abandoned.

Those in whose eyes this reticence on the part of heretics is no evil,
should consider in the first place, that in consequence of it there is
never any fair and thorough discussion of heretical opinions; and that
such of them as could not stand such a discussion, though they may be
prevented from spreading, do not disappear. But it is not the minds of
heretics that are deteriorated most, by the ban placed on all inquiry
which does not end in the orthodox conclusions. The greatest harm done
is to those who are not heretics, and whose whole mental development is
cramped, and their reason cowed, by the fear of heresy. Who can compute
what the world loses in the multitude of promising intellects combined
with timid Edition: current; Page: [63]characters, who dare not follow
out any bold, vigorous, independent train of thought, lest it should
land them in something which would admit of being considered irreligious
or immoral? Among them we may occasionally see some man of deep
conscientiousness, and subtile and refined understanding, who spends a
life in sophisticating with an intellect which he cannot silence, and
exhausts the resources of ingenuity in attempting to reconcile the
promptings of his conscience and reason with orthodoxy, which yet he
does not, perhaps, to the end succeed in doing. No one can be a great
thinker who does not recognize, that as a thinker it is his first duty
to follow his intellect to whatever conclusions it may lead. Truth gains
more even by the errors of one who, with due study and preparation,
thinks for himself, than by the true opinions of those who only hold
them because they do not suffer themselves to think. Not that it is
solely, or chiefly, to form great thinkers, that freedom of thinking is
required. On the contrary, it is as much, and even more indispensable,
to enable average human beings to attain the mental stature which they
are capable of. There have been, and may again be, great individual
thinkers, in a general atmosphere of mental slavery. But there never has
been, nor ever will be, in that atmosphere, an intellectually active
people. Where any people has made a temporary approach to such a
character, it has been because Edition: current; Page: [64]the dread of
heterodox speculation was for a time suspended. Where there is a tacit
convention that principles are not to be disputed; where the discussion
of the greatest questions which can occupy humanity is considered to be
closed, we cannot hope to find that generally high scale of mental
activity which has made some periods of history so remarkable. Never
when controversy avoided the subjects which are large and important
enough to kindle enthusiasm, was the mind of a people stirred up from
its foundations, and the impulse given which raised even persons of the
most ordinary intellect to something of the dignity of thinking beings.
Of such we have had an example in the condition of Europe during the
times immediately following the Reformation; another, though limited to
the Continent and to a more cultivated class, in the speculative
movement of the latter half of the eighteenth century; and a third, of
still briefer duration, in the intellectual fermentation of Germany
during the Goethian and Fichtean period. These periods differed widely
in the particular opinions which they developed; but were alike in this,
that during all three the yoke of authority was broken. In each, an old
mental despotism had been thrown off, and no new one had yet taken its
place. The impulse given at these three periods has made Europe what it
now is. Every single improvement which has taken place either in
Edition: current; Page: [65]the human mind or in institutions, may be
traced distinctly to one or other of them. Appearances have for some
time indicated that all three impulses are well-nigh spent; and we can
expect no fresh start, until we again assert our mental freedom.

Let us now pass to the second division of the argument, and dismissing
the supposition that any of the received opinions may be false, let us
assume them to be true, and examine into the worth of the manner in
which they are likely to be held, when their truth is not freely and
openly canvassed. However unwillingly a person who has a strong opinion
may admit the possibility that his opinion may be false, he ought to be
moved by the consideration that however true it may be, if it is not
fully, frequently, and fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead
dogma, not a living truth.

There is a class of persons (happily not quite so numerous as formerly)
who think it enough if a person assents undoubtingly to what they think
true, though he has no knowledge whatever of the grounds of the opinion,
and could not make a tenable defence of it against the most superficial
objections. Such persons, if they can once get their creed taught from
authority, naturally think that no good, and some harm, comes of its
being allowed to be questioned. Where their influence prevails, they
make it nearly impossible for the received opinion to be rejected wisely
and considerately, Edition: current; Page: [66]though it may still be
rejected rashly and ignorantly; for to shut out discussion entirely is
seldom possible, and when it once gets in, beliefs not grounded on
conviction are apt to give way before the slightest semblance of an
argument. Waiving, however, this possibility — assuming that the true
opinion abides in the mind, but abides as a prejudice, a belief
independent of, and proof against, argument — this is not the way in
which truth ought to be held by a rational being. This is not knowing
the truth. Truth, thus held, is but one superstition the more,
accidentally clinging to the words which enunciate a truth.

If the intellect and judgment of mankind ought to be cultivated, a thing
which Protestants at least do not deny, on what can these faculties be
more appropriately exercised by any one, than on the things which
concern him so much that it is considered necessary for him to hold
opinions on them? If the cultivation of the understanding consists in
one thing more than in another, it is surely in learning the grounds of
one’s own opinions. Whatever people believe, on subjects on which it is
of the first importance to believe rightly, they ought to be able to
defend against at least the common objections. But, some one may say,
“Let them be taught the grounds of their opinions. It does not follow
that opinions must be merely parroted because they are never heard
controverted. Persons who learn Edition: current; Page: [67]geometry do
not simply commit the theorems to memory, but understand and learn
likewise the demonstrations; and it would be absurd to say that they
remain ignorant of the grounds of geometrical truths, because they never
hear any one deny, and attempt to disprove them.” Undoubtedly: and such
teaching suffices on a subject like mathematics, where there is nothing
at all to be said on the wrong side of the question. The peculiarity of
the evidence of mathematical truths is, that all the argument is on one
side. There are no objections, and no answers to objections. But on
every subject on which difference of opinion is possible, the truth
depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of conflicting
reasons. Even in natural philosophy, there is always some other
explanation possible of the same facts; some geocentric theory instead
of heliocentric, some phlogiston instead of oxygen; and it has to be
shown why that other theory cannot be the true one: and until this is
shown, and until we know how it is shown, we do not understand the
grounds of our opinion. But when we turn to subjects infinitely more
complicated, to morals, religion, politics, social relations, and the
business of life, three-fourths of the arguments for every disputed
opinion consist in dispelling the appearances which favor some opinion
different from it. The greatest orator, save one, of antiquity, has left
it on record that he always studied his Edition: current; Page:
[68]adversary’s case with as great, if not with still greater, intensity
than even his own. What Cicero practised as the means of forensic
success, requires to be imitated by all who study any subject in order
to arrive at the truth. He who knows only his own side of the case,
knows little of that. His reasons may be good, and no one may have been
able to refute them. But if he is equally unable to refute the reasons
on the opposite side; if he does not so much as know what they are, he
has no ground for preferring either opinion. The rational position for
him would be suspension of judgment, and unless he contents himself with
that, he is either led by authority, or adopts, like the generality of
the world, the side to which he feels most inclination. Nor is it enough
that he should hear the arguments of adversaries from his own teachers,
presented as they state them, and accompanied by what they offer as
refutations. That is not the way to do justice to the arguments, or
bring them into real contact with his own mind. He must be able to hear
them from persons who actually believe them; who defend them in earnest,
and do their very utmost for them. He must know them in their most
plausible and persuasive form; he must feel the whole force of the
difficulty which the true view of the subject has to encounter and
dispose of; else he will never really possess himself of the portion of
truth which meets and removes that Edition: current; Page:
[69]difficulty. Ninety-nine in a hundred of what are called educated men
are in this condition, even of those who can argue fluently for their
opinions. Their conclusion may be true, but it might be false for
anything they know: they have never thrown themselves into the mental
position of those who think differently from them, and considered what
such persons may have to say; and consequently they do not, in any
proper sense of the word, know the doctrine which they themselves
profess. They do not know those parts of it which explain and justify
the remainder; the considerations which show that a fact which seemingly
conflicts with another is reconcilable with it, or that, of two
apparently strong reasons, one and not the other ought to be preferred.
All that part of the truth which turns the scale, and decides the
judgment of a completely informed mind, they are strangers to; nor is it
ever really known, but to those who have attended equally and
impartially to both sides, and endeavored to see the reasons of both in
the strongest light. So essential is this discipline to a real
understanding of moral and human subjects, that if opponents of all
important truths do not exist, it is indispensable to imagine them, and
supply them with the strongest arguments which the most skilful devil’s
advocate can conjure up.

To abate the force of these considerations, an enemy of free discussion
may be supposed Edition: current; Page: [70]to say, that there is no
necessity for mankind in general to know and understand all that can be
said against or for their opinions by philosophers and theologians. That
it is not needful for common men to be able to expose all the
misstatements or fallacies of an ingenious opponent. That it is enough
if there is always somebody capable of answering them, so that nothing
likely to mislead uninstructed persons remains unrefuted. That simple
minds, having been taught the obvious grounds of the truths inculcated
on them, may trust to authority for the rest, and being aware that they
have neither knowledge nor talent to resolve every difficulty which can
be raised, may repose in the assurance that all those which have been
raised have been or can be answered, by those who are specially trained
to the task.

Conceding to this view of the subject the utmost that can be claimed for
it by those most easily satisfied with the amount of understanding of
truth which ought to accompany the belief of it; even so, the argument
for free discussion is no way weakened. For even this doctrine
acknowledges that mankind ought to have a rational assurance that all
objections have been satisfactorily answered; and how are they to be
answered if that which requires to be answered is not spoken? or how can
the answer be known to be satisfactory, if the objectors have no
opportunity of showing Edition: current; Page: [71]that it is
unsatisfactory? If not the public, at least the philosophers and
theologians who are to resolve the difficulties, must make themselves
familiar with those difficulties in their most puzzling form; and this
cannot be accomplished unless they are freely stated, and placed in the
most advantageous light which they admit of. The Catholic Church has its
own way of dealing with this embarrassing problem. It makes a broad
separation between those who can be permitted to receive its doctrines
on conviction, and those who must accept them on trust. Neither, indeed,
are allowed any choice as to what they will accept; but the clergy, such
at least as can be fully confided in, may admissibly and meritoriously
make themselves acquainted with the arguments of opponents, in order to
answer them, and may, therefore, read heretical books; the laity, not
unless by special permission, hard to be obtained. This discipline
recognizes a knowledge of the enemy’s case as beneficial to the
teachers, but finds means, consistent with this, of denying it to the
rest of the world: thus giving to the élite more mental culture, though
not more mental freedom, than it allows to the mass. By this device it
succeeds in obtaining the kind of mental superiority which its purposes
require; for though culture without freedom never made a large and
liberal mind, it can make a clever nisi prius advocate of a cause. But
in countries Edition: current; Page: [72]professing Protestantism, this
resource is denied; since Protestants hold, at least in theory, that the
responsibility for the choice of a religion must be borne by each for
himself, and cannot be thrown off upon teachers. Besides, in the present
state of the world, it is practically impossible that writings which are
read by the instructed can be kept from the uninstructed. If the
teachers of mankind are to be cognizant of all that they ought to know,
everything must be free to be written and published without restraint.

If, however, the mischievous operation of the absence of free
discussion, when the received opinions are true, were confined to
leaving men ignorant of the grounds of those opinions, it might be
thought that this, if an intellectual, is no moral evil, and does not
affect the worth of the opinions, regarded in their influence on the
character. The fact, however, is, that not only the grounds of the
opinion are forgotten in the absence of discussion, but too often the
meaning of the opinion itself. The words which convey it, cease to
suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of those they were
originally employed to communicate. Instead of a vivid conception and a
living belief, there remain only a few phrases retained by rote; or, if
any part, the shell and husk only of the meaning is retained, the finer
essence being lost. The great chapter in human history which this fact
occupies and Edition: current; Page: [73]fills, cannot be too earnestly
studied and meditated on.

It is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and
religious creeds. They are all full of meaning and vitality to those who
originate them, and to the direct disciples of the originators. Their
meaning continues to be felt in undiminished strength, and is perhaps
brought out into even fuller consciousness, so long as the struggle
lasts to give the doctrine or creed an ascendency over other creeds. At
last it either prevails, and becomes the general opinion, or its
progress stops; it keeps possession of the ground it has gained, but
ceases to spread further. When either of these results has become
apparent, controversy on the subject flags, and gradually dies away. The
doctrine has taken its place, if not as a received opinion, as one of
the admitted sects or divisions of opinion: those who hold it have
generally inherited, not adopted it; and conversion from one of these
doctrines to another, being now an exceptional fact, occupies little
place in the thoughts of their professors. Instead of being, as at
first, constantly on the alert either to defend themselves against the
world, or to bring the world over to them, they have subsided into
acquiescence, and neither listen, when they can help it, to arguments
against their creed, nor trouble dissentients (if there be such) with
arguments in its favor. From this time may usually be dated the decline
Edition: current; Page: [74]in the living power of the doctrine. We
often hear the teachers of all creeds lamenting the difficulty of
keeping up in the minds of believers a lively apprehension of the truth
which they nominally recognize, so that it may penetrate the feelings,
and acquire a real mastery over the conduct. No such difficulty is
complained of while the creed is still fighting for its existence: even
the weaker combatants then know and feel what they are fighting for, and
the difference between it and other doctrines; and in that period of
every creed’s existence, not a few persons may be found, who have
realized its fundamental principles in all the forms of thought, have
weighed and considered them in all their important bearings, and have
experienced the full effect on the character, which belief in that creed
ought to produce in a mind thoroughly imbued with it. But when it has
come to be an hereditary creed, and to be received passively, not
actively — when the mind is no longer compelled, in the same degree as
at first, to exercise its vital powers on the questions which its belief
presents to it, there is a progressive tendency to forget all of the
belief except the formularies, or to give it a dull and torpid assent,
as if accepting it on trust dispensed with the necessity of realizing it
in consciousness, or testing it by personal experience; until it almost
ceases to connect itself at all with the inner life of the human being.
Then are seen the Edition: current; Page: [75]cases, so frequent in this
age of the world as almost to form the majority, in which the creed
remains as it were outside the mind, encrusting and petrifying it
against all other influences addressed to the higher parts of our
nature; manifesting its power by not suffering any fresh and living
conviction to get in, but itself doing nothing for the mind or heart,
except standing sentinel over them to keep them vacant.

To what an extent doctrines intrinsically fitted to make the deepest
impression upon the mind may remain in it as dead beliefs, without being
ever realized in the imagination, the feelings, or the understanding, is
exemplified by the manner in which the majority of believers hold the
doctrines of Christianity. By Christianity I here mean what is accounted
such by all churches and sects — the maxims and precepts contained in
the New Testament. These are considered sacred, and accepted as laws, by
all professing Christians. Yet it is scarcely too much to say that not
one Christian in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by
reference to those laws. The standard to which he does refer it, is the
custom of his nation, his class, or his religious profession. He has
thus, on the one hand, a collection of ethical maxims, which he believes
to have been vouchsafed to him by infallible wisdom as rules for his
government; and on the other, a set of every-day judgments and Edition:
current; Page: [76]practices, which go a certain length with some of
those maxims, not so great a length with others, stand in direct
opposition to some, and are, on the whole, a compromise between the
Christian creed and the interests and suggestions of worldly life. To
the first of these standards he gives his homage; to the other his real
allegiance. All Christians believe that the blessed are the poor and
humble, and those who are ill-used by the world; that it is easier for a
camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter
the kingdom of heaven; that they should judge not, lest they be judged;
that they should swear not at all that they should love their neighbor
as themselves; that if one take their cloak, they should give him their
coat also; that they should take no thought for the morrow; that if they
would be perfect, they should sell all that they have and give it to the
poor. They are not insincere when they say that they believe these
things. They do believe them, as people believe what they have always
heard lauded and never discussed. But in the sense of that living belief
which regulates conduct, they believe these doctrines just up to the
point to which it is usual to act upon them. The doctrines in their
integrity are serviceable to pelt adversaries with; and it is understood
that they are to be put forward (when possible) as the reasons for
whatever people do that they think laudable. But any one who reminded
them Edition: current; Page: [77]that the maxims require an infinity of
things which they never even think of doing, would gain nothing but to
be classed among those very unpopular characters who affect to be better
than other people. The doctrines have no hold on ordinary believers —
are not a power in their minds. They have an habitual respect for the
sound of them, but no feeling which spreads from the words to the things
signified, and forces the mind to take them in, and make them conform to
the formula. Whenever conduct is concerned, they look round for Mr. A
and B to direct them how far to go in obeying Christ.

Now we may be well assured that the case was not thus, but far
otherwise, with the early Christians. Had it been thus, Christianity
never would have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised Hebrews
into the religion of the Roman empire. When their enemies said, “See how
these Christians love one another” (a remark not likely to be made by
anybody now), they assuredly had a much livelier feeling of the meaning
of their creed than they have ever had since. And to this cause,
probably, it is chiefly owing that Christianity now makes so little
progress in extending its domain, and after eighteen centuries, is still
nearly confined to Europeans and the descendants of Europeans. Even with
the strictly religious, who are much in earnest about their doctrines,
and attach a greater amount of meaning to Edition: current; Page:
[78]many of them than people in general, it commonly happens that the
part which is thus comparatively active in their minds is that which was
made by Calvin, or Knox, or some such person much nearer in character to
themselves. The sayings of Christ coexist passively in their minds,
producing hardly any effect beyond what is caused by mere listening to
words so amiable and bland. There are many reasons, doubtless, why
doctrines which are the badge of a sect retain more of their vitality
than those common to all recognized sects, and why more pains are taken
by teachers to keep their meaning alive; but one reason certainly is,
that the peculiar doctrines are more questioned, and have to be oftener
defended against open gainsayers. Both teachers and learners go to sleep
at their post, as soon as there is no enemy in the field.

The same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional
doctrines — those of prudence and knowledge of life, as well as of
morals or religion. All languages and literatures are full of general
observations on life, both as to what it is, and how to conduct oneself
in it; observations which everybody knows, which everybody repeats, or
hears with acquiescence, which are received as truisms, yet of which
most people first truly learn the meaning, when experience, generally of
a painful kind, has made it a reality to them. How often, when smarting
under some unforeseen Edition: current; Page: [79]misfortune or
disappointment, does a person call to mind some proverb or common
saying, familiar to him all his life, the meaning of which, if he had
ever before felt it as he does now, would have saved him from the
calamity. There are indeed reasons for this, other than the absence of
discussion: there are many truths of which the full meaning cannot be
realized, until personal experience has brought it home. But much more
of the meaning even of these would have been understood and what was
understood would have been far more deeply impressed on the mind, if the
man had been accustomed to hear it argued pro and con by people who did
understand it. The fatal tendency of mankind to leave off thinking about
a thing when it is no longer doubtful, is the cause of half their
errors. A cotemporary author has well spoken of “the deep slumber of a
decided opinion.”

But what! (it may be asked) Is the absence of unanimity an indispensable
condition of true knowledge? Is it necessary that some part of mankind
should persist in error, to enable any to realize the truth? Does a
belief cease to be real and vital as soon as it is generally received —
and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt unless some
doubt of it remains? As soon as mankind have unanimously accepted a
truth, does the truth perish within them? The highest aim and best
result of improved intelligence, it has Edition: current; Page:
[80]hitherto been thought, is to unite mankind more and more in the
acknowledgment of all important truths: and does the intelligence only
last as long as it has not achieved its object? Do the fruits of
conquest perish by the very completeness of the victory?

I affirm no such thing. As mankind improve, the number of doctrines
which are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on the
increase: and the well-being of mankind may almost be measured by the
number and gravity of the truths which have reached the point of being
uncontested. The cessation, on one question after another, of serious
controversy, is one of the necessary incidents of the consolidation of
opinion; a consolidation as salutary in the case of true opinions, as it
is dangerous and noxious when the opinions are erroneous. But though
this gradual narrowing of the bounds of diversity of opinion is
necessary in both senses of the term, being at once inevitable and
indispensable, we are not therefore obliged to conclude that all its
consequences must be beneficial. The loss of so important an aid to the
intelligent and living apprehension of a truth, as is afforded by the
necessity of explaining it to, or defending it against, opponents,
though not sufficient to outweigh, is no trifling drawback from, the
benefit of its universal recognition. Where this advantage can no longer
be had, I confess I should like to see the teachers of mankind Edition:
current; Page: [81]endeavoring to provide a substitute for it; some
contrivance for making the difficulties of the question as present to
the learner’s consciousness, as if they were pressed upon him by a
dissentient champion, eager for his conversion.

But instead of seeking contrivances for this purpose, they have lost
those they formerly had. The Socratic dialectics, so magnificently
exemplified in the dialogues of Plato, were a contrivance of this
description. They were essentially a negative discussion of the great
questions of philosophy and life, directed with consummate skill to the
purpose of convincing any one who had merely adopted the commonplaces of
received opinion, that he did not understand the subject — that he as
yet attached no definite meaning to the doctrines he professed; in order
that, becoming aware of his ignorance, he might be put in the way to
attain a stable belief, resting on a clear apprehension both of the
meaning of doctrines and of their evidence. The school disputations of
the Middle Ages had a somewhat similar object. They were intended to
make sure that the pupil understood his own opinion, and (by necessary
correlation) the opinion opposed to it, and could enforce the grounds of
the one and confute those of the other. These last-mentioned contests
had indeed the incurable defect, that the premises appealed to were
taken from authority, not from reason; and, as a discipline Edition:
current; Page: [82]to the mind, they were in every respect inferior to
the powerful dialectics which formed the intellects of the “Socratici
viri:” but the modern mind owes far more to both than it is generally
willing to admit, and the present modes of education contain nothing
which in the smallest degree supplies the place either of the one or of
the other. A person who derives all his instruction from teachers or
books, even if he escape the besetting temptation of contenting himself
with cram, is under no compulsion to hear both sides; accordingly it is
far from a frequent accomplishment, even among thinkers, to know both
sides; and the weakest part of what everybody says in defence of his
opinion, is what he intends as a reply to antagonists. It is the fashion
of the present time to disparage negative logic — that which points out
weaknesses in theory or errors in practice, without establishing
positive truths. Such negative criticism would indeed be poor enough as
an ultimate result; but as a means to attaining any positive knowledge
or conviction worthy the name, it cannot be valued too highly; and until
people are again systematically trained to it, there will be few great
thinkers, and a low general average of intellect, in any but the
mathematical and physical departments of speculation. On any other
subject no one’s opinions deserve the name of knowledge, except so far
as he has either had forced upon him by others, or gone through of
himself Edition: current; Page: [83]the same mental process which would
have been required of him in carrying on an active controversy with
opponents. That, therefore, which when absent, it is so indispensable,
but so difficult, to create, how worse than absurd is it to forego, when
spontaneously offering itself! If there are any persons who contest a
received opinion, or who will do so if law or opinion will let them, let
us thank them for it, open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that
there is some one to do for us what we otherwise ought, if we have any
regard for either the certainty or the vitality of our convictions, to
do with much greater labor for ourselves.

It still remains to speak of one of the principal causes which make
diversity of opinion advantageous, and will continue to do so until
mankind shall have entered a stage of intellectual advancement which at
present seems at an incalculable distance. We have hitherto considered
only two possibilities: that the received opinion may be false, and some
other opinion, consequently, true; or that, the received opinion being
true, a conflict with the opposite error is essential to a clear
apprehension and deep feeling of its truth. But there is a commoner case
than either of these; when the conflicting doctrines, instead of being
one true and the other false, share the truth between them; and the
nonconforming opinion is needed Edition: current; Page: [84]to supply
the remainder of the truth, of which the received doctrine embodies only
a part. Popular opinions, on subjects not palpable to sense, are often
true, but seldom or never the whole truth. They are a part of the truth;
sometimes a greater, sometimes a smaller part, but exaggerated,
distorted, and disjoined from the truths by which they ought to be
accompanied and limited. Heretical opinions, on the other hand, are
generally some of these suppressed and neglected truths, bursting the
bonds which kept them down, and either seeking reconciliation with the
truth contained in the common opinion, or fronting it as enemies, and
setting themselves up, with similar exclusiveness, as the whole truth.
The latter case is hitherto the most frequent, as, in the human mind,
one-sidedness has always been the rule, and many-sidedness the
exception. Hence, even in revolutions of opinion, one part of the truth
usually sets while another rises. Even progress, which ought to
superadd, for the most part only substitutes one partial and incomplete
truth for another; improvement consisting chiefly in this, that the new
fragment of truth is more wanted, more adapted to the needs of the time,
than that which it displaces. Such being the partial character of
prevailing opinions, even when resting on a true foundation; every
opinion which embodies somewhat of the portion of truth which the common
opinion omits, ought to be considered precious, Edition: current; Page:
[85]with whatever amount of error and confusion that truth may be
blended. No sober judge of human affairs will feel bound to be indignant
because those who force on our notice truths which we should otherwise
have overlooked, overlook some of those which we see. Rather, he will
think that so long as popular truth is one-sided, it is more desirable
than otherwise that unpopular truth should have one-sided asserters too;
such being usually the most energetic, and the most likely to compel
reluctant attention to the fragment of wisdom which they proclaim as if
it were the whole.

Thus, in the eighteenth century, when nearly all the instructed, and all
those of the uninstructed who were led by them, were lost in admiration
of what is called civilization, and of the marvels of modern science,
literature, and philosophy, and while greatly overrating the amount of
unlikeness between the men of modern and those of ancient times,
indulged the belief that the whole of the difference was in their own
favor; with what a salutary shock did the paradoxes of Rousseau explode
like bombshells in the midst, dislocating the compact mass of one-sided
opinion, and forcing its elements to recombine in a better form and with
additional ingredients. Not that the current opinions were on the whole
farther from the truth than Rousseau’s were; on the contrary, they were
nearer to it; they contained more of positive truth, and very much less
of Edition: current; Page: [86]error. Nevertheless there lay in
Rousseau’s doctrine, and has floated down the stream of opinion along
with it, a considerable amount of exactly those truths which the popular
opinion wanted; and these are the deposit which was left behind when the
flood subsided. The superior worth of simplicity of life, the enervating
and demoralizing effect of the trammels and hypocrisies of artificial
society, are ideas which have never been entirely absent from cultivated
minds since Rousseau wrote; and they will in time produce their due
effect, though at present needing to be asserted as much as ever, and to
be asserted by deeds, for words, on this subject, have nearly exhausted
their power.

In politics, again, it is almost a commonplace, that a party of order or
stability, and a party of progress or reform, are both necessary
elements of a healthy state of political life; until the one or the
other shall have so enlarged its mental grasp as to be a party equally
of order and of progress, knowing and distinguishing what is fit to be
preserved from what ought to be swept away. Each of these modes of
thinking derives its utility from the deficiencies of the other; but it
is in a great measure the opposition of the other that keeps each within
the limits of reason and sanity. Unless opinions favorable to democracy
and to aristocracy, to property and to equality, to coöperation and to
competition, to luxury and to abstinence, Edition: current; Page: [87]to
sociality and individuality, to liberty and discipline, and all the
other standing antagonisms of practical life, are expressed with equal
freedom, and enforced and defended with equal talent and energy, there
is no chance of both elements obtaining their due; one scale is sure to
go up, and the other down. Truth, in the great practical concerns of
life, is so much a question of the reconciling and combining of
opposites, that very few have minds sufficiently capacious and impartial
to make the adjustment with an approach to correctness, and it has to be
made by the rough process of a struggle between combatants fighting
under hostile banners. On any of the great open questions just
enumerated, if either of the two opinions has a better claim than the
other, not merely to be tolerated, but to be encouraged and
countenanced, it is the one which happens at the particular time and
place to be in a minority. That is the opinion which, for the time
being, represents the neglected interests, the side of human well-being
which is in danger of obtaining less than its share. I am aware that
there is not, in this country, any intolerance of differences of opinion
on most of these topics. They are adduced to show, by admitted and
multiplied examples, the universality of the fact, that only through
diversity of opinion is there, in the existing state of human intellect,
a chance of fair play to all sides of the truth. When Edition: current;
Page: [88]there are persons to be found, who form an exception to the
apparent unanimity of the world on any subject, even if the world is in
the right, it is always probable that dissentients have something worth
hearing to say for themselves, and that truth would lose something by
their silence.

It may be objected, “But some received principles, especially on the
highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. The
Christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject,
and if any one teaches a morality which varies from it, he is wholly in
error.” As this is of all cases the most important in practice, none can
be fitter to test the general maxim. But before pronouncing what
Christian morality is or is not, it would be desirable to decide what is
meant by Christian morality. If it means the morality of the New
Testament, I wonder that any one who derives his knowledge of this from
the book itself, can suppose that it was announced, or intended, as a
complete doctrine of morals. The Gospel always refers to a preëxisting
morality, and confines its precepts to the particulars in which that
morality was to be corrected, or superseded by a wider and higher;
expressing itself, moreover, in terms most general, often impossible to
be interpreted literally, and possessing rather the impressiveness of
poetry or eloquence than the precision of legislation. To extract from
it a body of ethical doctrine, has never Edition: current; Page:
[89]been possible without eking it out from the Old Testament, that is,
from a system elaborate indeed, but in many respects barbarous, and
intended only for a barbarous people. St. Paul, a declared enemy to this
Judaical mode of interpreting the doctrine and filling up the scheme of
his Master, equally assumes a preëxisting morality, namely, that of the
Greeks and Romans; and his advice to Christians is in a great measure a
system of accommodation to that; even to the extent of giving an
apparent sanction to slavery. What is called Christian, but should
rather be termed theological, morality, was not the work of Christ or
the Apostles, but is of much later origin, having been gradually built
up by the Catholic Church of the first five centuries, and though not
implicitly adopted by moderns and Protestants, has been much less
modified by them than might have been expected. For the most part,
indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the additions
which had been made to it in the Middle Ages, each sect supplying the
place by fresh additions, adapted to its own character and tendencies.
That mankind owe a great debt to this morality, and to its early
teachers, I should be the last person to deny; but I do not scruple to
say of it, that it is, in many important points, incomplete and
one-sided, and that unless ideas and feelings, not sanctioned by it, had
contributed to the formation of European life and character, human
Edition: current; Page: [90]affairs would have been in a worse condition
than they now are. Christian morality (so called) has all the characters
of a reaction it is, in great part, a protest against Paganism. Its
ideal is negative rather than positive; passive rather than active;
Innocence rather than Nobleness; Abstinence from Evil, rather than
energetic Pursuit of Good: in its precepts (as has been well said) “thou
shalt not” predominates unduly over “thou shalt.” In its horror of
sensuality, it made an idol of asceticism, which has been gradually
compromised away into one of legality. It holds out the hope of heaven
and the threat of hell, as the appointed and appropriate motives to a
virtuous life: in this falling far below the best of the ancients, and
doing what lies in it to give to human morality an essentially selfish
character, by disconnecting each man’s feelings of duty from the
interests of his fellow-creatures, except so far as a self-interested
inducement is offered to him for consulting them. It is essentially a
doctrine of passive obedience; it inculcates submission to all
authorities found established; who indeed are not to be actively obeyed
when they command what religion forbids, but who are not to be resisted,
far less rebelled against, for any amount of wrong to ourselves. And
while, in the morality of the best Pagan nations, duty to the State
holds even a disproportionate place, infringing on the just liberty of
the individual; in purely Christian ethics, Edition: current; Page:
[91]that grand department of duty is scarcely noticed or acknowledged.
It is in the Koran, not the New Testament, that we read the maxim — “A
ruler who appoints any man to an office, when there is in his dominions
an other man better qualified for it, sins against God and against the
State.” What little recognition the idea of obligation to the public
obtains in modern morality, is derived from Greek and Roman sources, not
from Christian; as, even in the morality of private life, whatever
exists of magnanimity, high-mindedness, personal dignity, even the sense
of honor, is derived from the purely human, not the religious part of
our education, and never could have grown out of a standard of ethics in
which the only worth, professedly recognized, is that of obedience.

I am as far as any one from pretending that these defects are
necessarily inherent in the Christian ethics, in every manner in which
it can be conceived, or that the many requisites of a complete moral
doctrine which it does not contain, do not admit of being reconciled
with it. Far less would I insinuate this of the doctrines and precepts
of Christ himself. I believe that the sayings of Christ are all, that I
can see any evidence of their having been intended to be; that they are
irreconcilable with nothing which a comprehensive morality requires;
that everything which is excellent in ethics may be brought within them,
with no greater violence to their language than has Edition: current;
Page: [92]been done to it by all who have attempted to deduce from them
any practical system of conduct whatever. But it is quite consistent
with this, to believe that they contain, and were meant to contain, only
a part of the truth; that many essential elements of the highest
morality are among the things which are not provided for, nor intended
to be provided for in the recorded deliverances of the Founder of
Christianity, and which have been entirely thrown aside in the system of
ethics erected on the basis of those deliverances by the Christian
Church. And this being so, I think it a great error to persist in
attempting to find in the Christian doctrine that complete rule for our
guidance, which its author intended it to sanction and enforce, but only
partially to provide. I believe, too, that this narrow theory is
becoming a grave practical evil, detracting greatly from the value of
the moral training and instruction, which so many well-meaning persons
are now at length exerting themselves to promote. I much fear that by
attempting to form the mind and feelings on an exclusively religious
type, and discarding those secular standards (as for want of a better
name they may be called) which heretofore coexisted with and
supplemented the Christian ethics, receiving some of its spirit, and
infusing into it some of theirs, there will result, and is even now
resulting, a low, abject, servile type of character, which, submit
itself as it may to Edition: current; Page: [93]what it deems the
Supreme Will, is incapable of rising to or sympathizing in the
conception of Supreme Goodness. I believe that other ethics than any
which can be evolved from exclusively Christian sources, must exist side
by side with Christian ethics to produce the moral regeneration of
mankind; and that the Christian system is no exception to the rule, that
in an imperfect state of the human mind, the interests of truth require
a diversity of opinions. It is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore
the moral truths not contained in Christianity, men should ignore any of
those which it does contain. Such prejudice, or oversight, when it
occurs, is altogether an evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope
to be always exempt, and must be regarded as the price paid for an
inestimable good. The exclusive pretension made by a part of the truth
to be the whole, must and ought to be protested against, and if a
reactionary impulse should make the protestors unjust in their turn,
this one-sidedness, like the others, may be lamented, but must be
tolerated. If Christians would teach infidels to be just to
Christianity, they should themselves be just to in fidelity. It can do
truth no service to blink the fact, known to all who have the most
ordinary acquaintance with literary history, that a large portion of the
noblest and most valuable moral teaching has been the work, not Edition:
current; Page: [94]only of men who did not know, but of men who knew and
rejected, the Christian faith.

I do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom of
enunciating all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of
religous or philosophical sectarianism. Every truth which men of narrow
capacity are in earnest about, is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and
in many ways even acted on, as if no other truth existed in the world,
or at all events none that could limit or qualify the first. I
acknowledge that the tendency of all opinions to become sectarian is not
cured by the freest discussion, but is often heightened and exacerbated
thereby; the truth which ought to have been, but was not, seen, being
rejected all the more violently because proclaimed by persons regarded
as opponents. But it is not on the impassioned partisan, it is on the
calmer and more disinterested by-stander, that this collision of
opinions works its salutary effect. Not the violent conflict between
parts of the truth, but the quiet suppression of half of it, is the
formidable evil: there is always hope when people are forced to listen
to both sides; it is when they attend only to one that errors harden
into prejudices, and truth itself ceases to have the effect of truth, by
being exaggerated into falsehood. And since there are few mental
attributes more rare than that judicial faculty which can sit in
intelligent judgment between two sides of a question, of which only
Edition: current; Page: [95]one is represented by an advocate before it,
truth has no chance but in proportion as every side of it, every opinion
which embodies any fraction of the truth, not only finds advocates, but
is so advocated as to be listened to.

We have now recognized the necessity to the mental well-being of mankind
(on which all their other well-being depends) of freedom of opinion, and
freedom of the expression of opinion, on four distinct grounds; which we
will now briefly recapitulate.

First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for
aught we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own
infallibility.

Secondly, though the silenced opinion be an error, it may, and very
commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and since the general or
prevailing opinion on any subject is rarely or never the whole truth, it
is only by the collision of adverse opinions that the remainder of the
truth has any chance of being supplied.

Thirdly, even if the received opinion be not only true, but the whole
truth; unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and
earnestly contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held
in the manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of
its rational grounds. And not only this, but, fourthly, the meaning of
the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost, or enfeebled, and
deprived of its vital effect on the Edition: current; Page:
[96]character and conduct: the dogma becoming a mere formal profession,
inefficacious for good, but cumbering the ground, and preventing the
growth of any real and heartfelt conviction, from reason or personal
experience.

Before quitting the subject of freedom of opinion, it is fit to take
some notice of those who say, that the free expression of all opinions
should be permitted, on condition that the manner be temperate, and do
not pass the bounds of fair discussion. Much might be said on the
impossibility of fixing where these supposed bounds are to be placed;
for if the test be offence to those whose opinion is attacked, I think
experience testifies that this offence is given whenever the attack is
telling and powerful, and that every opponent who pushes them hard, and
whom they find it difficult to answer, appears to them, if he shows any
strong feeling on the subject, an intemperate opponent. But this, though
an important consideration in a practical point of view, merges in a
more fundamental objection. Undoubtedly the manner of asserting an
opinion, even though it be a true one, may be very objectionable, and
may justly incur severe censure. But the principal offences of the kind
are such as it is mostly impossible, unless by accidental self-betrayal,
to bring home to conviction. The gravest of them is, to argue
sophistically, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements
of the case, or misrepresent Edition: current; Page: [97]the opposite
opinion. But all this, even to the most aggravated degree, is so
continually done in perfect good faith, by persons who are not
considered, and in many other respects may not deserve to be considered,
ignorant or incompetent, that it is rarely possible on adequate grounds
conscientiously to stamp the misrepresentation as morally culpable; and
still less could law presume to interfere with this kind of
controversial misconduct. With regard to what is commonly meant by
intemperate discussion, namely, invective, sarcasm, personality, and the
like, the denunciation of these weapons would deserve more sympathy if
it were ever proposed to interdict them equally to both sides; but it is
only desired to restrain the employment of them against the prevailing
opinion: against the unprevailing they may not only be used without
general disapproval, but will be likely to obtain for him who uses them
the praise of honest zeal and righteous indignation. Yet whatever
mischief arises from their use, is greatest when they are employed
against the comparatively defenceless; and whatever unfair advantage can
be derived by any opinion from this mode of asserting it, accrues almost
exclusively to received opinions. The worst offence of this kind which
can be committed by a polemic, is to stigmatize those who hold the
contrary opinion as bad and immoral men. To calumny of this sort, those
who hold any unpopular Edition: current; Page: [98]opinion are
peculiarly exposed, because they are in general few and uninfluential,
and nobody but themselves feels much interest in seeing justice done
them; but this weapon is, from the nature of the case, denied to those
who attack a prevailing opinion: they can neither use it with safety to
themselves, nor, if they could, would it do anything but recoil on their
own cause. In general, opinions contrary to those commonly received can
only obtain a hearing by studied moderation of language, and the most
cautious avoidance of unnecessary offence, from which they hardly ever
deviate even in a slight degree without losing ground: while unmeasured
vituperation employed on the side of the prevailing opinion, really does
deter people from professing contrary opinions, and from listening to
those who profess them. For the interest, therefore, of truth and
justice, it is far more important to restrain this employment of
vituperative language than the other; and, for example, if it were
necessary to choose, there would be much more need to discourage
offensive attacks on infidelity, than on religion. It is, however,
obvious that law and authority have no business with restraining either,
while opinion ought, in every instance, to determine its verdict by the
circumstances of the individual case; condemning every one, on whichever
side of the argument he places himself, in whose mode of advocacy either
want of candor, or malignity, bigotry, Edition: current; Page: [99]or
intolerance of feeling manifest themselves; but not inferring these
vices from the side which a person takes, though it be the contrary side
of the question to our own: and giving merited honor to every one,
whatever opinion he may hold, who has calmness to see and honesty to
state what his opponents and their opinions really are, exaggerating
nothing to their discredit, keeping nothing back which tells, or can be
supposed to tell, in their favor. This is the real morality of public
discussion; and if often violated, I am happy to think that there are
many controversialists who to a great extent observe it, and a still
greater number who conscientiously strive towards it.

Edition: current; Page: [100]


CHAPTER III.: of individuality, as one of the elements of well-being.

SUCH being the reasons which make it imperative that human beings should
be free to form opinions, and to express their opinions without reserve;
and such the baneful consequences to the intellectual, and through that
to the moral nature of man, unless this liberty is either conceded, or
asserted in spite of prohibition; let us next examine whether the same
reasons do not require that men should be free to act upon their
opinions — to carry these out in their lives, without hindrance, either
physical or moral, from their fellow-men, so long as it is at their own
risk and peril. This last proviso is of course indispensable. No one
pretends that actions should be as free as opinions. On the contrary,
even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they
are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive
instigation to some mischievous act. An opinion that corn-dealers are
starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought to be
unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may Edition:
current; Page: [101]justly incur punishment when delivered orally to an
excited mob assembled before the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed
about among the same mob in the form of a placard. Acts, of whatever
kind, which, without justifiable cause, do harm to others, may be, and
in the more important cases absolutely require to be, controlled by the
unfavorable sentiments, and, when needful, by the active interference of
mankind. The liberty of the individual must be thus far limited; he must
not make himself a nuisance to other people. But if he refrains from
molesting others in what concerns them, and merely acts according to his
own inclination and judgment in things which concern himself, the same
reasons which show that opinion should be free, prove also that he
should be allowed, without molestation, to carry his opinions into
practice at his own cost. That mankind are not infallible; that their
truths, for the most part, are only half-truths; that unity of opinion,
unless resulting from the fullest and freest comparison of opposite
opinions, is not desirable, and diversity not an evil, but a good, until
mankind are much more capable than at present of recognizing all sides
of the truth, are principles applicable to men’s modes of action, not
less than to their opinions. As it is useful that while mankind are
imperfect there should be different opinions, so is it that there should
be different experiments of living; that free scope should Edition:
current; Page: [102]be given to varieties of character, short of injury
to others; and that the worth of different modes of life should be
proved practically, when any one thinks fit to try them. It is
desirable, in short, that in things which do not primarily concern
others, individuality should assert itself. Where, not the person’s own
character, but the traditions or customs of other people are the rule of
conduct, there is wanting one of the principal ingredients of human
happiness, and quite the chief ingredient of individual and social
progress.

In maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be encountered
does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an acknowledged end,
but in the indifference of persons in general to the end itself. If it
were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the
leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a coördinate
element with all that is designated by the terms civilization,
instruction, education, culture, but is itself a necessary part and
condition of all those things; there would be no danger that liberty
should be undervalued, and the adjustment of the boundaries between it
and social control would present no extraordinary difficulty. But the
evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognized by the common
modes of thinking as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving any regard
on its own account. The majority, being satisfied with the ways of
mankind as they Edition: current; Page: [103]now are (for it is they who
make them what they are), cannot comprehend why those ways should not be
good enough for everybody; and what is more, spontaneity forms no part
of the ideal of the majority of moral and social reformers, but is
rather looked on with jealousy, as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious
obstruction to the general acceptance of what these reformers, in their
own judgment, think would be best for mankind. Few persons, out of
Germany, even comprehend the meaning of the doctrine which Wilhelm von
Humboldt, so eminent both as a savant and as a politician, made the text
of a treatise — that “the end of man, or that which is prescribed by the
eternal or immutable dictates of reason, and not suggested by vague and
transient desires, is the highest and most harmonious development of his
powers to a complete and consistent whole;” that, therefore, the object
“towards which every human being must ceaselessly direct his efforts,
and on which especially those who design to influence their fellow-men
must ever keep their eyes, is the individuality of power and
development;” that for this there are two requisites, “freedom, and a
variety of situations;” and that from the union of these arise
“individual vigor and manifold diversity,” which combine themselves in
“originality.”*

Little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of Von
Humboldt, and Edition: current; Page: [104]surprising as it may be to
them to find so high a value attached to individuality, the question,
one must nevertheless think, can only be one of degree. No one’s idea of
excellence in conduct is that people should do absolutely nothing but
copy one another. No one would assert that people ought not to put into
their mode of life, and into the conduct of their concerns, any impress
whatever of their own judgment, or of their own individual character. On
the other hand, it would be absurd to pretend that people ought to live
as if nothing whatever had been known in the world before they came into
it; as if experience had as yet done nothing towards showing that one
mode of existence, or of conduct, is preferable to another. Nobody
denies that people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know
and benefit by the ascertained results of human experience. But it is
the privilege and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the
maturity of his faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own
way. It is for him to find out what part of recorded experience is
properly applicable to his own circumstances and character. The
traditions and customs of other people are, to a certain extent,
evidence of what their experience has taught them; presumptive evidence,
and as such, have a claim to his deference: but, in the first place,
their experience may be too narrow; or they may Edition: current; Page:
[105]not have interpreted it rightly. Secondly, their interpretation of
experience may be correct but unsuitable to him. Customs are made for
customary circumstances, and customary characters: and his circumstances
or his character may be uncustomary. Thirdly, though the customs be both
good as customs, and suitable to him, yet to conform to custom, merely
as custom, does not educate or develop in him any of the qualities which
are the distinctive endowment of a human being. The human faculties of
perception, judgment, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even
moral preference, are exercised only in making a choice. He who does
anything because it is the custom, makes no choice. He gains no practice
either in discerning or in desiring what is best. The mental and moral,
like the muscular powers, are improved only by being used. The faculties
are called into no exercise by doing a thing merely because others do
it, no more than by believing a thing only because others believe it. If
the grounds of an opinion are not conclusive to the person’s own reason,
his reason cannot be strengthened, but is likely to be weakened by his
adopting it: and if the inducements to an act are not such as are
consentaneous to his own feelings and character (where affection, or the
rights of others, are not concerned), it is so much done towards
rendering his feelings and character inert and torpid, instead of active
and energetic.

Edition: current; Page: [106]
He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of life
for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of
imitation. He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his
faculties. He must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to
foresee, activity to gather materials for decision, discrimination to
decide, and when he has decided, firmness and self-control to hold to
his deliberate decision. And these qualities he requires and exercises
exactly in proportion as the part of his conduct which he determines
according to his own judgment and feelings is a large one. It is
possible that he might be guided in some good path, and kept out of
harm’s way, without any of these things. But what will be his
comparative worth as a human being? It really is of importance, not only
what men do, but also what manner of men they are that do it. Among the
works of man, which human life is rightly employed in perfecting and
beautifying, the first in importance surely is man himself. Supposing it
were possible to get houses built, corn grown, battles fought, causes
tried, and even churches erected and prayers said, by machinery — by
automatons in human form — it would be a considerable loss to exchange
for these automatons even the men and women who at present inhabit the
more civilized parts of the world, and who assuredly are but starved
specimens of what nature can and will produce. Human Edition: current;
Page: [107]nature is not a machine to be built after a model, and set to
do exactly the work prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to
grow and develop itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the
inward forces which make it a living thing.

It will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should exercise
their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or
even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a
blind and simply mechanical adhesion to it. To a certain extent it is
admitted, that our understanding should be our own: but there is not the
same willingness to admit that our desires and impulses should be our
own likewise; or that to possess impulses of our own, and of any
strength, is anything but a peril and a snare. Yet desires and impulses
are as much a part of a perfect human being, as beliefs and restraints:
and strong impulses are only perilous when not properly balanced; when
one set of aims and inclinations is developed into strength, while
others, which ought to coexist with them, remain weak and inactive. It
is not because men’s desires are strong that they act ill; it is because
their consciences are weak. There is no natural connection between
strong impulses and a weak conscience. The natural connection is the
other way. To say that one person’s desires and feelings are stronger
and more various than those of another, Edition: current; Page: [108]is
merely to say that he has more of the raw material of human nature, and
is therefore capable, perhaps of more evil, but certainly of more good.
Strong impulses are but another name for energy. Energy may be turned to
bad uses; but more good may always be made of an energetic nature, than
of an indolent and impassive one. Those who have most natural feeling,
are always those whose cultivated feelings may be made the strongest.
The same strong susceptibilities which make the personal impulses vivid
and powerful, are also the source from whence are generated the most
passionate love of virtue, and the sternest self-control. It is through
the cultivation of these, that society both does its duty and protects
its interests: not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made,
because it knows not how to make them. A person whose desires and
impulses are his own — are the expression of his own nature, as it has
been developed and modified by his own culture — is said to have a
character. One whose desires and impulses are not his own, has no
character, no more than a steam-engine has a character. If, in addition
to being his own, his impulses are strong, and are under the government
of a strong will, he has an energetic character. Whoever thinks that
individuality of desires and impulses should not be encouraged to unfold
itself, must maintain that society has no need of strong natures
Edition: current; Page: [109]— is not the better for containing many
persons who have much character — and that a high general average of
energy is not desirable.

In some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too
much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and
controlling them. There has been a time when the element of spontaneity
and individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard
struggle with it. The difficulty then was, to induce men of strong
bodies or minds to pay obedience to any rules which required them to
control their impulses. To overcome this difficulty, law and discipline,
like the Popes struggling against the Emperors, asserted a power over
the whole man, claiming to control all his life in order to control his
character — which society had not found any other sufficient means of
binding. But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and
the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the
deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences. Things are vastly
changed, since the passions of those who were strong by station or by
personal endowment were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws
and ordinances, and required to be rigorously chained up to enable the
persons within their reach to enjoy any particle of security. In our
times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest Edition:
current; Page: [110]every one lives as under the eye of a hostile and
dreaded censorship. Not only in what concerns others, but in what
concerns only themselves, the individual, or the family, do not ask
themselves — what do I prefer? or, what would suit my character and
disposition? or, what would allow the best and highest in me to have
fair play, and enable it to grow and thrive? They ask themselves, what
is suitable to my position? what is usually done by persons of my
station and pecuniary circumstances? or (worse still) what is usually
done by persons of a station and circumstances superior to mine? I do
not mean that they choose what is customary, in preference to what suits
their own inclination. It does not occur to them to have any
inclination, except for what is customary. Thus the mind itself is bowed
to the yoke: even in what people do for pleasure, conformity is the
first thing thought of; they like in crowds; they exercise choice only
among things commonly done: peculiarity of taste, eccentricity of
conduct, are shunned equally with crimes: until by dint of not following
their own nature, they have no nature to follow: their human capacities
are withered and starved: they become incapable of any strong wishes or
native pleasures, and are generally without either opinions or feelings
of home growth, or properly their own. Now is this, or is it not, the
desirable condition of human nature?

Edition: current; Page: [111]
It is so, on the Calvinistic theory. According to that, the one great
offence of man is Self-will. All the good of which humanity is capable,
is comprised in Obedience. You have no choice; thus you must do, and no
otherwise: “whatever is not a duty is a sin.” Human nature being
radically corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human nature
is killed within him. To one holding this theory of life, crushing out
any of the human faculties, capacities, and susceptibilities, is no
evil: man needs no capacity, but that of surrendering himself to the
will of God: and if he uses any of his faculties for any other purpose
but to do that supposed will more effectually, he is better without
them. That is the theory of Calvinism; and it is held, in a mitigated
form, by many who do not consider themselves Calvinists; the mitigation
consisting in giving a less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will
of God; asserting it to be his will that mankind should gratify some of
their inclinations; of course not in the manner they themselves prefer,
but in the way of obedience, that is, in a way prescribed to them by
authority; and, therefore, by the necessary conditions of the case, the
same for all.

In some such insidious form there is at pressent a strong tendency to
this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of
human character which it patronizes. Many persons, no doubt, sincerely
think that human Edition: current; Page: [112]beings thus cramped and
dwarfed, are as their Maker designed them to be; just as many have
thought that trees are a much finer thing when clipped into pollards, or
cut out into figures of animals, than as nature made them. But if it be
any part of religion to believe that man was made by a good Being, it is
more consistent with that faith to believe, that this Being gave all
human faculties that they might be cultivated and unfolded, not rooted
out and consumed, and that he takes delight in every nearer approach
made by his creatures to the ideal conception embodied in them, every
increase in any of their capabilities of comprehension, of action, or of
enjoyment. There is a different type of human excellence from the
Calvinistic; a conception of humanity as having its nature bestowed on
it for other purposes than merely to be abnegated. “Pagan
self-assertion” is one of the elements of human worth, as well as
“Christian self-denial.”* There is a Greek ideal of self-development,
which the Platonic and Christian ideal of self-government blends with,
but does not supersede. It may be better to be a John Knox than an
Alcibiades, but it is better to be a Pericles than either; nor would a
Pericles, if we had one in these days, be without anything good which
belonged to John Knox.

It is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in
themselves, but by cultivating Edition: current; Page: [113]it and
calling it forth, within the limits imposed by the rights and interests
of others, that human beings become a noble and beautiful object of
contemplation; and as the works partake the character of those who do
them, by the same process human life also becomes rich, diversified, and
animating, furnishing more abundant aliment to high thoughts and
elevating feelings, and strengthening the tie which binds every
individual to the race, by making the race infinitely better worth
belonging to. In proportion to the development of his individuality,
each person becomes more valuable to himself, and is therefore capable
of being more valuable to others. There is a greater fulness of life
about his own existence, and when there is more life in the units there
is more in the mass which is composed of them. As much compression as is
necessary to prevent the stronger specimens of human nature from
encroaching on the rights of others, cannot be dispensed with; but for
this there is ample compensation even in the point of view of human
development. The means of development which the individual loses by
being prevented from gratifying his inclinations to the injury of
others, are chiefly obtained at the expense of the development of other
people. And even to himself there is a full equivalent in the better
development of the social part of his nature, rendered possible by the
restraint put upon the selfish part. To be held to rigid Edition:
current; Page: [114]rules of justice for the sake of others, develops
the feelings and capacities which have the good of others for their
object. But to be restrained in things not affecting their good, by
their mere displeasure, developes nothing valuable, except such force of
character as may unfold itself in resisting the restraint. If acquiesced
in, it dulls and blunts the whole nature. To give any fair play to the
nature of each, it is essential that different persons should be allowed
to lead different lives. In proportion as this latitude has been
exercised in any age, has that age been noteworthy to posterity. Even
despotism does not produce its worst effects, so long as Individuality
exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is despotism, by
whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes to be enforcing
the will of God or the injunctions of men.

Having said that Individuality is the same thing with development, and
that it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces, or can
produce, well-developed human beings, I might here close the argument:
for what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs,
than that it brings human beings themselves nearer to the best thing
they can be? or what worse can be said of any obstruction to good, than
that it prevents this? Doubtless, however, these considerations will not
suffice to convince those who most need Edition: current; Page:
[115]convincing; and it is necessary further to show, that these
developed human beings are of some use to the undeveloped — to point out
to those who do not desire liberty, and would not avail themselves of
it, that they may be in some intelligible manner rewarded for allowing
other people to make use of it without hindrance.

In the first place, then, I would suggest that they might possibly learn
something from them. It will not be denied by anybody, that originality
is a valuable element in human affairs. There is always need of persons
not only to discover new truths, and point out when what were once
truths are true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and set
the example of more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense in
human life. This cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not believe
that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways and
practices. It is true that this benefit is not capable of being rendered
by everybody alike: there are but few persons, in comparison with the
whole of mankind, whose experiments, if adopted by others, would be
likely to be any improvement on established practice. But these few are
the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a stagnant
pool. Not only is it they who introduce good things which did not before
exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already existed. If
there were Edition: current; Page: [116]nothing new to be done, would
human intellect cease to be necessary? Would it be a reason why those
who do the old things should forget why they are done, and do them like
cattle, not like human beings? There is only too great a tendency in the
best beliefs and practices to degenerate into the mechanical; and unless
there were a succession of persons whose ever-recurring originality
prevents the grounds of those beliefs and practices from becoming merely
traditional, such dead matter would not resist the smallest shock from
anything really alive, and there would be no reason why civilization
should not die out, as in the Byzantine Empire. Persons of genius, it is
true, are, and are always likely to be, a small minority; but in order
to have them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they grow.
Genius can only breathe freely in an atmosphere of freedom. Persons of
genius are, ex vi termini, more individual than any other people — less
capable, consequently, of fitting themselves, without hurtful
compression, into any of the small number of moulds which society
provides in order to save its members the trouble of forming their own
character. If from timidity they consent to be forced into one of these
moulds, and to let all that part of themselves which cannot expand under
the pressure remain unexpanded, society will be little the better for
their genius. If they are of a strong character, and break their
fetters, Edition: current; Page: [117]they become a mark for the society
which has not succeeded in reducing them to commonplace, to point at
with solemn warning as “wild,” “erratic,” and the like; much as if one
should complain of the Niagara river for not flowing smoothly between
its banks like a Dutch canal.

I insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the
necessity of allowing it to unfold itself freely both in thought and in
practice, being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory,
but knowing also that almost every one, in reality, is totally
indifferent to it. People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man
to write an exciting poem, or paint a picture. But in its true sense,
that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is
not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do
very well without it. Unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at.
Originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use
of. They cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they? If they
could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality. The
first service which originality has to render them, is that of opening
their eyes: which being once fully done, they would have a chance of
being themselves original. Meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever
yet done which some one was not the first to do, and that all good
things Edition: current; Page: [118]which exist are the fruits of
originality, let them be modest enough to believe that there is
something still left for it to accomplish, and assure themselves that
they are more in need of originality, the less they are conscious of the
want.

In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real
or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things
throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among
mankind. In ancient history, in the Middle Ages, and in a diminishing
degree through the long transition from feudality to the present time,
the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great
talents or a high social position, he was a considerable power. At
present individuals are lost in the crowd. In politics it is almost a
triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world. The only
power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while
they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and instincts of
masses. This is as true in the moral and social relations of private
life as in public transactions. Those whose opinions go by the name of
public opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in America, they
are the whole white population in England, chiefly the middle class. But
they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. And what
is a still greater novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions from
Edition: current; Page: [119]dignitaries in Church or State, from
ostensible leaders, or from books. Their thinking is done for them by
men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name, on
the spur of the moment, through the newspapers. I am not complaining of
all this. I do not assert that anything better is compatible, as a
general rule, with the present low state of the human mind. But that
does not hinder the government of mediocrity from being mediocre
government. No government by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy,
either in its political acts or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of
mind which it fosters, ever did or could rise above mediocrity, except
in so far as the sovereign Many have let themselves be guided (which in
their best times they always have done) by the counsels and influence of
a more highly gifted and instructed One or Few. The initiation of all
wise or noble things, comes and must come from individuals; generally at
first from some one individual. The honor and glory of the average man
is that he is capable of following that initiative; that he can respond
internally to wise and noble things, and be led to them with his eyes
open. I am not countenancing the sort of “hero-worship” which applauds
the strong man of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the
world and making it do his bidding in spite of itself. All he can claim
is, freedom to point out the way. The power of compelling others
Edition: current; Page: [120]into it, is not only inconsistent with the
freedom and development of all the rest, but corrupting to the strong
man himself. It does seem, however, that when the opinions of masses of
merely average men are everywhere become or becoming the dominant power,
the counterpoise and corrective to that tendency would be, the more and
more pronounced individuality of those who stand on the higher eminences
of thought. It is in these circumstances most especially, that
exceptional individuals, instead of being detered, should be encouraged
in acting differently from the mass. In other times there was no
advantage in their doing so, unless they acted not only differently, but
better. In this age the mere example of non-conformity, the mere refusal
to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service. Precisely because the
tyranny of opinion is such as to make eccentricity a reproach, it is
desirable, in order to break through that tyranny, that people should be
eccentric. Eccentricity has always abounded when and where strength of
character has abounded; and the amount of eccentricity in a society has
generally been proportional to the amount of genius, mental vigor, and
moral courage which it contained. That so few now dare to be eccentric,
marks the chief danger of the time.

I have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to
uncustomary things, in Edition: current; Page: [121]order that it may in
time appear which of these are fit to be converted into customs. But
independence of action, and disregard of custom are not solely deserving
of encouragement for the chance they afford that better modes of action,
and customs more worthy of general adoption, may be struck out; nor is
it only persons of decided mental superiority who have a just claim to
carry on their lives in their own way. There is no reason that all human
existences should be constructed on some one, or some small number of
patterns. If a person possesses any tolerable amount of common sense and
experience, his own mode of laying out his existence is the best, not
because it is the best in itself, but because it is his own mode. Human
beings are not like sheep; and even sheep are not undistinguishably
alike. A man cannot get a coat or a pair of boots to fit him, unless
they are either made to his measure, or he has a whole warehouseful to
choose from: and is it easier to fit him with a life than with a coat,
or are human beings more like one another in their whole physical and
spiritual conformation than in the shape of their feet? If it were only
that people have diversities of taste, that is reason enough for not
attempting to shape them all after one model. But different persons also
require different conditions for their spiritual development; and can no
more exist healthily in the same moral, than all the variety of plants
can in the same physical, Edition: current; Page: [122]atmosphere and
climate. The same things which are helps to one person towards the
cultivation of his higher nature, are hindrances to another. The same
mode of life is a healthy excitement to one, keeping all his faculties
of action and enjoyment in their best order, while to another it is a
distracting burden, which suspends or crushes all internal life. Such
are the differences among human beings in their sources of pleasure,
their susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them of different
physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a corresponding
diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain their fair share
of happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and æsthetic stature of
which their nature is capable. Why then should tolerance, as far as the
public sentiment is concerned, extend only to tastes and modes of life
which extort acquiescence by the multitude of their adherents? Nowhere
(except in some monastic institutions) is diversity of taste entirely
unrecognized; a person may without blame, either like or dislike rowing,
or smoking, or music, or athletic exercises, or chess, or cards, or
study, because both those who like each of these things, and those who
dislike them, are too numerous to be put down. But the man, and still
more the woman, who can be accused either of doing “what nobody does,”
or of not doing “what everybody does,” is the subject of as much
depreciatory remark as if he or she had committed some grave Edition:
current; Page: [123]moral delinquency. Persons require to possess a
title, or some other badge of rank, or the consideration of people of
rank, to be able to indulge somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like
without detriment to their estimation. To indulge somewhat, I repeat:
for whoever allow themselves much of that indulgence, incur the risk of
something worse than disparaging speeches — they are in peril of a
commission de lunatico, and of having their property taken from them and
given to their relations.*

Edition: current; Page: [124]
There is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion,
peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration
of individuality. The general average of mankind are not only moderate
in intellect, but also moderate in inclinations: they have no tastes or
wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and they
consequently do not understand those who have, and class all such with
the wild and intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down upon.
Now, in addition to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose
that a strong movement has set in towards the improvement of morals, and
it is evident what we have to expect. In these days such a movement has
set in; much has actually been effected in the way of increased
regularity of conduct, and discouragement of excesses; and there is a
philanthropic spirit abroad, for the exercise of which there is no more
inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of our
fellow-creatures. These tendencies of the times cause the public to be
more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of
conduct, and endeavor to make every one conform to the approved
standard. And that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing
strongly. Its ideal of character is to be without any marked character;
to maim by compression, like a Chinese lady’s foot, every part of human
nature which stands out prominently, Edition: current; Page: [125]and
tends to make the person markedly dissimilar in outline to commonplace
humanity.

As is usually the case with ideals which exclude one half of what is
desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior
imitation of the other half. Instead of great energies guided by
vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a
conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, which
therefore can be kept in outward conformity to rule without any strength
either of will or of reason. Already energetic characters on any large
scale are becoming merely traditional. There is now scarcely any outlet
for energy in this country except business. The energy expended in that
may still be regarded as considerable. What little is left from that
employment, is expended on some hobby; which may be a useful, even a
philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a thing
of small dimensions. The greatness of England is now all collective:
individually small, we only appear capable of anything great by our
habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious
philanthropists are perfectly contented. But it was men of another stamp
than this that made England what it has been; and men of another stamp
will be needed to prevent its decline.

The despotism of custom is everywhere the Edition: current; Page:
[126]standing hindrance to human advancement, being in unceasing
antagonism to that disposition to aim at something better than
customary, which is called, according to circumstances, the spirit of
liberty, or that of progress or improvement. The spirit of improvement
is not always a spirit of liberty, for it may aim at forcing
improvements on an unwilling people; and the spirit of liberty, in so
far as it resists such attempts, may ally itself locally and temporarily
with the opponents of improvement; but the only unfailing and permanent
source of improvement is liberty, since by it there are as many possible
independent centres of improvement as there are individuals. The
progressive principle, however, in either shape, whether as the love of
liberty or of improvement, is antagonistic to the sway of Custom,
involving at least emancipation from that yoke; and the contest between
the two constitutes the chief interest of the history of mankind. The
greater part of the world has, properly speaking, no history, because
the despotism of Custom is complete. This is the case over the whole
East. Custom is there, in all things, the final appeal; justice and
right mean conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless
some tyrant intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting. And we see the
result. Those nations must once have had originality; they did not start
out of the ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of
life Edition: current; Page: [127]they made themselves all this, and
were then the greatest and most powerful nations in the world. What are
they now? The subjects or dependents of tribes whose forefathers
wandered in the forests when theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous
temples, but over whom custom exercised only a divided rule with liberty
and progress. A people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain
length of time, and then stop: when does it stop? When it ceases to
possess individuality. If a similar change should befall the nations of
Europe, it will not be in exactly the same shape: the despotism of
custom with which these nations are threatened is not precisely
stationariness. It proscribes singularity, but it does not preclude
change, provided all change together. We have discarded the fixed
costumes of our fore-fathers; every one must still dress like other
people, but the fashion may change once or twice a year. We thus take
care that when there is change, it shall be for change’s sake, and not
from any idea of beauty or convenience; for the same idea of beauty or
convenience would not strike all the world at the same moment, and be
simultaneously thrown aside by all at another moment. But we are
progressive as well as changeable: we continually make new inventions in
mechanical things, and keep them until they are again superseded by
better; we are eager for improvement in politics, in education, even in
morals, though Edition: current; Page: [128]in this last our idea of
improvement chiefly consists in persuading or forcing other people to be
as good as ourselves. It is not progress that we object to; on the
contrary, we flatten ourselves that we are the most progressive people
who ever lived. It is individuality that we war against: we should think
we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike; forgetting that
the unlikeness of one person to another is generally the first thing
which draws the attention of either to the imperfection of his own type,
and the superiority of another, or the possibility, by combining the
advantages of both, of producing something better than either. We have a
warning example in China — a nation of much talent, and, in some
respects, even wisdom, owing to the rare good fortune of having been
provided at an early period with a particularly good set of customs, the
work, in some measure, of men to whom even the most enlightened European
must accord, under certain limitations, the title of sages and
philosophers. They are remarkable, too, in the excellence of their
apparatus for impressing, as far as possible, the best wisdom they
possess upon every mind in the community, and securing that those who
have appropriated most of it shall occupy the posts of honor and power.
Surely the people who did this have discovered the secret of human
progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of
the movement of the Edition: current; Page: [129]world. On the contrary,
they have become stationary — have remained so for thousands of years;
and if they are ever to be farther improved, it must be by foreigners.
They have succeeded beyond all hope in what English philanthropists are
so industriously working at — in making a people all alike, all
governing their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and
these are the fruits. The modern régime of public opinion is, in an
unorganized form, what the Chinese educational and political systems are
in an organized; and unless individuality shall be able successfully to
assert itself against this yoke, Europe, notwithstanding its noble
antecedents and its professed Christianity, will tend to become another
China.

What is it that has hitherto preserved Europe from this lot? What has
made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a
stationary portion of mankind? Not any superior excellence in them,
which when it exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their
remarkable diversity of character and culture. Individuals, classes,
nations, have been extremely unlike one another: they have struck out a
great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although
at every period those who travelled in different paths have been
intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent
thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel Edition:
current; Page: [130]his road, their attempts to thwart each other’s
development have rarely had any permanent success, and each has in time
endured to receive the good which the others have offered. Europe is, in
my judgment, wholly indebted to this plurality of paths for its
progressive and many-sided development. But it already begins to possess
this benefit in a considerably less degree. It is decidedly advancing
towards the Chinese ideal of making all people alike. M. de Tocqueville,
in his last important work, remarks how much more the Frenchmen of the
present day resemble one another, than did those even of the last
generation. The same remark might be made of Englishmen in a far greater
degree. In a passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt, he points
out two things as necessary conditions of human development, because
necessary to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and
variety of situations. The second of these two conditions is in this
country every day diminishing. The circumstances which surround
different classes and individuals, and shape their characters, are daily
becoming more assimilated. Formerly, different ranks, different
neighborhoods, different trades and professions, lived in what might be
called different worlds at present, to a great degree in the same
Comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the
same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have Edition:
current; Page: [131]their hopes and fears directed to the same objects,
have the same rights and liberties, and the same means of asserting
them. Great as are the differences of position which remain, they are
nothing to those which have ceased. And the assimilation is still
proceeding. All the political changes of the age promote it, since they
all tend to raise the low and to lower the high. Every extension of
education promotes it, because education brings people under common
influences, and gives them access to the general stock of facts and
sentiments. Improvements in the means of communication promote it, by
bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact, and
keeping up a rapid flow of changes of residence between one place and
another. The increase of commerce and manufactures promotes it, by
diffusing more widely the advantages of easy circumstances, and opening
all objects of ambition, even the highest, to general competition,
whereby the desire of rising becomes no longer the character of a
particular class, but of all classes. A more powerful agency than even
all these, in bringing about a general similarity among mankind, is the
complete establishment, in this and other free countries, of the
ascendency of public opinion in the State. As the various social
eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them to disregard the
opinion of the multitude, gradually become levelled; as the very idea of
Edition: current; Page: [132]resisting the will of the public, when it
is positively known that they have a will, disappears more and more from
the minds of practical politicians; there ceases to be any social
support for non-conformity — any substantive power in society, which,
itself opposed to the ascendancy of numbers, is interested in taking
under its protection opinions and tendencies at variance with those of
the public.

The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences
hostile to Individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand
its ground. It will do so with increasing difficulty, unless the
intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value — to see
that it is good there should be differences, even though not for the
better, even though, as it may appear to them, some should be for the
worse. If the claims of Individuality are ever to be asserted, the time
is now, while much is still wanting to complete the enforced
assimilation. It is only in the earlier stages that any stand can be
successfully made against the encroachment. The demand that all other
people shall resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on. If
resistance waits till life is reduced nearly to one uniform type, all
deviations from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral,
even monstrous and contrary to nature. Mankind speedily become unable to
conceive diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to
see it.

Edition: current; Page: [133]


CHAPTER IV.: of the limits to the authority of society over the individual.

WHAT, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual
over himself? Where does the authority of society begin? How much of
human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?

Each will receive its proper share, if each has that which more
particularly concerns it. To individuality should belong the part of
life in which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to
society, the part which chiefly interests society.

Though society is not founded on a contract, and though no good purpose
is answered by inventing a contract in order to deduce social
obligations from it, every one who receives the protection of society
owes a return for the benefit, and the fact of living in society renders
it indispensable that each should be bound to observe a certain line of
conduct towards the rest. This conduct consists, first, in not injuring
the interests of one another; or rather certain interests, which, either
by express Edition: current; Page: [134]legal provision or by tacit
understanding, ought to be considered as rights; and secondly, in each
person’s bearing his share (to be fixed on some equitable principle) of
the labors and sacrifices incurred for defending the society or its
members from injury and molestation. These conditions society is
justified in enforcing, at all costs to those who endeavor to withhold
fulfilment. Nor is this all that society may do. The acts of an
individual may be hurtful to others, or wanting in due consideration for
their welfare, without going the length of violating any of their
constituted rights. The offender may then be justly punished by opinion,
though not by law. As soon as any part of a person’s conduct affects
prejudicially the interests of others, society has jurisdiction over it,
and the question whether the general welfare will or will not be
promoted by interfering with it, becomes open to discussion. But there
is no room for entertaining any such question when a person’s conduct
affects the interests of no persons besides himself, or needs not affect
them unless they like (all the persons concerned being of full age, and
the ordinary amount of understanding). In all such cases there should be
perfect freedom, legal and social, to do the action and stand the
consequences.

It would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine, to suppose that
it is one of selfish indifference, which pretends that human Edition:
current; Page: [135]beings have no business with each other’s conduct in
life, and that they should not concern themselves about the well-doing
or well-being of one another, unless their own interest is involved.
Instead of any diminution, there is need of a great increase of
disinterested exertion to promote the good of others. But disinterested
benevolence can find other instruments to persuade people to their good,
than whips and scourges, either of the literal or the metaphorical sort.
I am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are
only second in importance, if even second, to the social. It is equally
the business of education to cultivate both. But even education works by
conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion, and it is by the
former only that, when the period of education is past, the
self-regarding virtues should be inculcated Human beings owe to each
other help to distinguish the better from the worse, and encouragement
to choose the former and avoid the latter. They should be forever
stimulating each other to increased exercise of their higher faculties,
and increased direction of their feelings and aims towards wise instead
of foolish, elevating instead of degrading, objects and contemplations.
But neither one person, nor any number of persons, is warranted in
saying to another human creature of ripe years, that he shall not do
with his life for his own benefit what he chooses to do with it. He is
the Edition: current; Page: [136]person most interested in his own
well-being the interest which any other person, except in cases of
strong personal attachment, can have in it, is trifling, compared with
that which he himself has; the interest which society has in him
individually (except as to his conduct to others) is fractional, and
altogether indirect: while, with respect to his own feelings and
circumstances, the most ordinary man or woman has means of knowledge
immeasurably surpassing those that can be possessed by any one else. The
interference of society to overrule his judgment and purposes in what
only regards himself, must be grounded on general presumptions; which
may be altogether wrong, and even if right, are as likely as not to be
misapplied to individual cases, by persons no better acquainted with the
circumstances of such cases than those are who look at them merely from
without. In this department, therefore, of human affairs, Individuality
has its proper field of action. In the conduct of human beings towards
one another, it is necessary that general rules should for the most part
be observed, in order that people may know what they have to expect; but
in each person’s own concerns, his individual spontaneity is entitled to
free exercise. Considerations to aid his judgment, exhortations to
strengthen his will, may be offered to him, even obtruded on him, by
others; but he, himself, is the final judge. All errors which he is
likely Edition: current; Page: [137]to commit against advice and
warning, are far outweighed by the evil of allowing others to constrain
him to what they deem his good.

I do not mean that the feelings with which a person is regarded by
others, ought not to be in any way affected by his self-regarding
qualities or deficiencies. This is neither possible nor desirable. If he
is eminent in any of the qualities which conduce to his own good, he is,
so far, a proper object of admiration. He is so much the nearer to the
ideal perfection of human nature. If he is grossly deficient in those
qualities, a sentiment the opposite of admiration will follow. There is
a degree of folly, and a degree of what may be called (though the phrase
is not unobjectionable) lowness or depravation of taste, which, though
it cannot justify doing harm to the person who manifests it, renders him
necessarily and properly a subject of distaste, or, in extreme cases,
even of contempt: a person could not have the opposite qualities in due
strength without entertaining these feelings. Though doing no wrong to
any one, a person may so act as to compel us to judge him, and feel to
him, as a fool, or as a being of an inferior order: and since this
judgment and feeling are a fact which he would prefer to avoid, it is
doing him a service to warm him of it beforehand, as of any other
disagreeable consequence to which he exposes himself. It would be well,
indeed, if this good office were much more Edition: current; Page:
[138]freely rendered than the common notions of politeness at present
permit, and if one person could honestly point out to another that he
thinks him in fault, without being considered unmannerly or presuming.
We have a right, also, in various ways, to act upon our unfavorable
opinion of any one, not to the oppression of his individuality, but in
the exercise of ours. We are not bound, for example, to seek his
society; we have a right to avoid it (though not to parade the
avoidance), for we have a right to choose the society most acceptable to
us. We have a right, and it may be our duty to caution others against
him, if we think his example or conversation likely to have a pernicious
effect on those with whom he associates. We may give others a preference
over him in optional good offices, except those which tend to his
improvement. In these various modes a person may suffer very severe
penalties at the hands of others, for faults which directly concern only
himself; but he suffers these penalties only in so far as they are the
natural, and, as it were, the spontaneous consequences of the faults
themselves, not because they are purposely inflicted on him for the sake
of punishment. A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit —
who cannot live within moderate means — who cannot restrain himself from
hurtful indulgences — who pursues animal pleasures at the expense of
those of feeling and intellect — must expect Edition: current; Page:
[139]to be lowered in the opinion of others, and to have a less share of
their favorable sentiments, but of this he has no right to complain,
unless he has merited their favor by special excellence in his social
relations, and has thus established a title to their good offices, which
is not affected by his demerits towards himself.

What I contend for is, that the inconveniences which are strictly
inseparable from the unfavorable judgment of others, are the only ones
to which a person should ever be subjected for that portion of his
conduct and character which concerns his own good, but which does not
affect the interests of others in their relations with him. Acts
injurious to others require a totally different treatment. Encroachment
on their rights; infliction on them of any loss or damage not justified
by his own rights; falsehood or duplicity in dealing with them; unfair
or ungenerous use of advantages over them; even selfish abstinence from
defending them against injury — these are fit objects of moral
reprobation, and, in grave cases, of moral retribution and punishment.
And not only these acts, but the dispositions which lead to them, are
properly immoral, and fit subjects of disapprobation which may rise to
abhorrence. Cruelty of disposition; malice and ill-nature; that most
anti-social and odious of all passions, envy; dissimulation and
insincerity; irascibility on insufficient cause, and resentment
disproportioned to the provocation; the Edition: current; Page:
[140]love of domineering over others; the desire to engross more than
one’s share of advantages (the πλεονεξία of the Greeks); the pride which
derives gratification from the abasement of others; the egotism which
thinks self and its concerns more important than everything else, and
decides all doubtful questions in his own favor; — these are moral
vices, and constitute a bad and odious moral character: unlike the
self-regarding faults previously mentioned, which are not properly
immoralities, and to whatever pitch they may be carried, do not
constitute wickedness. They may be proofs of any amount of folly, or
want of personal dignity and self-respect; but they are only a subject
of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for
whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself. What are
called duties to ourselves are not socially obligatory, unless
circumstances render them at the same time duties to others. The term
duty to oneself, when it means anything more than prudence, means
self-respect or self-development; and for none of these is any one
accountable to his fellow-creatures, because for none of them is it for
the good of mankind that he be held accountable to them.

The distinction between the loss of consideration which a person may
rightly incur by defect of prudence or of personal dignity, and the
reprobation which is due to him for an offence against the rights of
others, is not a Edition: current; Page: [141]merely nominal
distinction. It makes a vast difference both in our feelings and in our
conduct towards him, whether he displeases us in things in which we
think we have a right to control him, or in things in which we know that
we have not. If he displeases us, we may express our distaste, and we
may stand aloof from a person as well as from a thing that displeases
us; but we shall not therefore feel called on to make his life
uncomfortable. We shall reflect that he already bears, or will bear, the
whole penalty of his error; if he spoils his life by mismanagement, we
shall not, for that reason, desire to spoil it still further: instead of
wishing to punish him, we shall rather endeavor to alleviate his
punishment, by showing him how he may avoid or cure the evils his
conduct tends to bring upon him. He may be to us an object of pity,
perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or resentment; we shall not treat
him like an enemy of society: the worst we shall think ourselves
justified in doing is leaving him to himself, if we do not interfere
benevolently by showing interest or concern for him. It is far otherwise
if he has infringed the rules necessary for the protection of his
fellow-creatures, individually or collectively. The evil consequences of
his acts do not then fall on himself, but on others; and society, as the
protector of all its members, must retaliate on him; must inflict pain
on him for the express purpose of punishment, and must take care
Edition: current; Page: [142]that it be sufficiently severe. In the one
case, he is an offender at our bar, and we are called on not only to sit
in judgment on him, but, in one shape or another, to execute our own
sentence: in the other case, it is not our part to inflict any suffering
on him, except what may incidentally follow from our using the same
liberty in the regulation of our own affairs, which we allow to him in
his.

The distinction here pointed out between the part of a person’s life
which concerns only himself, and that which concerns others, many
persons will refuse to admit. How (it may be asked) can any part of the
conduct of a member of society be a matter of indifference to the other
members? No person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a
person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself,
without mischief reaching at least to his near connections, and often
far beyond them. If he injures his property, he does harm to those who
directly or indirectly derived support from it, and usually diminishes,
by a greater or less amount, the general resources of the community. If
he deteriorates his bodily or mental faculties, he not only brings evil
upon all who depended on him for any portion of their happiness, but
disqualifies himself for rendering the services which he owes to his
fellow-creatures generally; perhaps becomes a burden on their affection
or benevolence; and if such conduct were very frequent, hardly any
Edition: current; Page: [143]offence that is committed would detract
more from the general sum of good. Finally, if by his vices or follies a
person does no direct harm to others, he is nevertheless (it may be
said) injurious by his example; and ought to be compelled to control
himself, for the sake of those whom the sight or knowledge of his
conduct might corrupt or mislead.

And even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could be
confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to
abandon to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it? If
protection against themselves is confessedly due to children and persons
under age, is not society equally bound to afford it to persons of
mature years who are equally incapable of self-government? If gambling,
or drunkenness, or incontinence, or idleness, or uncleanliness, are as
injurious to happiness, and as great a hindrance to improvement, as many
or most of the acts prohibited by law, why (it may be asked) should not
law, so far as is consistent with practicability and social convenience,
endeavor to repress these also? And as a supplement to the unavoidable
imperfections of law, ought not opinion at least to organize a powerful
police against these vices, and visit rigidly with social penalties
those who are known to practise them? There is no question here (it may
be said) about restricting individuality, or impeding the trial of new
and original experiments Edition: current; Page: [144]in living. The
only things it is sought to prevent are things which have been tried and
condemned from the beginning of the world until now; things which
experience has shown not to be useful or suitable to any person’s
individuality. There must be some length of time and amount of
experience, after which a moral or prudential truth may be regarded as
established: and it is merely desired to prevent generation after
generation from falling over the same precipice which has been fatal to
their predecessors.

I fully admit that the mischief which a person does to himself, may
seriously affect, both through their sympathies and their interests,
those nearly connected with him, and in a minor degree, society at
large. When, by conduct of this sort, a person is led to violate a
distinct and assignable obligation to any other person or persons, the
case is taken out of the self-regarding class, and becomes amenable to
moral disapprobation in the proper sense of the term. If, for example, a
man, through intemperance or extravagance, becomes unable to pay his
debts, or, having undertaken the moral responsibility of a family,
becomes from the same cause incapable of supporting or educating them,
he is deservedly reprobated, and might be justly punished; but it is for
the breach of duty to his family or creditors, not for the extravagance.
If the resources which ought to have been devoted to them, had been
diverted from them for the most prudent investment, Edition: current;
Page: [145]the moral culpability would have been the same. George
Barnwell murdered his uncle to get money for his mistress, but if he had
done it to set himself up in business, he would equally have been
hanged. Again, in the frequent case of a man who causes grief to his
family by addiction to bad habits, he deserves reproach for his
unkindness or ingratitude; but so he may for cultivating habits not in
themselves vicious, if they are painful to those with whom he passes his
life, or who from personal ties are dependent on him for their comfort.
Whoever fails in the consideration generally due to the interests and
feelings of others, not being compelled by some more imperative duty, or
justified by allowable self-preference, is a subject of moral
disapprobation for that failure, but not for the cause of it, nor for
the errors, merely personal to himself, which may have remotely led to
it. In like manner, when a person disables himself, by conduct purely
self-regarding, from the performance of some definite duty incumbent on
him to the public, he is guilty of a social offence. No person ought to
be punished simply for being drunk; but a soldier or a policeman should
be punished for being drunk on duty. Whenever, in short, there is a
definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an individual
or to the public, the case is taken out of the province of liberty, and
placed in that of morality or law.

Edition: current; Page: [146]
But with regard to the merely contingent, or, as it may be called,
constructive injury which a person causes to society, by conduct which
neither violates any specific duty to the public, nor occasions
perceptible hurt to any assignable individual except himself; the
inconvenience is one which society can afford to bear, for the sake of
the greater good of human freedom. If grown persons are to be punished
for not taking proper care of themselves, I would rather it were for
their own sake, than under pretence of preventing them from impairing
their capacity of rendering to society benefits which society does not
pretend it has a right to exact. But I cannot consent to argue the point
as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to its
ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do
something irrational, and then punishing them, legally or morally, for
it. Society has had absolute power over them during all the early
portion of their existence: it has had the whole period of childhood and
nonage in which to try whether it could make them capable of rational
conduct in life. The existing generation is master both of the training
and the entire circumstances of the generation to come; it cannot indeed
make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself so lamentably
deficient in goodness and wisdom; and its best efforts are not always,
in individual cases, its most successful ones; but it is Edition:
current; Page: [147]perfectly well able to make the rising generation,
as a whole, as good as, and a little better than, itself. If society
lets any considerable number of its members grow up mere children,
incapable of being acted on by rational consideration of distant
motives, society has itself to blame for the consequences. Armed not
only with all the powers of education, but with the ascendency which the
authority of a received opinion always exercises over the minds who are
least fitted to judge for themselves; and aided by the natural penalties
which cannot be prevented from falling on those who incur the distaste
or the contempt of those who know them; let not society pretend that it
needs, besides all this, the power to issue commands and enforce
obedience in the personal concerns of individuals, in which, on all
principles of justice and policy, the decision ought to rest with those
who are to abide the consequences. Nor is there anything which tends
more to discredit and frustrate the better means of influencing conduct,
than a resort to the worse. If there be among those whom it is attempted
to coerce into prudence or temperance, any of the material of which
vigorous and independent characters are made, they will infallibly rebel
against the yoke. No such person will ever feel that others have a right
to control him in his concerns, such as they have to prevent him from
injuring them in theirs; and it easily comes to Edition: current; Page:
[148]be considered a mark of spirit and courage to fly in the face of
such usurped authority, and do with ostentation the exact opposite of
what it enjoins; as in the fashion of grossness which succeeded, in the
time of Charles II., to the fanatical moral intolerance of the Puritans
With respect to what is said of the necessity of protecting society from
the bad example set to others by the vicious or the self-indulgent; it
is true that bad example may have a pernicious effect, especially the
example of doing wrong to others with impunity to the wrongdoer. But we
are now speaking of conduct which, while it does no wrong to others, is
supposed to do great harm to the agent himself: and I do not see how
those who believe this, can think otherwise than that the example, on
the whole, must be more salutary than hurtful, since, if it displays the
misconduct, it displays also the painful or degrading consequences
which, if the conduct is justly censured, must be supposed to be in all
or most cases attendant on it.

But the strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the
public with purely personal conduct, is that when it does interfere, the
odds are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place. On
questions of social morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the
public, that is, of an overruling majority, though often wrong, is
likely to be still oftener right; because on such questions they
Edition: current; Page: [149]are only required to judge of their own
interests; of the manner in which some mode of conduct, if allowed to be
practised, would affect themselves. But the opinion of a similar
majority, imposed as a law on the minority, on questions of
self-regarding conduct, is quite as likely to be wrong as right; for in
these cases public opinion means, at the best, some people’s opinion of
what is good or bad for other people; while very often it does not even
mean that; the public, with the most perfect indifference, passing over
the pleasure or convenience of those whose conduct they censure, and
considering only their own preference. There are many who consider as an
injury to themselves any conduct which they have a distaste for, and
resent it as an outrage to their feelings; as a religious bigot, when
charged with disregarding the religious feelings of others, has been
known to retort that they disregard his feelings, by persisting in their
abominable worship or creed. But there is no parity between the feeling
of a person for his own opinion, and the feeling of another who is
offended at his holding it; no more than between the desire of a thief
to take a purse, and the desire of the right owner to keep it. And a
person’s taste is as much his own peculiar concern as his opinion or his
purse. It is easy for any one to imagine an ideal public, which leaves
the freedom and choice of individuals in all uncertain matters Edition:
current; Page: [150]undisturbed, and only requires them to abstain from
modes of conduct which universal experience has condemned. But where has
there been seen a public which set any such limit to its censorship? or
when does the public trouble itself about universal experience? In its
interferences with personal conduct it is seldom thinking of anything
but the enormity of acting or feeling differently from itself; and this
standard of judgment, thinly disguised, is held up to mankind as the
dictate of religion and philosophy, by nine tenths of all moralists and
speculative writers. These teach that things are right because they are
right; because we feel them to be so. They tell us to search in our own
minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on ourselves and on all
others. What can the poor public do but apply these instructions, and
make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if they are tolerably
unanimous in them, obligatory on all the world?

The evil here pointed out is not one which exists only in theory; and it
may perhaps be expected that I should specify the instances in which the
public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences
with the character of moral laws. I am not writing an essay on the
aberrations of existing moral feeling. That is too weighty a subject to
be discussed parenthetically, and by way of illustration. Yet examples
are necessary, to show that the principle I maintain is of serious
Edition: current; Page: [151]and practical moment, and that I am not
endeavoring to erect a barrier against imaginary evils. And it is not
difficult to show, by abundant instances, that to extend the bounds of
what may be called moral police, until it encroaches on the most
unquestionably legitimate liberty of the individual, is one of the most
universal of all human propensities.

As a first instance, consider the antipathies which men cherish on no
better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different
from theirs, do not practise their religious observances, especially
their religious abstinences. To cite a rather trivial example, nothing
in the creed or practice of Christians does more to envenom the hatred
of Mahomedans against them, than the fact of their eating pork. There
are few acts which Christians and Europeans regard with more unaffected
disgust, than Mussulmans regard this particular mode of satisfying
hunger. It is, in the first place, an offence against their religion;
but this circumstance by no means explains either the degree or the kind
of their repugnance; for wine also is forbidden by their religion, and
to partake of it is by all Mussulmans accounted wrong, but not
disgusting. Their aversion to the flesh of the “unclean beast” is, on
the contrary, of that peculiar character, resembling an instinctive
antipathy, which the idea of uncleanness, when once it thoroughly sinks
into the feelings, seems always Edition: current; Page: [152]to excite
even in those whose personal habits are anything but scrupulously
cleanly, and of which the sentiment of religious impurity, so intense in
the Hindoos, is a remarkable example. Suppose now that in a people, of
whom the majority were Mussulmans, that majority should insist upon not
permitting pork to be eaten within the limits of the country. This would
be nothing new in Mahomedan countries.* Would it be a legitimate
exercise of the moral authority of public opinion? and if not, why not?
The practice is really revolting to such a public. They also sincerely
think that it is forbidden and abhorred by the Deity. Neither could the
prohibition be censured as religious persecution. It might be religious
in its origin, but it would not be persecution for religion, since
nobody’s religion makes it a duty to eat pork. The only tenable ground
of condemnation would be, that with the personal tastes and
self-regarding concerns of individuals the public has no business to
interfere.

Edition: current; Page: [153]
To come somewhat nearer home: the majority of Spaniards consider it a
gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the Supreme Being, to
worship him in any other manner than the Roman Catholic; and no other
public worship is lawful on Spanish soil. The people of all Southern
Europe look upon a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste,
indecent, gross, disgusting. What do Protestants think of these
perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against
non-Catholics? Yet, if mankind are justified in interfering with each
other’s liberty in things which do not concern the interests of others,
on what principle is it possible consistently to exclude these cases? or
who can blame people for desiring to suppress what they regard as a
scandal in the sight of God and man? No stronger case can be shown for
prohibiting anything which is regarded as a personal immorality, than is
made out for suppressing these practices in the eyes of those who regard
them as impieties; and unless we are willing to adopt the logic of
persecutors, and to say that we may persecute others because we are
right, and that they must not persecute us because they are wrong, we
must beware of admitting a principle of which we should resent as a
gross injustice the application to ourselves.

The preceding instances may be objected to, although unreasonably, as
drawn from contingencies impossible among us: opinion, in this Edition:
current; Page: [154]country, not being likely to enforce abstinence from
meats, or to interfere with people for worshipping, and for either
marrying or not marrying, according to their creed or inclination. The
next example, however, shall be taken from an interference with liberty
which we have by no means passed all danger of. Wherever the Puritans
have been sufficiently powerful, as in New England, and in Great Britain
at the time of the Commonwealth, they have endeavored, with considerable
success, to put down all public, and nearly all private, amusements:
especially music, dancing, public games, or other assemblages for
purposes of diversion, and the theatre. There are still in this country
large bodies of persons by whose notions of morality and religion these
recreations are condemned; and those persons belonging chiefly to the
middle class, who are the ascendant power in the present social and
political condition of the kingdom, it is by no means impossible that
persons of these sentiments may at some time or other command a majority
in Parliament. How will the remaining portion of the community like to
have the amusements that shall be permitted to them regulated by the
religious and moral sentiments of the stricter Calvinists and
Methodists? Would they not, with considerable peremptoriness, desire
these intrusively pious members of society to mind their own business?
This is precisely what should be said Edition: current; Page: [155]to
every government and every public, who have the pretension that no
person shall enjoy any pleasure which they think wrong. But if the
principle of the pretension be admitted, no one can reasonably object to
its being acted on in the sense of the majority, or other preponderating
power in the country; and all persons must be ready to conform to the
idea of a Christian commonwealth, as understood by the early settlers in
New England, if a religious profession similar to theirs should ever
succeed in regaining its lost ground, as religions supposed to be
declining have so often been known to do.

To imagine another contingency, perhaps more likely to be realized than
the one last mentioned. There is confessedly a strong tendency in the
modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, accompanied
or not by popular political institutions. It is affirmed that in the
country where this tendency is most completely realized — where both
society and the government are most democratic — the United States — the
feeling of the majority, to whom any appearance of a more showy or
costly style of living than they can hope to rival is disagreeable,
operates as a tolerably effectual sumptuary law, and that in many parts
of the Union it is really difficult for a person possessing a very large
income, to find any mode of spending it, which will not incur popular
disapprobation. Though such Edition: current; Page: [156]statements as
these are doubtless much exaggerated as a representation of existing
facts, the state of things they describe is not only a conceivable and
possible, but a probable result of democratic feeling, combined with the
notion that the public has a right to a veto on the manner in which
individuals shall spend their incomes. We have only further to suppose a
considerable diffusion of Socialist opinions, and it may become infamous
in the eyes of the majority to possess more property than some very
small amount, or any income not earned by manual labor. Opinions similar
in principle to these, already prevail widely among the artisan class,
and weigh oppressively on those who are amenable to the opinion chiefly
of that class, namely, its own members. It is known that the bad workmen
who form the majority of the operatives in many branches of industry,
are decidedly of opinion that bad workmen ought to receive the same
wages as good, and that no one ought to be allowed, through piecework or
otherwise, to earn by superior skill or industry more than others can
without it. And they employ a moral police, which occasionally becomes a
physical one, to deter skilful workmen from receiving, and employers
from giving, a larger remuneration for a more useful service. If the
public have any jurisdiction over private concerns, I cannot see that
these people are in fault, or that any individual’s particular public
can be blamed for asserting Edition: current; Page: [157]the same
authority over his individual conduct, which the general public asserts
over people in general.

But, without dwelling upon supposititious cases, there are, in our own
day, gross usurpations upon the liberty of private life actually
practised, and still greater ones threatened with some expectation of
success, and opinions proposed which assert an unlimited right in the
public not only to prohibit by law everything which it thinks wrong, but
in order to get at what it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of
things which it admits to be innocent.

Under the name of preventing intemperance, the people of one English
colony, and of nearly half the United States, have been interdicted by
law from making any use whatever of fermented drinks, except for medical
purposes: for prohibition of their sale is in fact, as it is intended to
be, prohibition of their use. And though the impracticability of
executing the law has caused its repeal in several of the States which
had adopted it, including the one from which it derives its name, an
attempt has notwithstanding been commenced, and is prosecuted with
considerable zeal by many of the professed philanthropists, to agitate
for a similar law in this country. The association, or “Alliance” as it
terms itself, which has been formed for this purpose, has acquired some
notoriety through the publicity given to a correspondence between its
Secretary and one of Edition: current; Page: [158]the very few English
public men who hold that a politician’s opinions ought to be founded on
principles. Lord Stanley’s share in this correspondence is calculated to
strengthen the hopes already built on him, by those who know how rare
such qualities as are manifested in some of his public appearances,
unhappily are among those who figure in political life. The organ of the
Alliance, who would “deeply deplore the recognition of any principle
which could be wrested to justify bigotry and persecution,” undertakes
to point out the “broad and impassable barrier” which divides such
principles from those of the association. “All matters relating to
thought, opinion, conscience, appear to me,” he says, “to be without the
sphere of legislation; all pertaining to social act, habit, relation,
subject only to a discretionary power vested in the State itself, and
not in the individual, to be within it.” No mention is made of a third
class, different from either of these, viz., acts and habits which are
not social, but individual; although it is to this class, surely, that
the act of drinking fermented liquors belongs. Selling fermented
liquors, however, is trading, and trading is a social act. But the
infringement complained of is not on the liberty of the seller, but on
that of the buyer and consumer; since the State might just as well
forbid him to drink wine, as purposely make it impossible for him to
obtain it. The Secretary, however, says, “I Edition: current; Page:
[159]claim, as a citizen, a right to legislate whenever my social rights
are invaded by the social act of another.” And now for the definition of
these “social rights.” “If anything invades my social rights, certainly
the traffic in strong drink does. It destroys my primary right of
security, by constantly creating and stimulating social disorder. It
invades my right of equality, by deriving a profit from the creation of
a misery, I am taxed to support. It impedes my right to free moral and
intellectual development, by surrounding my path with dangers, and by
weakening and demoralizing society, from which I have a right to claim
mutual aid and intercourse.” A theory of “social rights,” the like of
which probably never before found its way into distinct language — being
nothing short of this — that it is the absolute social right of every
individual, that every other individual shall act in every respect
exactly as he ought; that whosoever fails thereof in the smallest
particular, violates my social right, and entitles me to demand from the
legislature the removal of the grievance. So monstrous a principle is
far more dangerous than any single interference with liberty; there is
no violation of liberty which it would not justify; it acknowledges no
right to any freedom whatever, except perhaps to that of holding
opinions in secret, without ever disclosing them: for the moment an
opinion which I consider noxious, passes any one’s lips, it invades all
Edition: current; Page: [160]the “social rights” attributed to me by the
Alliance. The doctrine ascribes to all mankind a vested interest in each
other’s moral, intellectual, and even physical perfection, to be defined
by each claimant according to his own standard.

Another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful
liberty of the individual, not simply threatened, but long since carried
into triumphant effect, is Sabbatarian legislation. Without doubt,
abstinence on one day in the week, so far as the exigencies of life
permit, from the usual daily occupation, though in no respect
religiously binding on any except Jews, is a highly beneficial custom.
And inasmuch as this custom cannot be observed without a general consent
to that effect among the industrious classes, therefore, in so far as
some persons by working may impose the same necessity on others, it may
be allowable and right that the law should guarantee to each, the
observance by others of the custom, by suspending the greater operations
of industry on a particular day. But this justification, grounded on the
direct interest which others have in each individual’s observance of the
practice, does not apply to the self-chosen occupations in which a
person may think fit to employ his leisure; nor does it hold good, in
the smallest degree, for legal restrictions on amusements. It is true
that the amusement of some is the day’s work of others; but the Edition:
current; Page: [161]pleasure not to say the useful recreation, of many,
is worth the labor of a few, provided the occupation is freely chosen,
and can be freely resigned. The operatives are perfectly right in
thinking that if all worked on Sunday seven days’ work would have to be
given for six days’ wages: but so long as the great mass of employments
are suspended, the small number who for the enjoyment of others must
still work, obtain a proportional increase of earnings; and they are not
obliged to follow those occupations, if they prefer leisure to
emolument. If a further remedy is sought, it might be found in the
establishment by custom of a holiday on some other day of the week for
those particular classes of persons. The only ground, therefore, on
which restrictions on Sunday amusements can be defended, must be that
they are religiously wrong; a motive of legislation which never can be
too earnestly protested against. “Deorum injuriæ Diis curæ.” It remains
to be proved that society or any of its officers holds a commission from
on high to avenge any supposed offence to Omnipotence, which is not also
a wrong to our fellow-creatures. The notion that it is one man’s duty
that another should be religious, was the foundation of all the
religious persecutions ever perpetrated, and if admitted, would fully
justify them. Though the feeling which breaks out in the repeated
attempts to stop railway travelling on Sunday, in the resistance
Edition: current; Page: [162]to the opening of Museums, and the like,
has not the cruelty of the old persecutors, the state of mind indicated
by it is fundamentally the same. It is a determination not to tolerate
others in doing what is permitted by their religion, because it is not
permitted by the persecutor’s religion. It is a belief that God not only
abominates the act of the misbeliever, but will not hold us guiltless if
we leave him unmolested.

I cannot refrain from adding to these examples of the little account
commonly made of human liberty, the language of downright persecution
which breaks out from the press of this country, whenever it feels
called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism. Much might
be said on the unexpected and instructive fact, that an alleged new
revelation, and a religion founded on it, the product of palpable
imposture, not even supported by the prestige of extraordinary qualities
in its founder, is believed by hundreds of thousands, and has been made
the foundation of a society, in the age of newspapers, railways, and the
electric telegraph. What here concerns us is, that this religion, like
other and better religions, has its martys; that its prophet and founder
was, for his teaching, put to death by a mob; that others of its
adherents lost their lives by the same lawless violence; that they were
forcibly expelled, in a body, from the country in which they first
Edition: current; Page: [163]grew up; while, now that they have been
chased into a solitary recess in the midst of a desert, many in this
country openly declare that it would be right (only that it is not
convenient) to send an expedition against them, and compel them by force
to conform to the opinions of other people. The article of the Mormonite
doctrine which is the chief provocative to the antipathy which thus
breaks through the ordinary restraints of religious tolerance, is its
sanction of polygamy; which, though permitted to Mahomedans, and
Hindoos, and Chinese, seems to excite unquenchable animosity when
practised by persons who speak English, and profess to be a kind of
Christians. No one has a deeper disapprobation than I have of this
Mormon institution; both for other reasons, and because, far from being
in any way countenanced by the principle of liberty, it is a direct
infraction of that principle, being a mere riveting of the chains of one
half of the community, and an emancipation of the other from reciprocity
of obligation towards them. Still, it must be remembered that this
relation is as much voluntary on the part of the women concerned in it,
and who may be deemed the sufferers by it, as is the case with any other
form of the marriage institution; and however surprising this fact may
appear, it has its explanation in the common ideas and customs of the
world, which teaching women to think marriage the one Edition: current;
Page: [164]thing needful, make it intelligible that many a woman should
prefer being one of several wives, to not being a wife at all. Other
countries are not asked to recognize such unions, or release any portion
of their inhabitants from their own laws on the score of Mormonite
opinions. But when the dissentients have conceded to the hostile
sentiments of others, far more than could justly be demanded; when they
have left the countries to which their doctrines were unacceptable, and
established themselves in a remote corner of the earth, which they have
been the first to render habitable to human beings; it is difficult to
see on what principles but those of tyranny they can be prevented from
living there under what laws they please, provided they commit no
aggression on other nations, and allow perfect freedom of departure to
those who are dissatisfied with their ways. A recent writer, in some
respects of considerable merit, proposes (to use his own words,) not a
crusade, but a civilizade, against this polygamous community, to put an
end to what seems to him a retrograde step in civilization. It also
appears so to me, but I am not aware that any community has a right to
force another to be civilized. So long as the sufferers by the bad law
do not invoke assistance from other communities, I cannot admit that
persons entirely unconnected with them ought to step in and require that
a condition of things with which Edition: current; Page: [165]all who
are directly interested appear to be satisfied, should be put an end to
because it is a scandal to persons some thousands of miles distant, who
have no part or concern in it. Let them send missionaries, if they
please, to preach against it; and let them, by any fair means (of which
silencing the teachers is not one,) oppose the progress of similar
doctrines among their own people. If civilization has got the better of
barbarism when barbarism had the world to itself, it is too much to
profess to be afraid lest barbarism, after having been fairly got under,
should revive and conquer civilization. A civilization that can thus
succumb to its vanquished enemy must first have become so degenerate,
that neither its appointed priests and teachers, nor anybody else, has
the capacity, or will take the trouble, to stand up for it. If this be
so, the sooner such a cizilization receives notice to quit, the better.
It can only go on from bad to worse, until destroyed and regenerated
(like the Western Empire) by energetic barbarians.

Edition: current; Page: [166]


CHAPTER V.: applications.

The principles asserted in these pages must be more generally admitted
as the basis for discussion of details, before a consistent application
of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be
attempted with any prospect of advantage. The few observations I propose
to make on questions of detail, are designed to illustrate the
principles, rather than to follow them out to their consequences. I
offer, not so much applications, as specimens of application; which may
serve to bring into greater clearness the meaning and limits of the two
maxims which together form the entire doctrine of this Essay, and to
assist the judgment in holding the balance between them, in the cases
where it appears doubtful which of them is applicable to the case.

The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society
for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person
but himself. Advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other
people, if thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only
measures by which society can justifiably Edition: current; Page:
[167]express its dislike or disapprobation of his conduct. Secondly,
that for such actions as are prejudicial to the interests of others, the
individual is accountable, and may be subjected either to social or to
legal punishments, if society is of opinion that the one or the other is
requisite for its protection.

In the first place, it must by no means be supposed, because damage, or
probability of damage, to the interests of others, can alone justify the
interference of society, that therefore it always does justify such
interference. In many cases, an individual, in pursuing a legitimate
object, necessarily and therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to
others, or intercepts a good which they had a reasonable hope of
obtaining. Such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise
from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while those
institutions last; and some would be unavoidable under any institutions.
Whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession, or in a competitive
examination; whoever is preferred to another in any contest for an
object which both desire, reaps benefit from the loss of others, from
their wasted exertion and their disappointment. But it is, by common
admission, better for the general interest of mankind, that persons
should pursue their objects undeterred by this sort of consequences. In
other words, society admits no right, either legal or moral, in the
disappointed competitors, to immunity from Edition: current; Page:
[168]this kind of suffering; and feels called on to interfere, only when
means of success have been employed which it is contrary to the general
interest to permit — namely, fraud or treachery, and force.

Again, trade is a social act. Whoever undertakes to sell any description
of goods to the public, does what affects the interest of other persons,
and of society in general; and thus his conduct, in principle, comes
within the jurisdiction of society: accordingly, it was once held to be
the duty of governments, in all cases which were considered of
importance, to fix prices, and regulate the processes of manufacture.
But it is now recognized, though not till after a long struggle, that
both the cheapness and the good quality of commodities are most
effectually provided for by leaving the producers and sellers perfectly
free, under the sole check of equal freedom to the buyers for supplying
themselves elsewhere. This is the so-called doctrine of Free Trade,
which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid with, the
principle of individual liberty asserted in this Essay. Restrictions on
trade, or on production for purposes of trade, are indeed restraints;
and all restraint, quâ restraint, is an evil: but the restraints in
question affect only that part of conduct which society is competent to
restrain, and are wrong solely because they do not really produce the
results which it is desired to produce by them. As the principle of
Edition: current; Page: [169]individual liberty is not involved in the
doctrine of Free Trade, so neither is it in most of the questions which
arise respecting the limits of that doctrine: as for example, what
amount of public control is admissible for the prevention of fraud by
adulteration; how far sanitary precautions, or arrangements to protect
workpeople employed in dangerous occupations, should be enforced on
employers. Such questions involve considerations of liberty, only in so
far as leaving people to themselves is always better, cæteris paribus,
than controlling them: but that they may be legitimately controlled for
these ends, is in principle undeniable. On the other hand, there are
questions relating to interference with trade, which are essentially
questions of liberty; such as the Maine Law, already touched upon; the
prohibition of the importation of opium into China; the restriction of
the sale of poisons; all cases, in short, where the object of the
interference is to make it impossible or difficult to obtain a
particular commodity. These interferences are objectionable, not as
infringements on the liberty of the producer or seller, but on that of
the buyer.

One of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, opens a new
question; the proper limits of what may be called the functions of
police; how far liberty may legitimately be invaded for the prevention
of crime, or of accident. It is one of the undisputed functions of
government to take precautions against crime Edition: current; Page:
[170]before it has been committed, as well as to detect and punish it
afterwards. The preventive function of government, however, is far more
liable to be abused, to the prejudice of liberty, than the punitory
function; for there is hardly any part of the legitimate freedom of
action of a human being which would not admit of being represented, and
fairly too, as increasing the facilities for some form or other of
delinquency. Nevertheless, if a public authority, or even a private
person, sees any one evidently preparing to commit a crime, they are not
bound to look on inactive until the crime is committed, but may
interfere to prevent it. If poisons were never bought or used for any
purpose except the commission of murder, it would be right to prohibit
their manufacture and sale They may, however, be wanted not only for
innocent but for useful purposes, and restrictions cannot be imposed in
the one case without operating in the other. Again, it is a proper
office of public authority to guard against accidents. If either a
public officer or any one else saw a person attempting to cross a bridge
which had been ascertained to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn
him of his danger, they might seize him and turn him back, without any
real infringement of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one
desires, and he does not desire to fall into the river. Nevertheless,
when there is not a certainty, but only a danger of mischief, no one
Edition: current; Page: [171]but the person himself can judge of the
sufficiency of the motive which may prompt him to incur the risk: in
this case, therefore, (unless he is a child, or delirious, or in some
state of excitement or absorption incompatible with the full use of the
reflecting faculty), he ought, I conceive, to be only warned of the
danger; not forcibly prevented from exposing himself to it Similar
considerations, applied to such a question as the sale of poisons, may
enable us to decide which among the possible modes of regulation are or
are not contrary to principle. Such a precaution, for example, as that
of labelling the drug with some word expressive of its dangerous
character, may be enforced without violation of liberty: the buyer
cannot wish not to know that the thing he possesses has poisonous
qualities. But to require in all cases the certificate of a medical
practitioner, would make it sometimes impossible, always expensive, to
obtain the article for legitimate uses. The only mode apparent to me, in
which difficulties may be thrown in the way of crime committed through
this means, without any infringement, worth taking into account, upon
the liberty of those who desire the poisonous substance for other
purposes, consists in providing what, in the apt language of Bentham, is
called “preappointed evidence.” This provision is familiar to every one
in the case of contracts. It is usual and right that the law, when a
contract is entered into, should require Edition: current; Page: [172]as
the condition of its enforcing performance, that certain formalities
should be observed, such as signatures, attestation of witnesses, and
the like, in order that in case of subsequent dispute, there may be
evidence to prove that the contract was really entered into, and that
there was nothing in the circumstances to render it legally invalid: the
effect being, to throw great obstacles in the way of fictitious
contracts, or contracts made in circumstances which, if known, would
destroy their validity. Precautions of a similar nature might be
enforced in the sale of articles adapted to be instruments of crime. The
seller, for example, might be required to enter in a register the exact
time of the transaction, the name and address of the buyer, the precise
quality and quantity sold; to ask the purpose for which it was wanted,
and record the answer he received. When there was no medical
prescription, the presence of some third person might be required, to
bring home the fact to the purchaser, in case there should afterwards be
reason to believe that the article had been applied to criminal
purposes. Such regulations would in general be no material impediment to
obtaining the article, but a very considerable one to making an improper
use of it without detection.

The right inherent in society, to ward off crimes against itself by
antecedent precautions, suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim,
Edition: current; Page: [173]that purely self-regarding misconduct
cannot properly be meddled with in the way of prevention or punishment.
Drunkenness, for example, in ordinary cases, is not a fit subject for
legislative interference; but I should deem it perfectly legitimate that
a person, who had once been convicted of any act of violence to others
under the influence of drink, should be placed under a special legal
restriction, personal to himself; that if he were afterwards found
drunk, he should be liable to a penalty, and that if when in that state
he committed another offence, the punishment to which he would be liable
for that other offence should be increased in severity. The making
himself drunk, in a person whom drunkenness excites to do harm to
others, is a crime against others. So, again, idleness, except in a
person receiving support from the public, or except when it constitutes
a breach of contract, cannot without tyranny be made a subject of legal
punishment; but if either from idleness or from any other avoidable
cause, a man fails to perform his legal duties to others, as for
instance to support his children, it is no tyranny to force him to
fulfil that obligation, by compulsory labor, if no other means are
available.

Again, there are many acts which, being directly injurious only to the
agents themselves, ought not to be legally interdicted, but which, if
done publicly, are a violation of good manners, and coming thus within
the category Edition: current; Page: [174]of offences against others,
may rightfully be prohibited. Of this kind are offences against decency;
on which it is unnecessary to dwell, the rather as they are only
connected indirectly with our subject, the objection to publicity being
equally strong in the case of many actions not in themselves
condemnable, nor supposed to be so.

There is another question to which an answer must be found, consistent
with the principles which have been laid down. In cases of personal
conduct supposed to be blameable, but which respect for liberty
precludes society from preventing or punishing, because the evil
directly resulting falls wholly on the agent; what the agent is free to
do, ought other persons to be equally free to counsel or instigate? This
question is not free from difficulty. The case of a person who solicits
another to do an act, is not strictly a case of self-regarding conduct.
To give advice or offer inducements to any one, is a social act, and may
therefore, like actions in general which affect others, be supposed
amenable to social control. But a little reflection corrects the first
impression, by showing that if the case is not strictly within the
definition of individual liberty, yet the reasons on which the principle
of individual liberty is grounded, are applicable to it. If people must
be allowed, in whatever concerns only themselves, to act as seems best
to themselves at their own peril, they must equally be Edition: current;
Page: [175]free to consult with one another about what is fit to be so
done; to exchange opinions, and give and receive suggestions. Whatever
it is permitted to do, it must be permitted to advise to do. The
question is doubtful, only when the instigator derives a personal
benefit from his advice; when he makes it his occupation, for
subsistence or pecuniary gain, to promote what society and the State
consider to be an evil. Then, indeed, a new element of complication is
introduced; namely, the existence of classes of persons with an interest
opposed to what is considered as the public weal, and whose mode of
living is grounded on the counteraction of it. Ought this to be
interfered with, or not? Fornication, for example, must be tolerated,
and so must gambling; but should a person be free to be a pimp, or to
keep a gambling-house? The case is one of those which lie on the exact
boundary line between two principles, and it is not at once apparent to
which of the two it properly belongs. There are arguments on both sides.
On the side of toleration it may be said, that the fact of following
anything as an occupation, and living or profiting by the practice of
it, cannot make that criminal which would otherwise be admissible; that
the act should either be consistently permitted or consistently
prohibited; that if the principles which we have hitherto defended are
true, society has no business, as society, to decide anything to
Edition: current; Page: [176]be wrong which concerns only the
individual; that it cannot go beyond dissuasion, and that one person
should be as free to persuade, as another to dissuade. In opposition to
this it may be contended, that although the public, or the State, are
not warranted in authoritatively deciding, for purposes of repression or
punishment, that such or such conduct affecting only the interests of
the individual is good or bad, they are fully justified in assuming, if
they regard it as bad, that its being so or not is at least a disputable
question: That, this being supposed, they cannot be acting wrongly in
endeavoring to exclude the influence of solicitations which are not
disinterested, of instigators who cannot possibly be impartial — who
have a direct personal interest on one side, and that side the one which
the State believes to be wrong, and who confessedly promote it for
personal objects only. There can surely, it may be urged, be nothing
lost, no sacrifice of good, by so ordering matters that persons shall
make their election, either wisely or foolishly, on their own prompting,
as free as possible from the arts of persons who stimulate their
inclinations for interested purposes of their own. Thus (it may be said)
though the statutes respecting unlawful games are utterly indefensible —
though all persons should be free to gamble in their own or each other’s
houses, or in any place of meeting established by their own
subscriptions, and open only to Edition: current; Page: [177]the members
and their visitors — yet public gambling-houses should not be permitted.
It is true that the prohibition is never effectual, and that whatever
amount of tyrannical power is given to the police, gambling-houses can
always be maintained under other pretences but they may be compelled to
conduct their operations with a certain degree of secrecy and mystery,
so that nobody knows anything about them but those who seek them; and
more than this, society ought not to aim at. There is considerable force
in these arguments. I will not venture to decide whether they are
sufficient to justify the moral anomaly of punishing the accessary, when
the principal is (and must be) allowed to go free; of fining or
imprisoning the procurer, but not the fornicator, the gambling-house
keeper, but not the gambler. Still less ought the common operations of
buying and selling to be interfered with on analogous grounds. Almost
every article which is bought and sold may used in excess, and the
sellers have a pecuniary interest in encouraging that excess; but no
argument can be founded on this, in favor, for instance, of the Maine
Law; because the class of dealers in strong drinks, though interested in
their abuse, are indispensably required for the sake of their legitimate
use. The interest however, of these dealers in promoting intemperance is
a real evil, and justifies the State in imposing restrictions and
requiring guarantees which but for that justification would be
infringements of legitimate liberty.

A further question is, whether the State, while it permits, should
nevertheless indirectly discourage conduct which it deems contrary to
the best interests of the agent; whether, for example, it should take
measures to render the means of drunkenness more costly, or add to the
difficulty of procuring them, by limiting the number of the places of
sale. On this as on most other practical questions, many distinctions
require to be made. To tax stimulants for the sole purpose of making
them more difficult to be obtained, is a measure differing only in
degree from their entire prohibition; and would be justifiable only if
that were justifiable. Every increase of cost is a prohibition, to those
whose means do not come up to the augmented price; and to those who do,
it is a penalty laid on them for gratifying a particular taste. Their
choice of pleasures, and their mode of expending their income, after
satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the State and to
individuals, are their own concern, and must rest with their own
judgment. These considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the
selection of stimulants as special subjects of taxation for purposes of
revenue. But it must be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is
absolutely inevitable; that in most countries it is necessary that a
considerable part of that taxation should be indirect; that the State,
Edition: current; Page: [179]therefore, cannot help imposing penalties,
which to some persons may be prohibitory, on the use of some articles of
consumption. It is hence the duty of the State to consider, in the
imposition of taxes, what commodities the consumers can best spare; and
à fortiori, to select in preference those of which it deems the use,
beyond a very moderate quantity, to be positively injurious. Taxation,
therefore, of stimulants, up to the point which produces the largest
amount of revenue (supposing that the State needs all the revenue which
it yields) is not only admissible, but to be approved of.

The question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less
exclusive privilege, must be answered differently, according to the
purposes to which the restriction is intended to be subservient. All
places of public resort require the restraint of a police, and places of
this kind peculiarly, because offences against society are especially
apt to originate there. It is, therefore, fit to confine the power of
selling these commodities (at least for consumption on the spot) to
persons of known or vouched-for respectability of conduct; to make such
regulations respecting hours of opening and closing as may be requisite
for public surveillance, and to withdraw the license if breaches of the
peace repeatedly take place through the connivance or incapacity of the
keeper of the house, or if it becomes a rendezvous for concocting and
preparing offences against the law Edition: current; Page: [180]Any
further restriction I do not conceive to be, in principle, justifiable.
The limitation in number, for instance, of beer and spirit-houses, for
the express purpose of rendering them more difficult of access, and
diminishing the occasions of temptation, not only exposes all to an
inconvenience because there are some by whom the facility would be
abused, but is suited only to a state of society in which the laboring
classes are avowedly treated as children or savages, and placed under an
education of restraint, to fit them for future admission to the
privileges of freedom. This is not the principle on which the laboring
classes are professedly governed in any free country; and no person who
sets due value on freedom will give his adhesion to their being so
governed, unless after all efforts have been exhausted to educate them
for freedom and govern them as freemen, and it has been definitively
proved that they can only be governed as children. The bare statement of
the alternative shows the absurdity of supposing that such efforts have
been made in any case which needs be considered here. It is only because
the institutions of this country are a mass of inconsistencies, that
things find admittance into our practice which belong to the system of
despotic, or what is called paternal, government, while the general
freedom of our institutions precludes the exercise of the amount of
control Edition: current; Page: [181]necessary to render the restraint
of any real efficacy as a moral education.

It was pointed out in an early part of this Essay, that the liberty of
the individual, in things wherein the individual is alone concerned,
implies a corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate
by mutual agreement such things as regard them jointly, and regard no
persons but themselves. This question presents no difficulty, so long as
the will of all the persons implicated remains unaltered; but since that
will may change, it is often necessary, even in things in which they
alone are concerned, that they should enter into engagements with one
another; and when they do, it is fit, as a general rule, that those
engagements should be kept. Yet in the laws, probably, of every country,
this general rule has some exceptions. Not only persons are not held to
engagements which violate the rights of third parties, but it is
sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an
engagement, that it is injurious to themselves. In this and most other
civilized countries, for example, an engagement by which a person should
sell himself, or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would be null and
void; neither enforced by law nor by opinion. The ground for thus
limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, is
apparent, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. The reason for
not interfering, Edition: current; Page: [182]unless for the sake of
others, with a person’s voluntary acts, is consideration for his
liberty. His voluntary choice is evidence that what he so chooses is
desirable, or at the least endurable, to him, and his good is on the
whole best provided for by allowing him to take his own means of
pursuing it. But by selling himself for a slave, he abdicates his
liberty; he foregoes any future use of it, beyond that single act. He
therefore defeats, in his own case, the very purpose which is the
justification of allowing him to dispose of himself. He is no longer
free; but is thenceforth in a position which has no longer the
presumption in its favor, that would be afforded by his voluntarily
remaining in it. The principle of freedom cannot require that he should
be free not to be free. It is not freedom, to be allowed to alienate his
freedom. These reasons, the force of which is so conspicuous in this
peculiar case, are evidently of far wider application; yet a limit is
everywhere set to them by the necessities of life, which continually
require, not indeed that we should resign our freedom, but that we
should consent to this and the other limitation of it. The principle,
however, which demands uncontrolled freedom of action in all that
concerns only the agents themselves, requires that those who have become
bound to one another, in things which concern no third party, should be
able to release one another from the engagement; and even without
Edition: current; Page: [183]such voluntary release, there are perhaps
no contracts or engagements, except those that relate to money or
money’s worth, of which one can venture to say that there ought to be no
liberty whatever of retractation. Baron Wilhelm von Humboldt, in the
excellent Essay from which I have already quoted, states it as his
conviction, that engagements which involve personal relations or
services, should never be legally binding beyond a limited duration of
time; and that the most important of these engagements, marriage, having
the peculiarity that its objects are frustrated unless the feelings of
both the parties are in harmony with it, should require nothing more
than the declared will of either party to dissolve it. This subject is
too important, and too complicated, to be discussed in a parenthesis,
and I touch on it only so far as is necessary for purposes of
illustration. If the conciseness and generality of Baron Humboldt’s
dissertation had not obliged him in this instance to content himself
with enunciating his conclusion without discussing the premises, he
would doubtless have recognized that the question cannot be decided on
grounds so simple as those to which he confines himself. When a person,
either by express promise or by conduct, has encouraged another to rely
upon his continuing to act in a certain way — to build expectations and
calculations, and stake any part of his plan of life upon that
supposition, a new series of moral Edition: current; Page:
[184]obligations arises on his part towards that person, which may
possibly be overruled, but cannot be ignored. And again, if the relation
between two contracting parties has been followed by consequences to
others; if it has placed third parties in any peculiar position, or, as
in the case of marriage, has even called third parties into existence,
obligations arise on the part of both the contracting parties towards
those third persons, the fulfilment of which, or at all events the mode
of fulfilment, must be greatly affected by the continuance or disruption
of the relation between the original parties to the contract. It does
not follow, nor can I admit, that these obligations extend to requiring
the fulfilment of the contract at all costs to the happiness of the
reluctant party; but they are a necessary element in the question; and
even if, as Von Humboldt maintains, they ought to make no difference in
the legal freedom of the parties to release themselves from the
engagement (and I also hold that they ought not to make much
difference), they necessarily make a great difference in the moral
freedom. A person is bound to take all these circumstances into account,
before resolving on a step which may affect such important interests of
others; and if he does not allow proper weight to those interests, he is
morally responsible for the wrong. I have made these obvious remarks for
the better illustration of the general principle of liberty, and not
because Edition: current; Page: [185]they are at all needed on the
particular question, which, on the contrary, is usually discussed as if
the interest of children was everything, and that of grown persons
nothing.

I have already observed that, owing to the absence of any recognized
general principles, liberty is often granted where it should be
withheld, as well as withheld where it should be granted; and one of the
cases in which, in the modern European world, the sentiment of liberty
is the strongest, is a case where, in my view, it is altogether
misplaced. A person should be free to do as he likes in his own
concerns; but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in acting for
another under the pretext that the affairs of another are his own
affairs. The State, while it respects the liberty of each in what
specially regards himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over
his exercise of any power which it allows him to possess over others.
This obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of the family
relations, a case, in its direct influence on human happiness, more
important than all others taken together. The almost despotic power of
husbands over wives needs not be enlarged upon here, because nothing
more is needed for the complete removal of the evil, than that wives
should have the same rights, and should receive the protection of law in
the same manner, as all other persons; and because, on this subject,
Edition: current; Page: [186]the defenders of established injustice do
not avail themselves of the plea of liberty, but stand forth openly as
the champions of power. It is in the case of children, that misapplied
notions of liberty are a real obstacle to the fulfilment by the State of
its duties. One would almost think that a man’s children were supposed
to be literally, and not metaphorically, a part of himself, so jealous
is opinion of the smallest interference of law with his absolute and
exclusive control over them; more jealous than of almost any
interference with his own freedom of action: so much less do the
generality of mankind value liberty than power. Consider, for example,
the case of education. Is it not almost a self-evident axiom, that the
State should require and compel the education, up to a certain standard,
of every human being who is born its citizen? Yet who is there that is
not afraid to recognize and assert this truth? Hardly any one indeed
will deny that it is one of the most sacred duties of the parents (or,
as law and usage now stand, the father), after summoning a human being
into the world, to give to that being an education fitting him to
perform his part well in life towards others and towards himself. But
while this is unanimously declared to be the father’s duty, scarcely
anybody, in this country, will bear to hear of obliging him to perform
it. Instead of his being required to make any exertion or sacrifice for
securing education to the Edition: current; Page: [187]child, it is left
to his choice to accept it or not when it is provided gratis! It still
remains unrecognized, that to bring a child into existence without a
fair prospect of being able, not only to provide food for its body, but
instruction and training for its mind, is a moral crime, both against
the unfortunate offspring and against society; and that if the parent
does not fulfil this obligation, the State ought to see it fulfilled at
the charge, as far as possible, of the parent.

Were the duty of enforcing universal education once admitted, there
would be an end to the difficulties about what the State should teach,
and how it should teach, which now convert the subject into a mere
battle-field for sects and parties, causing the time and labor which
should have been spent in educating, to be wasted in quarrelling about
education. If the government would make up its mind to require for every
child a good education, it might save itself the trouble of providing
one. It might leave to parents to obtain the education where and how
they pleased, and content itself with helping to pay the school fees of
the poorer classes of children, and defraying the entire school expenses
of those who have no one else to pay for them. The objections which are
urged with reason against State education, do not apply to the
enforcement of education by the State, but to the State’s taking upon
itself to direct that education: which Edition: current; Page: [188]is a
totally different thing. That the whole or any large part of the
education of the people should be in State hands, I go as far as any one
in deprecating. All that has been said of the importance of
individuality of character, and diversity in opinions and modes of
conduct, involves, as of the same unspeakable importance, diversity of
education. A general State education is a mere contrivance for moulding
people to be exactly like one another: and as the mould in which it
casts them is that which pleases the predominant power in the
government, whether this be a monarch, a priesthood, an aristocracy, or
the majority of the existing generation, in proportion as it is
efficient and successful, it establishes a despotism over the mind,
leading by natural tendency to one over the body. An education
established and controlled by the State, should only exist, if it exist
at all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the
purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain
standard of excellence. Unless, indeed, when society in general is in so
backward a state that it could not or would not provide for itself any
proper institutions of education, unless the government undertook the
task; then, indeed, the government may, as the less of two great evils,
take upon itself the business of schools and universities, as it may
that of joint-stock companies, when private enterprise, in a shape
fitted Edition: current; Page: [189]for undertaking great works of
industry does not exist in the country. But in general, if the country
contains a sufficient number of persons qualified to provide education
under government auspices, the same persons would be able and willing to
give an equally good education on the voluntary principle, under the
assurance of remuneration afforded by a law rendering education
compulsory, combined with State aid to those unable to defray the
expense.

The instrument for enforcing the law could be no other than public
examinations, extending to all children, and beginning at an early age.
An age might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to
ascertain if he (or she) is able to read. If a child proves unable, the
father, unless he has some sufficient ground of excuse, might be
subjected to a moderate fine, to be worked out, if necessary, by his
labor, and the child might be put to school at his expense. Once in
every year the examination should be renewed, with a gradually extending
range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition, and what is
more, retention, of a certain minimum of general knowledge, virtually
compulsory. Beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary examinations
on all subjects, at which all who come up to a certain standard of
proficiency might claim a certificate. To prevent the State from
exercising through these arrangements, an improper Edition: current;
Page: [190]influence over opinion, the knowledge required for passing an
examination (beyond the merely instrumental parts of knowledge, such as
languages and their use) should, even in the higher class of
examinations, be confined to facts and positive science exclusively. The
examinations on religion, politics, or other disputed topics, should not
turn on the truth or falsehood of opinions, but on the matter of fact
that such and such an opinion is held, on such grounds, by such authors,
or schools, or churches. Under this system, the rising generation would
be no worse off in regard to all disputed truths, than they are at
present; they would be brought up either churchmen or dissenters as they
now are, the State merely taking care that they should be instructed
churchmen, or instructed dissenters. There would be nothing to hinder
them from being taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same
schools where they were taught other things. All attempts by the State
to bias the conclusions of its citizens on disputed subjects, are evil;
but it may very properly offer to ascertain and certify that a person
possesses the knowledge, requisite to make his conclusions, on any given
subject, worth attending to. A student of philosophy would be the better
for being able to stand an examination both in Locke and in Kant,
whichever of the two he takes up with, or even if with neither: and
there is no reasonable objection to examining Edition: current; Page:
[191]an atheist in the evidences of Christianity, provided he is not
required to profess a belief in them. The examinations, however, in the
higher branches of knowledge should, I conceive, be entirely voluntary.
It would be giving too dangerous a power to governments, were they
allowed to exclude any one from professions, even from the profession of
teacher, for alleged deficiency of qualifications: and I think, with
Wilhelm von Humboldt, that degrees, or other public certificates of
scientific or professional acquirements, should be given to all who
present themselves for examination, and stand the test; but that such
certificates should confer no advantage over competitors, other than the
weight which may be attached to their testimony by public opinion.

It is not in the matter of education only, that misplaced notions of
liberty prevent moral obligations on the part of parents from being
recognized, and legal obligations from being imposed, where there are
the strongest grounds for the former always, and in many cases for the
latter also. The fact itself, of causing the existence of a human being,
is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life. To
undertake this responsibility — to bestow a life which may be either a
curse or a blessing — unless the being on whom it is to be bestowed will
have at east the ordinary chances of a desirable existence, is a crime
against that being. And in a country either over-peopled, Edition:
current; Page: [192]or threatened with being so, to produce children,
beyond a very small number, with the effect of reducing the reward of
labor by their competition, is a serious offence against all who live by
the remuneration of their labor. The laws which, in many countries on
the Continent, forbid marriage unless the parties can show that they
have the means of supporting a family, do not exceed the legitimate
powers of the State: and whether such laws be expedient or not (a
question mainly dependent on local circumstances and feelings), they are
not objectionable as violations of liberty. Such laws are interferences
of the State to prohibit a mischievous act — an act injurious to others,
which ought to be a subject of reprobation, and social stigma, even when
it is not deemed expedient to superadd legal punishment. Yet the current
ideas of liberty, which bend so easily to real infringements of the
freedom of the individual, in things which concern only himself, would
repel the attempt to put any restraint upon his inclinations when the
consequence of their indulgence is a life, or lives, of wretchedness and
depravity to the offspring, with manifold evils to those sufficiently
within reach to be in any way affected by their actions. When we compare
the strange respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange want of
respect for it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right
to do harm to others, and no right at Edition: current; Page: [193]all
to please himself without giving pain to any one.

I have reserved for the last place a large class of questions respecting
the limits of government interference, which, though closely connected
with the subject of this Essay, do not, in strictness, belong to it.
These are cases in which the reasons against interference do not turn
upon the principle of liberty: the question is not about restraining the
actions of individuals, but about helping them: it is asked whether the
government should do, or cause to be done, something for their benefit,
instead of leaving it to be done by themselves, individually, or in
voluntary combination.

The objections to government interference, when it is not such as to
involve infringement of liberty, may be of three kinds.

The first is, when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by
individuals than by the government. Speaking generally, there is no one
so fit to conduct any business, or to determine how or by whom it shall
be conducted, as those who are personally interested in it. This
principle condemns the interferences, once so common, of the
legislature, or the officers of government, with the ordinary processes
of industry. But this part of the subject has been sufficiently enlarged
upon by political economists, and is not particularly related to the
principles of this Essay.

The second objection is more nearly allied to Edition: current; Page:
[194]our subject. In many cases, though individuals may not do the
particular thing so well, on the average, as the officers of government,
it is nevertheless desirable that it should be done by them, rather than
by the government, as a means to their own mental education — a mode of
strengthening their active faculties, exercising their judgment, and
giving them a familiar knowledge of the subjects with which they are
thus left to deal. This is a principal, though not the sole,
recommendation of jury trial (incases not political); of free and
popular local and municipal institutions; of the conduct of industrial
and philanthropic enterprises by voluntary associations. These are not
questions of liberty, and are connected with that subject only by remote
tendencies; but they are questions of development. It belongs to a
different occasion from the present to dwell on these things as parts of
national education; as being, in truth, the peculiar training of a
citizen, the practical part of the political education of a free people,
taking them out of the narrow circle of personal and family selfishness,
and accustoming them to the comprehension of joint interests, the
management of joint concerns — habituating them to act from public or
semi-public motives, and guide their conduct by aims which unite instead
of isolating them from one another. Without these habits and powers, a
free constitution can neither be worked nor preserved, as is exemplified
by the Edition: current; Page: [195]too-often transitory nature of
political freedom in countries where it does not rest upon a sufficient
basis of local liberties. The management of purely local business by the
localities, and of the great enterprises of industry by the union of
those who voluntarily supply the pecuniary means, is further recommended
by all the advantages which have been set forth in this Essay as
belonging to individuality of development, and diversity of modes of
action. Government operations tend to be everywhere alike. With
individuals and voluntary associations, on the contrary, there are
varied experiments, and endless diversity of experience. What the State
can usefully do, is to make itself a central depository, and active
circulator and diffuser, of the experience resulting from many trials.
Its business is to enable each experimentalist to benefit by the
experiments of others, instead of tolerating no experiments but its own.

The third, and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of
government, is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power.
Every function superadded to those already exercised by the government,
causes its influence over hopes and fears to be more widely diffused,
and converts, more and more, the active and ambitious part of the public
into hangers-on of the government, or of some party which aims at
becoming the government. If the roads, the railways, the banks, the
insurance Edition: current; Page: [196]offices, the great joint-stock
companies, the universities, and the public charities, were all of them
branches of the government; if, in addition, the municipal corporations
and local boards, with all that now devolves on them, became departments
of the central administration; if the employés of all these different
enterprises were appointed and paid by the government, and looked to the
government for every rise in life; not all the freedom of the press and
popular constitution of the legislature would make this or any other
country free otherwise than in name. And the evil would be greater, the
more efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was
constructed — the more skilful the arrangements for obtaining the best
qualified hands and heads with which to work it. In England it has of
late been proposed that all the members of the civil service of
government should be selected by competitive examination, to obtain for
those employments the most intelligent and instructed persons
procurable; and much has been said and written for and against this
proposal. One of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents, is
that the occupation of a permanent official servant of the State does
not hold out sufficient prospects of emolument and importance to attract
the highest talents, which will always be able to find a more inviting
career in the professions, or in the service of companies and other
public bodies. One would not have been Edition: current; Page:
[197]surprised if this argument had been used by the friends of the
proposition, as an answer to its principal difficulty. Coming from the
opponents it is strange enough. What is urged as an objection is the
safety-valve of the proposed system. If indeed all the high talent of
the country could be drawn into the service of the government, a
proposal tending to bring about that result might well inspire
uneasiness. If every part of the business of society which required
organized concert, or large and comprehensive views, were in the hands
of the government, and if government offices were universally filled by
the ablest men, all the enlarged culture and practised intelligence in
the country, except the purely speculative, would be concentrated in a
numerous bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest of the community would look
for all things: the multitude for direction and dictation in all they
had to do; the able and aspiring for personal advancement. To be
admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy, and when admitted, to rise
therein, would be the sole objects of ambition. Under this régime, not
only is the outside public ill-qualified, for want of practical
experience, to criticize or check the mode of operation of the
bureaucracy, but even if the accidents of despotic or the natural
working of popular institutions occasionally raise to the summit a ruler
or rulers of reforming inclinations, no reform can be effected which is
contrary to the interest of Edition: current; Page: [198]the
bureaucracy. Such is the melancholy condition of the Russian empire, as
is shown in the accounts of those who have had sufficient opportunity of
observation. The Czar himself is powerless against the bureaucratic
body; he can send any one of them to Siberia, but he cannot govern
without them, or against their will. On every decree of his they have a
tacit veto, by merely refraining from carrying it into effect. In
countries of more advanced civilization and of a more insurrectionary
spirit, the public, accustomed to expect everything to be done for them
by the State, or at least to do nothing for themselves without asking
from the State not only leave to do it, but even how it is to be done,
naturally hold the State responsible for all evil which befalls them,
and when the evil exceeds their amount of patience, they rise against
the government and make what is called a revolution; whereupon somebody
else, with or without legitimate authority from the nation, vaults into
the seat, issues his orders to the bureaucracy, and everything goes on
much as it did before; the bureaucracy being unchanged, and nobody else
being capable of taking their place.

A very different spectacle is exhibited among a people accustomed to
transact their own business. In France, a large part of the people
having been engaged in military service, many of whom have held at least
the rank of non-commissioned officers, there are in every popular
Edition: current; Page: [199]insurrection several persons competent to
take the lead, and improvise some tolerable plan of action. What the
French are in military affairs, the Americans are in every kind of civil
business; let them be left without a government, every body of Americans
is able to improvise one, and to carry on that or any other public
business with a sufficient amount of intelligence, order, and decision.
This is what every free people ought to be: and a people capable of this
is certain to be free; it will never let itself be enslaved by any man
or body of men because these are able to seize and pull the reins of the
central administration. No bureaucracy can hope to make such a people as
this do or undergo anything that they do not like. But where everything
is done through the bureaucracy, nothing to which the bureaucracy is
really adverse can be done at all. The constitution of such countries is
an organization of the experience and practical ability of the nation,
into a disciplined body for the purpose of governing the rest; and the
more perfect that organization is in itself, the more successful in
drawing to itself and educating for itself the persons of greatest
capacity from all ranks of the community, the more complete is the
bondage of all, the members of the bureaucracy included. For the
governors are as much the slaves of their organization and discipline,
as the governed are of the governors. A Chinese mandarin is as much the
tool and Edition: current; Page: [200]creature of a despotism as the
humblest cultivator. An individual Jesuit is to the utmost degree of
abasement the slave of his order though the order itself exists for the
collective power and importance of its members.

It is not, also, to be forgotten, that the absorption of all the
principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal,
sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of the body
itself. Banded together as they are — working a system which, like all
systems, necessarily proceeds in a great measure by fixed rules — the
official body are under the constant temptation of sinking into indolent
routine, or, if they now and then desert that mill-horse round, of
rushing into some half-examined crudity which has struck the fancy of
some leading member of the corps: and the sole check to these closely
allied, though seemingly opposite, tendencies, the only stimulus which
can keep the ability of the body itself up to a high standard, is
liability to the watchful criticism of equal ability outside the body.
It is indispensable, therefore, that the means should exist,
independently of the government, of forming such ability, and furnishing
it with the opportunities and experience necessary for a correct
judgment of great practical affairs. If we would possess permanently a
skilful and efficient body of functionaries — above all, a body able to
originate and willing to adopt improvements; if we would not have our
bureaucracy Edition: current; Page: [201]degenerate into a pedantocracy,
this body must not engross all the occupations which form and cultivate
the faculties required for the government of mankind.

To determine the point at which evils, so formidable to human freedom
and advancement, begin, or rather at which they begin to predominate
over the benefits attending the collective application of the force of
society, under its recognized chiefs, for the removal of the obstacles
which stand in the way of its well-being, to secure as much of the
advantages of centralized power and intelligence, as can be had without
turning into governmental channels too great a proportion of the general
activity, is one of the most difficult and complicated questions in the
art of government. It is, in a great measure, a question of detail, in
which many and various considerations must be kept in view, and no
absolute rule can be laid down. But I believe that the practical
principle in which safety resides, the ideal to be kept in view, the
standard by which to test all arrangements intended for overcoming the
difficulty, may be conveyed in these words: the greatest dissemination
of power consistent with efficiency; but the greatest possible
centralization of information, and diffusion of it from the centre.
Thus, in municipal administration, there would be, as in the New England
States, a very minute division among separate officers, chosen by the
Edition: current; Page: [202]localities, of all business which is not
better left to the persons directly interested; but besides this, there
would be, in each department of local affairs, a central
superintendence, forming a branch of the general government. The organ
of this superintendence would concentrate, as in a focus, the variety of
information and experience derived from the conduct of that branch of
public business in all the localities, from everything analogous which
is done in foreign countries, and from the general principles of
political science. This central organ should have a right to know all
that is done, and its special duty should be that of making the
knowledge acquired in one place available for others. Emancipated from
the petty prejudices and narrow views of a locality by its elevated
position and comprehensive sphere of observation, its advice would
naturally carry much authority; but its actual power, as a permanent
institution, should, I conceive, be limited to compelling the local
officers to obey the laws laid down for their guidance. In all things
not provided for by general rules, those officers should be left to
their own judgment, under responsibility to their constituents. For the
violation of rules, they should be responsible to law, and the rules
themselves should be laid down by the legislature; the central
administrative authority only watching over their execution, and if they
were not properly carried into effect, appealing, according to the
nature Edition: current; Page: [203]of the case, to the tribunal to
enforce the law, or to the constituencies to dismiss the functionaries
who had not executed it according to its spirit. Such, in its general
conception, is the central superintendence which the Poor Law Board is
intended to exercise over the administrators of the Poor Rate throughout
the country. Whatever powers the Board exercises beyond this limit, were
right and necessary in that peculiar case, for the cure of rooted habits
of mal-administration in matters deeply affecting not the localities
merely, but the whole community; since no locality has a moral right to
make itself by mismanagement a nest of pauperism, necessarily
overflowing into other localities, and impairing the moral and physical
condition of the whole laboring community. The powers of administrative
coercion and subordinate legislation possessed by the Poor Law Board
(but which, owing to the state of opinion on the subject, are very
scantily exercised by them), though perfectly justifiable in a case of a
first-rate national interest, would be wholly out of place in the
superintendence of interests purely local. But a central organ of
information and instruction for all the localities, would be equally
valuable in all departments of administration. A government cannot have
too much of the kind of activity which does not impede, but aids and
stimulates, individual exertion and development. The mischief begins
when, instead of calling forth the activity Edition: current; Page:
[204]and powers of individuals and bodies, it substitutes its own
activity for theirs; when, instead of informing, advising, and, upon
occasion, denouncing, it makes them work in fetters or bids them stand
aside and does their work instead of them. The worth of a State, in the
long run, is the worth of the individuals composing it; and a State
which postpones the interests of their mental expansion and elevation,
to a little more of administrative skill, or that semblance of it which
practice gives, it the details of business; a State which dwarfs its
men, in order that they may be more docile instruments in its hands even
for beneficial purposes, will find that with small men no great thing
can really be accomplished; and that the perfection of machinery to
which it has sacrificed everything, will in the end avail it nothing,
for want of the vital power which, in order that the machine might work
more smoothly, it has preferred to banish.

Edition: current; Page: [205]


THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN.

Edition: current; Page: [206] Edition: current; Page: [207]


CHAPTER I.

THE object of this Essay is to explain as clearly as I am able, the
grounds of an opinion which I have held from the very earliest period
when I had formed any opinions at all on social or political matters,
and which, instead of being weakened or modified, has been constantly
growing stronger by the progress of reflection and the experience of
life: That the principle which regulates the existing social relations
between the two sexes—the legal subordination of one sex to the other—is
wrong in itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human
improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect
equality, admitting no power or privilege on the one side, nor
disability on the other.

The very words necessary to express the task I have undertaken, show how
arduous it is. But it would be a mistake to suppose that the difficulty
of the case must lie in the insufficiency or obscurity of the grounds of
reason on which Edition: current; Page: [208]my conviction rests. The
difficulty is that which exists in all cases in which there is a mass of
feeling to be contended against. So long as an opinion is strongly
rooted in the feelings, it gains rather than loses in stability by
having a preponderating weight of argument against it. For if it were
accepted as a result of argument, the refutation of the argument might
shake the solidity of the conviction; but when it rests solely on
feeling, the worse it fares in argumentative contest, the more persuaded
its adherents are that their feeling must have some deeper ground, which
the arguments do not reach; and while the feeling remains, it is always
throwing up fresh intrenchments of argument to repair any breach made in
the old. And there are so many causes tending to make the feelings
connected with this subject the most intense and most deeply-rooted of
all those which gather round and protect old institutions and customs,
that we need not wonder to find them as yet less undermined and loosened
than any of the rest by the progress of the great modern spiritual and
social transition; nor suppose that the barbarisms to which men cling
longest must be less barbarisms than those which they earlier shake off.

In every respect the burthen is hard on those who attack an almost
universal opinion. They must be very fortunate as well as unusually
Edition: current; Page: [209]capable if they obtain a hearing at all.
They have more difficulty in obtaining a trial, than any other litigants
have in getting a verdict. If they do extort a hearing, they are
subjected to a set of logical requirements totally different from those
exacted from other people. In all other cases, the burthen of proof is
supposed to lie with the affirmative. If a person is charged with a
murder, it rests with those who accuse him to give proof of his guilt,
not with himself to prove his innocence. If there is a difference of
opinion about the reality of any alleged historical event, in which the
feelings of men in general are not much interested, as the Siege of Troy
for example, those who maintain that the event took place are expected
to produce their proofs, before those who take the other side can be
required to say anything; and at no time are these required to do more
than show that the evidence produced by the others is of no value.
Again, in practical matters, the burthen of proof is supposed to be with
those who are against liberty; who contend for any restriction or
prohibition; either any limitation of the general freedom of human
action, or any disqualification or disparity of privilege affecting one
person or kind of persons, as compared with others. The à priori
presumption is in favour of freedom and impartiality. It is held that
there should Edition: current; Page: [210]be no restraint not required
by the general good, and that the law should be no respecter of persons,
but should treat all alike, save where dissimilarity of treatment is
required by positive reasons, either of justice or of policy. But of
none of these rules of evidence will the benefit be allowed to those who
maintain the opinion I profess. It is useless for me to say that those
who maintain the doctrine that men have a right to command and women are
under an obligation to obey, or that men are fit for government and
women unfit, are on the affirmative side of the question, and that they
are bound to show positive evidence for the assertions, or submit to
their rejection. It is equally unavailing for me to say that those who
deny to women any freedom or privilege rightly allowed to men, having
the double presumption against them that they are opposing freedom and
recommending partiality, must be held to the strictest proof of their
case, and unless their success be such as to exclude all doubt, the
judgment ought to go against them. These would be thought good pleas in
any common case; but they will not be thought so in this instance.
Before I could hope to make any impression, I should be expected not
only to answer all that has ever been said by those who take the other
side of the question, but to imagine all that could be said by them—to
find them Edition: current; Page: [211]in reasons, as well as answer all
I find: and besides refuting all arguments for the affirmative, I shall
be called upon for invincible positive arguments to prove a negative.
And even if I could do all this, and leave the opposite party with a
host of unanswered arguments against them, and not a single unrefuted
one on their side, I should be thought to have done little; for a cause
supported on the one hand by universal usage, and on the other by so
great a preponderance of popular sentiment, is supposed to have a
presumption in its favour, superior to any conviction which an appeal to
reason has power to produce in any intellects but those of a high class.

I do not mention these difficulties to complain of them; first, because
it would be useless; they are inseparable from having to contend through
people’s understandings against the hostility of their feelings and
practical tendencies: and truly the understandings of the majority of
mankind would need to be much better cultivated than has ever yet been
the case, before they can be asked to place such reliance in their own
power of estimating arguments, as to give up practical principles in
which they have been born and bred and which are the basis of much of
the existing order of the world, at the first argumentative attack which
they are not capable of logically resisting. I do not therefore quarrel
with them Edition: current; Page: [212]for having too little faith in
argument, but for having too much faith in custom and the general
feeling. It is one of the characteristic prejudices of the reaction of
the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, to accord to the
unreasoning elements in human nature the infallibility which the
eighteenth century is supposed to have ascribed to the reasoning
elements. For the apotheosis of Reason we have substituted that of
Instinct; and we call everything instinct which we find in ourselves and
for which we cannot trace any rational foundation. This idolatry,
infinitely more degrading than the other, and the most pernicious of the
false worships of the present day, of all of which it is now the main
support, will probably hold its ground until it gives way before a sound
psychology, laying bare the real root of much that is bowed down to as
the intention of Nature and the ordinance of God. As regards the present
question, I am willing to accept the unfavourable conditions which the
prejudice assigns to me. I consent that established custom, and the
general feeling, should be deemed conclusive against me, unless that
custom and feeling from age to age can be shown to have owed their
existence to other causes than their soundness, and to have derived
their power from the worse rather than the better parts of human nature.
I am willing that judgment Edition: current; Page: [213]should go
against me, unless I can show that my judge has been tampered with. The
concession is not so great as it might appear; for to prove this, is by
far the easiest portion of my task.

The generality of a practice is in some cases a strong presumption that
it is, or at all events once was, conducive to laudable ends. This is
the case, when the practice was first adopted, or afterwards kept up, as
a means to such ends, and was grounded on experience of the mode in
which they could be most effectually attained. If the authority of men
over women, when first established, had been the result of a
conscientious comparison between different modes of constituting the
government of society; if, after trying various other modes of social
organization—the government of women over men, equality between the two,
and such mixed and divided modes of government as might be invented—it
had been decided, on the testimony of experience, that the mode in which
women are wholly under the rule of men, having no share at all in public
concerns, and each in private being under the legal obligation of
obedience to the man with whom she has associated her destiny, was the
arrangement most conducive to the happiness and well being of both; its
general adoption might then be fairly thought to be some evidence that,
at the time when it was adopted, it was the best: though even Edition:
current; Page: [214]then the considerations which recommended it may,
like so many other primeval social facts of the greatest importance,
have subsequently, in the course of ages, ceased to exist. But the state
of the case is in every respect the reverse of this. In the first place,
the opinion in favour of the present system, which entirely subordinates
the weaker sex to the stronger, rests upon theory only; for there never
has been trial made of any other: so that experience, in the sense in
which it is vulgarly opposed to theory, cannot be pretended to have
pronounced any verdict. And in the second place, the adoption of this
system of inequality never was the result of deliberation, or
forethought, or any social ideas, or any notion whatever of what
conduced to the benefit of humanity or the good order of society. It
arose simply from the fact that from the very earliest twilight of human
society, every woman (owing to the value attached to her by men,
combined with her inferiority in muscular strength) was found in a state
of bondage to some man. Laws and systems of polity always begin by
recognising the relations they find already existing between
individuals. They convert what was a mere physical fact into a legal
right, give it the sanction of society, and principally aim at the
substitution of public and organized means of asserting and protecting
these rights, instead Edition: current; Page: [215]of the irregular and
lawless conflict of physical strength. Those who had already been
compelled to obedience became in this manner legally bound to it.
Slavery, from being a mere affair of force between the master and the
slave, became regularized and a matter of compact among the masters,
who, binding themselves to one another for common protection, guaranteed
by their collective strength the private possessions of each, including
his slaves. In early times, the great majority of the male sex were
slaves, as well as the whole of the female. And many ages elapsed, some
of them ages of high cultivation, before any thinker was bold enough to
question the rightfulness, and the absolute social necessity, either of
the one slavery or of the other. By degrees such thinkers did arise: and
(the general progress of society assisting) the slavery of the male sex
has, in all the countries of Christian Europe at least (though, in one
of them, only within the last few years) been at length abolished, and
that of the female sex has been gradually changed into a milder form of
dependence. But this dependence, as it exists at present, is not an
original institution, taking a fresh start from considerations of
justice and social expediency—it is the primitive state of slavery
lasting on, through successive mitigations and modifications occasioned
by the same causes Edition: current; Page: [216]which have softened the
general manners, and brought all human relations more under the control
of justice and the influence of humanity. It has not lost the taint of
its brutal origin. No presumption in its favour, therefore, can be drawn
from the fact of its existence. The only such presumption which it could
be supposed to have, must be grounded on its having lasted till now,
when so many other things which came down from the same odious source
have been done away with. And this, indeed, is what makes it strange to
ordinary ears, to hear it asserted that the inequality of rights between
men and women has no other source than the law of the strongest.

That this statement should have the effect of a paradox, is in some
respects creditable to the progress of civilization, and the improvement
of the moral sentiments of mankind. We now live—that is to say, one or
two of the most advanced nations of the world now live—in a state in
which the law of the strongest seems to be entirely abandoned as the
regulating principle of the world’s affairs: nobody professes it, and,
as regards most of the relations between human beings, nobody is
permitted to practise it. When any one succeeds in doing so, it is under
cover of some pretext which gives him the semblance of having some
general social interest on his side. Edition: current; Page: [217]This
being the ostensible state of things, people flatter themselves that the
rule of mere force is ended; that the law of the strongest cannot be the
reason of existence of anything which has remained in full operation
down to the present time. However any of our present institutions may
have begun, it can only, they think, have been preserved to this period
of advanced civilization by a wellgrounded feeling of its adaptation to
human nature, and conduciveness to the general good. They do not
understand the great vitality and durability of institutions which place
right on the side of might; how intensely they are clung to; how the
good as well as the bad propensities and sentiments of those who have
power in their hands, become identified with retaining it; how slowly
these bad institutions give way, one at a time, the weakest first,
beginning with those which are least interwoven with the daily habits of
life; and how very rarely those who have obtained legal power because
they first had physical, have ever lost their hold of it until the
physical power had passed over to the other side. Such shifting of the
physical force not having taken place in the case of women; this fact,
combined with all the peculiar and characteristic features of the
particular case, made it certain from the first that this branch of the
system of right founded on might, though softened in its most atrocious
features at an Edition: current; Page: [218]earlier period than several
of the others, would be the very last to disappear. It was inevitable
that this one case of a social relation grounded on force, would survive
through generations of institutions grounded on equal justice, an almost
solitary exception to the general character of their laws and customs;
but which, so long as it does not proclaim its own origin, and as
discussion has not brought out its true character, is not felt to jar
with modern civilization, any more than domestic slavery among the
Greeks jarred with their notion of themselves as a free people.

The truth is, that people of the present and the last two or three
generations have lost all practical sense of the primitive condition of
humanity; and only the few who have studied history accurately, or have
much frequented the parts of the world occupied by the living
representatives of ages long past, are able to form any mental picture
of what society then was. People are not aware how entirely, in former
ages, the law of superior strength was the rule of life; how publicly
and openly it was avowed, I do not say cynically or shamelessly—for
these words imply a feeling that there was something in it to be ashamed
of, and no such notion could find a place in the faculties of any person
in those ages, except a philosopher or a saint. History gives a cruel
experience of human nature, in shewing Edition: current; Page: [219]how
exactly the regard due to the life, possessions, and entire earthly
happiness of any class of persons, was measured by what they had the
power of enforcing; how all who made any resistance to authorities that
had arms in their hands, however dreadful might be the provocation, had
not only the law of force but all other laws, and all the notions of
social obligation against them; and in the eyes of those whom they
resisted, were not only guilty of crime, but of the worst of all crimes,
deserving the most cruel chastisement which human beings could inflict.
The first small vestige of a feeling of obligation in a superior to
acknowledge any right in inferiors, began when he had been induced, for
convenience, to make some promise to them. Though these promises, even
when sanctioned by the most solemn oaths, were for many ages revoked or
violated on the most trifling provocation or temptation, it is probable
that this, except by persons of still worse than the average morality,
was seldom done without some twinges of conscience. The ancient
republics, being mostly grounded from the first upon some kind of mutual
compact, or at any rate formed by an union of persons not very unequal
in strength, afforded, in consequence, the first instance of a portion
of human relations fenced round, and placed under the dominion of
another law than Edition: current; Page: [220]that of force. And though
the original law of force remained in full operation between them and
their slaves, and also (except so far as limited by express compact)
between a commonwealth and its subjects, or other independent
commonwealths; the banishment of that primitive law even from so narrow
a field, commenced the regeneration of human nature, by giving birth to
sentiments of which experience soon demonstrated the immense value even
for material interests, and which thenceforward only required to be
enlarged, not created. Though slaves were no part of the commonwealth,
it was in the free states that slaves were first felt to have rights as
human beings. The Stoics were, I believe, the first (except so far as
the Jewish law constitutes an exception) who taught as a part of
morality that men were bound by moral obligations to their slaves. No
one, after Christianity became ascendant, could ever again have been a
stranger to this belief, in theory; nor, after the rise of the Catholic
Church, was it ever without persons to stand up for it. Yet to enforce
it was the most arduous task which Christianity ever had to perform. For
more than a thousand years the Church kept up the contest, with hardly
any perceptible success. It was not for want of power over men’s minds.
Its power was prodigious. It could make kings and nobles resign their
most Edition: current; Page: [221]valued possessions to enrich the
Church. It could make thousands, in the prime of life and the height of
worldly advantages, shut themselves up in convents to work out their
salvation by poverty, fasting, and prayer. It could send hundreds of
thousands across land and sea, Europe and Asia, to give their lives for
the deliverance of the Holy Sepulchre. It could make kings relinquish
wives who were the object of their passionate attachment, because the
Church declared that they were within the seventh (by our calculation
the fourteenth) degree of relationship. All this it did; but it could
not make men fight less with one another, nor tyrannize less cruelly
over the serfs, and when they were able, over burgesses. It could not
make them renounce either of the applications of force; force militant,
or force triumphant. This they could never be induced to do until they
were themselves in their turn compelled by superior force. Only by the
growing power of kings was an end put to fighting except between kings,
or competitors for kingship; only by the growth of a wealthy and warlike
bourgeoisie in the fortified towns, and of a plebeian infantry which
proved more powerful in the field than the undisciplined chivalry, was
the insolent tyranny of the nobles over the bourgeoisie and peasantry
brought within some bounds. It was persisted in not only until, but long
after, Edition: current; Page: [222]the oppressed had obtained a power
enabling them often to take conspicuous vengeance; and on the Continent
much of it continued to the time of the French Revolution, though in
England the earlier and better organization of the democratic classes
put an end to it sooner, by establishing equal laws and free national
institutions.

If people are mostly so little aware how completely, during the greater
part of the duration of our species, the law of force was the avowed
rule of general conduct, any other being only a special and exceptional
consequence of peculiar ties—and from how very recent a date it is that
the affairs of society in general have been even pretended to be
regulated according to any moral law; as little do people remember or
consider, how institutions and customs which never had any ground but
the law of force, last on into ages and states of general opinion which
never would have permitted their first establishment. Less than forty
years ago, Englishmen might still by law hold human beings in bondage as
saleable property: within the present century they might kidnap them and
carry them off, and work them literally to death. This absolutely
extreme case of the law of force, condemned by those who can tolerate
almost every other form of arbitrary power, and which, of all others,
presents features the most revolting to the feelings Edition: current;
Page: [223]of all who look at it from an impartial position, was the law
of civilized and Christian England within the memory of persons now
living: and in one half of Anglo-Saxon America three or four years ago,
not only did slavery exist, but the slave trade, and the breeding of
slaves expressly for it, was a general practice between slave states.
Yet not only was there a greater strength of sentiment against it, but,
in England at least, a less amount either of feeling or of interest in
favour of it, than of any other of the customary abuses of force: for
its motive was the love of gain, unmixed and undisguised; and those who
profited by it were a very small numerical fraction of the country,
while the natural feeling of all who were not personally interested in
it, was unmitigated abhorrence. So extreme an instance makes it almost
superfluous to refer to any other: but consider the long duration of
absolute monarchy. In England at present it is the almost universal
conviction that military despotism is a case of the law of force, having
no other origin or justification. Yet in all the great nations of Europe
except England it either still exists, or has only just ceased to exist,
and has even now a strong party favourable to it in all ranks of the
people, especially among persons of station and consequence. Such is the
power of an established system, even when far from Edition: current;
Page: [224]universal; when not only in almost every period of history
there have been great and well-known examples of the contrary system,
but these have almost invariably been afforded by the most illustrious
and most prosperous communities. In this case, too, the possessor of the
undue power, the person directly interested in it, is only one person,
while those who are subject to it and suffer from it are literally all
the rest. The yoke is naturally and necessarily humiliating to all
persons, except the one who is on the throne, together with, at most,
the one who expects to succeed to it. How different are these cases from
that of the power of men over women! I am not now prejudging the
question of its justifiableness. I am showing how vastly more permanent
it could not but be, even if not justifiable, than these other
dominations which have nevertheless lasted down to our own time.
Whatever gratification of pride there is in the possession of power, and
whatever personal interest in its exercise, is in this case not confined
to a limited class, but common to the whole male sex. Instead of being,
to most of its supporters, a thing desirable chiefly in the abstract,
or, like the political ends usually contended for by factious, of little
private importance to any but the leaders; it comes home to the person
and hearth of every male head of a family, and of every one Edition:
current; Page: [225]who looks forward to being so. The clodhopper
exercises, or is to exercise, his share of the power equally with the
highest nobleman. And the case is that in which the desire of power is
the strongest: for every one who desires power, desires it most over
those who are nearest to him, with whom his life is passed, with whom he
has most concerns in common, and in whom any independence of his
authority is oftenest likely to interfere with his individual
preferences. If, in the other cases specified, powers manifestly
grounded only on force, and having so much less to support them, are so
slowly and with so much difficulty got rid of, much more must it be so
with this, even if it rests on no better foundation than those. We must
consider, too, that the possessors of the power have facilities in this
case, greater than in any other, to prevent any uprising against it.
Every one of the subjects lives under the very eye, and almost, it may
be said, in the hands, of one of the masters—in closer intimacy with him
than with any of her fellow-subjects; with no means of combining against
him, no power of even locally overmastering him, and, on the other hand,
with the strongest motives for seeking his favour and avoiding to give
him offence. In struggles for political emancipation, everybody knows
how often its champions are bought off by bribes, or daunted Edition:
current; Page: [226]by terrors. In the case of women, each individual of
the subject-class is in a chronic state of bribery and intimidation
combined. In setting up the standard of resistance, a large number of
the leaders, and still more of the followers, must make an almost
complete sacrifice of the pleasures or the alleviations of their own
individual lot. If ever any system of privilege and enforced subjection
had its yoke tightly riveted on the necks of those who are kept down by
it, this has. I have not yet shown that it is a wrong system: but every
one who is capable of thinking on the subject must see that even if it
is, it was certain to outlast all other forms of unjust authority. And
when some of the grossest of the other forms still exist in many
civilized countries, and have only recently been got rid of in others,
it would be strange if that which is so much the deepest-rooted had yet
been perceptibly shaken anywhere. There is more reason to wonder that
the protests and testimonies against it should have been so numerous and
so weighty as they are.

Some will object, that a comparison cannot fairly be made between the
government of the male sex and the forms of unjust power which I have
adduced in illustration of it, since these are arbitrary, and the effect
of mere usurpation, while it on the contrary is natural. But was
Edition: current; Page: [227]there ever any domination which did not
appear natural to those who possessed it? There was a time when the
division of mankind into two classes, a small one of masters and a
numerous one of slaves, appeared, even to the most cultivated minds, to
be a natural, and the only natural, condition of the human race. No less
an intellect, and one which contributed no less to the progress of human
thought, than Aristotle, held this opinion without doubt or misgiving;
and rested it on the same premises on which the same assertion in regard
to the dominion of men over women is usually based, namely that there
are different natures among mankind, free natures, and slave natures;
that the Greeks were of a free nature, the barbarian races of Thracians
and Asiatics of a slave nature. But why need I go back to Aristotle? Did
not the slaveowners of the Southern United States maintain the same
doctrine, with all the fanaticism with which men cling to the theories
that justify their passions and legitimate their personal interests? Did
they not call heaven and earth to witness that the dominion of the white
man over the black is natural, that the black race is by nature
incapable of freedom, and marked out for slavery? some even going so far
as to say that the freedom of manual labourers is an unnatural order of
things anywhere. Again, the theorists of absolute Edition: current;
Page: [228]monarchy have always affirmed it to be the only natural form
of government; issuing from the patriarchal, which was the primitive and
spontaneous form of society, framed on the model of the paternal, which
is anterior to society itself, and, as they contend, the most natural
authority of all. Nay, for that matter, the law of force itself, to
those who could not plead any other, has always seemed the most natural
of all grounds for the exercise of authority. Conquering races hold it
to be Nature’s own dictate that the conquered should obey the
conquerors, or, as they euphoniously paraphrase it, that the feebler and
more unwarlike races should submit to the braver and manlier. The
smallest acquaintance with human life in the middle ages, shows how
supremely natural the dominion of the feudal nobility over men of low
condition appeared to the nobility themselves, and how unnatural the
conception seemed, of a person of the inferior class claiming equality
with them, or exercising authority over them. It hardly seemed less so
to the class held in subjection. The emancipated serfs and burgesses,
even in their most vigorous struggles, never made any pretension to a
share of authority; they only demanded more or less of limitation to the
power of tyrannizing over them. So true is it that unnatural generally
means only uncustomary, and that everything Edition: current; Page:
[229]which is usual appears natural. The subjection of women to men
being a universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears
unnatural. But how entirely, even in this case, the feeling is dependent
on custom, appears by ample experience. Nothing so much astonishes the
people of distant parts of the world, when they first learn anything
about England, as to be told that it is under a queen: the thing seems
to them so unnatural as to be almost incredible. To Englishmen this does
not seem in the least degree unnatural, because they are used to it; but
they do feel it unnatural that women should be soldiers or members of
parliament. In the feudal ages, on the contrary, war and politics were
not thought unnatural to women, because not unusual; it seemed natural
that women of the privileged classes should be of manly character,
inferior in nothing but bodily strength to their husbands and fathers.
The independence of women seemed rather less unnatural to the Greeks
than to other ancients, on account of the fabulous Amazons (whom they
believed to be historical), and the partial example afforded by the
Spartan women; who, though no less subordinate by law than in other
Greek states, were more free in fact, and being trained to bodily
exercises in the same manner with men, gave ample proof that they were
not naturally Edition: current; Page: [230]disqualified for them. There
can be little doubt that Spartan experience suggested to Plato, among
many other of his doctrines, that of the social and political equality
of the two sexes.

But, it will be said, the rule of men over women differs from all these
others in not being a rule of force: it is accepted voluntarily; women
make no complaint, and are consenting parties to it. In the first place,
a great number of women do not accept it. Ever since there have been
women able to make their sentiments known by their writings (the only
mode of publicity which society permits to them), an increasing number
of them have recorded protests against their present social condition:
and recently many thousands of them, headed by the most eminent women
known to the public, have petitioned Parliament for their admission to
the Parliamentary Suffrage. The claim of women to be educated as
solidly, and in the same branches of knowledge, as men, is urged with
growing intensity, and with a great prospect of success; while the
demand for their admission into professions and occupations hitherto
closed against them, becomes every year more urgent. Though there are
not in this country, as there are in the United States, periodical
Conventions and an organized party to agitate for the Rights of Women,
there is a numerous and active Society organized and managed by women,
for the more Edition: current; Page: [231]limited object of obtaining
the political franchise. Nor is it only in our own country and in
America that women are beginning to protest, more or less collectively,
against the disabilities under which they labour. France, and Italy, and
Switzerland, and Russia now afford examples of the same thing. How many
more women there are who silently cherish similar aspirations, no one
can possibly know; but there are abundant tokens how many would cherish
them, were they not so strenuously taught to repress them as contrary to
the proprieties of their sex. It must be remembered, also, that no
enslaved class ever asked for complete liberty at once. When Simon de
Montfort called the deputies of the commons to sit for the first time in
Parliament, did any of them dream of demanding that an assembly, elected
by their constituents, should make and destroy ministries, and dictate
to the king in affairs of state? No such thought entered into the
imagination of the most ambitious of them. The nobility had already
these pretensions; the commons pretended to nothing but to be exempt
from arbitrary taxation, and from the gross individual oppression of the
king’s officers. It is a political law of nature that those who are
under any power of ancient origin, never begin by complaining of the
power itself, but only of its oppressive exercise. There is never any
want of Edition: current; Page: [232]women who complain of ill usage by
their husbands. There would be infinitely more, if complaint were not
the greatest of all provocatives to a repetition and increase of the ill
usage. It is this which frustrates all attempts to maintain the power
but protect the woman against its abuses. In no other case (except that
of a child) is the person who has been proved judicially to have
suffered an injury, replaced under the physical power of the culprit who
inflicted it. Accordingly wives, even in the most extreme and protracted
cases of bodily ill usage, hardly ever dare avail themselves of the laws
made for their protection: and if, in a moment of irrepressible
indignation, or by the interference of neighbours, they are induced to
do so, their whole effort afterwards is to disclose as little as they
can, and to beg off their tyrant from his merited chastisement.

All causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that women
should be collectively rebellious to the power of men. They are so far
in a position different from all other subject classes, that their
masters require something more from them than actual service. Men do not
want solely the obedience of women, they want their sentiments. All men,
except the most brutish, desire to have, in the woman most nearly
connected with them, not a forced slave but a willing one, not a slave
merely, but a favourite. Edition: current; Page: [233]They have
therefore put everything in practice to enslave their minds. The masters
of all other slaves rely, for maintaining obedience, on fear; either
fear of themselves, or religious fears. The masters of women wanted more
than simple obedience, and they turned the whole force of education to
effect their purpose. All women are brought up from the very earliest
years in the belief that their ideal of character is the very opposite
to that of men; not self-will, and government by self-control, but
submission, and yielding to the control of others. All the moralities
tell them that it is the duty of women, and all the current
sentimentalities that it is their nature, to live for others; to make
complete abnegation of themselves, and to have no life but in their
affections. And by their affections are meant the only ones they are
allowed to have—those to the men with whom they are connected, or to the
children who constitute an additional and indefeasible tie between them
and a man. When we put together three things—first, the natural
attraction between opposite sexes; secondly, the wife’s entire
dependence on the husband, every privilege or pleasure she has being
either his gift, or depending entirely on his will; and lastly, that the
principal object of human pursuit, consideration, and all objects of
social ambition, can in general be sought or obtained by her only
through Edition: current; Page: [234]him, it would be a miracle if the
object of being attractive to men had not become the polar star of
feminine education and formation of character. And, this great means of
influence over the minds of women having been acquired, an instinct of
selfishness made men avail themselves of it to the utmost as a means of
holding women in subjection, by representing to them meekness,
submissiveness, and resignation of all individual will into the hands of
a man, as an essential part of sexual attractiveness. Can it be doubted
that any of the other yokes which mankind have succeeded in breaking,
would have subsisted till now if the same means had existed, and had
been as sedulously used, to bow down their minds to it? If it had been
made the object of the life of every young plebeian to find personal
favour in the eyes of some patrician, of every young serf with some
seigneur; if domestication with him, and a share of his personal
affections, had been held out as the prize which they all should look
out for, the most gifted and aspiring being able to reckon on the most
desirable prizes; and if, when this prize had been obtained, they had
been shut out by a wall of brass from all interests not centering in
him, all feelings and desires but those which he shared or inculcated;
would not serfs and seigneurs, plebeians and patricians, have been as
broadly distinguished at this day as men Edition: current; Page:
[235]and women are? and would not all but a thinker here and there, have
believed the distinction to be a fundamental and unalterable fact in
human nature?

The preceding considerations are amply sufficient to show that custom,
however universal it may be, affords in this case no presumption, and
ought not to create any prejudice, in favour of the arrangements which
place women in social and political subjection to men. But I may go
farther, and maintain that the course of history, and the tendencies of
progressive human society, afford not only no presumption in favour of
this system of inequality of rights, but a strong one against it; and
that, so far as the whole course of human improvement up to this time,
the whole stream of modern tendencies, warrants any inference on the
subject, it is, that this relic of the past is discordant with the
future, and must necessarily disappear.

For, what is the peculiar character of the modern world—the difference
which chiefly distinguishes modern institutions, modern social ideas,
modern life itself, from those of times long past? It is, that human
beings are no longer born to their place in life, and chained down by an
inexorable bond to the place they are born to, but are free to employ
their faculties, and such favourable chances as offer, to achieve the
lot which Edition: current; Page: [236]may appear to them most
desirable. Human society of old was constituted on a very different
principle. All were born to a fixed social position, and were mostly
kept in it by law, or interdicted from any means by which they could
emerge from it. As some men are born white and others black, so some
were born slaves and others freemen and citizens; some were born
patricians, others plebeians; some were born feudal nobles, others
commoners and roturiers. A slave or serf could never make himself free,
nor, except by the will of his master, become so. In most European
countries it was not till towards the close of the middle ages, and as a
consequence of the growth of regal power, that commoners could be
ennobled. Even among nobles, the eldest son was born the exclusive heir
to the paternal possessions, and a long time elapsed before it was fully
established that the father could disinherit him. Among the industrious
classes, only those who were born members of a guild, or were admitted
into it by its members, could lawfully practise their calling within its
local limits; and nobody could practise any calling deemed important, in
any but the legal manner—by processes authoritatively prescribed.
Manufacturers have stood in the pillory for presuming to carry on their
business by new and improved methods. In modern Europe, and most in
those parts of Edition: current; Page: [237]it which have participated
most largely in all other modern improvements, diametrically opposite
doctrines now prevail. Law and government do not undertake to prescribe
by whom any social or industrial operation shall or shall not be
conducted, or what modes of conducting them shall be lawful. These
things are left to the unfettered choice of individuals. Even the laws
which required that workmen should serve an apprenticeship, have in this
country been repealed: there being ample assurance that in all cases in
which an apprenticeship is necessary, its necessity will suffice to
enforce it. The old theory was, that the least possible should be left
to the choice of the individual agent; that all he had to do should, as
far as practicable, be laid down for him by superior wisdom. Left to
himself he was sure to go wrong. The modern conviction, the fruit of a
thousand years of experience, is, that things in which the individual is
the person directly interested, never go right but as they are left to
his own discretion; and that any regulation of them by authority, except
to protect the rights of others, is sure to be mischievous. This
conclusion, slowly arrived at, and not adopted until almost every
possible application of the contrary theory had been made with
disastrous result, now (in the industrial department) prevails
universally in the most advanced Edition: current; Page: [238]countries,
almost universally in all that have pretensions to any sort of
advancement. It is not that all processes are supposed to be equally
good, or all persons to be equally qualified for everything; but that
freedom of individual choice is now known to be the only thing which
procures the adoption of the best processes, and throws each operation
into the hands of those who are best qualified for it. Nobody thinks it
necessary to make a law that only a strong-armed man shall be a
blacksmith. Freedom and competition suffice to make blacksmiths
strong-armed men, because the weak-armed can earn more by engaging in
occupations for which they are more fit. In consonance with this
doctrine, it is felt to be an overstepping of the proper bounds of
authority to fix beforehand, on some general presumption, that certain
persons are not fit to do certain things. It is now thoroughly known and
admitted that if some such presumptions exist, no such presumption is
infallible. Even if it be well grounded in a majority of cases, which it
is very likely not to be, there will be a minority of exceptional cases
in which it does not hold: and in those it is both an injustice to the
individuals, and a detriment to society, to place barriers in the way of
their using their faculties for their own benefit and for that of
others. In the cases, Edition: current; Page: [239]on the other hand, in
which the unfitness is real, the ordinary motives of human conduct will
on the whole suffice to prevent the incompetent person from making, or
from persisting in, the attempt.

If the general principle of social and economical science is not true;
if individuals, with such help as they can derive from the opinion of
those who know them, are not better judges than the law and the
government, of their own capacities and vocation; the world cannot too
soon abandon this principle, and return to the old system of regulations
and disabilities. But if the principle is true, we ought to act as if we
believed it, and not to ordain that to be born a girl instead of a boy,
any more than to be born black instead of white, or a commoner instead
of a nobleman, shall decide the person’s position through all life —
shall interdict people from all the more elevated social positions, and
from all, except a few, respectable occupations. Even were we to admit
the utmost that is ever pretended as to the superior fitness of men for
all the functions now reserved to them, the same argument applies which
forbids a legal qualification for members of Parliament. If only once in
a dozen years the conditions of eligibility exclude a fit person, there
is a real loss, while the exclusion of thousands Edition: current; Page:
[240]of unfit persons is no gain; for if the constitution of the
electoral body disposes them to choose unfit persons, there are always
plenty of such persons to choose from. In all things of any difficulty
and importance, those who can do them well are fewer than the need, even
with the most unrestricted latitude of choice: and any limitation of the
field of selection deprives society of some chances of being served by
the competent, without ever saving it from the incompetent.

At present, in the more improved countries, the disabilities of women
are the only case, save one, in which laws and institutions take persons
at their birth, and ordain that they shall never in all their lives be
allowed to compete for certain things. The one exception is that of
royalty. Persons still are born to the throne; no one, not of the
reigning family, can ever occupy it, and no one even of that family can,
by any means but the course of hereditary succession, attain it. All
other dignities and social advantages are open to the whole male sex:
many indeed are only attainable by wealth, but wealth may be striven for
by any one, and is actually obtained by many men of the very humblest
origin. The difficulties, to the majority, are indeed insuperable
without the aid of fortunate accidents; but no male human being is under
any legal ban: neither law nor opinion superadd artificial obstacles to
Edition: current; Page: [241]the natural ones. Royalty, as I have said,
is excepted: but in this case every one feels it to be an exception—an
anomaly in the modern world, in marked opposition to its customs and
principles, and to be justified only by extraordinary special
expediencies, which, though individuals and nations differ in estimating
their weight, unquestionably do in fact exist. But in this exceptional
case, in which a high social function is, for important reasons,
bestowed on birth instead of being put up to competition, all free
nations contrive to adhere in substance to the principle from which they
nominally derogate; for they circumscribe this high function by
conditions avowedly intended to prevent the person to whom it ostensibly
belongs from really performing it; while the person by whom it is
performed, the responsible minister, does obtain the post by a
competition from which no full-grown citizen of the male sex is legally
excluded. The disabilities, therefore, to which women are subject from
the mere fact of their birth, are the solitary examples of the kind in
modern legislation. In no instance except this, which comprehends half
the human race, are the higher social functions closed against any one
by a fatality of birth which no exertions, and no change of
circumstances, can overcome; for even religious disabilities (besides
that in England and in Europe they Edition: current; Page: [242]have
practically almost ceased to exist) do not close any career to the
disqualified person in case of conversion.

The social subordination of women thus stands out an isolated fact in
modern social institutions; a solitary breach of what has become their
fundamental law; a single relic of an old world of thought and practice
exploded in everything else, but retained in the one thing of most
universal interest; as if a gigantic dolmen, or a vast temple of Jupiter
Olympius, occupied the site of St. Paul’s and received daily worship,
while the surrounding Christian churches were only resorted to on fasts
and festivals. This entire discrepancy between one social fact and all
those which accompany it, and the radical opposition between its nature
and the progressive movement which is the boast of the modern world, and
which has successively swept away everything else of an analogous
character, surely affords, to a conscientious observer of human
tendencies, serious matter for reflection. It raises a primâ facie
presumption on the unfavourable side, far outweighing any which custom
and usage could in such circumstances create on the favourable; and
should at least suffice to make this, like the choice between
republicanism and royalty, a balanced question.

The least that can be demanded is, that the Edition: current; Page:
[243]question should not be considered as prejudged by existing fact and
existing opinion, but open to discussion on its merits, as a question of
justice and expediency: the decision on this, as on any of the other
social arrangements of mankind, depending on what an enlightened
estimate of tendencies and consequences may show to be most advantageous
to humanity in general, without distinction of sex. And the discussion
must be a real discussion, descending to foundations, and not resting
satisfied with vague and general assertions. It will not do, for
instance, to assert in general terms, that the experience of mankind has
pronounced in favour of the existing system. Experience cannot possibly
have decided between two courses, so long as there has only been
experience of one. If it be said that the doctrine of the equality of
the sexes rests only on theory, it must be remembered that the contrary
doctrine also has only theory to rest upon. All that is proved in its
favour by direct experience, is that mankind have been able to exist
under it, and to attain the degree of improvement and prosperity which
we now see; but whether that prosperity has been attained sooner, or is
now greater, than it would have been under the other system, experience
does not say. On the other hand, experience does say, that every step in
improvement has been so invariably accompanied by a step Edition:
current; Page: [244]made in raising the social position of women, that
historians and philosophers have been led to adopt their elevation or
debasement as on the whole the surest test and most correct measure of
the civilization of a people or an age. Through all the progessive
period of human history, the condition of women has been approaching
nearer to equality with men. This does not of itself prove that the
assimilation must go on to complete equality; but it assuredly affords
some presumption that such is the case.

Neither does it avail anything to say that the nature of the two sexes
adapts them to their present functions and position, and renders these
appropriate to them. Standing on the ground of common sense and the
constitution of the human mind, I deny that any one knows, or can know,
the nature of the two sexes, as long as they have only been seen in
their present relation to one another. If men had ever been found in
society without women, or women without men, or if there had been a
society of men and women in which the women were not under the control
of the men, something might have been positively known about the mental
and moral differences which may be inherent in the nature of each. What
is now called the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing—the
result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation
Edition: current; Page: [245]in others. It may be asserted without
scruple, that no other class of dependents have had their character so
entirely distorted from its natural proportions by their relation with
their masters; for, if conquered and slave races have been, in some
respects, more forcibly repressed, whatever in them has not been crushed
down by an iron heel has generally been let alone, and if left with any
liberty of development, it has developed itself according to its own
laws; but in the case of women, a hot-house and stove cultivation has
always been carried on of some of the capabilities of their nature, for
the benefit and pleasure of their masters. Then, because certain
products of the general vital force sprout luxuriantly and reach a great
development in this heated atmosphere and under this active nurture and
watering, while other shoots from the same root, which are left outside
in the wintry air, with ice purposely heaped all round them, have a
stunted growth, and some are burnt off with fire and disappear; men,
with that inability to recognise their own work which distinguishes the
unanalytic mind, indolently believe that the tree grows of itself in the
way they have made it grow, and that it would die if one half of it were
not kept in a vapour bath and the other half in the snow.

Of all difficulties which impede the progress Edition: current; Page:
[246]of thought, and the formation of well-grounded opinions on life and
social arrangements, the greatest is now the unspeakable ignorance and
inattention of mankind in respect to the influences which form human
character. Whatever any portion of the human species now are, or seem to
be, such, it is supposed, they have a natural tendency to be: even when
the most elementary knowledge of the circumstances in which they have
been placed, clearly points out the causes that made them what they are.
Because a cottier deeply in arrears to his landlord is not industrious,
there are people who think that the Irish are naturally idle. Because
constitutions can be overthrown when the authorities appointed to
execute them turn their arms against them, there are people who think
the French incapable of free government. Because the Greeks cheated the
Turks, and the Turks only plundered the Greeks, there are persons who
think that the Turks are naturally more sincere: and because women, as
is often said, care nothing about politics except their personalities,
it is supposed that the general good is naturally less interesting to
women than to men. History, which is now so much better understood than
formerly, teaches another lesson: if only by showing the extraordinary
susceptibility of human nature to external influences, and the extreme
Edition: current; Page: [247]variableness of those of its manifestations
which are supposed to be most universal and uniform. But in history, as
in travelling, men usually see only what they already had in their own
minds; and few learn much from history, who do not bring much with them
to its study.

Hence, in regard to that most difficult question, what are the natural
differences between the two sexes—a subject on which it is impossible in
the present state of society to obtain complete and correct
knowledge—while almost everybody dogmatizes upon it, almost all neglect
and make light of the only means by which any partial insight can be
obtained into it. This is, an analytic study of the most important
department of psychology, the laws of the influence of circumstances on
character. For, however great and apparently ineradicable the moral and
intellectual differences between men and women might be, the evidence of
their being natural differences could only be negative. Those only could
be inferred to be natural which could not possibly be artificial—the
residuum, after deducting every characteristic of either sex which can
admit of being explained from education or external circumstances. The
profoundest knowledge of the laws of the formation of character is
indispensable to entitle any one to affirm even that there is any
difference, much more what Edition: current; Page: [248]the difference
is, between the two sexes considered as moral and rational beings; and
since no one, as yet, has that knowledge, (for there is hardly any
subject which, in proportion to its importance, has been so little
studied), no one is thus far entitled to any positive opinion on the
subject. Conjectures are all that can at present be made; conjectures
more or less probable, according as more or less authorized by such
knowledge as we yet have of the laws of psychology, as applied to the
formation of character.

Even the preliminary knowledge, what the differences between the sexes
now are, apart from all question as to how they are made what they are,
is still in the crudest and most incomplete state. Medical practitioners
and physiologists have ascertained, to some extent, the differences in
bodily constitution; and this is an important element to the
psychologist: but hardly any medical practitioner is a psychologist.
Respecting the mental characteristics of women; their observations are
of no more worth than those of common men. It is a subject on which
nothing final can be known, so long as those who alone can really know
it, women themselves, have given but little testimony, and that little,
mostly suborned. It is easy to know stupid women. Stupidity is much the
same all the world over. A stupid person’s notions and feelings Edition:
current; Page: [249]may confidently be inferred from those which prevail
in the circle by which the person is surrounded. Not so with those whose
opinions and feelings are an emanation from their own nature and
faculties. It is only a man here and there who has any tolerable
knowledge of the character even of the women of his own family. I do not
mean, of their capabilities; these nobody knows, not even themselves,
because most of them have never been called out. I mean their actually
existing thoughts and feelings. Many a man thinks he perfectly
understands women, because he has had amatory relations with several,
perhaps with many of them. If he is a good observer, and his experience
extends to quality as well as quantity, he may have learnt something of
one narrow department of their nature—an important department, no doubt.
But of all the rest of it, few persons are generally more ignorant,
because there are few from whom it is so carefully hidden. The most
favourable case which a man can generally have for studying the
character of a woman, is that of his own wife: for the opportunities are
greater, and the cases of complete sympathy not so unspeakably rare. And
in fact, this is the source from which any knowledge worth having on the
subject has, I believe, generally come. But most men have not had the
opportunity of studying in Edition: current; Page: [250]this way more
than a single case: accordingly one can, to an almost laughable degree,
infer what a man’s wife is like, from his opinions about women in
general. To make even this one case yield any result, the woman must be
worth knowing, and the man not only a competent judge, but of a
character so sympathetic in itself, and so well adapted to hers, that he
can either read her mind by sympathetic intuition, or has nothing in
himself which makes her shy of disclosing it. Hardly anything, I
believe, can be more rare than this conjunction. It often happens that
there is the most complete unity of feeling and community of interests
as to all external things, yet the one has as little admission into the
internal life of the other as if they were common acquaintance. Even
with true affection, authority on the one side and subordination on the
other prevent perfect confidence. Though nothing may be intentionally
withheld, much is not shown. In the analogous relation of parent and
child, the corresponding phenomenon must have been in the observation of
every one. As between father and son, how many are the cases in which
the father, in spite of real affection on both sides, obviously to all
the world does not know, nor suspect, parts of the son’s character
familiar to his companions and equals. The truth is, that the position
of Edition: current; Page: [251]looking up to another is extremely
unpropitious to complete sincerity and openness with him. The fear of
losing ground in his opinion or in his feelings is so strong, that even
in an upright character, there is an unconscious tendency to show only
the best side, or the side which, though not the best, is that which he
most likes to see: and it may be confidently said that thorough
knowledge of one another hardly ever exists, but between persons who,
besides being intimates, are equals. How much more true, then, must all
this be, when the one is not only under the authority of the other, but
has it inculcated on her as a duty to reckon everything else subordinate
to his comfort and pleasure, and to let him neither see nor feel
anything coming from her, except what is agreeable to him. All these
difficulties stand in the way of a man’s obtaining any thorough
knowledge even of the one woman whom alone, in general, he has
sufficient opportunity of studying. When we further consider that to
understand one woman is not necessarily to understand any other woman;
that even if he could study many women of one rank, or of one country,
he would not thereby understand women of other ranks or countries; and
even if he did, they are still only the women of a single period of
history; we may safely assert that the knowledge which men can acquire
of women, even as they have Edition: current; Page: [252]been and are,
without reference to what they might be, is wretchedly imperfect and
superficial, and always will be so, until women themselves have told all
that they have to tell.

And this time has not come; nor will it come otherwise than gradually.
It is but of yesterday that women have either been qualified by literary
accomplishments, or permitted by society, to tell anything to the
general public. As yet very few of them dare tell anything, which men,
on whom their literary success depends, are unwilling to hear. Let us
remember in what manner, up to a very recent time, the expression, even
by a male author, of uncustomary opinions, or what are deemed eccentric
feelings, usually was, and in some degree still is, received; and we may
form some faint conception under what impediments a woman, who is
brought up to think custom and opinion her sovereign rule, attempts to
express in books anything drawn from the depths of her own nature. The
greatest woman who has left writings behind her sufficient to give her
an eminent rank in the literature of her country, thought it necessary
to prefix as a motto to her boldest work, “Un homme peut braver
l’opinion; une femme doit s’y soumettre.”* The greater part of what
women write about women is mere sycophancy to men. In the case of
unmarried Edition: current; Page: [253]women, much of it seems only
intended to increase their chance of a husband. Many, both married and
unmarried, overstep the mark, and inculcate a servility beyond what is
desired or relished by any man, except the very vulgarest. But this is
not so often the case as, even at a quite late period, it still was.
Literary women are becoming more freespoken, and more willing to express
their real sentiments. Unfortunately, in this country especially, they
are themselves such artificial products, that their sentiments are
compounded of a small element of individual observation and
consciousness, and a very large one of acquired associations. This will
be less and less the case, but it will remain true to a great extent, as
long as social institutions do not admit the same free development of
originality in women which is possible to men. When that time comes, and
not before, we shall see, and not merely hear, as much as it is
necessary to know of the nature of women, and the adaptation of other
things to it.

I have dwelt so much on the difficulties which at present obstruct any
real knowledge by men of the true nature of women, because in this as in
so many other things “opinio copiæ inter maximas causas inopiæ est;” and
there is little chance of reasonable thinking on the matter, while
people flatter themselves that they perfectly Edition: current; Page:
[254]understand a subject of which most men know absolutely nothing, and
of which it is at present impossible that any man, or all men taken
together, should have knowledge which can qualify them to lay down the
law to women as to what is, or is not, their vocation. Happily, no such
knowledge is necessary for any practical purpose connected with the
position of women in relation to society and life. For, according to all
the principles involved in modern society, the question rests with women
themselves—to be decided by their own experience, and by the use of
their own faculties. There are no means of finding what either one
person or many can do, but by trying—and no means by which any one else
can discover for them what it is for their happiness to do or leave
undone.

One thing we may be certain of—that what is contrary to women’s nature
to do, they never will be made to do by simply giving their nature free
play. The anxiety of mankind to interfere in behalf of nature, for fear
lest nature should not succeed in effecting its purpose, is an
altogether unnecessary solicitude. What women by nature cannot do, it is
quite superfluous to forbid them from doing. What they can do, but not
so well as the men who are their competitors, competition suffices to
exclude them from; since nobody asks for protective duties and bounties
Edition: current; Page: [255]in favour of women; it is only asked that
the present bounties and protective duties in favour of men should be
recalled. If women have a greater natural inclination for some things
than for others, there is no need of laws or social inculcation to make
the majority of them do the former in preference to the latter. Whatever
women’s services are most wanted for, the free play of competition will
hold out the strongest inducements to them to undertake. And, as the
words imply, they are most wanted for the things for which they are most
fit; by the apportionment of which to them, the collective faculties of
the two sexes can be applied on the whole with the greatest sum of
valuable result.

The general opinion of men is supposed to be, that the natural vocation
of a woman is that of a wife and mother. I say, is supposed to be,
because, judging from acts—from the whole of the present constitution of
society—one might infer that their opinion was the direct contrary. They
might be supposed to think that the alleged natural vocation of women
was of all things the most repugnant to their nature; insomuch that if
they are free to do anything else—if any other means of living, or
occupation of their time and faculties, is open, which has any chance of
appearing desirable to them—there Edition: current; Page: [256]will not
be enough of them who will be willing to accept the condition said to be
natural to them. If this is the real opinion of men in general, it would
be well that it should be spoken out. I should like to hear somebody
openly enunciating the doctrine (it is already implied in much that is
written on the subject)—“It is necessary to society that women should
marry and produce children. They will not do so unless they are
compelled. Therefore it is necessary to compel them.” The merits of the
case would then be clearly defined. It would be exactly that of the
slaveholders of South Carolina and Louisiana. “It is necessary that
cotton and sugar should be grown. White men cannot produce them. Negroes
will not, for any wages which we choose to give. Ergo they must be
compelled.” An illustration still closer to the point is that of
impressment. Sailors must absolutely be had to defend the country. It
often happens that they will not voluntarily enlist. Therefore there
must be the power of forcing them. How often has this logic been used!
and, but for one flaw in it, without doubt it would have been successful
up to this day. But it is open to the retort—First pay the sailors the
honest value of their labour. When you have made it as well worth their
while to serve you, as to work for Edition: current; Page: [257]other
employers, you will have no more difficulty than others have in
obtaining their services. To this there is no logical answer except “I
will not:” and as people are now not only ashamed, but are not desirous,
to rob the labourer of his hire, impressment is no longer advocated.
Those who attempt to force women into marriage by closing all other
doors against them, lay themselves open to a similar retort. If they
mean what they say, their opinion must evidently be, that men do not
render the married condition so desirable to women, as to induce them to
accept it for its own recommendations. It is not a sign of one’s
thinking the boon one offers very attractive, when one allows only
Hobson’s choice, “that or none.” And here, I believe, is the clue to the
feelings of those men, who have a real antipathy to the equal freedom of
women. I believe they are afraid, not lest women should be unwilling to
marry, for I do not think that any one in reality has that apprehension;
but lest they should insist that marriage should be on equal conditions;
lest all women of spirit and capacity should prefer doing almost
anything else, not in their own eyes degrading, rather than marry, when
marrying is giving themselves a master, and a master too of all their
earthly possessions. And truly, if this consequence were necessarily
incident to Edition: current; Page: [258]marriage, I think that the
apprehension would be very well founded. I agree in thinking it probable
that few women, capable of anything else, would, unless under an
irresistible entrainement, rendering them for the time insensible to
anything but itself, choose such a lot, when any other means were open
to them of filling a conventionally honourable place in life: and if men
are determined that the law of marriage shall be a law of despotism,
they are quite right, in point of mere policy, in leaving to women only
Hobson’s choice. But, in that case, all that has been done in the modern
world to relax the chain on the minds of women, has been a mistake. They
never should have been allowed to receive a literary education. Women
who read, much more women who write, are, in the existing constitution
of things, a contradiction and a disturbing element: and it was wrong to
bring women up with any acquirements but those of an odalisque, or of a
domestic servant.

Edition: current; Page: [259]


CHAPTER II.

IT will be well to commence the detailed discussion of the subject by
the particular branch of it to which the course of our observations has
led us: the conditions which the laws of this and all other countries
annex to the marriage contract. Marriage being the destination appointed
by society for women, the prospect they are brought up to, and the
object which it is intended should be sought by all of them, except
those who are too little attractive to be chosen by any man as his
companion; one might have supposed that everything would have been done
to make this condition as eligible to them as possible, that they might
have no cause to regret being denied the option of any other. Society,
however, both in this, and, at first, in all other cases, has preferred
to attain its object by foul rather than fair means: but this is the
only case in which it has substantially persisted in them even to the
present day. Originally women were taken by force, or regularly sold by
their father to the husband. Until a late period in Edition: current;
Page: [260]European history, the father had the power to dispose of his
daughter in marriage at his own will and pleasure, without any regard to
hers. The Church, indeed, was so far faithful to a better morality as to
require a formal “yes” from the woman at the marriage ceremony; but
there was nothing to shew that the consent was other than compulsory;
and it was practically impossible for the girl to refuse compliance if
the father persevered, except perhaps when she might obtain the
protection of religion by a determined resolution to take monastic vows.
After marriage, the man had anciently (but this was anterior to
Christianity) the power of life and death over his wife. She could
invoke no law against him; he was her sole tribunal and law. For a long
time he could repudiate her, but she had no corresponding power in
regard to him. By the old laws of England, the husband was called the
lord of the wife; he was literally regarded as her sovereign, inasmuch
that the murder of a man by his wife was called treason (petty as
distinguished from high treason), and was more cruelly avenged than was
usually the case with high treason, for the penalty was burning to
death. Because these various enormities have fallen into disuse (for
most of them were never formally abolished, or not until they had long
ceased to be practised) men suppose that all is now as it Edition:
current; Page: [261]should be in regard to the marriage contract; and we
are continually told that civilization and Christianity have restored to
the woman her just rights. Meanwhile the wife is the actual bondservant
of her husband: no less so, as far as legal obligation goes, than slaves
commonly so called. She vows a lifelong obedience to him at the altar,
and is held to it all through her life by law. Casuists may say that the
obligation of obedience stops short of participation in crime, but it
certainly extends to everything else. She can do no act whatever but by
his permission, at least tacit. She can acquire no property but for him;
the instant it becomes hers, even if by inheritance, it becomes ipso
facto his. In this respect the wife’s position under the common law of
England is worse than that of slaves in the laws of many countries: by
the Roman law, for example, a slave might have his peculium, which to a
certain extent the law guaranteed to him for his exclusive use. The
higher classes in this country have given an analogous advantage to
their women, through special contracts setting aside the law, by
conditions of pin-money, &c.: since parental feeling being stronger with
fathers than the class feeling of their own sex, a father generally
prefers his own daughter to a son-in-law who is a stranger to him. By
means of settlements, the rich usually contrive to withdraw Edition:
current; Page: [262]the whole or part of the inherited property of the
wife from the absolute control of the husband: but they do not succeed
in keeping it under her own control; the utmost they can do only
prevents the husband from squandering it, at the same time debarring the
rightful owner from its use. The property itself is out of the reach of
both; and as to the income derived from it, the form of settlement most
favourable to the wife (that called “to her separate use”) only
precludes the husband from receiving it instead of her: it must pass
through her hands, but if he takes it from her by personal violence as
soon as she receives it, he can neither be punished, nor compelled to
restitution. This is the amount of the protection which, under the laws
of this country, the most powerful nobleman can give to his own daughter
as respects her husband. In the immense majority of cases there is no
settlement: and the absorption of all rights, all property, as well as
all freedom of action, is complete. The two are called “one person in
law,” for the purpose of inferring that whatever is hers is his, but the
parallel inference is never drawn that whatever is his is hers; the
maxim is not applied against the man, except to make him responsible to
third parties for her acts, as a master is for the acts of his slaves or
of his cattle. I am far from pretending that wives are in Edition:
current; Page: [263]general no better treated than slaves; but no slave
is a slave to the same lengths, and in so full a sense of the word, as a
wife is. Hardly any slave, except one immediately attached to the
master’s person, is a slave at all hours and all minutes; in general he
has, like a soldier, his fixed task, and when it is done, or when he is
off duty, he disposes, within certain limits, of his own time, and has a
family life into which the master rarely intrudes. “Uncle Tom” under his
first master had his own life in his “cabin,” almost as much as any man
whose work takes him away from home, is able to have in his own family.
But it cannot be so with the wife. Above all, a female slave has (in
Christian countries) an admitted right, and is considered under a moral
obligation, to refuse to her master the last familiarity. Not so the
wife: however brutal a tyrant she may unfortunately be chained to—though
she may know that he hates her, though it may be his daily pleasure to
torture her, and though she may feel it impossible not to loathe him—he
can claim from her and enforce the lowest degradation of a human being,
that of being made the instrument of an animal function contrary to her
inclinations. While she is held in this worst description of slavery as
to her own person, what is her position in regard to the children in
whom she and her master have a joint interest? Edition: current; Page:
[264]They are by law his children. He alone has any legal rights over
them. Not one act can she do towards or in relation to them, except by
delegation from him. Even after he is dead she is not their legal
guardian, unless he by will has made her so. He could even send them
away from her, and deprive her of the means of seeing or corresponding
with them, until this power was in some degree restricted by Serjeant
Talfourd’s Act. This is her legal state. And from this state she has no
means of withdrawing herself. If she leaves her husband, she can take
nothing with her, neither her children nor anything which is rightfully
her own. If he chooses, he can compel her to return, by law, or by
physical force; or he may content himself with seizing for his own use
anything which she may earn, or which may be given to her by her
relations. It is only legal separation by a decree of a court of
justice, which entitles her to live apart, without being forced back
into the custody of an exasperated jailer—or which empowers her to apply
any earnings to her own use, without fear that a man whom perhaps she
has not seen for twenty years will pounce upon her some day and carry
all off. This legal separation, until lately, the courts of justice
would only give at an expense which made it inaccessible to any one out
of the higher ranks. Even now it is only given in cases of desertion, or
of Edition: current; Page: [265]the extreme of cruelty; and yet
complaints are made every day that it is granted too easily. Surely, if
a woman is denied any lot in life but that of being the personal
body-servant of a despot, and is dependent for everything upon the
chance of finding one who may be disposed to make a favourite of her
instead of merely a drudge, it is a very cruel aggravation of her fate
that she should be allowed to try this chance only once. The natural
sequel and corollary from this state of things would be, that since her
all in life depends upon obtaining a good master, she should be allowed
to change again and again until she finds one. I am not saying that she
ought to be allowed this privilege. That is a totally different
consideration. The question of divorce, in the sense involving liberty
of remarriage, is one into which it is foreign to my purpose to enter.
All I now say is, that to those to whom nothing but servitude is
allowed, the free choice of servitude is the only, though a most
insufficient, alleviation. Its refusal completes the assimilation of the
wife to the slave—and the slave under not the mildest form of slavery:
for in some slave codes the slave could, under certain circumstances of
ill usage, legally compel the master to sell him. But no amount of ill
usage without adultery superadded, will in England free a wife from her
tormentor.

Edition: current; Page: [266]
I have no desire to exaggerate, nor does the case stand in any need of
exaggeration. I have described the wife’s legal position, not her actual
treatment. The laws of most countries are far worse than the people who
execute them, and many of them are only able to remain laws by being
seldom or never carried into effect. If married life were all that it
might be expected to be, looking to the laws alone, society would be a
hell upon earth. Happily there are both feelings and interests which in
many men exclude, and in most, greatly temper, the impulses and
propensities which lead to tyranny: and of those feelings, the tie which
connects a man with his wife affords, in a normal state of things,
incomparably the strongest example. The only tie which at all approaches
to it, that between him and his children, tends, in all save exceptional
cases, to strengthen, instead of conflicting with, the first. Because
this is true; because men in general do not inflict, nor women suffer,
all the misery which could be inflicted and suffered if the full power
of tyranny with which the man is legally invested were acted on; the
defenders of the existing form of the institution think that all its
iniquity is justified, and that any complaint is merely quarrelling with
the evil which is the price paid for every great good. But the
mitigations Edition: current; Page: [267]in practice, which are
compatible with maintaining in full legal force this or any other kind
of tyranny, instead of being any apology for despotism, only serve to
prove what power human nature possesses of reacting against the vilest
institutions, and with what vitality the seeds of good as well as those
of evil in human character diffuse and propagate themselves. Not a word
can be said for despotism in the family which cannot be said for
political despotism. Every absolute king does not sit at his window to
enjoy the groans of his tortured subjects, nor strips them of their last
rag and turns them out to shiver in the road. The despotism of Louis
XVI. was not the despotism of Philippe le Bel, or of Nadir Shah, or of
Caligula; but it was bad enough to justify the French Revolution, and to
palliate even its horrors. If an appeal be made to the intense
attachments which exist between wives and their husbands, exactly as
much may be said of domestic slavery. It was quite an ordinary fact in
Greece and Rome for slaves to submit to death by torture rather than
betray their masters. In the proscriptions of the Roman civil wars it
was remarked that wives and slaves were heroically faithful, sons very
commonly treacherous. Yet we know how cruelly many Romans treated their
slaves. But in truth these intense individual Edition: current; Page:
[268]feelings nowhere rise to such a luxuriant height as under the most
atrocious institutions. It is part of the irony of life, that the
strongest feelings of devoted gratitude of which human nature seems to
be susceptible, are called forth in human beings towards those who,
having the power entirely to crush their earthly existence, voluntarily
refrain from using that power. How great a place in most men this
sentiment fills, even in religious devotion, it would be cruel to
inquire. We daily see how much their gratitude to Heaven appears to be
stimulated by the contemplation of fellow-creatures to whom God has not
been so merciful as he has to themselves.

Whether the institution to be defended is slavery, political absolutism,
or the absolutism of the head of a family, we are always expected to
judge of it from its best instances; and we are presented with pictures
of loving exercise of authority on one side, loving submission to it on
the other—superior wisdom ordering all things for the greatest good of
the dependents, and surrounded by their smiles and benedictions. All
this would be very much to the purpose if any one pretended that there
are no such things as good men. Who doubts that there may be great
goodness, and great happiness, and great affection, under the absolute
government of a good man? Meanwhile, laws and institutions require to be
Edition: current; Page: [269]adapted, not to good men, but to bad.
Marriage is not an institution designed for a select few. Men are not
required, as a preliminary to the marriage ceremony, to prove by
testimonials that they are fit to be trusted with the exercise of
absolute power. The tie of affection and obligation to a wife and
children is very strong with those whose general social feelings are
strong, and with many who are little sensible to any other social ties;
but there are all degrees of sensibility and insensibility to it, as
there are all grades of goodness and wickedness in men, down to those
whom no ties will bind, and on whom society has no action but through
its ultima ratio, the penalties of the law. In every grade of this
descending scale are men to whom are committed all the legal powers of a
husband. The vilest malefactor has some wretched woman tied to him,
against whom he can commit any atrocity except killing her, and, if
tolerably cautious, can do that without much danger of the legal
penalty. And how many thousands are there among the lowest classes in
every country, who, without being in a legal sense malefactors in any
other respect, because in every other quarter their aggressions meet
with resistance, indulge the utmost habitual excesses of bodily violence
towards the unhappy wife, who alone, at least of grown persons, can
neither repel nor escape from Edition: current; Page: [270]their
brutality; and towards whom the excess of dependence inspires their mean
and savage natures, not with a generous forbearance, and a point of
honour to behave well to one whose lot in life is trusted entirely to
their kindness, but on the contrary with a notion that the law has
delivered her to them as their thing, to be used at their pleasure, and
that they are not expected to practise the consideration towards her
which is required from them towards everybody else. The law, which till
lately left even these atrocious extremes of domestic oppression
practically unpunished, has within these few years made some feeble
attempts to repress them. But its attempts have done little, and cannot
be expected to do much, because it is contrary to reason and experience
to suppose that there can be any real check to brutality, consistent
with leaving the victim still in the power of the executioner. Until a
conviction for personal violence, or at all events a repetition of it
after a first conviction, entitles the woman ipso facto to a divorce, or
at least to a judicial separation, the attempt to repress these
“aggravated assaults” by legal penalties will break down for want of a
prosecutor, or for want of a witness.

When we consider how vast is the number of men, in any great country,
who are little higher than brutes, and that this never prevents them
Edition: current; Page: [271]from being able, through the law of
marriage, to obtain a victim, the breadth and depth of human misery
caused in this shape alone by the abuse of the institution swells to
something appalling. Yet these are only the extreme cases. They are the
lowest abysses, but there is a sad succession of depth after depth
before reaching them. In domestic as in political tyranny, the case of
absolute monsters chiefly illustrates the institution by showing that
there is scarcely any horror which may not occur under it if the despot
pleases, and thus setting in a strong light what must be the terrible
frequency of things only a little less atrocious. Absolute fiends are as
rare as angels, perhaps rarer: ferocious savages, with occasional
touches of humanity, are however very frequent: and in the wide interval
which separates these from any worthy representatives of the human
species, how many are the forms and gradations of animalism and
selfishness, often under an outward varnish of civilization and even
cultivation, living at peace with the law, maintaining a creditable
appearance to all who are not under their power, yet sufficient often to
make the lives of all who are so, a torment and a burthen to them! It
would be tiresome to repeat the commonplaces about the unfitness of men
in general for power, which, after the political discussions of
centuries, every Edition: current; Page: [272]one knows by heart, were
it not that hardly any one thinks of applying these maxims to the case
in which above all others they are applicable, that of power, not placed
in the hands of a man here and there, but offered to every adult male,
down to the basest and most ferocious. It is not because a man is not
known to have broken any of the Ten Commandments, or because he
maintains a respectable character in his dealings with those whom he
cannot compel to have intercourse with him, or because he does not fly
out into violent bursts of ill-temper against those who are not obliged
to bear with him, that it is possible to surmise of what sort his
conduct will be in the unrestraint of home. Even the commonest men
reserve the violent, the sulky, the undisguisedly selfish side of their
character for those who have no power to withstand it. The relation of
superiors to dependents is the nursery of these vices of character,
which, wherever else they exist, are an overflowing from that source. A
man who is morose or violent to his equals, is sure to be one who has
lived among inferiors, whom he could frighten or worry into submission.
If the family in its best forms is, as it is often said to be, a school
of sympathy, tenderness, and loving forgetfulness of self, it is still
oftener, as respects its chief, a school of wilfulness,
over-bearingness, unbounded self-indulgence, and a Edition: current;
Page: [273]double-dyed and idealized selfishness, of which sacrifice
itself is only a particular form: the care for the wife and children
being only care for them as parts of the man’s own interests and
belongings, and their individual happiness being immolated in every
shape to his smallest preferences. What better is to be looked for under
the existing form of the institution? We know that the bad propensities
of human nature are only kept within bounds when they are allowed no
scope for their indulgence. We know that from impulse and habit, when
not from deliberate purpose, almost every one to whom others yield, goes
on encroaching upon them, until a point is reached at which they are
compelled to resist. Such being the common tendency of human nature; the
almost unlimited power which present social institutions give to the man
over at least one human being—the one with whom he resides, and whom he
has always present—this power seeks out and evokes the latent germs of
selfishness in the remotest corners of his nature—fans its faintest
sparks and smouldering embers—offers to him a license for the indulgence
of those points of his original character which in all other relations
he would have found it necessary to repress and conceal, and the
repression of which would in time have become a second nature. I know
that there is another side to Edition: current; Page: [274]the question.
I grant that the wife, if she cannot effectually resist, can at least
retaliate; she, too, can make the man’s life extremely uncomfortable,
and by that power is able to carry many points which she ought, and many
which she ought not, to prevail in. But this instrument of
self-protection—which may be called the power of the scold, or the
shrewish sanction—has the fatal defect, that it avails most against the
least tyrannical superiors, and in favour of the least deserving
dependents. It is the weapon of irritable and self-willed women; of
those who would make the worst use of power if they themselves had it,
and who generally turn this power to a bad use. The amiable cannot use
such an instrument, the highminded disdain it. And on the other hand,
the husbands against whom it is used most effectively are the gentler
and more inoffensive; those who cannot be induced, even by provocation,
to resort to any very harsh exercise of authority. The wife’s power of
being disagreeable generally only establishes a counter-tyranny, and
makes victims in their turn chiefly of those husbands who are least
inclined to be tyrants.

What is it, then, which really tempers the corrupting effects of the
power, and makes it compatible with such amount of good as we actually
see? Mere feminine blandishments, Edition: current; Page: [275]though of
great effect in individual instances, have very little effect in
modifying the general tendencies of the situation; for their power only
lasts while the woman is young and attractive often only while her charm
is new, and not dimmed by familiarity; and on many men they have not
much influence at any time. The real mitigating causes are, the personal
affection which is the growth of time, in so far as the man’s nature is
susceptible of it, and the woman’s character sufficiently congenial with
his to excite it; their common interests as regards the children, and
their general community of interest as concerns third persons (to which
however there are very great limitations); the real importance of the
wife to his daily comforts and enjoyments, and the value he consequently
attaches to her on his personal account, which, in a man capable of
feeling for others, lays the foundation of caring for her on her own;
and lastly, the influence naturally acquired over almost all human
beings by those near to their persons (if not actually disagreeable to
them): who, both by their direct entreaties, and by the insensible
contagion of their feelings and dispositions, are often able, unless
counter-acted by some equally strong personal influence, to obtain a
degree of command over the conduct of the superior, altogether excessive
and unreasonable. Through these various means, the Edition: current;
Page: [276]wife frequently exercises even too much power over the man;
she is able to affect his conduct in things in which she may not be
qualified to influence it for good—in which her influence may be not
only unenlightened, but employed on the morally wrong side; and in which
he would act better if left to his own prompting. But neither in the
affairs of families nor in those of states is power a compensation for
the loss of freedom. Her power often gives her what she has no right to,
but does not enable her to assert her own rights. A Sultan’s favourite
slave has slaves under her, over whom she tyrannizes; but the desirable
thing would be that she should neither have slaves nor be a slave. By
entirely sinking her own existence in her husband; by having no will (or
persuading him that she has no will) but his, in anything which regards
their joint relation, and by making it the business of her life to work
upon his sentiments, a wife may gratify herself by influencing, and very
probably perverting, his conduct, in those of his external relations
which she has never qualified herself to judge of, or in which she is
herself wholly influenced by some personal or other partiality or
prejudice. Accordingly, as things now are, those who act most kindly to
their wives, are quite as often made worse, as better, by the wife’s
influence, in respect to all interests extending Edition: current; Page:
[277]beyond the family. She is taught that she has no business with
things out of that sphere; and accordingly she seldom has any honest and
conscientious opinion on them; and therefore hardly ever meddles with
them for any legitimate purpose, but generally for an interested one.
She neither knows nor cares which is the right side in politics, but she
knows what will bring in money or invitations, give her husband a title,
her son a place, or her daughter a good marriage.

But how, it will be asked, can any society exist without government? In
a family, as in a state, some one person must be the ultimate ruler. Who
shall decide when married people differ in opinion? Both cannot have
their way, yet a decision one way or the other must be come to.

It is not true that in all voluntary association between two people, one
of them must be absolute master: still less that the law must determine
which of them it shall be. The most frequent case of voluntary
association, next to marriage, is partnership in business: and it is not
found or thought necessary to enact that in every partnership, one
partner shall have entire control over the concern, and the others shall
be bound to obey his orders. No one would enter into partnership on
terms which would subject him to the responsibilities of a principal,
with only the Edition: current; Page: [278]powers and privileges of a
clerk or agent. If the law dealt with other contracts as it does with
marriage, it would ordain that one partner should administer the common
business as if it was his private concern; that the others should have
only delegated powers; and that this one should be designated by some
general presumption of law, for example as being the eldest. The law
never does this: nor does experience show it to be necessary that any
theoretical inequality of power should exist between the partners, or
that the partnership should have any other conditions than what they may
themselves appoint by their articles of agreement. Yet it might seem
that the exclusive power might be conceded with less danger to the
rights and interests of the inferior, in the case of partnership than in
that of marriage, since he is free to cancel the power by withdrawing
from the connexion. The wife has no such power, and even if she had, it
is almost always desirable that she should try all measures before
resorting to it.

It is quite true that things which have to be decided every day, and
cannot adjust themselves gradually, or wait for a compromise, ought to
depend on one will: one person must have their sole control. But it does
not follow that this should always be the same person. The natural
arrangement is a division of powers Edition: current; Page: [279]between
the two; each being absolute in the executive branch of their own
department, and any change of system and principle requiring the consent
of both. The division neither can nor should be pre-established by the
law, since it must depend on individual capacities and suitabilities. If
the two persons chose, they might pre-appoint it by the marriage
contract, as pecuniary arrangements are now often pre-appointed. There
would seldom be any difficulty in deciding such things by mutual
consent, unless the marriage was one of those unhappy ones in which all
other things, as well as this, become subjects of bickering and dispute.
The division of rights would naturally follow the division of duties and
functions; and that is already made by consent, or at all events not by
law, but by general custom, modified and modifiable at the pleasure of
the persons concerned.

The real practical decision of affairs, to whichever may be given the
legal authority, will greatly depend, as it even now does, upon
comparative qualifications. The mere fact that he is usually the eldest,
will in most cases give the preponderance to the man; at least until
they both attain a time of life at which the difference in their years
is of no importance. There will naturally also be a more potential voice
on the side, whichever it is, that brings the means of Edition: current;
Page: [280]support. Inequality from this source does not depend on the
law of marriage, but on the general conditions of human society, as now
constituted. The influence of mental superiority, either general or
special, and of superior decision of character, will necessarily tell
for much. It always does so at present. And this fact shows how little
foundation there is for the apprehension that the powers and
responsibilities of partners in life (as of partners in business),
cannot be satisfactorily apportioned by agreement between themselves.
They always are so apportioned, except in cases in which the marriage
institution is a failure. Things never come to an issue of downright
power on one side, and obedience on the other, except where the
connexion altogether has been a mistake, and it would be a blessing to
both parties to be relieved from it. Some may say that the very thing by
which an amicable settlement of differences becomes possible, is the
power of legal compulsion known to be in reserve; as people submit to an
arbitration because there is a court of law in the background, which
they know that they can be forced to obey. But to make the cases
parallel, we must suppose that the rule of the court of law was, not to
try the cause, but to give judgment always for the same side, suppose
the defendant. If so, Edition: current; Page: [281]the amenability to it
would be a motive with the plaintiff to agree to almost any arbitration,
but it would be just the reverse with the defendant. The despotic power
which the law gives to the husband may be a reason to make the wife
assent to any compromise by which power is practically shared between
the two, but it cannot be the reason why the husband does. That there is
always among decently conducted people a practical compromise, though
one of them at least is under no physical or moral necessity of making
it, shows that the natural motives which lead to a voluntary adjustment
of the united life of two persons in a manner acceptable to both, do on
the whole, except in unfavourable cases, prevail. The matter is
certainly not improved by laying down as an ordinance of law, that the
superstructure of free government shall be raised upon a legal basis of
despotism on one side and subjection on the other, and that every
concession which the despot makes may, at his mere pleasure, and without
any warning, be recalled. Besides that no freedom is worth much when
held on so precarious a tenure, its conditions are not likely to be the
most equitable when the law throws so prodigious a weight into one
scale; when the adjustment rests between two persons one of whom is
declared to be entitled to Edition: current; Page: [282]everything, the
other not only entitled to nothing except during the good pleasure of
the first, but under the strongest moral and religious obligation not to
rebel under any excess of oppression.

A pertinacious adversary, pushed to extremities, may say, that husbands
indeed are willing to be reasonable, and to make fair concessions to
their partners without being compelled to it, but that wives are not:
that if allowed any rights of their own, they will acknowledge no rights
at all in any one else, and never will yield in anything, unless they
can be compelled, by the man’s mere authority, to yield in everything.
This would have been said by many persons some generations ago, when
satires on women were in vogue, and men thought it a clever thing to
insult women for being what men made them. But it will be said by no one
now who is worth replying to. It is not the doctrine of the present day
that women are less susceptible of good feeling, and consideration for
those with whom they are united by the strongest ties, than men are. On
the contrary, we are perpetually told that women are better than men, by
those who are totally opposed to treating them as if they were as good;
so that the saying has passed into a piece of tiresome cant, intended to
put a complimentary face upon an injury, and resembling Edition:
current; Page: [283]those celebrations of royal clemency which,
according to Gulliver, the king of Lilliput always prefixed to his most
sanguinary decrees. If women are better than men in anything, it surely
is in individual self-sacrifice for those of their own family. But I lay
little stress on this, so long as they are universally taught that they
are born and created for self-sacrifice. I believe that equality of
rights would abate the exaggerated self-abnegation which is the present
artificial ideal of feminine character, and that a good woman would not
be more self-sacrificing than the best man: but on the other hand, men
would be much more unselfish and self-sacrificing than at present,
because they would no longer be taught to worship their own will as such
a grand thing that it is actually the law for another rational being.
There is nothing which men so easily learn as this self-worship: all
privileged persons, and all privileged classes, have had it. The more we
descend in the scale of humanity, the intenser it is; and most of all in
those who are not, and can never expect to be, raised above any one
except an unfortunate wife and children. The honourable exceptions are
proportionally fewer than in the case of almost any other human
infirmity. Philosophy and religion, instead of keeping it in check, are
generally suborned to defend it; and nothing controls it but that
Edition: current; Page: [284]practical feeling of the equality of human
beings, which is the theory of Christianity, but which Christianity will
never practically teach, while it sanctions institutions grounded on an
arbitrary preference of one human being over another.

There are, no doubt, women, as there are men, whom equality of
consideration will not satisfy; with whom there is no peace while any
will or wish is regarded but their own. Such persons are a proper
subject for the law of divorce. They are only fit to live alone, and no
human beings ought to be compelled to associate their lives with them.
But the legal subordination tends to make such characters among women
more, rather than less, frequent. If the man exerts his whole power, the
woman is of course crushed: but if she is treated with indulgence, and
permitted to assume power, there is no rule to set limits to her
encroachments. The law, not determining her rights, but theoretically
allowing her none at all, practically declares that the measure of what
she has a right to, is what she can contrive to get.

The equality of married persons before the law, is not only the sole
mode in which that particular relation can be made consistent with
justice to both sides, and conducive to the happiness of both, but it is
the only means of rendering the daily life of mankind, in any Edition:
current; Page: [285]high sense, a school of moral cultivation. Though
the truth may not be felt or generally acknowledged for generations to
come, the only school of genuine moral sentiment is society between
equals. The moral education of mankind has hitherto emanated chiefly
from the law of force, and is adapted almost solely to the relations
which force creates. In the less advanced states of society, people
hardly recognise any relation with their equals. To be an equal is to be
an enemy. Society, from its highest place to its lowest, is one long
chain, or rather ladder, where every individual is either above or below
his nearest neighbour, and wherever he does not command he must obey.
Existing moralities, accordingly, are mainly fitted to a relation of
command and obedience. Yet command and obedience are but unfortunate
necessities of human life: society in equality is its normal state.
Already in modern life, and more and more as it progressively improves,
command and obedience become exceptional facts in life, equal
association its general rule. The morality of the first ages rested on
the obligation to submit to power; that of the ages next following, on
the right of the weak to the forbearance and protection of the strong.
How much longer is one form of society and life to content itself with
the morality made for another? We have had Edition: current; Page:
[286]the morality of submission, and the morality of chivalry and
generosity; the time is now come for the morality of justice. Whenever,
in former ages, any approach has been made to society in equality,
Justice has asserted its claims as the foundation of virtue. It was thus
in the free republics of antiquity. But even in the best of these, the
equals were limited to the free male citizens; slaves, women, and the
unenfranchised residents were under the law of force. The joint
influence of Roman civilization and of Christianity obliterated these
distinctions, and in theory (if only partially in practice) declared the
claims of the human being, as such, to be paramount to those of sex,
class, or social position. The barriers which had begun to be levelled
were raised again by the northern conquests; and the whole of modern
history consists of the slow process by which they have since been
wearing away. We are entering into an order of things in which justice
will again be the primary virtue; grounded as before on equal, but now
also on sympathetic association; having its root no longer in the
instinct of equals for self-protection, but in a cultivated sympathy
between them; and no one being now left out, but an equal measure being
extended to all. It is no novelty that mankind do not distinctly foresee
their own changes, Edition: current; Page: [287]and that their
sentiments are adapted to past, not to coming ages. To see the futurity
of the species has always been the privilege of the intellectual élite,
or of those who have learnt from them; to have the feelings of that
futurity has been the distinction, and usually the martyrdom, of a still
rarer élite. Institutions, books, education, society, all go on training
human beings for the old, long after the new has come; much more when it
is only coming. But the true virtue of human beings is fitness to live
together as equals; claiming nothing for themselves but what they as
freely concede to every one else; regarding command of any kind as an
exceptional necessity, and in all cases a temporary one; and preferring,
whenever possible, the society of those with whom leading and following
can be alternate and reciprocal. To these virtues, nothing in life as at
present constituted gives cultivation by exercise. The family is a
school of despotism, in which the virtues of despotism, but also its
vices, are largely nourished. Citizenship, in free countries, is partly
a school of society in equality; but citizenship fills only a small
place in modern life, and does not come near the daily habits or inmost
sentiments. The family, justly constituted, would be the real school of
the virtues of freedom. It is sure to be a sufficient one of everything
else. It will Edition: current; Page: [288]always be a school of
obedience for the children, of command for the parents. What is needed
is, that it should be a school of sympathy in equality, of living
together in love, without power on one side or obedience on the other.
This it ought to be between the parents. It would then be an exercise of
those virtues which each requires to fit them for all other association,
and a model to the children of the feelings and conduct which their
temporary training by means of obedience is designed to render habitual,
and therefore natural, to them. The moral training of mankind will never
be adapted to the conditions of the life for which all other human
progress is a preparation, until they practise in the family the same
moral rule which is adapted to the normal constitution of human society.
Any sentiment of freedom which can exist in a man whose nearest and
dearest intimacies are with those of whom he is absolute master, is not
the genuine or Christian love of freedom, but, what the love of freedom
generally was in the ancients and in the middle ages—an intense feeling
of the dignity and importance of his own personality; making him disdain
a yoke for himself, of which he has no abhorrence whatever in the
abstract, but which he is abundantly ready to impose on others for his
own interest or glorification.

Edition: current; Page: [289]
I readily admit (and it is the very foundation of my hopes) that numbers
of married people even under the present law, (in the higher classes of
England probably a great majority,) live in the spirit of a just law of
equality. Laws never would be improved, if there were not numerous
persons whose moral sentiments are better than the existing laws. Such
persons ought to support the principles here advocated; of which the
only object is to make all other married couples similar to what these
are now. But persons even of considerable moral worth, unless they are
also thinkers, are very ready to believe that laws or practices, the
evils of which they have not personally experienced, do not produce any
evils, but (if seeming to be generally approved of) probably do good,
and that it is wrong to object to them. It would, however, be a great
mistake in such married people to suppose, because the legal conditions
of the tie which unites them do not occur to their thoughts once in a
twelvemonth, and because they live and feel in all respects as if they
were legally equals, that the same is the case with all other married
couples, wherever the husband is not a notorious ruffian. To suppose
this, would be to show equal ignorance of human nature and of fact. The
less fit a man is for the possession of power—the less likely to be
allowed to exercise Edition: current; Page: [290]it over any person with
that person’s voluntary consent—the more does he hug himself in the
consciousness of the power the law gives him, exact its legal rights to
the utmost point which custom (the custom of men like himself) will
tolerate, and take pleasure in using the power, merely to enliven the
agreeable sense of possessing it. What is more; in the most naturally
brutal and morally uneducated part of the lower classes, the legal
slavery of the woman, and something in the merely physical subjection to
their will as an instrument, causes them to feel a sort of disrespect
and contempt towards their own wife which they do not feel towards any
other woman, or any other human being, with whom they come in contact;
and which makes her seem to them an appropriate subject for any kind of
indignity. Let an acute observer of the signs of feeling, who has the
requisite opportunities, judge for himself whether this is not the case:
and if he finds that it is, let him not wonder at any amount of disgust
and indignation that can be felt against institutions which lead
naturally to this depraved state of the human mind.

We shall be told, perhaps, that religion imposes the duty of obedience;
as every established fact which is too bad to admit of any other
defence, is always presented to us as an injunction of religion. The
Church, it is very true, enjoins it Edition: current; Page: [291]in her
formularies, but it would be difficult to derive any such injunction
from Christianity. We are told that St. Paul said, “Wives, obey your
husbands:” but he also said, “Slaves, obey your masters.” It was not St.
Paul’s business, nor was it consistent with his object, the propagation
of Christianity, to incite any one to rebellion against existing laws.
The apostle’s acceptance of all social institutions as he found them, is
no more to be construed as a disapproval of attempts to improve them at
the proper time, than his declaration, “The powers that be are ordained
of God,” gives his sanction to military despotism, and to that alone, as
the Christian form of political government, or commands passive
obedience to it. To pretend that Christianity was intended to stereotype
existing forms of government and society, and protect them against
change, is to reduce it to the level of Islamism or of Brahminism. It is
precisely because Christianity has not done this, that it has been the
religion of the progressive portion of mankind, and Islamism,
Brahminism, &c., have been those of the stationary portions; or rather
(for there is no such thing as a really stationary society) of the
declining portions. There have been abundance of people, in all ages of
Christianity, who tried to make it something of the same kind; to
convert us into a sort of Christian Edition: current; Page:
[292]Mussulmans, with the Bible for a Koran, prohibiting all
improvement: and great has been their power, and many have had to
sacrifice their lives in resisting them. But they have been resisted,
and the resistance has made us what we are, and will yet make us what we
are to be.

After what has been said respecting the obligation of obedience, it is
almost superfluous to say anything concerning the more special point
included in the general one—a woman’s right to her own property; for I
need not hope that this treatise can make any impression upon those who
need anything to convince them that a woman’s inheritance or gains ought
to be as much her own after marriage as before. The rule is simple:
whatever would be the husband’s or wife’s if they were not married,
should be under their exclusive control during marriage; which need not
interfere with the power to tie up property by settlement, in order to
preserve it for children. Some people are sentimentally shocked at the
idea of a separate interest in money matters, as inconsistent with the
ideal fusion of two lives into one. For my own part, I am one of the
strongest supporters of community of goods, when resulting from an
entire unity of feeling in the owners, which makes all things common
between them. But I have no relish for a community of goods resting on
the doctrine, Edition: current; Page: [293]that what is mine is yours
but what is yours is not mine; and I should prefer to decline entering
into such a compact with any one, though I were myself the person to
profit by it.

This particular injustice and oppression to women, which is, to common
apprehensions, more obvious than all the rest, admits of remedy without
interfering with any other mischiefs: and there can be little doubt that
it will be one of the earliest remedied. Already, in many of the new and
several of the old States of the American Confederation, provisions have
been inserted even in the written Constitutions, securing to women
equality of rights in this respect: and thereby improving materially the
position, in the marriage relation, of those women at least who have
property, by leaving them one instrument of power which they have not
signed away; and preventing also the scandalous abuse of the marriage
institution, which is perpetrated when a man entraps a girl into
marrying him without a settlement, for the sole purpose of getting
possession of her money. When the support of the family depends, not on
property, but on earnings, the common arrangement, by which the man
earns the income and the wife superintends the domestic expenditure,
seems to me in general the most suitable division of Edition: current;
Page: [294]labour between the two persons. If, in addition to the
physical suffering of bearing children, and the whole responsibility of
their care and education in early years, the wife undertakes the careful
and economical application of the husband’s earnings to the general
comfort of the family; she takes not only her fair share, but usually
the larger share, of the bodily and mental exertion required by their
joint existence. If she undertakes any additional portion, it seldom
relieves her from this, but only prevents her from performing it
properly. The care which she is herself disabled from taking of the
children and the household, nobody else takes; those of the children who
do not die, grow up as they best can, and the management of the
household is likely to be so bad, as even in point of economy to be a
great drawback from the value of the wife’s earnings. In an otherwise
just state of things, it is not, therefore, I think, a desirable custom,
that the wife should contribute by her labour to the income of the
family. In an unjust state of things, her doing so may be useful to her,
by making her of more value in the eyes of the man who is legally her
master; but, on the other hand, it enables him still farther to abuse
his power, by forcing her to work, and leaving the support of the family
to her exertions, while he spends most of his time in drinking Edition:
current; Page: [295]and idleness. The power of earning is essential to
the dignity of a woman, if she has not independent property. But if
marriage were an equal contract, not implying the obligation of
obedience; if the connexion were no longer enforced to the oppression of
those to whom it is purely a mischief, but a separation, on just terms
(I do not now speak of a divorce), could be obtained by any woman who
was morally entitled to it; and if she would then find all honourable
employments as freely open to her as to men; it would not be necessary
for her protection, that during marriage she should make this particular
use of her faculties. Like a man when he chooses a profession, so, when
a woman marries, it may in general be understood that she makes choice
of the management of a household, and the bringing up of a family, as
the first call upon her exertions, during as many years of her life as
may be required for the purpose; and that she renounces, not all other
objects and occupations, but all which are not consistent with the
requirements of this. The actual exercise, in a habitual or systematic
manner, of outdoor occupations, or such as cannot be carried on at home,
would by this principle be practically interdicted to the greater number
of married women. But the utmost latitude ought to exist for the
adaptation of Edition: current; Page: [296]general rules to individual
suitabilities; and there ought to be nothing to prevent faculties
exceptionally adapted to any other pursuit, from obeying their vocation
notwithstanding marriage: due provision being made for supplying
otherwise any falling-short which might become inevitable, in her full
performance of the ordinary functions of mistress of a family. These
things, if once opinion were rightly directed on the subject, might with
perfect safety be left to be regulated by opinion, without any
interfenence of law.

Edition: current; Page: [297]


CHAPTER III.

ON the other point which is involved in the just equality of women,
their admissibility to all the functions and occupations hitherto
retained as the monopoly of the stronger sex, I should anticipate no
difficulty in convincing any one who has gone with me on the subject of
the equality of women in the family. I believe that their disabilities
elsewhere are only clung to in order to maintain their subordination in
domestic life; because the generality of the male sex cannot yet
tolerate the idea of living with an equal. Were it not for that, I think
that almost every one, in the existing state of opinion in politics and
political economy, would admit the injustice of excluding half the human
race from the greater number of lucrative occupations, and from almost
all high social functions; ordaining from their birth either that they
are not, and cannot by any possibility become, fit for employments which
are legally open to the stupidest and basest of the other sex, or else
that however fit they may be, those employments shall Edition: current;
Page: [298]be interdicted to them, in order to be preserved for the
exclusive benefit of males. In the last two centuries, when (which was
seldom the case) any reason beyond the mere existence of the fact was
thought to be required to justify the disabilities of women, people
seldom assigned as a reason their inferior mental capacity; which, in
times when there was a real trial of personal faculties (from which all
women were not excluded) in the struggles of public life, no one really
believed in. The reason given in those days was not women’s unfitness,
but the interest of society, by which was meant the interest of men:
just as the raison d’état, meaning the convenience of the government,
and the support of existing authority, was deemed a sufficient
explanation and excuse for the most flagitious crimes. In the present
day, power holds a smoother language, and whomsoever it oppresses,
always pretends to do so for their own good: accordingly, when anything
is forbidden to women, it is thought necessary to say, and desirable to
believe, that they are incapable of doing it, and that they depart from
their real path of success and happiness when they aspire to it. But to
make this reason plausible (I do not say valid), those by whom it is
urged must be prepared to carry it to a much greater length than any one
ventures to do in the face of present experience. It is not sufficient
to maintain that women on Edition: current; Page: [299]the average are
less gifted than men on the average, with certain of the higher mental
faculties, or that a smaller number of women than of men are fit for
occupations and functions of the highest intellectual character. It is
necessary to maintain that no women at all are fit for them, and that
the most eminent women are inferior in mental faculties to the most
mediocre of the men on whom those functions at present devolve. For if
the performance of the function is decided either by competition, or by
any mode of choice which secures regard to the public interest, there
needs be no apprehension that any important employments will fall into
the hands of women inferior to average men, or to the average of their
male competitors. The only result would be that there would be fewer
women than men in such employments; a result certain to happen in any
case, if only from the preference always likely to be felt by the
majority of women for the one vocation in which there is nobody to
compete with them. Now, the most determined depreciator of women will
not venture to deny, that when we add the experience of recent times to
that of ages past, women, and not a few merely, but many women, have
proved themselves capable of everything, perhaps without a single
exception, which is done by men, and of doing it successfully and
creditably. The utmost that can be Edition: current; Page: [300]said is,
that there are many things which none of them have succeeded in doing as
well as they have been done by some men—many in which they have not
reached the very highest rank. But there are extremely few, dependent
only on mental faculties, in which they have not attained the rank next
to the highest. Is not this enough, and much more than enough, to make
it a tyranny to them, and a detriment to society, that they should not
be allowed to compete with men for the exercise of these functions? Is
it not a mere truism to say, that such functions are often filled by men
far less fit for them than numbers of women, and who would be beaten by
women in any fair field of competition? What difference does it make
that there may be men somewhere, fully employed about other things, who
may be still better qualified for the things in question than these
women? Does not this take place in all competitions? Is there so great a
superfluity of men fit for high duties, that society can afford to
reject the service of any competent person? Are we so certain of always
finding a man made to our hands for any duty or function of social
importance which falls vacant, that we lose nothing by putting a ban
upon one-half of mankind, and refusing beforehand to make their
faculties available, however distinguished they may be? And even if we
could do without Edition: current; Page: [301]them, would it be
consistent with justice to refuse to them their fair share of honour and
distinction, or to deny to them the equal moral right of all human
beings to choose their occupation (short of injury to others) according
to their own preferences, at their own risk? Nor is the injustice
confined to them: it is shared by those who are in a position to benefit
by their services. To ordain that any kind of persons shall not be
physicians, or shall not be advocates, or shall not be members of
parliament, is to injure not them only, but all who employ physicians or
advocates, or elect members of parliament, and who are deprived of the
stimulating effect of greater competition on the exertions of the
competitors, as well as restricted to a narrower range of individual
choice.

It will perhaps be sufficient if I confine myself, in the details of my
argument, to functions of a public nature: since, if I am successful as
to those, it probably will be readily granted that women should be
admissible to all other occupations to which it is at all material
whether they are admitted or not. And here let me begin by marking out
one function, broadly distinguished from all others, their right to
which is entirely independent of any question which can be raised
concerning their faculties. I mean the suffrage, both parliamentary and
municipal. The Edition: current; Page: [302]right to share in the choice
of those who are to exercise a public trust, is altogether a distinct
thing from that of competing for the trust itself. If no one could vote
for a member of parliament who was not fit to be a candidate, the
government would be a narrow oligarchy indeed. To have a voice in
choosing those by whom one is to be governed, is a means of
self-protection due to every one, though he were to remain for ever
excluded from the function of governing: and that women are considered
fit to have such a choice, may be presumed from the fact, that the law
already gives it to women in the most important of all cases to
themselves: for the choice of the man who is to govern a woman to the
end of life, is always supposed to be voluntarily made by herself. In
the case of election to public trusts, it is the business of
constitutional law to surround the right of suffrage with all needful
securities and limitations; but whatever securities are sufficient in
the case of the male sex, no others need be required in the case of
women. Under whatever conditions, and within whatever limits, men are
admitted to the suffrage, there is not a shadow of justification for not
admitting women under the same. The majority of the women of any class
are not likely to differ in political opinion from the majority of the
men of the same class, unless Edition: current; Page: [303]the question
be one in which the interests of women, as such, are in some way
involved; and if they are so, women require the suffrage, as their
guarantee of just and equal consideration. This ought to be obvious even
to those who coincide in no other of the doctrines for which I contend.
Even if every woman were a wife, and if every wife ought to be a slave,
all the more would these slaves stand in need of legal protection: and
we know what legal protection the slaves have, where the laws are made
by their masters.

With regard to the fitness of women, not only to participate in
elections, but themselves to hold offices or practise professions
involving important public responsibilities; I have already observed
that this consideration is not essential to the practical question in
dispute: since any woman, who succeeds in an open profession, proves by
that very fact that she is qualified for it. And in the case of public
offices, if the political system of the country is such as to exclude
unfit men, it will equally exclude unfit women: while if it is not,
there is no additional evil in the fact that the unfit persons whom it
admits may be either women or men. As long therefore as it is
acknowledged that even a few women may be fit for these duties, the laws
which shut the door on those exceptions cannot be justified by any
opinion which can be held respecting the Edition: current; Page:
[304]capacities of women in general. But, though this last consideration
is not essential, it is far from being irrelevant. An unprejudiced view
of it gives additional strength to the arguments against the
disabilities of women, and reinforces them by high considerations of
practical utility.

Let us at first make entire abstraction of all psychological
considerations tending to show, that any of the mental differences
supposed to exist between women and men are but the natural effect of
the differences in their education and circumstances, and indicate no
radical difference, far less radical inferiority, of nature. Let us
consider women only as they already are, or as they are known to have
been; and the capacities which they have already practically shown. What
they have done, that at least, if nothing else, it is proved that they
can do. When we consider how sedulously they are all trained away from,
instead of being trained towards, any of the occupations or objects
reserved for men, it is evident that I am taking a very humble ground
for them, when I rest their case on what they have actually achieved.
For, in this case, negative evidence is worth little, while any positive
evidence is conclusive. It cannot be inferred to be impossible that a
woman should be a Homer, or an Aristotle, or a Michael Angelo, or a
Beethoven, because no woman has yet actually produced Edition: current;
Page: [305]works comparable to theirs in any of those lines of
excellence. This negative fact at most leaves the question uncertain,
and open to psychological discussion. But it is quite certain that a
woman can be a Queen Elizabeth, or a Deborah, or a Joan of Arc, since
this is not inference, but fact. Now it is a curious consideration, that
the only things which the existing law excludes women from doing, are
the things which they have proved that they are able to do. There is no
law to prevent a woman from having written all the plays of Shakspeare,
or composed all the operas of Mozart. But Queen Elizabeth or Queen
Victoria, had they not inherited the throne, could not have been
intrusted with the smallest of the political duties, of which the former
showed herself equal to the greatest.

If anything conclusive could be inferred from experience, without
psychological analysis, it would be that the things which women are not
allowed to do are the very ones for which they are peculiarly qualified;
since their vocation for government has made its way, and become
conspicuous, through the very few opportunities which have been given;
while in the lines of distinction which apparently were freely open to
them, they have by no means so eminently distinguished themselves. We
know how small a number of reigning queens history presents, in Edition:
current; Page: [306]comparison with that of kings. Of this smaller
number a far larger proportion have shown talents for rule; though many
of them have occupied the throne in difficult periods. It is remarkable,
too, that they have, in a great number of instances, been distinguished
by merits the most opposite to the imaginary and conventional character
of women: they have been as much remarked for the firmness and vigour of
their rule, as for its intelligence. When, to queens and empresses, we
add regents, and viceroys of provinces, the list of women who have been
eminent rulers of mankind swells to a great length.* This fact is so
undeniable, that some one, long ago, tried to retort the argument, and
turned the admitted truth into an additional insult, by saying that
queens are better than Edition: current; Page: [307]kings, because under
kings women govern, but under queens, men.

It may seem a waste of reasoning to argue against a bad joke; but such
things do affect people’s minds; and I have heard men quote this saying,
with an air as if they thought that there was something in it. At any
rate, it will serve as well as anything else for a starting point in
discussion. I say, then, that it is not true that under kings, women
govern. Such cases are entirely exceptional: and weak kings have quite
as often governed ill through the influence of male favourites, as of
female. When a king is governed by a woman merely through his amatory
propensities, good government is not probable, though even then there
are exceptions. But French history counts two kings who have voluntarily
given the direction of affairs during many years, the one to his mother,
the other to his sister: one of them, Charles VIII., was a mere boy, but
in doing so he followed the intentions of his father Louis XI., the
ablest monarch of his age. The other, Saint Louis, was the best, and one
of the most vigorous rulers, since the time of Charlemagne. Both these
princesses ruled in a manner hardly equalled by any prince among their
cotemporaries. The emperor Charles the Fifth, the most politic prince of
his time, who had as great a number of able men in Edition: current;
Page: [308]his service as a ruler ever had, and was one of the least
likely of all sovereigns to sacrifice his interest to personal feelings,
made two princesses of his family successively Governors of the
Netherlands, and kept one or other of them in that post during his whole
life, (they were afterwards succeeded by a third). Both ruled very
successfully, and one of them, Margaret of Austria, was one of the
ablest politicians of the age. So much for one side of the question. Now
as to the other. When it is said that under queens men govern, is the
same meaning to be understood as when kings are said to be governed by
women? Is it meant that queens choose as their instruments of
government, the associates of their personal pleasures? The case is rare
even with those who are as unscrupulous on the latter point as Catherine
II.: and it is not in these cases that the good government, alleged to
arise from male influence, is to be found. If it be true, then, that the
administration is in the hands of better men under a queen than under an
average king, it must be that queens have a superior capacity for
choosing them; and women must be better qualified than men both for the
position of sovereign, and for that of chief minister; for the principal
business of a prime minister is not to govern in person, but to find the
fittest persons to conduct every department of public affairs. Edition:
current; Page: [309]The more rapid insight into character, which is one
of the admitted points of superiority in women over men, must certainly
make them, with anything like parity of qualifications in other
respects, more apt than men in that choice of instruments, which is
nearly the most important business of every one who has to do with
governing mankind. Even the unprincipled Catherine de’ Medici could feel
the value of a Chancellor de l’Hôpital. But it is also true that most
great queens have been great by their own talents for government, and
have been well served precisely for that reason. They retained the
supreme direction of affairs in their own hands: and if they listened to
good advisers, they gave by that fact the strongest proof that their
judgment fitted them for dealing with the great questions of government.

Is it reasonable to think that those who are fit for the greater
functions of politics, are incapable of qualifying themselves for the
less? Is there any reason in the nature of things, that the wives and
sisters of princes should, whenever called on, be found as competent as
the princes themselves to their business, but that the wives and sisters
of statesmen, and administrators, and directors of companies, and
managers of public institutions, should be unable to do what is done by
their brothers and husbands? The real Edition: current; Page:
[310]reason is plain enough; it is that princesses, being more raised
above the generality of men by their rank than placed below them by
their sex, have never been taught that it was improper for them to
concern themselves with politics; but have been allowed to feel the
liberal interest natural to any cultivated human being, in the great
transactions which took place around them, and in which they might be
called on to take a part. The ladies of reigning families are the only
women who are allowed the same range of interests and freedom of
development as men; and it is precisely in their case that there is not
found to be any inferiority. Exactly where and in proportion as women’s
capacities for government have been tried, in that proportion have they
been found adequate.

This fact is in accordance with the best general conclusions which the
world’s imperfect experience seems as yet to suggest, concerning the
peculiar tendencies and aptitudes characteristic of women, as women have
hitherto been. I do not say, as they will continue to be; for, as I have
already said more than once, I consider it presumption in any one to
pretend to decide what women are or are not, can or cannot be, by
natural constitution. They have always hitherto been kept, as far as
regards spontaneous development, in so unnatural a state, that their
nature Edition: current; Page: [311]cannot but have been greatly
distorted and disguised; and no one can safely pronounce that if women’s
nature were left to choose its direction as freely as men’s, and if no
artificial bent were attempted to be given to it except that required by
the conditions of human society, and given to both sexes alike, there
would be any material difference, or perhaps any difference at all, in
the character and capacities which would unfold themselves. I shall
presently show, that even the least contestable of the differences which
now exist, are such as may very well have been produced merely by
circumstances, without any difference of natural capacity. But, looking
at women as they are known in experience, it may be said of them, with
more truth than belongs to most other generalizations on the subject,
that the general bent of their talents is towards the practical. This
statement is conformable to all the public history of women, in the
present and the past. It is no less borne out by common and daily
experience. Let us consider the special nature of the mental capacities
most characteristic of a woman of talent. They are all of a kind which
fits them for practice, and makes them tend towards it. What is meant by
a woman’s capacity of intuitive perception? It means, a rapid and
correct insight into present fact. It has nothing to do with general
principles. Edition: current; Page: [312]Nobody ever perceived a
scientific law of nature by intuition, nor arrived at a general rule of
duty or prudence by it. These are results of slow and careful collection
and comparison of experience; and neither the men nor the women of
intuition usually shine in this department, unless, indeed, the
experience necessary is such as they can acquire by themselves. For what
is called their intuitive sagacity makes them peculiarly apt in
gathering such general truths as can be collected from their individual
means of observation. When, consequently, they chance to be as well
provided as men are with the results of other people’s experience, by
reading and education, (I use the word chance advisedly, for, in respect
to the knowledge that tends to fit them for the greater concerns of
life, the only educated women are the self-educated) they are better
furnished than men in general with the essential requisites of skilful
and successful practice. Men who have been much taught, are apt to be
deficient in the sense of present fact; they do not see, in the facts
which they are called upon to deal with, what is really there, but what
they have been taught to expect. This is seldom the case with women of
any ability. Their capacity of “intuition” preserves them from it. With
equality of experience and of general faculties, a woman Edition:
current; Page: [313]usually sees much more than a man of what is
immediately before her. Now this sensibility to the present, is the main
quality on which the capacity for practice, as distinguished from
theory, depends. To discover general principles, belongs to the
speculative faculty: to discern and discriminate the particular cases in
which they are and are not applicable, constitutes practical talent: and
for this, women as they now are have a peculiar aptitude. I admit that
there can be no good practice without principles, and that the
predominant place which quickness of observation holds among a woman’s
faculties, makes her particularly apt to build over-hasty
generalizations upon her own observation; though at the same time no
less ready in rectifying those generalizations, as her observation takes
a wider range. But the corrective to this defect, is access to the
experience of the human race; general knowledge—exactly the thing which
education can best supply. A woman’s mistakes are specifically those of
a clever self-educated man, who often sees what men trained in routine
do not see, but falls into errors for want of knowing things which have
long been known. Of course he has acquired much of the pre-existing
knowledge, or he could not have got on at all; but what he knows of it
he has picked up in fragments and at random, as women do.

Edition: current; Page: [314]
But this gravitation of women’s minds to the present, to the real, to
actual fact, while in its exclusiveness it is a source of errors, is
also a most useful counteractive of the contrary error. The principal
and most characteristic aberration of speculative minds as such,
consists precisely in the deficiency of this lively perception and
ever-present sense of objective fact For want of this, they often not
only overlook the contradiction which outward facts oppose to their
theories, but lose sight of the legitimate purpose of speculation
altogether, and let their speculative faculties go astray into regions
not peopled with real beings, animate or inanimate, even idealized, but
with personified shadows created by the illusions of metaphysics or by
the mere entanglement of words, and think these shadows the proper
objects of the highest, the most transcendant, philosophy. Hardly
anything can be of greater value to a man of theory and speculation who
employs himself not in collecting materials of knowledge by observation,
but in working them up by processes of thought into comprehensive truths
of science and laws of conduct, than to carry on his speculations in the
companionship, and under the criticism, of a really superior woman.
There is nothing comparable to it for keeping his thoughts within the
limits of real things, and the actual facts of nature. Edition: current;
Page: [315]A woman seldom runs wild after an abstraction. The habitual
direction of her mind to dealing with things as individuals rather than
in groups, and (what is closely connected with it) her more lively
interest in the present feelings of persons, which makes her consider
first of all, in anything which claims to be applied to practice, in
what manner persons will be affected by it—these two things make her
extremely unlikely to put faith in any speculation which loses sight of
individuals, and deals with things as if they existed for the benefit of
some imaginary entity, some mere creation of the mind, not resolvable
into the feelings of living beings. Women’s thoughts are thus as useful
in giving reality to those of thinking men, as men’s thoughts in giving
width and largeness to those of women. In depth, as distinguished from
breadth, I greatly doubt if even now, women, compared with men, are at
any disadvantage.

If the existing mental characteristics of women are thus valuable even
in aid of speculation, they are still more important, when speculation
has done its work, for carrying out the results of speculation into
practice. For the reasons already given, women are comparatively
unlikely to fall into the common error of men, that of sticking to their
rules in a case whose specialities either take it out of the class to
which the rules are Edition: current; Page: [316]applicable, or require
a special adaptation of them. Let us now consider another of the
admitted superiorities of clever women, greater quickness of
apprehension. Is not this pre-eminently a quality which fits a person
for practice? In action, everything continually depends upon deciding
promptly. In speculation, nothing does. A mere thinker can wait, can
take time to consider, can collect additional evidence; he is not
obliged to complete his philosophy at once, lest the opportunity should
go by. The power of drawing the best conclusion possible from
insufficient data is not indeed useless in philosophy; the construction
of a provisional hypothesis consistent with all known facts is often the
needful basis for further inquiry. But this faculty is rather
serviceable in philosophy, than the main qualification for it: and, for
the auxiliary as well as for the main operation, the philosopher can
allow himself any time he pleases. He is in no need of the capacity of
doing rapidly what he does; what he rather needs is patience, to work on
slowly until imperfect lights have become perfect, and a conjecture has
ripened into a theorem. For those, on the contrary, whose business is
with the fugitive and perishable—with individual facts, not kinds of
facts—rapidity of thought is a qualification next only in importance to
the power of thought itself, Edition: current; Page: [317]He who has not
his faculties under immediate command, in the contingencies of action,
might as well not have them at all. He may be fit to criticize, but he
is not fit to act. Now it is in this that women, and the men who are
most like women, confessedly excel. The other sort of man, however
pre-eminent may be his faculties, arrives slowly at complete command of
them: rapidity of judgment and promptitude of judicious action, even in
the things he knows best, are the gradual and late result of strenuous
effort grown into habit.

It will be said, perhaps, that the greater nervous susceptibility of
women is a disqualification for practice, in anything but domestic life,
by rendering them mobile, changeable, too vehemently under the influence
of the moment, incapable of dogged perseverance, unequal and uncertain
in the power of using their faculties. I think that these phrases sum up
the greater part of the objections commonly made to the fitness of women
for the higher class of serious business. Much of all this is the mere
overflow of nervous energy run to waste, and would cease when the energy
was directed to a definite end. Much is also the result of conscious or
unconscious cultivation; as we see by the almost total disappearance of
“hysterics” and fainting fits, since they have gone out of fashion.
Moreover, Edition: current; Page: [318]when people are brought up, like
many women of the higher classes (though less so in our own country than
in any other) a kind of hot-house plants, shielded from the wholesome
vicissitudes of air and temperature, and untrained in any of the
occupations and exercises which give stimulus and development to the
circulatory and muscular system, while their nervous system, especially
in its emotional department, is kept in unnaturally active play; it is
no wonder if those of them who do not die of consumption, grow up with
constitutions liable to derangement from slight causes, both internal
and external, and without stamina to support any task, physical or
mental, requiring continuity of effort. But women brought up to work for
their livelihood show none of these morbid characteristics, unless
indeed they are chained to an excess of sedentary work in confined and
unhealthy rooms. Women who in their early years have shared in the
healthful physical education and bodily freedom of their brothers, and
who obtain a sufficiency of pure air and exercise in after-life, very
rarely have any excessive susceptibility of nerves which can disqualify
them for active pursuits. There is indeed a certain proportion of
persons, in both sexes, in whom an unusual degree of nervous sensibility
is constitutional, and of so marked a character as to be the feature of
their Edition: current; Page: [319]organization which exercises the
greatest influence over the whole character of the vital phenomena. This
constitution, like other physical conformations, is hereditary, and is
transmitted to sons as well as daughters; but it is possible, and
probable, that the nervous temperament (as it is called) is inherited by
a greater number of women than of men. We will assume this as a fact:
and let me then ask, are men of nervous temperament found to be unfit
for the duties and pursuits usually followed by men? If not, why should
women of the same temperament be unfit for them? The peculiarities of
the temperament are, no doubt, within certain limits, an obstacle to
success in some employments, though an aid to it in others. But when the
occupation is suitable to the temperament, and sometimes even when it is
unsuitable, the most brilliant examples of success are continually given
by the men of high nervous sensibility. They are distinguished in their
practical manifestations chiefly by this, that being susceptible of a
higher degree of excitement than those of another physical constitution,
their powers when excited differ more than in the case of other people,
from those shown in their ordinary state: they are raised, as it were,
above themselves, and do things with ease which they are wholly
incapable of at other times. But this lofty excitement is not except in
weak bodily constitutions, Edition: current; Page: [320]a mere flash,
which passes away immediately, leaving no permanent traces, and
incompatible with persistent and steady pursuit of an object. It is the
character of the nervous temperament to be capable of sustained
excitement, holding out through long continued efforts. It is what is
meant by spirit. It is what makes the highbred racehorse run without
slackening speed till he drops down dead. It is what has enabled so many
delicate women to maintain the most sublime constancy not only at the
stake, but through a long preliminary succession of mental and bodily
tortures. It is evident that people of this temperament are particularly
apt for what may be called the executive department of the leadership of
mankind. They are the material of great orators, great preachers,
impressive diffusers of moral influences. Their constitution might be
deemed less favourable to the qualities required from a statesman in the
cabinet, or from a judge. It would be so, if the consequence necessarily
followed that because people are excitable they must always be in a
state of excitement. But this is wholly a question of training. Strong
feeling is the instrument and element of strong self-control: but it
requires to be cultivated in that direction. When it is, it forms not
the heroes of impulse only, but those also of self-conquest. History and
experience prove that Edition: current; Page: [321]the most passionate
characters are the most fanatically rigid in their feelings of duty,
when their passion has been trained to act in that direction. The judge
who gives a just decision in a case where his feelings are intensely
interested on the other side, derives from that same strength of feeling
the determined sense of the obligation of justice, which enables him to
achieve this victory over himself. The capability of that lofty
enthusiasm which takes the human being out of his every-day character,
reacts upon the daily character itself. His aspirations and powers when
he is in this exceptional state, become the type with which he compares,
and by which he estimates, his sentiments and proceedings at other
times: and his habitual purposes assume a character moulded by and
assimilated to the moments of lofty excitement, although those, from the
physical nature of a human being, can only be transient. Experience of
races, as well as of individuals, does not show those of excitable
temperament to be less fit, on the average, either for speculation or
practice, than the more unexcitable. The French, and the Italians, are
undoubtedly by nature more nervously excitable than the Teutonic races,
and, compared at least with the English, they have a much greater
habitual and daily emotional life: but have they been less great in
science, in public business, in Edition: current; Page: [322]legal and
judicial eminence, or in war? There is abundant evidence that the Greeks
were of old, as their descendants and successors still are, one of the
most excitable of the races of mankind. It is superfluous to ask, what
among the achievements of men they did not excel in. The Romans,
probably, as an equally southern people, had the same original
temperament: but the stern character of their national discipline, like
that of the Spartans, made them an example of the opposite type of
national character; the greater strength of their natural feelings being
chiefly apparent in the intensity which the same original temperament
made it possible to give to the artificial. If these cases exemplify
what a naturally excitable people may be made, the Irish Celts afford
one of the aptest examples of what they are when left to themselves; (if
those can be said to be left to themselves who have been for centuries
under the indirect influence of bad government, and the direct training
of a Catholic hierarchy and of a sincere belief in the Catholic
religion.) The Irish character must be considered, therefore, as an
unfavourable case: yet, whenever the circumstances of the individual
have been at all favourable, what people have shown greater capacity for
the most varied and multifarious individual eminence? Like the French
compared with the English, the Irish with the Swiss, the Edition:
current; Page: [323]Greeks or Italians compared with the German races,
so women compared with men may be found, on the average, to do the same
things with some variety in the particular kind of excellence. But, that
they would do them fully as well on the whole, if their education and
cultivation were adapted to correcting instead of aggravating the
infirmities incident to their temperament, I see not the smallest reason
to doubt.

Supposing it, however, to be true that women’s minds are by nature more
mobile than those of men, less capable of persisting long in the same
continuous effort, more fitted for dividing their faculties among many
things than for travelling in any one path to the highest point which
can be reached by it: this may be true of women as they now are (though
not without great and numerous exceptions), and may account for their
having remained behind the highest order of men in precisely the things
in which this absorption of the whole mind in one set of ideas and
occupations may seem to be most requisite. Still, this difference is one
which can only affect the kind of excellence, not the excellence itself,
or its practical worth: and it remains to be shown whether this
exclusive working of a part of the mind, this absorption of the whole
thinking faculty in a single subject, and concentration of it on a
single work, is the Edition: current; Page: [324]normal and healthful
condition of the human faculties, even for speculative uses. I believe
that what is gained in special development by this concentration, is
lost in the capacity of the mind for the other purposes of life; and
even in abstract thought, it is my decided opinion that the mind does
more by frequently returning to a difficult problem, than by sticking to
it without interruption. For the purposes, at all events, of practice,
from its highest to its humblest departments, the capacity of passing
promptly from one subject of consideration to another, without letting
the active spring of the intellect run down between the two, is a power
far more valuable; and this power women pre-eminently possess, by virtue
of the very mobility of which they are accused. They perhaps have it
from nature, but they certainly have it by training and education; for
nearly the whole of the occupations of women consist in the management
of small but multitudinous details, on each of which the mind cannot
dwell even for a minute, but must pass on to other things, and if
anything requires longer thought, must steal time at odd moments for
thinking of it. The capacity indeed which women show for doing their
thinking in circumstances and at times which almost any man would make
an excuse to himself for not attempting it, has often been noticed: and
a Edition: current; Page: [325]woman’s mind, though it may be occupied
only with small things, can hardly ever permit itself to be vacant, as a
man’s so often is when not engaged in what he chooses to consider the
business of his life. The business of a woman’s ordinary life is things
in general, and can as little cease to go on as the world to go round.

But (it is said) there is anatomical evidence of the superior mental
capacity of men compared with women: they have a larger brain. I reply,
that in the first place the fact itself is doubtful. It is by no means
established that the brain of a woman is smaller than that of a man. If
it is inferred merely because a woman’s bodily frame generally is of
less dimensions than a man’s, this criterion would lead to strange
consequences. A tall and large-boned man must on this showing be
wonderfully superior in intelligence to a small man, and an elephant or
a whale must prodigiously excel mankind. The size of the brain in human
beings, anatomists say, varies much less than the size of the body, or
even of the head, and the one cannot be at all inferred from the other.
It is certain that some women have as large a brain as any man. It is
within my knowledge that a man who had weighed many human brains, said
that the heaviest he knew of, heavier even than Cuvier’s (the heaviest
previously Edition: current; Page: [326]recorded,) was that of a woman.
Next, I must observe that the precise relation which exists between the
brain and the intellectual powers is not yet well understood, but is a
subject of great dispute. That there is a very close relation we cannot
doubt. The brain is certainly the material organ of thought and feeling:
and (making abstraction of the great unsettled controversy respecting
the appropriation of different parts of the brain to different mental
faculties) I admit that it would be an anomaly, and an exception to all
we know of the general laws of life and organization, if the size of the
organ were wholly indifferent to the function; if no accession of power
were derived from the greater magnitude of the instrument. But the
exception and the anomaly would be fully as great if the organ exercised
influence by its magnitude only. In all the more delicate operations of
nature—of which those of the animated creation are the most delicate,
and those of the nervous system by far the most delicate of
these—differences in the effect depend as much on differences of quality
in the physical agents, as on their quantity: and if the quality of an
instrument is to be tested by the nicety and delicacy of the work it can
do, the indications point to a greater average fineness of quality in
the brain and nervous system of women than of men. Edition: current;
Page: [327]Dismissing abstract difference of quality, a thing difficult
to verify, the efficiency of an organ is known to depend not solely on
its size but on its activity: and of this we have an approximate measure
in the energy with which the blood circulates through it, both the
stimulus and the reparative force being mainly dependent on the
circulation. It would not be surprising—it is indeed an hypothesis which
accords well with the differences actually observed between the mental
operations of the two sexes—if men on the average should have the
advantage in the size of the brain, and women in activity of cerebral
circulation. The results which conjecture, founded on analogy, would
lead us to expect from this difference of organization, would correspond
to some of those which we most commonly see. In the first place, the
mental operations of men might be expected to be slower. They would
neither be so prompt as women in thinking, nor so quick to feel. Large
bodies take more time to get into full action. On the other hand, when
once got thoroughly into play, men’s brain would bear more work. It
would be more persistent in the line first taken; it would have more
difficulty in changing from one mode of action to another, but, in the
one thing it was doing, it could go on longer without loss of power or
sense of fatigue. And do we not find that Edition: current; Page:
[328]the things in which men most excel women are those which require
most plodding and long hammering at a single thought, while women do
best what must be done rapidly? A woman’s brain is sooner fatigued,
sooner exhausted; but given the degree of exhaustion, we should expect
to find that it would recover itself sooner. I repeat that this
speculation is entirely hypothetical; it pretends to no more than to
suggest a line of enquiry. I have before repudiated the notion of its
being yet certainly known that there is any natural difference at all in
the average strength or direction of the mental capacities of the two
sexes, much less what that difference is. Nor is it possible that this
should be known, so long as the psychological laws of the formation of
character have been so little studied, even in a general way, and in the
particular case never scientifically applied at all; so long as the most
obvious external causes of difference of character are habitually
disregarded—left unnoticed by the observer, and looked down upon with a
kind of supercilious contempt by the prevalent schools both of natural
history and of mental philosophy: who, whether they look for the source
of what mainly distinguishes human beings from one another, in the world
of matter or in that of spirit, agree in running down those who prefer
to explain these differences by the Edition: current; Page:
[329]different relations of human beings to society and life.

To so ridiculous an extent are the notions formed of the nature of
women, mere empirical generalizations, framed, without philosophy or
analysis, upon the first instances which present themselves, that the
popular idea of it is different in different countries, according as the
opinions and social circumstances of the country have given to the women
living in it any speciality of development or non-development. An
Oriental thinks that women are by nature peculiarly voluptuous; see the
violent abuse of them on this ground in Hindoo writings. An Englishman
usually thinks that they are by nature cold. The sayings about women’s
fickleness are mostly of French origin; from the famous distich of
Francis the First, upward and downward. In England it is a common
remark, how much more constant women are than men. Inconstancy has been
longer reckoned discreditable to a woman, in England than in France; and
Englishwomen are besides, in their inmost nature, much more subdued to
opinion. It may be remarked by the way, that Englishmen are in
peculiarly unfavourable circumstances for attempting to judge what is or
is not natural, not merely to women, but to men, or to human beings
altogether, at least if they have only English experience to go upon:
because there is no place where Edition: current; Page: [330]human
nature shows so little of its original lineaments. Both in a good and a
bad sense, the English are farther from a state of nature than any other
modern people. They are, more than any other people, a product of
civilization and discipline. England is the country in which social
discipline has most succeeded, not so much in conquering, as in
suppressing, whatever is liable to conflict with it. The English, more
than any other people, not only act but feel according to rule. In other
countries, the taught opinion, or the requirement of society, may be the
stronger power, but the promptings of the individual nature are always
visible under it, and often resisting it: rule may be stronger than
nature, but nature is still there. In England, rule has to a great
degree substituted itself for nature. The greater part of life is
carried on, not by following inclination under the control of rule, but
by having no inclination but that of following a rule. Now this has its
good side doubtless, though it has also a wretchedly bad one; but it
must render an Englishman peculiarly ill-qualified to pass a judgment on
the original tendencies of human nature from his own experience. The
errors to which observers elsewhere are liable on the subject, are of a
different character. An Englishman is ignorant respecting human nature,
a Frenchman is prejudiced. An Englishman’s errors are negative, a
Frenchman’s Edition: current; Page: [331]positive. An Englishman fancies
that things do not exist, because he never sees them; a Frenchman thinks
they must always and necessarily exist, because he does see them. An
Englishman does not know nature, because he has had no opportunity of
observing it; a Frenchman generally knows a great deal of it, but often
mistakes it, because he has only seen it sophisticated and distorted.
For the artificial state superinduced by society disguises the natural
tendencies of the thing which is the subject of observation, in two
different ways: by extinguishing the nature, or by transforming it. In
the one case there is but a starved residuum of nature remaining to be
studied; in the other case there is much, but it may have expanded in
any direction rather than that in which it would spontaneously grow.

I have said that it cannot now be known how much of the existing mental
differences between men and women is natural, and how much artificial;
whether there are any natural differences at all; or, supposing all
artificial causes of difference to be withdrawn, what natural character
would be revealed. I am not about to attempt what I have pronounced
impossible: but doubt does not forbid conjecture, and where certainty is
unattainable, there may yet be the means of arriving at some degree of
probability. The first point, the origin of the differences actually
Edition: current; Page: [332]observed, is the one most accessible to
speculation; and I shall attempt to approach it, by the only path by
which it can be reached; by tracing the mental consequences of external
influences. We cannot isolate a human being from the circumstances of
his condition, so as to ascertain experimentally what he would have been
by nature; but we can consider what he is, and what his circumstances
have been, and whether the one would have been capable of producing the
other.

Let us take, then, the only marked case which observation affords, of
apparent inferiority of women to men, if we except the merely physical
one of bodily strength. No production in philosophy, science, or art,
entitled to the first rank, has been the work of a woman. Is there any
mode of accounting for this, without supposing that women are naturally
incapable of producing them?

In the first place, we may fairly question whether experience has
afforded sufficient grounds for an induction. It is scarcely three
generations since women, saving very rare exceptions, have begun to try
their capacity in philosophy, science, or art. It is only in the present
generation that their attempts have been at all numerous; and they are
even now extremely few, everywhere but in England and France. It is a
relevant question, whether a mind possessing the requisites of Edition:
current; Page: [333]first-rate eminence in speculation or creative art
could have been expected, on the mere calculation of chances, to turn up
during that lapse of time, among the women whose tastes and personal
position admitted of their devoting themselves to these pursuits. In all
things which there has yet been time for—in all but the very highest
grades in the scale of excellence, especially in the department in which
they have been longest engaged, literature (both prose and poetry)—women
have done quite as much, have obtained fully as high prizes and as many
of them, as could be expected from the length of time and the number of
competitors. If we go back to the earlier period when very few women
made the attempt, yet some of those few made it with distinguished
success. The Greeks always accounted Sappho among their great poets; and
we may well suppose that Myrtis, said to have been the teacher of
Pindar, and Corinna, who five times bore away from him the prize of
poetry, must at least have had sufficient merit to admit of being
compared with that great name. Aspasia did not leave any philosophical
writings; but it is an admitted fact that Socrates resorted to her for
instruction, and avowed himself to have obtained it.

If we consider the works of women in modern times, and contrast them
with those of men, either in the literary or the artistic department,
Edition: current; Page: [334]such inferiority as may be observed
resolves itself essentially into one thing: but that is a most material
one; deficiency of originality. Not total deficiency; for every
production of mind which is of any substantive value, has an originality
of its own—is a conception of the mind itself, not a copy of something
else. Thoughts original, in the sense of being unborrowed—of being
derived from the thinker’s own observations or intellectual
processes—are abundant in the writings of women. But they have not yet
produced any of those great and luminous new ideas which form an era in
thought, nor those fundamentally new conceptions in art, which open a
vista of possible effects not before thought of, and found a new school.
Their compositions are mostly grounded on the existing fund of thought,
and their creations do not deviate widely from existing types. This is
the sort of inferiority which their works manifest: for in point of
execution, in the detailed application of thought, and the perfection of
style, there is no inferiority. Our best novelists in point of
composition, and of the management of detail, have mostly been women;
and there is not in all modern literature a more eloquent vehicle of
thought than the style of Madame de Stael, nor, as a specimen of purely
artistic excellence, anything superior to the prose of Madame Sand,
whose style acts upon the Edition: current; Page: [335]nervous system
like a symphony of Haydn or Mozart. High originality of conception is,
as I have said, what is chiefly wanting. And now to examine if there is
any manner in which this deficiency can be accounted for.

Let us remember, then, so far as regards mere thought, that during all
that period in the world’s existence, and in the progress of
cultivation, in which great and fruitful new truths could be arrived at
by mere force of genius, with little previous study and accumulation of
knowledge—during all that time women did not concern themselves with
speculation at all. From the days of Hypatia to those of the
Reformation, the illustrious Heloisa is almost the only woman to whom
any such achievement might have been possible; and we know not how great
a capacity of speculation in her may have been lost to mankind by the
misfortunes of her life. Never since any considerable number of women
have began to cultivate serious thought, has originality been possible
on easy terms. Nearly all the thoughts which can be reached by mere
strength of original faculties, have long since been arrived at; and
originality, in any high sense of the word, is now scarcely ever
attained but by minds which have undergone elaborate discipline, and are
deeply versed in the results of previous thinking. It is Mr. Maurice, I
think, Edition: current; Page: [336]who has remarked on the present age,
that its most original thinkers are those who have known most thoroughly
what had been thought by their predecessors: and this will always
henceforth be the case. Every fresh stone in the edifice has now to be
placed on the top of so many others, that a long process of climbing,
and of carrying up materials, has to be gone through by whoever aspires
to take a share in the present stage of the work. How many women are
there who have gone through any such process? Mrs. Somerville, alone
perhaps of women, knows as much of mathematics as is now needful for
making any considerable mathematical discovery: is it any proof of
inferiority in women, that she has not happened to be one of the two or
three persons who in her lifetime have associated their names with some
striking advancement of the science? Two women, since political economy
has been made a science, have known enough of it to write usefully on
the subject: of how many of the innumerable men who have written on it
during the same time, is it possible with truth to say more? If no woman
has hitherto been a great historian, what woman has had the necessary
erudition? If no woman is a great philologist, what woman has studied
Sanscrit and Slavonic, the Gothic of Ulphila and the Persic of the
Zendavesta? Even in practical matters Edition: current; Page: [337]we
all know what is the value of the originality of untaught geniuses. It
means, inventing over again in its rudimentary form something already
invented and improved upon by many successive inventors. When women have
had the preparation which all men now require to be eminently original,
it will be time enough to begin judging by experience of their capacity
for originality.

It no doubt often happens that a person, who has not widely and
accurately studied the thoughts of others on a subject, has by natural
sagacity a happy intuition, which he can suggest, but cannot prove,
which yet when matured may be an important addition to knowledge: but
even then, no justice can be done to it until some other person, who
does possess the previous acquirements, takes it in hand, tests it,
gives it a scientific or practical form, and fits it into its place
among the existing truths of philosophy or science. Is it supposed that
such felicitous thoughts do not occur to women? They occur by hundreds
to every woman of intellect. But they are mostly lost, for want of a
husband or friend who has the other knowledge which can enable him to
estimate them properly and bring them before the world: and even when
they are brought before it, they generally appear as his ideas, not
their real author’s. Who can tell how many of the most Edition: current;
Page: [338]original thoughts put forth by male writers, belong to a
woman by suggestion, to themselves only by verifying and working out? If
I may judge by my own case, a very large proportion indeed.

If we turn from pure speculation to literature in the narrow sense of
the term, and the fine arts, there is a very obvious reason why women’s
literature is, in its general conception and in its main features, an
imitation of men’s. Why is the Roman literature, as critics proclaim to
satiety, not original, but an imitation of the Greek? Simply because the
Greeks came first. If women lived in a different country from men, and
had never read any of their writings, they would have had a literature
of their own. As it is, they have not created one, because they found a
highly advanced literature already created. If there had been no
suspension of the knowledge of antiquity, or if the Renaissance had
occurred before the Gothic cathedrals were built, they never would have
been built. We see that, in France and Italy, imitation of the ancient
literature stopped the original development even after it had commenced.
All women who write are pupils of the great male writers. A painter’s
early pictures, even if he be a Raffaelle, are undistinguishable in
style from those of his master. Even a Mozart does not display his
powerful originality in his Edition: current; Page: [339]earliest
pieces. What years are to a gifted individual, generations are to a
mass. If women’s literature is destined to have a different collective
character from that of men, depending on any difference of natural
tendencies, much longer time is necessary than has yet elapsed, before
it can emancipate itself from the influence of accepted models, and
guide itself by its own impulses. But if, as I believe, there will not
prove to be any natural tendencies common to women, and distinguishing
their genius from that of men, yet every individual writer among them
has her individual tendencies, which at present are still subdued by the
influence of precedent and example: and it will require generations
more, before their individuality is sufficiently developed to make head
against that influence.

It is in the fine arts, properly so called, that the primâ facie
evidence of inferior original powers in women at first sight appears the
strongest: since opinion (it may be said) does not exclude them from
these, but rather encourages them, and their education, instead of
passing over this department, is in the affluent classes mainly composed
of it. Yet in this line of exertion they have fallen still more short
than in many others, of the highest eminence attained by men. This
shortcoming, however, needs no other explanation than the familiar fact,
more universally true Edition: current; Page: [340]in the fine arts than
in anything else; the vast superiority of professional persons over
amateurs. Women in the educated classes are almost universally taught
more or less of some branch or other of the fine arts, but not that they
may gain their living or their social consequence by it. Women artists
are all amateurs. The exceptions are only of the kind which confirm the
general truth. Women are taught music, but not for the purpose of
composing, only of executing it: and accordingly it is only as
composers, that men, in music, are superior to women. The only one of
the fine arts which women do follow, to any extent, as a profession, and
an occupation for life, is the histrionic; and in that they are
confessedly equal, if not superior, to men. To make the comparison fair,
it should be made between the productions of women in any branch of art,
and those of men not following it as a profession. In musical
composition, for example, women surely have produced fully as good
things as have ever been produced by male amateurs. There are now a few
women, a very few, who practise painting as a profession, and these are
already beginning to show quite as much talent as could be expected.
Even male painters (pace Mr. Ruskin) have not made any very remarkable
figure these last centuries, and it will be long before they do so. The
reason why the old painters Edition: current; Page: [341]were so greatly
superior to the modern, is that a greatly superior class of men applied
themselves to the art. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the
Italian painters were the most accomplished men of their age. The
greatest of them were men of encyclopædical acquirements and powers,
like the great men of Greece. But in their times fine art was, to men’s
feelings and conceptions, among the grandest things in which a human
being could excel; and by it men were made, what only political or
military distinction now makes them, the companions of sovereigns, and
the equals of the highest nobility. In the present age, men of anything
like similar calibre find something more important to do for their own
fame and the uses of the modern world, than painting: and it is only now
and then that a Reynolds or a Turner (of whose relative rank among
eminent men I do not pretend to an opinion) applies himself to that art.
Music belongs to a different order of things; it does not require the
same general powers of mind, but seems more dependant on a natural gift:
and it may be thought surprising that no one of the great musical
composers has been a woman. But even this natural gift, to be made
available for great creations, requires study, and professional devotion
to the pursuit. The only countries which have produced first-rate
composers, even of the male sex, are Germany and Italy—countries
Edition: current; Page: [342]in which, both in point of special and of
general cultivation, women have remained far behind France and England,
being generally (it may be said without exaggeration) very little
educated, and having scarcely cultivated at all any of the higher
faculties of mind. And in those countries the men who are acquainted
with the principles of musical composition must be counted by hundreds,
or more probably by thousands, the women barely by scores: so that here
again, on the doctrine of averages, we cannot reasonably expect to see
more than one eminent woman to fifty eminent men; and the last three
centuries have not produced fifty eminent male composers either in
Germany or in Italy.

There are other reasons, besides those which we have now given, that
help to explain why women remain behind men, even in the pursuits which
are open to both. For one thing, very few women have time for them. This
may seem a paradox; it is an undoubted social fact. The time and
thoughts of every woman have to satisfy great previous demands on them
for things practical. There is, first, the superintendence of the family
and the domestic expenditure, which occupies at least one woman in every
family, generally the one of mature years and acquired experience;
unless the family is so rich as to admit of delegating that task to
hired agency, and submitting to all the Edition: current; Page:
[343]waste and malversation inseparable from that mode of conducting it.
The superintendence of a household, even when not in other respects
laborious, is extremely onerous to the thoughts; it requires incessant
vigilance, an eye which no detail escapes, and presents questions for
consideration and solution, foreseen and unforeseen, at every hour of
the day, from which the person responsible for them can hardly ever
shake herself free. If a woman is of a rank and circumstances which
relieve her in a measure from these cares, she has still devolving on
her the management for the whole family of its intercourse with
others—of what is called society, and the less the call made on her by
the former duty, the greater is always the development of the latter:
the dinner parties, concerts, evening parties, morning visits, letter
writing, and all that goes with them. All this is over and above the
engrossing duty which society imposes exclusively on women, of making
themselves charming. A clever woman of the higher ranks finds nearly a
sufficient employment of her talents in cultivating the graces of manner
and the arts of conversation. To look only at the outward side of the
subject: the great and continual exercise of thought which all women who
attach any value to dressing well (I do not mean expensively, but with
taste, and perception of natural and of artificial convenance) must
bestow upon their own dress, perhaps also upon Edition: current; Page:
[344]that of their daughters, would alone go a great way towards
achieving respectable results in art, or science, or literature, and
does actually exhaust much of the time and mental power they might have
to spare for either.* If it were possible that all this number of little
practical interests (which are made great to them) should leave them
either much leisure, or much energy and freedom of mind, to be devoted
to art or speculation, they must have a much greater original supply of
active faculty than the vast majority of men. But this is not all.
Independently of the regular offices of life which devolve upon a woman,
she is expected to have her time and faculties always at the disposal of
everybody. If a man has not a profession to exempt him from such
demands, still, if he has a pursuit, he offends nobody by devoting his
time to it; occupation is Edition: current; Page: [345]received as a
valid excuse for his not answering to every casual demand which may be
made on him. Are a woman’s occupations, especially her chosen and
voluntary ones, ever regarded as excusing her from any of what are
termed the calls of society? Scarcely are her most necessary and
recognised duties allowed as an exemption. It requires an illness in the
family, or something else out of the common way, to entitle her to give
her own business the precedence over other people’s amusement. She must
always be at the beck and call of somebody, generally of everybody. If
she has a study or a pursuit, she must snatch any short interval which
accidentally occurs to be employed in it. A celebrated woman, in a work
which I hope will some day be published, remarks truly that everything a
woman does is done at odd times. Is it wonderful, then, if she does not
attain the highest eminence in things which require consecutive
attention, and the concentration on them of the chief interest of life?
Such is philosophy, and such, above all, is art, in which, besides the
devotion of the thoughts and feelings, the hand also must be kept in
constant exercise to attain high skill.

There is another consideration to be added to all these. In the various
arts and intellectual occupations, there is a degree of proficiency
sufficient for living by it, and there is a higher Edition: current;
Page: [346]degree on which depend the great productions which
immortalize a name. To the attainment of the former, there are adequate
motives in the case of all who follow the pursuit professionally: the
other is hardly ever attained where there is not, or where there has not
been at some period of life, an ardent desire of celebrity. Nothing less
is commonly a sufficient stimulus to undergo the long and patient
drudgery, which, in the case even of the greatest natural gifts, is
absolutely required for great eminence in pursuits in which we already
possess so many splendid memorials of the highest genius. Now, whether
the cause be natural or artificial, women seldom have this eagerness for
fame. Their ambition is generally confined within narrower bounds. The
influence they seek is over those who immediately surround them. Their
desire is to be liked, loved, or admired, by those whom they see with
their eyes: and the proficiency in knowledge, arts, and accomplishments,
which is sufficient for that, almost always contents them. This is a
trait of character which cannot be left out of the account in judging of
women as they are. I do not at all believe that it is inherent in women.
It is only the natural result of their circumstances. The love of fame
in men is encouraged by education and opinion: to “scorn delights and
live laborious days” for its sake, is accounted the part Edition:
current; Page: [347]of “noble minds,” even if spoken of as their “last
infirmity,” and is stimulated by the access which fame gives to all
objects of ambition, including even the favour of women; while to women
themselves all these objects are closed, and the desire of fame itself
considered daring and unfeminine. Besides, how could it be that a
woman’s interests should not be all concentrated upon the impressions
made on those who come into her daily life, when society has ordained
that all her duties should be to them, and has contrived that all her
comforts should depend on them? The natural desire of consideration from
our fellow creatures is as strong in a woman as in a man; but society
has so ordered things that public consideration is, in all ordinary
cases, only attainable by her through the consideration of her husband
or of her male relations, while her private consideration is forfeited
by making herself individually prominent, or appearing in any other
character than that of an appendage to men. Whoever is in the least
capable of estimating the influence on the mind of the entire domestic
and social position and the whole habit of a life, must easily recognise
in that influence a complete explanation of nearly all the apparent
differences between women and men, including the whole of those which
imply any inferiority.

Edition: current; Page: [348]
As for moral differences, considered as distinguished from intellectual,
the distinction commonly drawn is to the advantage of women. They are
declared to be better than men, an empty compliment, which must provoke
a bitter smile from every woman of spirit, since there is no other
situation in life in which it is the established order, and considered
quite natural and suitable, that the better should obey the worse. If
this piece of idle talk is good for anything, it is only as an admission
by men, of the corrupting influence of power; for that is certainly the
only truth which the fact, if it be a fact, either proves or
illustrates. And it is true that servitude, except when it actually
brutalizes, though corrupting to both, is less so to the slaves than to
the slave-masters. It is wholesomer for the moral nature to be
restrained, even by arbitrary power, than to be allowed to exercise
arbitrary power without restraint. Women, it is said, seldomer fall
under the penal law—contribute a much smaller number of offenders to the
criminal calendar, than men. I doubt not that the same thing may be
said, with the same truth, of negro slaves. Those who are under the
control of others cannot often commit crimes, unless at the command and
for the purposes of their masters. I do not know a more signal instance
of the blindness with which the world, including the Edition: current;
Page: [349]herd of studious men, ignore and pass over all the influences
of social circumstances, than their silly depreciation of the
intellectual, and silly panegyrics on the moral, nature of women.

The complimentary dictum about women’s superior moral goodness may be
allowed to pair off with the disparaging one respecting their greater
liability to moral bias. Women, we are told, are not capable of
resisting their personal partialities: their judgment in grave affairs
is warped by their sympathies and antipathies. Assuming it to be so, it
is still to be proved that women are oftener misled by their personal
feelings than men by their personal interests. The chief difference
would seem in that case to be, that men are led from the course of duty
and the public interest by their regard for themselves, women (not being
allowed to have private interests of their own) by their regard for
somebody else. It is also to be considered, that all the education which
women receive from society inculcates on them the feeling that the
individuals connected with them are the only ones to whom they owe any
duty—the only ones whose interest they are called upon to care for;
while, as far as education is concerned, they are left strangers even to
the elementary ideas which are presupposed in any intelligent regard for
larger interests or higher moral objects. The complaint Edition:
current; Page: [350]against them resolves itself merely into this, that
they fulfil only too faithfully the sole duty which they are taught, and
almost the only one which they are permitted to practise.

The concessions of the privileged to the unprivileged are so seldom
brought about by any better motive than the power of the unprivileged to
extort them, that any arguments against the prerogative of sex are
likely to be little attended to by the generality, as long as they are
able to say to themselves that women do not complain of it. That fact
certainly enables men to retain the unjust privilege some time longer;
but does not render it less unjust. Exactly the same thing may be said
of the women in the harem of an Oriental: they do not complain of not
being allowed the freedom of European women. They think our women
insufferably bold and unfeminine. How rarely it is that even men
complain of the general order of society; and how much rarer still would
such complaint be, if they did not know of any different order existing
anywhere else. Women do not complain of the general lot of women; or
rather they do, for plaintive elegies on it are very common in the
writings of women, and were still more so as long as the lamentations
could not be suspected of having any practical object. Their complaints
are like the complaints which men make of the Edition: current; Page:
[351]general unsatisfactoriness of human life; they are not meant to
imply blame, or to plead for any change. But though women do not
complain of the power of husbands, each complains of her own husband, or
of the husbands of her friends. It is the same in all other cases of
servitude, at least in the commencement of the emancipatory movement.
The serfs did not at first complain of the power of their lords, but
only of their tyranny. The Commons began by claiming a few municipal
privileges; they next asked an exemption for themselves from being taxed
without their own consent; but they would at that time have thought it a
great presumption to claim any share in the king’s sovereign authority.
The case of women is now the only case in which to rebel against
established rules is still looked upon with the same eyes as was
formerly a subject’s claim to the right of rebelling against his king. A
woman who joins in any movement which her husband disapproves, makes
herself a martyr, without even being able to be an apostle, for the
husband can legally put a stop to her apostleship. Women cannot be
expected to devote themselves to the emancipation of women, until men in
considerable number are prepared to join with them in the undertaking.

Edition: current; Page: [352]


CHAPTER IV.

THERE remains a question, not of less importance than those already
discussed, and which will be asked the most importunately by those
opponents whose conviction is somewhat shaken on the main point. What
good are we to expect from the changes proposed in our customs and
institutions? Would mankind be at all better off if women were free? If
not, why disturb their minds, and attempt to make a social revolution in
the name of an abstract right?

It is hardly to be expected that this question will be asked in respect
to the change proposed in the condition of women in marriage. The
sufferings, immoralities, evils of all sorts, produced in innumerable
cases by the subjection of individual women to individual men, are far
too terrible to be overlooked. Unthinking or uncandid persons, counting
those cases alone which are extreme, or which attain publicity, may say
that the evils are exceptional; but no one can be blind to their
existence, nor, in many cases, Edition: current; Page: [353]to their
intensity. And it is perfectly obvious that the abuse of the power
cannot be very much checked while the power remains. It is a power
given, or offered, not to good men, or to decently respectable men, but
to all men; the most brutal, and the most criminal. There is no check
but that of opinion, and such men are in general within the reach of no
opinion but that of men like themselves. If such men did not brutally
tyrannize over the one human being whom the law compels to bear
everything from them, society must already have reached a paradisiacal
state. There could be no need any longer of laws to curb men’s vicious
propensities. Astræa must not only have returned to earth, but the heart
of the worst man must have become her temple. The law of servitude in
marriage is a monstrous contradiction to all the principles of the
modern world, and to all the experience through which those principles
have been slowly and painfully worked out. It is the sole case, now that
negro slavery has been abolished, in which a human being in the
plenitude of every faculty is delivered up to the tender mercies of
another human being, in the hope forsooth that this other will use the
power solely for the good of the person subjected to it. Marriage is the
only actual bondage known to our law. There remain no legal slaves,
except the mistress of every house.

Edition: current; Page: [354]
It is not, therefore, on this part of the subject, that the question is
likely to be asked, Cui bono? We may be told that the evil would
outweigh the good, but the reality of the good admits of no dispute. In
regard, however, to the larger question, the removal of women’s
disabilities—their recognition as the equals of men in all that belongs
to citizenship—the opening to them of all honourable employments, and of
the training and education which qualifies for those employments—there
are many persons for whom it is not enough that the inequality has no
just or legitimate defence; they require to be told what express
advantage would be obtained by abolishing it.

To which let me first answer, the advantage of having the most universal
and pervading of all human relations regulated by justice instead of
injustice. The vast amount of this gain to human nature, it is hardly
possible, by any explanation or illustration, to place in a stronger
light than it is placed by the bare statement, to any one who attaches a
moral meaning to words. All the selfish propensities, the self-worship,
the unjust self-preference, which exist among mankind, have their source
and root in, and derive their principal nourishment from, the present
constitution of the relation between men and women. Think what it is to
a boy, to grow up to manhood in the Edition: current; Page: [355]belief
that without any merit or any exertion of his own, though he may be the
most frivolous and empty or the most ignorant and stolid of mankind, by
the mere fact of being born a male he is by right the superior of all
and every one of an entire half of the human race: including probably
some whose real superiority to himself he has daily or hourly occasion
to feel; but even if in his whole conduct he habitually follows a
woman’s guidance, still, if he is a fool, she thinks that of course she
is not, and cannot be, equal in ability and judgment to himself; and if
he is not a fool, he does worse—he sees that she is superior to him, and
believes that, notwithstanding her superiority, he is entitled to
command and she is bound to obey. What must be the effect on his
character, of this lesson? And men of the cultivated classes are often
not aware how deeply it sinks into the immense majority of male minds.
For, among right-feeling and well-bred people, the inequality is kept as
much as possible out of sight; above all, out of sight of the children.
As much obedience is required from boys to their mother as to their
father: they are not permitted to domineer over their sisters, nor are
they accustomed to see these postponed to them, but the contrary; the
compensations of the chivalrous feeling being made prominent, while the
servitude which requires them is kept in the background. Edition:
current; Page: [356]Well brought-up youths in the higher classes thus
often escape the bad influences of the situation in their early years,
and only experience them when, arrived at manhood, they fall under the
dominion of facts as they really exist. Such people are little aware,
when a boy is differently brought up, how early the notion of his
inherent superiority to a girl arises in his mind; how it grows with his
growth and strengthens with his strength; how it is inoculated by one
schoolboy upon another; how early the youth thinks himself superior to
his mother, owing her perhaps forbearance, but no real respect; and how
sublime and sultan-like a sense of superiority he feels, above all, over
the woman whom he honours by admitting her to a partnership of his life.
Is it imagined that all this does not pervert the whole manner of
existence of the man, both as an individual and as a social being? It is
an exact parallel to the feeling of a hereditary king that he is
excellent above others by being born a king, or a noble by being born a
noble. The relation between husband and wife is very like that between
lord and vassal, except that the wife is held to more unlimited
obedience than the vassal was. However the vassal’s character may have
been affected, for better and for worse, by his subordination, who can
help seeing that the lord’s was affected greatly for the worse? whether
he was Edition: current; Page: [357]led to believe that his vassals were
really superior to himself, or to feel that he was placed in command
over people as good as himself, for no merits or labours of his own, but
merely for having, as Figaro says, taken the trouble to be born. The
self-worship of the monarch, or of the feudal superior, is matched by
the self-worship of the male. Human beings do not grow up from childhood
in the possession of unearned distinctions, without pluming themselves
upon them. Those whom privileges not acquired by their merit, and which
they feel to be disproportioned to it, inspire with additional humility,
are always the few, and the best few. The rest are only inspired with
pride, and the worst sort of pride, that which values itself upon
accidental advantages, not of its own achieving. Above all, when the
feeling of being raised above the whole of the other sex is combined
with personal authority over one individual among them; the situation,
if a school of conscientious and affectionate forbearance to those whose
strongest points of character are conscience and affection, is to men of
another quality a regularly constituted Academy or Gymnasium for
training them in arrogance and overbearingness; which vices, if curbed
by the certainty of resistance in their intercourse with other men,
their equals, break out towards all who are in a position to be obliged
to tolerate them, and often revenge themselves Edition: current; Page:
[358]upon the unfortunate wife for the involuntary restraint which they
are obliged to submit to elsewhere.

The example afforded, and the education given to the sentiments, by
laying the foundation of domestic existence upon a relation
contradictory to the first principles of social justice, must, from the
very nature of man, have a perverting influence of such magnitude, that
it is hardly possible with our present experience to raise our
imaginations to the conception of so great a change for the better as
would be made by its removal. All that education and civilization are
doing to efface the influences on character of the law of force, and
replace them by those of justice, remains merely on the surface, as long
as the citadel of the enemy is not attacked. The principle of the modern
movement in morals and politics, is that conduct, and conduct alone,
entitles to respect: that not what men are, but what they do,
constitutes their claim to deference; that, above all, merit, and not
birth, is the only rightful claim to power and authority. If no
authority, not in its nature temporary, were allowed to one human being
over another, society would not be employed in building up propensities
with one hand which it has to curb with the other. The child would
really, for the first time in man’s existence on earth, be trained in
the way he should go, and Edition: current; Page: [359]when he was old
there would be a chance that he would not depart from it. But so long as
the right of the strong to power over the weak rules in the very heart
of society, the attempt to make the equal right of the weak the
principle of its outward actions will always be an uphill struggle; for
the law of justice, which is also that of Christianity, will never get
possession of men’s inmost sentiments; they will be working against it,
even when bending to it.

The second benefit to be expected from giving to women the free use of
their faculties, by leaving them the free choice of their employments,
and opening to them the same field of occupation and the same prizes and
encouragements as to other human beings, would be that of doubling the
mass of mental faculties available for the higher service of humanity.
Where there is now one person qualified to benefit mankind and promote
the general improvement, as a public teacher, or an administrator of
some branch of public or social affairs, there would then be a chance of
two. Mental superiority of any kind is at present everywhere so much
below the demand; there is such a deficiency of persons competent to do
excellently anything which it requires any considerable amount of
ability to do; that the loss to the world, by refusing to make use of
one-half of the whole quantity of talent it possesses, is Edition:
current; Page: [360]extremely serious. It is true that this amount of
mental power is not totally lost. Much of it is employed, and would in
any case be employed, in domestic management, and in the few other
occupations open to women; and from the remainder indirect benefit is in
many individual cases obtained, through the personal influence of
individual women over individual men. But these benefits are partial;
their range is extremely circumscribed; and if they must be admitted, on
the one hand, as a deduction from the amount of fresh social power that
would be acquired by giving freedom to one-half of the whole sum of
human intellect, there must be added, on the other, the benefit of the
stimulus that would be given to the intellect of men by the competition;
or (to use a more true expression) by the necessity that would be
imposed on them of deserving precedency before they could expect to
obtain it.

This great accession to the intellectual power of the species, and to
the amount of intellect available for the good management of its
affairs, would be obtained, partly, through the better and more complete
intellectual education of women, which would then improve pari passu
with that of men. Women in general would be brought up equally capable
of understanding business, public affairs, and the higher matters of
speculation, with men in the same class of society; and the select
Edition: current; Page: [361]few of the one as well as of the other sex,
who were qualified not only to comprehend what is done or thought by
others, but to think or do something considerable themselves, would meet
with the same facilities for improving and training their capacities in
the one sex as in the other. In this way, the widening of the sphere of
action for women would operate for good, by raising their education to
the level of that of men, and making the one participate in all
improvements made in the other. But independently of this, the mere
breaking down of the barrier would of itself have an educational virtue
of the highest worth. The mere getting rid of the idea that all the
wider subjects of thought and action, all the things which are of
general and not solely of private interest, are men’s business, from
which women are to be warned off—positively interdicted from most of it,
coldly tolerated in the little which is allowed them—the mere
consciousness a woman would then have of being a human being like any
other, entitled to choose her pursuits, urged or invited by the same
inducements as any one else to interest herself in whatever is
interesting to human beings, entitled to exert the share of influence on
all human concerns which belongs to an individual opinion, whether she
attempted actual participation in them or not—this alone would effect an
immense expansion of Edition: current; Page: [362]the faculties of
women, as well as enlargement of the range of their moral sentiments.

Besides the addition to the amount of individual talent available for
the conduct of human affairs, which certainly are not at present so
abundantly provided in that respect that they can afford to dispense
with one-half of what nature proffers; the opinion of women would then
possess a more beneficial, rather than a greater, influence upon the
general mass of human belief and sentiment. I say a more beneficial,
rather than a greater influence; for the influence of women over the
general tone of opinion has always, or at least from the earliest known
period, been very considerable. The influence of mothers on the early
character of their sons, and the desire of young men to recommend
themselves to young women, have in all recorded times been important
agencies in the formation of character, and have determined some of the
chief steps in the progress of civilization. Even in the Homeric age,
αίδώς towards the Τρωάδας ἑλκεσιπέπλους is an acknowledged and powerful
motive of action in the great Hector. The moral influence of women has
had two modes of operation. First, it has been a softening influence.
Those who were most liable to be the victims of violence, have naturally
tended as much as they could towards limiting its sphere and mitigating
Edition: current; Page: [363]its excesses. Those who were not taught to
fight, have naturally inclined in favour of any other mode of settling
differences rather than that of fighting. In general, those who have
been the greatest sufferers by the indulgence of selfish passion, have
been the most earnest supporters of any moral law which offered a means
of bridling passion. Women were powerfully instrumental in inducing the
northern conquerors to adopt the creed of Christianity, a creed so much
more favourable to women than any that preceded it. The conversion of
the Anglo-Saxons and of the Franks may be said to have been begun by the
wives of Ethelbert and Clovis. The other mode in which the effect of
women’s opinion has been conspicuous, is by giving a powerful stimulus
to those qualities in men, which, not being themselves trained in, it
was necessary for them that they should find in their protectors.
Courage, and the military virtues generally, have at all times been
greatly indebted to the desire which men felt of being admired by women:
and the stimulus reaches far beyond this one class of eminent qualities,
since, by a very natural effect of their position, the best passport to
the admiration and favour of women has always been to be thought highly
of by men. From the combination of the two kinds of moral influence thus
exercised by women, arose the spirit Edition: current; Page: [364]of
chivalry: the peculiarity of which is, to aim at combining the highest
standard of the warlike qualities with the cultivation of a totally
different class of virtues—those of gentleness, generosity, and
self-abnegation, towards the non-military and defenceless classes
generally, and a special submission and worship directed towards women;
who were distinguished from the other defenceless classes by the high
rewards which they had it in their power voluntarily to bestow on those
who endeavoured to earn their favour, instead of extorting their
subjection. Though the practice of chivalry fell even more sadly short
of its theoretic standard than practice generally falls below theory, it
remains one of the most precious monuments of the moral history of our
race; as a remarkable instance of a concerted and organized attempt by a
most disorganized and distracted society, to raise up and carry into
practice a moral ideal greatly in advance of its social condition and
institutions; so much so as to have been completely frustrated in the
main object, yet never entirely inefficacious, and which has left a most
sensible, and for the most part a highly valuable impress on the ideas
and feelings of all subsequent times.

The chivalrous ideal is the acme of the influence of women’s sentiments
on the moral cultivation of mankind: and if women are to remain in their
subordinate situation, it were Edition: current; Page: [365]greatly to
be lamented that the chivalrous standard should have passed away, for it
is the only one at all capable of mitigating the demoralizing influences
of that position. But the changes in the general state of the species
rendered inevitable the substitution of a totally different ideal of
morality for the chivalrous one. Chivalry was the attempt to infuse
moral elements into a state of society in which everything depended for
good or evil on individual prowess, under the softening influences of
individual delicacy and generosity. In modern societies, all things,
even in the military department of affairs, are decided, not by
individual effort, but by the combined operations of numbers; while the
main occupation of society has changed from fighting to business, from
military to industrial life. The exigencies of the new life are no more
exclusive of the virtues of generosity than those of the old, but it no
longer entirely depends on them. The main foundations of the moral life
of modern times must be justice and prudence; the respect of each for
the rights of every other, and the ability of each to take care of
himself. Chivalry left without legal check all forms of wrong which
reigned unpunished throughout society; it only encouraged a few to do
right in preference to wrong, by the direction it gave to the
instruments of praise and admiration. But the real dependence Edition:
current; Page: [366]of morality must always be upon its penal
sanctions—its power to deter from evil. The security of society cannot
rest on merely rendering honour to right, a motive so comparatively weak
in all but a few, and which on very many does not operate at all. Modern
society is able to repress wrong through all departments of life, by a
fit exertion of the superior strength which civilization has given it,
and thus to render the existence of the weaker members of society (no
longer defenceless but protected by law) tolerable to them, without
reliance on the chivalrous feelings of those who are in a position to
tyrannize. The beauties and graces of the chivalrous character are still
what they were, but the rights of the weak, and the general comfort of
human life, now rest on a far surer and steadier support; or rather,
they do so in every relation of life except the conjugal.

At present the moral influence of women is no less real, but it is no
longer of so marked and definite a character: it has more nearly merged
in the general influence of public opinion. Both through the contagion
of sympathy, and through the desire of men to shine in the eyes of
women, their feelings have great effect in keeping alive what remains of
the chivalrous ideal—in fostering the sentiments and continuing the
traditious of spirit and generosity. In these Edition: current; Page:
[367]points of character, their standard is higher than that of men; in
the quality of justice, somewhat lower. As regards the relations of
private life it may be said generally, that their influence is, on the
whole, encouraging to the softer virtues, discouraging to the sterner:
though the statement must be taken with all the modifications dependent
on individual character. In the chief of the greater trials to which
virtue is subject in the concerns of life—the conflict between interest
and principle—the tendency of women’s influence is of a very mixed
character. When the principle involved happens to be one of the very few
which the course of their religious or moral education has strongly
impressed upon themselves, they are potent auxiliaries to virtue: and
their husbands and sons are often prompted by them to acts of abnegation
which they never would have been capable of without that stimulus. But,
with the present education and position of women, the moral principles
which have been impressed on them cover but a comparatively small part
of the field of virtue, and are, moreover, principally negative;
forbidding particular acts, but having little to do with the general
direction of the thoughts and purposes. I am afraid it must be said,
that disinterestedness in the general conduct of life—the devotion of
the energies to purposes which hold Edition: current; Page: [368]out no
promise of private advantages to the family—is very seldom encouraged or
supported by women’s influence. It is small blame to them that they
discourage objects of which they have not learnt to see the advantage,
and which withdraw their men from them, and from the interests of the
family. But the consequence is that women’s influence is often anything
but favourable to public virtue.

Women have, however, some share of influence in giving the tone to
public moralities since their sphere of action has been a little
widened, and since a considerable number of them have occupied
themselves practically in the promotion of objects reaching beyond their
own family and household. The influence of women counts for a great deal
in two of the most marked features of modern European life—its aversion
to war, and its addiction to philanthropy. Excellent characteristics
both; but unhappily, if the influence of women is valuable in the
encouragement it gives to these feelings in general, in the particular
applications the direction it gives to them is at least as often
mischievous as useful. In the philanthropic department more
particularly, the two provinces chiefly cultivated by women are
religious proselytism and charity. Religious proselytism at home, is but
another word for embittering of religious animosities: abroad, it is
usually a Edition: current; Page: [369]blind running at an object,
without either knowing or heeding the fatal mischiefs—fatal to the
religious object itself as well as to all other desirable objects—which
may be produced by the means employed. As for charity, it is a matter in
which the immediate effect on the persons directly concerned, and the
ultimate consequence to the general good, are apt to be at complete war
with one another: while the education given to women—an education of the
sentiments rather than of the understanding—and the habit inculcated by
their whole life, of looking to immediate effects on persons, and not to
remote effects on classes of persons—make them both unable to see, and
unwilling to admit, the ultimate evil tendency of any form of charity or
philanthropy which commends itself to their sympathetic feelings. The
great and continually increasing mass of unenlightened and shortsighted
benevolence, which, taking the care of people’s lives out of their own
hands, and relieving them from the disagreeable consequences of their
own acts, saps the very foundations of the self-respect, self-help, and
self-control which are the essential conditions both of individual
prosperity and of social virtue—this waste of resources and of
benevolent feelings in doing harm instead of good, is immensely swelled
by women’s contributions, and stimulated by their influence. Not that
this is Edition: current; Page: [370]a mistake likely to be made by
women, where they have actually the practical management of schemes of
beneficence. It sometimes happens that women who administer public
charities—with that insight into present fact, and especially into the
minds and feelings of those with whom they are in immediate contact, in
which women generally excel men—recognise in the clearest manner the
demoralizing influence of the alms given or the help afforded, and could
give lessons on the subject to many a male political economist. But
women who only give their money, and are not brought face to face with
the effects it produces, how can they be expected to foresee them? A
woman born to the present lot of women, and content with it, how should
she appreciate the value of self-dependence? She is not self-dependent;
she is not taught self-dependence; her destiny is to receive everything
from others, and why should what is good enough for her be bad for the
poor? Her familiar notions of good are of blessings descending from a
superior. She forgets that she is not free, and that the poor are; that
if what they need is given to them unearned, they cannot be compelled to
earn it: that everybody cannot be taken care of by everybody, but there
must be some motive to induce people to take care of themselves; and
that to be helped to help themselves, if they are physically capable
Edition: current; Page: [371]of it, is the only charity which proves to
be charity in the end.

These considerations shew how usefully the part which women take in the
formation of general opinion, would be modified for the better by that
more enlarged instruction, and practical conversancy with the things
which their opinions influence, that would necessarily arise from their
social and political emancipation. But the improvement it would work
through the influence they exercise, each in her own family, would be
still more remarkable.

It is often said that in the classes most exposed to temptation, a man’s
wife and children tend to keep him honest and respectable, both by the
wife’s direct influence, and by the concern he feels for their future
welfare. This may be so, and no doubt often is so, with those who are
more weak than wicked; and this beneficial influence would be preserved
and strengthened under equal laws; it does not depend on the woman’s
servitude, but is, on the contrary, diminished by the disrespect which
the inferior class of men always at heart feel towards those who are
subject to their power. But when we ascend higher in the scale, we come
among a totally different set of moving forces. The wife’s influence
tends, as far as it goes, to prevent the husband from falling below the
common standard Edition: current; Page: [372]of approbation of the
country. It tends quite as strongly to hinder him from rising above it.
The wife is the auxiliary of the common public opinion. A man who is
married to a woman his inferior in intelligence, finds her a perpetual
dead weight, or, worse than a dead weight, a drag, upon every aspiration
of his to be better than public opinion requires him to be. It is hardly
possible for one who is in these bonds, to attain exalted virtue. If he
differs in his opinion from the mass—if he sees truths which have not
yet dawned upon them, or if, feeling in his heart truths which they
nominally recognise, he would like to act up to those truths more
conscientiously than the generality of mankind—to all such thoughts and
desires, marriage is the heaviest of drawbacks, unless he be so
fortunate as to have a wife as much above the common level as he himself
is.

For, in the first place, there is always some sacrifice of personal
interest required; either of social consequence, or of pecuniary means;
perhaps the risk of even the means of subsistence. These sacrifices and
risks he may be willing to encounter for himself; but he will pause
before he imposes them on his family. And his family in this case means
his wife and daughters; for he always hopes that his sons will feel as
he feels himself, and that what he can do without, they Edition:
current; Page: [373]will do without, willingly, in the same cause. But
his daughters—their marriage may depend upon it: and his wife, who is
unable to enter into or understand the objects for which these
sacrifices are made—who, if she thought them worth any sacrifice, would
think so on trust, and solely for his sake—who can participate in none
of the enthusiasm or the self-approbation he himself may feel, while the
things which he is disposed to sacrifice are all in all to her; will not
the best and most unselfish man hesitate the longest before bringing on
her this consequence? If it be not the comforts of life, but only social
consideration, that is at stake, the burthen upon his conscience and
feelings is still very severe. Whoever has a wife and children has given
hostages to Mrs. Grundy. The approbation of that potentate may be a
matter of indifference to him, but it is of great importance to his
wife. The man himself may be above opinion, or may find sufficient
compensation in the opinion of those of his own way of thinking. But to
the women connected with him, he can offer no compensation. The almost
invariable tendency of the wife to place her influence in the same scale
with social consideration, is sometimes made a reproach to women, and
represented as a peculiar trait of feebleness and childishness of
character in them: surely with great injustice. Edition: current; Page:
[374]Society makes the whole life of a woman, in the easy classes, a
continued self-sacrifice; it exacts from her an unremitting restraint of
the whole of her natural inclinations, and the sole return it makes to
her for what often deserves the name of a martyrdom, is consideration.
Her consideration is inseparably connected with that of her husband, and
after paying the full price for it, she finds that she is to lose it,
for no reason of which she can feel the cogency. She has sacrificed her
whole life to it, and her husband will not sacrifice to it a whim, a
freak, an eccentricity; something not recognised or allowed for by the
world, and which the world will agree with her in thinking a folly, if
it thinks no worse! The dilemma is hardest upon that very meritorious
class of men, who, without possessing talents which qualify them to make
a figure among those with whom they agree in opinion, hold their opinion
from conviction, and feel bound in honour and conscience to serve it, by
making profession of their belief, and giving their time, labour, and
means, to anything undertaken in its behalf. The worst case of all is
when such men happen to be of a rank and position which of itself
neither gives them, nor excludes them from, what is considered the best
society; when their admission to it depends mainly on what is thought of
them personally — and however unexceptionable Edition: current; Page:
[375]their breeding and habits, their being identified with opinions and
public conduct unacceptable to those who give the tone to society would
operate as an effectual exclusion. Many a woman flatters herself (nine
times out of ten quite erroneously) that nothing prevents her and her
husband from moving in the highest society of her neighbourhood—society
in which others well known to her, and in the same class of life, mix
freely—except that her husband is unfortunately a Dissenter, or has the
reputation of mingling in low radical politics. That it is, she thinks,
which hinders George from getting a commission or a place, Caroline from
making an advantageous match, and prevents her and her husband from
obtaining invitations, perhaps honours, which, for aught she sees, they
are as well entitled to as some folks. With such an influence in every
house, either exerted actively, or operating all the more powerfully for
not being asserted, is it any wonder that people in general are kept
down in that mediocrity of respectability which is becoming a marked
characteristic of modern times?

There is another very injurious aspect in which the effect, not of
women’s disabilities directly, but of the broad line of difference which
those disabilities create between the education and character of a woman
and that of a man, requires to Edition: current; Page: [376]be
considered. Nothing can be more unfavourable to that union of thoughts
and inclinations which is the ideal of married life. Intimate society
between people radically dissimilar to one another, is an idle dream.
Unlikeness may attract, but it is likeness which retains; and in
proportion to the likeness is the suitability of the individuals to give
each other a happy life. While women are so unlike men, it is not
wonderful that selfish men should feel the need of arbitrary power in
their own hands, to arrest in limine the life-long conflict of
inclinations, by deciding every question on the side of their own
preference. When people are extremely unlike, there can be no real
identity of interest. Very often there is conscientious difference of
opinion between married people, on the highest points of duty. Is there
any reality in the marriage union where this takes place? Yet it is not
uncommon anywhere, when the woman has any earnestness of character; and
it is a very general case indeed in Catholic countries, when she is
supported in her dissent by the only other authority to which she is
taught to bow, the priest. With the usual barefacedness of power not
accustomed to find itself disputed, the influence of priests over women
is attacked by Protestant and Liberal writers, less for being bad in
itself, than because it is a rival authority to the husband, and raises
up a revolt against his infallibility. Edition: current; Page: [377]In
England, similar differences occasionally exist when an Evangelical wife
has allied herself with a husband of a different quality; but in general
this source at least of dissension is got rid of, by reducing the minds
of women to such a nullity, that they have no opinions but those of Mrs.
Grundy, or those which the husband tells them to have. When there is no
difference of opinion, differences merely of taste may be sufficient to
detract greatly from the happiness of married life. And though it may
stimulate the amatory propensities of men, it does not conduce to
married happiness, to exaggerate by differences of education whatever
may be the native differences of the sexes. If the married pair are
well-bred and well-behaved people, they tolerate each other’s tastes;
but is mutual toleration what people look forward to, when they enter
into marriage? These differences of inclination will naturally make
their wishes different, if not restrained by affection or duty, as to
almost all domestic questions which arise. What a difference there must
be in the society which the two persons will wish to frequent, or be
frequented by! Each will desire associates who share their own tastes:
the persons agreeable to one, will be indifferent or positively
disagreeable to the other; yet there can be none who are not common to
both, for married people do not now live in different Edition: current;
Page: [378]parts of the house and have totally different visiting lists,
as in the reign of Louis XV. They cannot help having different wishes as
to the bringing up of the children: each will wish to see reproduced in
them their own tastes and sentiments: and there is either a compromise,
and only a half-satisfaction to either, or the wife has to yield—often
with bitter suffering; and, with or without intention, her occult
influence continues to counterwork the husband’s purposes.

It would of course be extreme folly to suppose that these differences of
feeling and inclination only exist because women are brought up
differently from men, and that there would not be differences of taste
under any imaginable circumstances. But there is nothing beyond the mark
in saying that the distinction in bringing-up immensely aggravates those
differences, and renders them wholly inevitable. While women are brought
up as they are, a man and a woman will but rarely find in one another
real agreement of tastes and wishes as to daily life. They will
generally have to give it up as hopeless, and renounce the attempt to
have, in the intimate associate of their daily life, that idem velle,
idem nolle, which is the recognised bond of any society that is really
such: or if the man succeeds in obtaining it, he does so by choosing a
woman who is so complete a nullity that she has no Edition: current;
Page: [379]velle or nolle at all, and is as ready to comply with one
thing as another if anybody tells her to do so. Even this calculation is
apt to fail; dulness and want of spirit are not always a guarantee of
the submission which is so confidently expected from them. But if they
were, is this the ideal of marriage? What, in this case, does the man
obtain by it, except an upper servant, a nurse, or a mistress? On the
contrary, when each of two persons, instead of being a nothing, is a
something; when they are attached to one another, and are not too much
unlike to begin with; the constant partaking in the same things,
assisted by their sympathy, draws out the latent capacities of each for
being interested in the things which were at first interesting only to
the other; and works a gradual assimilation of the tastes and characters
to one another, partly by the insensible modification of each, but more
by a real enriching of the two natures, each acquiring the tastes and
capacities of the other in addition to its own. This often happens
between two friends of the same sex, who are much associated in their
daily life: and it would be a common, if not the commonest, case in
marriage, did not the totally different bringing-up of the two sexes
make it next to an impossibility to form a really well-assorted union.
Were this remedied, whatever differences there might still Edition:
current; Page: [380]be in individual tastes, there would at least be, as
a general rule, complete unity and unanimity as to the great objects of
life. When the two persons both care for great objects, and are a help
and encouragement to each other in whatever regards these, the minor
matters on which their tastes may differ are not all-important to them;
and there is a foundation for solid friendship, of an enduring
character, more likely than anything else to make it, through the whole
of life, a greater pleasure to each to give pleasure to the other, than
to receive it.

I have considered, thus far, the effects on the pleasures and benefits
of the marriage union which depend on the mere unlikeness between the
wife and the husband: but the evil tendency is prodigiously aggravated
when the unlikeness is inferiority. Mere unlikeness, when it only means
difference of good qualities, may be more a benefit in the way of mutual
improvement, than a drawback from comfort. When each emulates, and
desires and endeavours to acquire, the other’s peculiar qualities, the
difference does not produce diversity of interest, but increased
identity of it, and makes each still more valuable to the other. But
when one is much the inferior of the two in mental ability and
cultivation, and is not actively attempting by the other’s aid to rise
to the other’s level, the whole influence of the connexion upon Edition:
current; Page: [381]the development of the superior of the two is
deteriorating: and still more so in a tolerably happy marriage than in
an unhappy one. It is not with impunity that the superior in intellect
shuts himself up with an inferior, and elects that inferior for his
chosen, and sole completely intimate, associate. Any society which is
not improving, is deteriorating: and the more so, the closer and more
familiar it is. Even a really superior man almost always begins to
deteriorate when he is habitually (as the phrase is) king of his
company: and in his most habitual company the husband who has a wife
inferior to him is always so. While his self-satisfaction is incessantly
ministered to on the one hand, on the other he insensibly imbibes the
modes of feeling, and of looking at things, which belong to a more
vulgar or a more limited mind than his own. This evil differs from many
of those which have hitherto been dwelt on, by being an increasing one.
The association of men with women in daily life is much closer and more
complete than it ever was before. Men’s life is more domestic. Formerly,
their pleasures and chosen occupations were among men, and in men’s
company: their wives had but a fragment of their lives. At the present
time, the progress of civilization, and the turn of opinion against the
rough amusements and convivial excesses which formerly occupied most men
Edition: current; Page: [382]in their hours of relaxation—together with
(it must be said) the improved tone of modern feeling as to the
reciprocity of duty which binds the husband towards the wife—have thrown
the man very much more upon home and its inmates, for his personal and
social pleasures: while the kind and degree of improvement which has
been made in women’s education, has made them in some degree capable of
being his companions in ideas and mental tastes, while leaving them, in
most cases, still hopelessly inferior to him. His desire of mental
communion is thus in general satisfied by a communion from which he
learns nothing. An unimproving and unstimulating companionship is
substituted for (what he might otherwise have been obliged to seek) the
society of his equals in powers and his fellows in the higher pursuits.
We see, accordingly, that young men of the greatest promise generally
cease to improve as soon as they marry, and, not improving, inevitably
degenerate. If the wife does not push the husband forward, she always
holds him back. He ceases to care for what she does not care for; he no
longer desires, and ends by disliking and shunning, society congenial to
his former aspirations, and which would now shame his falling-off from
them; his higher faculties both of mind and heart cease to be called
into activity. And this change coinciding with the new and Edition:
current; Page: [383]selfish interests which are created by the family,
after a few years he differs in no material respect from those who have
never had wishes for anything but the common vanities and the common
pecuniary objects.

What marriage may be in the case of two persons of cultivated faculties,
identical in opinions and purposes, between whom there exists that best
kind of equality, similarity of powers and capacities with reciprocal
superiority in them—so that each can enjoy the luxury of looking up to
the other, and can have alternately the pleasure of leading and of being
led in the path of development—I will not attempt to describe. To those
who can conceive it, there is no need; to those who cannot, it would
appear the dream of an enthusiast. But I maintain, with the profoundest
conviction, that this, and this only, is the ideal of marriage; and that
all opinions, customs, and institutions which favour any other notion of
it, or turn the conceptions and aspirations connected with it into any
other direction, by whatever pretences they may be coloured, are relics
of primitive barbarism. The moral regeneration of mankind will only
really commence, when the most fundamental of the social relations is
placed under the rule of equal justice, and when human beings learn to
cultivate their strongest sympathy with an equal in rights and in
cultivation.

Edition: current; Page: [384]
Thus far, the benefits which it has appeared that the world would gain
by ceasing to make sex a disqualification for privileges and a badge of
subjection, are social rather than individual; consisting in an increase
of the general fund of thinking and acting power, and an improvement in
the general conditions of the association of men with women. But it
would be a grievous understatement of the case to omit the most direct
benefit of all, the unspeakable gain in private happiness to the
liberated half of the species; the difference to them between a life of
subjection to the will of others, and a life of rational freedom. After
the primary necessities of food and raiment, freedom is the first and
strongest want of human nature. While mankind are lawless, their desire
is for lawless freedom. When they have learnt to understand the meaning
of duty and the value of reason, they incline more and more to be guided
and restrained by these in the exercise of their freedom; but they do
not therefore desire freedom less; they do not become disposed to accept
the will of other people as the representative and interpreter of those
guiding principles. On the contrary, the communities in which the reason
has been most cultivated, and in which the idea of social duty has been
most powerful, are those which have most strongly asserted the freedom
Edition: current; Page: [385]of action of the individual—the liberty of
each to govern his conduct by his own feelings of duty, and by such laws
and social restraints as his own conscience can subscribe to.

He who would rightly appreciate the worth of personal independence as an
element of happiness, should consider the value he himself puts upon it
as an ingredient of his own. There is no subject on which there is a
greater habitual difference of judgment between a man judging for
himself, and the same man judging for other people. When he hears others
complaining that they are not allowed freedom of action—that their own
will has not sufficient influence in the regulation of their affairs—his
inclination is, to ask, what are their grievances? what positive damage
they sustain? and in what respect they consider their affairs to be
mismanaged? and if they fail to make out, in answer to these questions,
what appears to him a sufficient case, he turns a deaf ear, and regards
their complaint as the fanciful querulousness of people whom nothing
reasonable will satisfy. But he has a quite different standard of
judgment when he is deciding for himself. Then, the most unexceptionable
administration of his interests by a tutor set over him, does not
satisfy his feelings: his personal exclusion from the deciding authority
appears itself the greatest grievance of all, rendering it superfluous
even to Edition: current; Page: [386]enter into the question of
mismanagement. It is the same with nations. What citizen of a free
country would listen to any offers of good and skilful administration,
in return for the abdication of freedom? Even if he could believe that
good and skilful administration can exist among a people ruled by a will
not their own, would not the consciousness of working out their own
destiny under their own moral responsibility be a compensation to his
feelings for great rudeness and imperfection in the details of public
affairs? Let him rest assured that whatever he feels on this point,
women feel in a fully equal degree. Whatever has been said or written,
from the time of Herodotus to the present, of the ennobling influence of
free government—the nerve and spring which it gives to all the
faculties, the larger and higher objects which it presents to the
intellect and feelings, the more unselfish public spirit, and calmer and
broader views of duty, that it engenders, and the generally loftier
platform on which it elevates the individual as a moral, spiritual, and
social being — is every particle as true of women as of men. Are these
things no important part of individual happiness? Let any man call to
mind what he himself felt on emerging from bodyhood—from the tutelage
and control of even loved and affectionate elders—and entering upon the
responsibilities of manhood. Edition: current; Page: [387]Was it not
like the physical effect of taking off a heavy weight, or releasing him
from obstructive, even if not otherwise painful, bonds? Did he not feel
twice as much alive, twice as much a human being, as before? And does he
imagine that women have none of these feelings? But it is a striking
fact, that the satisfactions and mortifications of personal pride,
though all in all to most men when the case is their own, have less
allowance made for them in the case of other people, and are less
listened to as a ground or a justification of conduct, than any other
natural human feelings; perhaps because men compliment them in their own
case with the names of so many other qualities, that they are seldom
conscious how mighty an influence these feelings exercise in their own
lives. No less large and powerful is their part, we may assure
ourselves, in the lives and feelings of women. Women are schooled into
suppressing them in their most natural and most healthy direction, but
the internal principle remains, in a different outward form. An active
and energetic mind, if denied liberty, will seek for power: refused the
command of itself, it will assert its personality by attempting to
control others. To allow to any human beings no existence of their own
but what depends on others, is giving far too high a premium on bending
others to their purposes. Edition: current; Page: [388]Where liberty
cannot be hoped for and power can, power becomes the grand object of
human desire; those to whom others will not leave the undisturbed
management of their own affairs, will compensate themselves, if they
can, by meddling for their own purposes with the affairs of others.
Hence also women’s passion for personal beauty, and dress and display;
and all the evils that flow from it, in the way of mischievous luxury
and social immorality. The love of power and the love of liberty are in
eternal antagonism. Where there is least liberty, the passion for power
is the most ardent and unscrupulous. The desire of power over others can
only cease to be a depraving agency among mankind, when each of them
individually is able to do without it: which can only be where respect
for liberty in the personal concerns of each is an established
principle.

But it is not only through the sentiment of personal dignity, that the
free direction and disposal of their own faculties is a source of
individual happiness, and to be fettered and restricted in it, a source
of unhappiness, to human beings, and not least to women. There is
nothing, after disease, indigence, and guilt, so fatal to the
pleasurable enjoyment of life as the want of a worthy outlet for the
active faculties. Women who have the cares of a family, and while they
have the cares of a family, have this outlet, and it generally Edition:
current; Page: [389]suffices for them: but what of the greatly
increasing number of women, who have had no opportunity of exercising
the vocation which they are mocked by telling them is their proper one?
What of the women whose children have been lost to them by death or
distance, or have grown up, married, and formed homes of their own?
There are abundant examples of men who, after a life engrossed by
business, retire with a competency to the enjoyment, as they hope, of
rest, but to whom, as they are unable to acquire new interests and
excitements that can replace the old, the change to a life of inactivity
brings ennui, melancholy, and premature death. Yet no one thinks of the
parallel case of so many worthy and devoted women, who, having paid what
they are told is their debt to society—having brought up a family
blamelessly to manhood and womanhood—having kept a house as long as they
had a house needing to be kept—are deserted by the sole occupation for
which they have fitted themselves; and remain with undiminished activity
but with no employment for it, unless perhaps a daughter or
daughter-in-law is willing to abdicate in their favour the discharge of
the same functions in her younger household. Surely a hard lot for the
old age of those who have worthily discharged, as long as it was given
to them to discharge, what the world accounts their only Edition:
current; Page: [390]social duty. Of such women, and of those others to
whom this duty has not been committed at all—many of whom pine through
life with the consciousness of thwarted vocations, and activities which
are not suffered to expand—the only resources, speaking generally, are
religion and charity. But their religion, though it may be one of
feeling, and of ceremonial observance, cannot be a religion of action,
unless in the form of charity. For charity many of them are by nature
admirably fitted; but to practise it usefully, or even without doing
mischief, requires the education, the manifold preparation, the
knowledge and the thinking powers, of a skilful administrator. There are
few of the administrative functions of government for which a person
would not be fit, who is fit to bestow charity usefully. In this as in
other cases (pre-eminently in that of the education of children), the
duties permitted to women cannot be performed properly, without their
being trained for duties which, to the great loss of society, are not
permitted to them. And here let me notice the singular way in which the
question of women’s disabilities is frequently presented to view, by
those who find it easier to draw a ludicrous picture of what they do not
like, than to answer the arguments for it. When it is suggested that
women’s executive capacities and prudent counsels might sometimes
Edition: current; Page: [391]be found valuable in affairs of state,
these lovers of fun hold up to the ridicule of the world, as sitting in
parliament or in the cabinet, girls in their teens, or young wives of
two or three and twenty, transported bodily, exactly as they are, from
the drawing-room to the House of Commons. They forget that males are not
usually selected at this early age for a seat in Parliament, or for
responsible political functions. Common sense would tell them that if
such trusts were confided to women, it would be to such as having no
special vocation for married life, or preferring another employment of
their faculties (as many women even now prefer to marriage some of the
few honourable occupations within their reach), have spent the best
years of their youth in attempting to qualify themselves for the
pursuits in which they desire to engage; or still more frequently
perhaps, widows or wives of forty or fifty, by whom the knowledge of
life and faculty of government which they have acquired in their
families, could by the aid of appropriate studies be made available on a
less contracted scale. There is no country of Europe in which the ablest
men have not frequently experienced, and keenly appreciated, the value
of the advice and help of clever and experienced women of the world, in
the attainment both of private and of public objects; and Edition:
current; Page: [392]there are important matters of public administration
to which few men are equally competent with such women; among others,
the detailed control of expenditure. But what we are now discussing is
not the need which society has of the services of women in public
business, but the dull and hopeless life to which it so often condemns
them, by forbidding them to exercise the practical abilities which many
of them are conscious of, in any wider field than one which to some of
them never was, and to others is no longer, open. If there is anything
vitally important to the happiness of human beings, it is that they
should relish their habitual pursuit. This requisite of an enjoyable
life is very imperfectly granted, or altogether denied, to a large part
of mankind; and by its absence many a life is a failure, which is
provided, in appearance, with every requisite of success. But if
circumstances which society is not yet skilful enough to overcome,
render such failures often for the present inevitable, society need not
itself inflict them. The injudiciousness of parents, a youth’s own
inexperience, or the absence of external opportunities for the congenial
vocation, and their presence for an uncongenial, condemn numbers of men
to pass their lives in doing one thing reluctantly and ill, when there
are other things which they could have done well and happily. But on
Edition: current; Page: [393]women this sentence is imposed by actual
law, and by customs equivalent to law. What, in unenlightened societies,
colour, race, religion, or in the case of a conquered country,
nationality, are to some men, sex is to all women; a peremptory
exclusion from almost all honourable occupations, but either such as
cannot be fulfilled by others, or such as those others do not think
worthy of their acceptance. Sufferings arising from causes of this
nature usually meet with so little sympathy, that few persons are aware
of the great amount of unhappiness even now produced by the feeling of a
wasted life. The case will be even more frequent, as increased
cultivation creates a greater and greater disproportion between the
ideas and faculties of women, and the scope which society allows to
their activity.

When we consider the positive evil caused to the disqualified half of
the human race by their disqualification—first in the loss of the most
inspiriting and elevating kind of personal enjoyment, and next in the
weariness, disappointment, and profound dissatisfaction with life, which
are so often the substitute for it; one feels that among all the lessons
which men require for carrying on the struggle against the inevitable
imperfections of their lot on earth, there is no lesson which they more
need, than not to add to the evils which nature inflicts, by their
jealous Edition: current; Page: [394]and prejudiced restrictions on one
another. Their vain fears only substitute other and worse evils for
those which they are idly apprehensive of: while every restraint on the
freedom of conduct of any of their human fellow creatures, (otherwise
than by making them responsible for any evil actually caused by it),
dries up pro tanto the principal fountain of human happiness, and leaves
the species less rich, to an inappreciable degree, in all that makes
life valuable to the individual human being.

the end.

Edition: current; Page: [none]


PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CO.

BRINTON’S (D. G.) WORKS. The Myths of the New World. A Treatise on the
Symbolism and Mythology of the Red Race of America. Second edition,
large 12mo, $2.50. Large-paper (first) edition. $6.00.

“The philosophical spirit in which it is written is deserving of
unstinted praise, and justifies the belief that in whatever Dr. Brinton
may in future contribute to the literature of Comparative Mythology, he
will continue to reflect credit upon himself and his country.”

—N. A. Review.

The Religious Sentiment, its Source and Aim. A contribution to the
science and philosophy of religion. Large 12mo. $2.50.

CONWAY’S (M. D.) Sacred Anthology. 12mo. $2.00.

“He deserves our hearty thanks for the trouble he has taken in
collecting these gems, and stringing them together for the use of those
who have no access to the originals, and we trust that his book will
arouse a more general interest in a long-neglected and even despised
branch of literature, the Sacred Books of the East.”

—Prof. Max Muller.

DEUTSCH’S (E.) LITERARY REMAINS. With a Brief Memoir. 8vo. $4.00.

Contents:—The Talmud—Islam—Egypt. Ancient and Modern—Hermes
Trismegistus—Judeo-Arabic Metaphysics—Semitic Palæography—Renan’s “Les
Apôtres”—Worship of Baalim in Israel—The Œcumenical Council—Apostolicæ
Sedes?—Roman Passion Drama—Semitic Languages—Samaritan Pentateuch—The
Targums—Book of Jashar—Arabic Poetry.

“A noble monument of study and erudition.”

—N. Y. Tribune.

GOULD’S (REV. S. B.) LEGENDS of the PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS. Crown 8vo.
$2.00.

“There are few Bible readers who have not at some time wished for just
such a volume.”

—Congregationalist.

HAWEIS’ (REV. H. R.) THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES. Sermons by the author of
“Music and Morals.” 12mo. $1.50.

“They have a special interest as exhibiting the treatment which
old-fashioned orthodoxy is just now undergoing at the hands of the
liberal clergy.

—Pall Mall Gazette.

MARTINEAU’S (JAMES) WORKS.

Essays, Theological and Philosophical. 2 vols. 8vo. $5.00.

Mr. Martineau’s contributions to the Prospective, Westminster, National,
and other Reviews attracted the attention of the best minds in both
England and America, and produced a marked and favorable impression upon
men of all denominations.

The New Affinities of Faith. 12mo, paper. 25 cents.

STRAUSS’ (D. F.) THE OLD FAITH AND THE NEW. 12mo. $2.00.

“Will make its mark upon the time, not so much as an attack upon what we
venerate as an apology for those who honestly differ from the majority
of their brothers.”

—Atlantic Monthly.

TYLOR’S (E. B.) PRIMITIVE CULTURE: Researches into the Development of
Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Art, and Custom. 2 vols., 8vo. $5.00.

“One of the most remarkable and interesting books of the present day. .
. . It takes up man . . . at the remotest periods of which we have any
knowledge, and traces his intellectual growth . . . from that time
forth. . . Admirably written, often with great humor, and at times with
eloquence, and never with a dull line.”

—Atlantic Monthly.

“One of the few erudite treatises which are at once truly great and
thoroughly entertaining.”

—North American Review.

TYLOR’S (E. B.) RESEARCHES INTO THE EARLY HISTORY OF MANKIND and the
Development of Civilization, 8vo. $3.50.

Edition: current; Page: [none]
ADAMS’ (PROF. C. K.) DEMOCRACY AND MONARCHY IN FRANCE, from the
Inception of the Great Revolution to the Overthrow of the Second Empire.
By Prof. C. K. Adams, of the University of Michigan. Large 12mo. Cloth,
$2.50.

“A valuable example of the scientific mode of dealing with political
problems.”

—Nation.

“Full of shrewd and suggestive criticism, and few readers will peruse it
without gaining new ideas on the subject.”

—London Saturday Review.

“Remarkably lucid writing.”

—London Academy.

CHESNEY’S (C. C.) MILITARY BIOGRAPHY. Essays in Military Biography. By
Charles Cornwallis Chesney, Colonel in the British Army,
Lieutenant-Colonel in the Royal Engineers. Large 12mo. $2.50.

“Very able.”

—Nation.

“Uncommonly entertaining and instructive.”

—N. Y. Evening Post.

“Full of interest, not only to the professional soldier, but to the
general reader.”

—Boston Globe.

FAMILY RECORD ALBUM. In Blanks classified on a New System. Large quarto,
gilt edges, 328 pages. Cloth, $5. Half Morocco, $8. Full Morocco, $15.
Levant or Russia, $25.

This Book for keeping family records has been made because the editor
felt the need of it and supposed that many others felt the same need.

The pages are of eight kinds, called respectively Family, Genealogical,
Tabular, Biographical Heirloom, Domestic Economy, Travel, and
Miscellaneous.

FREEMAN’S (EDWARD A.) HISTORICAL COURSE. A series of historical works on
a plan entirely different from that of any before published for the
general reader or educational purposes. It embodies the results of the
latest scholarship in comparative philology, mythology, and the
philosophy of history. Uniform volumes. 16mo.

1. General Sketch of History. By Edward A. Freeman, D.C.L. 16mo. $1.40.

2. History of England. By Miss Edith Thompson. $1.00.

3. History of Scotland. By Margaret Macarthur. $1.00.

4. History of Italy. By Rev. W. Hunt, M. A. $1.00.

5. History of Germany. By James Sime. $1.00.

6. History of the United States. By J. A. Doyle. With Maps by Francis A.
Walker, Prof. in Yale College. $1.25.

7. History of France. By Rev. J. R. Green. (In preparation.)

8. History of Greece. By J. Annan Bryce. (In preparation.)

“Useful not only for school study, but for the library.”

—Boston Advertiser.

STAHR’S (ADOLPH) THE LIFE AND WORKS OF GOTTHOLD EPHRAIM LESSING. From
the German of Adolph Stahr. By E. P. Evans, Ph.D. 2 vols. 8vo. $5.00.

“A work of permanent value. It is the best of the many books which have
been written and compiled for the purpose of portraying the character
and career of one of the most illustrious scholars and thinkers that
even Germany has ever produced.”

—Nation.

Edition: current; Page: [none]
GAUTIER’S (THEOPHILE) WORKS. A Winter in Russia. Translated from the
French by M. M. Ripley. 12mo. $1.75.

“The book is a charming one, and nothing approaching it in merit has
been written on the outward face of things in Russia.”

—Nation.

“We do not remember when we have taken up a more fascinating book.”

—Boston Gazette.

Constantinople. Translated from the French by Robert Howe Gould, M. A.
12mo. $1.75.

“It is never too late in the day to reproduce the sparkling descriptions
and acute reflections of so brilliant a master of style as the present
author.”

—N. Y. Tribune.

JONES’ (C. H.) AFRICA: the History of Exploration and Adventure as given
in the leading authorities from Herodotus to Livingstone. By C. H.
Jones. With Map and Illustrations. 8vo. $5.00.

“A cyclopædia of African exploration, and a useful substitute in the
library for the whole list of costly original works on that subject.”

—Boston Advertiser.

“This volume contains the quintessence of a whole library. . . . What
makes it peculiarly valuable is its combination of so much material
which is inaccessible to the general reader. The excellent map, showing
the routes of the leading explorers, and the numerous illustrations
increase the value and interest of the book.”

—Boston Globe.

MORELET’S (ARTHUR) TRAVELS IN CENTRAL AMERICA. Including Accounts of
some Regions Unexplored since the Conquest. Introduction and Notes by E.
Geo. Squier. Post 8vo. Illus. $2.00.

“One of the most interesting books of travel we have read for a long
time. . . . His descriptions are evidently truthful, as he seems
penetrated with true scientific spirit.”

—Nation.

PUMPELLY’S (R.) AMERICA AND ASIA. Notes of a Five Years’ Journey Around
the World, and of Residence in Arizona, Japan and China. By Raphael
Pumpelly, Professor in Harvard University, and some time Mining Engineer
in the employ of the Chinese and Japanese Governments. With maps,
woodcuts, and lithographic facsimiles of Japanese color-printing. Fine
edition, royal 8vo, tinted paper, gilt side, $5.00. Cheap edition, post
8vo, plain, $2.50.

“One of the most interesting books of travel we have ever read . . . We
have great admiration of the book, and feel great respect for the author
for his intelligence, humanity, manliness, and philosophic spirit, which
are conspicuous throughout his writings.”

—Nation.

“Crowded with entertainment and instruction. A careful reading of it
will give more real acquaintance with both the physical geography and
the ethnology of the northern temperate regions of both hemispheres than
perhaps any other book in existence.”

—N. Y. Evening Post.

STILLMAN’S (W. J.) CRETAN INSURRECTION OF 1866–7–8. By W. J. Stillman,
late U. S. Consul in Crete. 12mo. $1.50.

WHIST (SHORT WHIST). Edited by J. L. Baldwin. The Standard adopted by
the London Clubs. And a Treatise on the Game, by J. C. 18mo,
appropriately decorated, $1.00.

“Having been for thirty-six years a player and lover of the game, we
commend the book to a beginner desirous of playing well.”

—Boston Commonwealth.

*
These words had scarcely been written, when, as if to give them an
emphatic contradiction, occurred the Government Press Prosecutions of
1858. That ill-judged interference with the liberty of public discussion
has not, however, induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has
it at all weakened my conviction that, moments of panic excepted, the
era of pains and penalties for political discussion has, in our own
country, passed away. For, in the first place, the prosecutions were not
persisted in; and, in the second, they were never, properly speaking,
political prosecutions. The offence charged was not that of criticizing
institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but of circulating what
was deemed an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of Tyrannicide.

If the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there ought
to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter
of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be
considered. It would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to
examine here, whether the doctrine of Tyrannicide deserves that title. I
shall content myself with saying, that the subject has been at all times
one of the open questions of morals; that the act of a private citizen
in striking down a criminal, who, by raising himself above the law, has
placed himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, has been
accounted by whole nations, and by some of the best and wisest of men,
not a crime, but an act of exalted virtue; and that, right or wrong, it
is not of the nature of assassination, but of civil war. As such, I hold
that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a proper subject
of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a
probable connection can be established between the act and the
instigation. Even then, it is not a foreign government, but the very
government assailed, which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can
legitimately punish attacks directed against its own existence.

*
Thomas Pooley, Bodmin Assizes, July 31, 1857. In December following, he
received a free pardon from the Crown.

†
George Jacob Holyoake, August 17, 1857; Edward Truelove, July, 1857.

‡
Baron de Gleichen, Marlborough Street Police Court, August 4, 1857.

*
Ample warning may be drawn from the large infusion of the passions of a
persecutor, which mingled with the general display of the worst parts of
our national character on the occasion of the Sepoy insurrection. The
ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may be unworthy of
notice; but the heads of the Evangelical party have announced as their
principle, for the government of Hindoos and Mahomedans, that no schools
be supported by public money in which the Bible is not taught, and by
necessary consequence that no public employment be given to any but real
or pretended Christians. An Under-Secretary of State, in a speech
delivered to his constituents on the 12th of November, 1857, is reported
to have said: “Toleration of their faith” (the faith of a hundred
millions of British subjects), “the superstition which they called
religion, by the British Government, had had the effect of retarding the
ascendency of the British name, and preventing the salutary growth of
Christianity. . . . Toleration was the great corner-stone of the
religious liberties of this country; but do not let them abuse that
precious word toleration. As he understood it, it meant the complete
liberty to all, freedom of worship, among Christians, who worshipped
upon the same foundation. It meant toleration of all sects and
denominations of Christians who believed in the one mediation.” I desire
to call attention to the fact, that a man who has been deemed fit to
fill a high office in the government of this country, under a liberal
Ministry, maintains the doctrine that all who do not believe in the
divinity of Christ are beyond the pale of toleration. Who, after this
imbecile display can indulge the illusion that religious persecution has
passed away never to return?

*
The Sphere and Duties of Government, from the German of Baron Wilhelm
von Humboldt, pp. 11-13.

*
Sterling’s Essays.

*
There is something both contemptible and frightful in the sort of
evidence on which, of late years, any person can be judicially declared
unfit for the management of his affairs; and after his death, his
disposal of his property can be set aside, if there is enough of it to
pay the expenses of litigation — which are charged on the property
itself. All the minute details of his daily life are pried into, and
whatever is found which, seen through the medium of the perceiving and
describing faculties of the lowest of the low, bears an appearance
unlike absolute commonplace, is laid before the jury as evidence of
insanity, and often with success; the jurors being little, if at all,
less vulgar and ignorant than the witnesses; while the judges, with that
extraordinary want of knowledge of human nature and life which
continually astonishes us in English lawyers, often help to mislead
them. These trials speak volumes as to the state of feeling and opinion
among the vulgar with regard to human liberty. So far from setting any
value on individuality — so far from respecting the rights of each
individual to act, in things indifferent, as seems good to his own
judgment and inclinations, judges and juries cannot even conceive that a
person in a state of sanity can desire such freedom. In former days,
when it was proposed to burn atheists, charitable people used to suggest
putting them in a madhouse instead: it would be nothing surprising
now-a-days were we to see this done, and the doers applauding
themselves, because, instead of persecuting for religion, they had
adopted so humane and Christian a mode of treating these unfortunates,
not without a silent satisfaction at their having thereby obtained their
deserts.

*
The case of the Bombay Parsees is a curious instance in point. When this
industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the Persian
fire-worshippers, flying from their native country before the Caliphs,
arrived in Western India, they were admitted to toleration by the Hindoo
sovereigns, on condition of not eating beef. When those regions
afterwards fell under the dominion of Mahomedan conquerors, the Parsees
obtained from them a continuance of indulgence, on condition of
refraining from pork. What was at first obedience to authority became a
second nature, and the Parsees to this day abstain both from beef and
pork. Though not required by their religion, the double abstinence has
had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and custom, in the East,
is a religion.

*
Title-page of Mme. de Stael’s “Delphine.”

*
Especially is this true if we take into consideration Asia as well as
Europe. If a Hindoo principality is strongly, vigilantly, and
economically governed; if order is preserved without oppression; if
cultivation is extending, and the people prosperous, in three cases out
of four that principality is under a woman’s rule. This fact, to me an
entirely unexpected one, I have collected from a long official knowledge
of Hindoo governments. There are many such instances: for though, by
Hindoo institutions, a woman cannot reign, she is the legal regent of a
kingdom during the minority of the heir; and minorities are frequent,
the lives of the male rulers being so often prematurely terminated
through the effect of inactivity and sensual excesses. When we consider
that these princesses have never been seen in public, have never
conversed with any man not of their own family except from behind a
curtain, that they do not read, and if they did, there is no book in
their languages which can give them the smallest instruction on
political affairs; the example they afford of the natural capacity of
women for government is very striking.

*
“It appears to be the same right turn of mind which enables a man to
acquire the truth, or the just idea of what is right, in the ornaments,
as in the more stable principles of art. It has still the same centre of
perfection, though it is the centre of a smaller circle.—To illustrate
this by the fashion of dress, in which there is allowed to be a good or
bad taste. The component parts of dress are continually changing from
great to little, from short to long; but the general form still remains:
it is still the same general dress which is comparatively fixed, though
on a very slender foundation; but it is on this which fashion must rest.
He who invents with the most success, or dresses in the best taste,
would probably, from the same sagacity employed to greater purposes,
have discovered equal skill, or have formed the same correct taste, in
the highest labours of art.”—Sir Joshua Reynolds’ Discourses, Disc. vii.


