Trade with India

on the 15th may,* Mr. Wolryche Whitmore moved for a Committee to inquire
into the trade between Great Britain and India. Mr. Whitmore rested his
demand for investigation upon a specification of grievances; among which
he insisted chiefly upon the inequality of the duties on East India and
on West India produce; the impediments which, as he affirmed, the East
India Company were accused of throwing in the way of private merchants
trading to the East Indies; and lastly, the commercial restrictions,
which he seemed to suppose existed at Singapore, and other “emporia in
the Eastern Archipelago.”1

On the first of these topics, the discriminating duties on East India
produce, our opinion has been already given. The subject was plainly
treated, in the course of the debate, by Mr. William Smith; who placed
the advocates of these duties in a dilemma from which they cannot
possibly escape.2 If the duties were equalized, the taxed commodities
either could, or could not, be obtained at less cost from the East
Indies than from the West. If they could, the discriminating duties are
a tax on the people of England, to enable the West Indians to carry on
what is, or would otherwise be, a losing business, by means of slave
labour. If not, the duties are meant for no purpose except to ward off a
danger which does not exist: they ought, therefore, to be repealed, were
it for no other reason but because animosities are engendered, and
valuable time wasted, by the agitation of the question from year to
year.

The complaints of Mr. Whitmore against the East India Company, it is
impossible to decide upon without a full inquiry: and if they be
persevered in, it is highly proper that they should be subjected to
investigation by any committee which may hereafter be appointed to
inquire into the East India trade. Judging, however, from what Mr.
Whitmore hinted rather than stated concerning the nature Edition:
current; Page: [4] of the imputations, we do not imagine them to be of a
very serious character. “The Company secured to itself, in some cases,
the right of preemption. Their resident agents advanced money to the
growers, and then shut up the produce, so as to answer the demands of
the Company.”3 This is the sum total of Mr. Whitmore’s complaints: but
surely if, as would appear from this statement, the Company actually
advances to the producers the capital with which they carry on the
production, it is entitled to privileges somewhat greater than those of
a simple purchaser; and there is nothing unfair in the transaction,
unless it can be shewn, that, by an abuse of the powers of government,
the Company extorts from the producers more favourable terms than the
private merchants could obtain, for the same equivalent, by the
competition of the market. This, however, Mr. Whitmore does not affirm.

The debate chiefly turned upon the question of the discriminating
duties; on which subject Mr. Huskisson, though he opposed the motion,
expressed his entire concurrence in the general principles laid down by
Mr. Whitmore, and declared that he had nothing more at heart than to
promote them, “so far as they could be fairly and justly brought into
operation.”4 This, we believe, is a profession which few men would have
any objection to make on any subject. To attach to it any meaning, it
would be necessary that we should have the means of knowing how far the
speaker’s ideas of fairness and justice extend. Mr. Huskisson, however,
took particular care to say nothing which should give the remotest
indication of the course he intended to pursue. His speech was according
to the old approved parliamentary tactics. Fair words to all parties,
pledges to none: impossibility of laying down any principles which could
be inflexibly adhered to: necessity of delay; not a short delay, to give
time for consideration, but a delay of several years—delay until the
House should take into consideration the renewal of the East India
Company’s charter, which expires, we believe, in 1834.5 It was
impossible to shew one single point of contact or connexion between the
question of the East India Company’s charter, and that of the duties on
East India produce. If the duties on East India sugar are a grievance,
they are a grievance whether the King or the Company is to have the
government of India, and whether the Company or private merchants are to
be, after 1834, the importers of tea from Canton. Yet, so truly
parliamentary is the policy of postponing the consideration of whatever
appears likely to give trouble or annoyance; so deeply rooted in the
hearts of our public men is the desire to put off, till the latest
period possible, the evil day when the partial interests of any powerful
body are to be interfered with; Edition: current; Page: [5] that almost
every member who followed joined with Mr. Huskisson in begging Mr.
Whitmore to withdraw his motion, and “leave the matter to Government,”6
to be by them postponed until the time comes when attention will be
distracted by so many other still more important topics connected with
India, that whatever the Government may be pleased to ordain on the
subject will pass, comparatively speaking, unchallenged and undiscussed.

The reasons stated for the postponement were far from sufficient to
account for the apparent universality of the desire for it. There were
“experiments already in progress,”7 of which the result was not yet
apparent. We are aware of none, the result of which, if known, could
have the slightest influence upon the merits of this question. The
inquiry would “excite and inflame those anxious alarms,” which Mr.
Huskisson said it was his “earnest wish to allay.”8 This argument,
though it is perfectly en règle, being invariably brought forward as a
reason against discussion whenever discussion is inconvenient, is yet
such a one as ought never to be heard from the lips of an enlightened
statesman. Common sense, if it were listened to, would dictate a
directly opposite conclusion. If there are groundless alarms, by what
means can they be so effectually dispelled as by laying open promptly
and completely the real state of the case? As a general proposition, it
will scarcely, we presume, be maintained, that ignorance or
misinformation is less likely to produce groundless alarms than correct
information; and if it is on the sugar question in particular that
correct information is expected to prove so alarming, the reason must be
one which it would not answer Mr. Huskisson’s purpose to tell; that, if
all the facts were known, so gross and glaring would the injustice
appear which is done to the public of Great Britain, for the sake of the
planters, that public indignation would at once compel a reform of the
system. The absurdity of this plea is the more obvious, because the West
Indians, and Mr. Huskisson along with them, profess to believe that the
East Indies, even if the duties were equalized, could not supply sugar
on equally advantageous terms with the West. Surely, if this be true, an
inquiry, the result of which would be to establish this fact, would
allay apprehensions, not excite them. True it is that the West Indians,
by their strenuous opposition to the removal of these unpopular duties,
an opposition which would be without a motive if they themselves
believed what they say, prove sufficiently their own insincerity. But
every one will acquit Mr. Huskisson of such paltry artifices. The true
reason, as we suspect, which would render the granting of a committee a
source of real alarm to the planters, is one which Mr. Huskisson
Edition: current; Page: [6] could not decently state, however strongly
he may have felt it. This reason is simple;—it would convince them that
Government was in earnest. At present, they may flatter themselves, with
some appearance of justice, that it is not.

It well deserves attention, that such flimsy excuses, when they were
excuses for delay, should have been so completely satisfactory to the
House. But any reason is good enough, when the conclusion accords with
our inclinations: any ostensible motive will suffice, when the course
which it recommends falls in with the predominant habit of our minds.

In answer to what had been observed by Mr. Whitmore on the subject of
Singapore, and the other “emporia in the Eastern Archipelago,”9 Mr.
Huskisson stated, that “no tonnage, or duty of any description,”10 was
now demanded at those ports: and the fact is, that Singapore has always
been a free port, and that the duties which were formerly levied at
Penang and Malacca have recently been discontinued. Mr. Huskisson viewed
this circumstance “with great satisfaction, because it was the result of
those principles of policy which he had recommended.”11 Were we, also,
convinced that the measure was borne out by the principles to which Mr.
Huskisson alluded, it could not but have our entire approbation. We are
afraid, however, that, instead of being a result of those principles, it
is in direct opposition to them; and that the ministry, which
recommended or sanctioned such a measure, have been misled by names.

The principle, which Mr. Huskisson supposes to have dictated this
course, is the principle of free trade; and if we look to the words
alone, free trade undoubtedly implies exemption from all taxes or duties
whatsoever. But a principle, when it is expressed in two words, is very
seldom expressed accurately; some necessary condition or qualification
is almost always omitted: and when we are satisfied with adhering to the
terms of a proposition, and are not careful to keep always in view the
grounds of it, we are perpetually in danger of acting in contradiction
to the very principle which we imagine to be directing our conduct.

The principle of free trade is the principle of leaving undisturbed the
natural distribution of capital; and the foundation of it is the
observed and well-established fact, that capital, when left to itself,
under the guidance of individual interest, always finds out the channels
in which, under the existing circumstances, and in the existing state of
knowledge, the greatest produce can be obtained at the least expense to
the community. When this principle is clearly apprehended, it is evident
at once that free trade does not require that the different employments
of capital shall be subject to no taxation, but only that, if taxed at
all, they shall be taxed equally, so that one employment may not be
encouraged more than another.

If there are two modes of obtaining the same commodity, and both are
Edition: current; Page: [7] taxed,—taxed moreover to an exactly equal
amount,—the commodity will naturally be obtained in the cheaper of the
modes; but if a minister awkwardly attempts to introduce free trade, by
removing the tax from the more expensive mode of obtaining the article,
while the cheaper mode remains taxed, as before, the commodity will
probably be obtained in the more expensive mode, and a quantity, greater
or smaller, of expense and labour, will be uselessly thrown away.

This is precisely what has been done in the Eastern seas. The ports of
Continental India, particularly Calcutta and Bombay, have hitherto been
the entrepôts of a very extensive and valuable commerce; but at these
places the port charges still continue, while they are now abolished in
the Straits of Malacca. The unavoidable consequence will be, that many
ships, for unloading which the situation of Bombay or Calcutta is more
convenient, will resort to Penang or Singapore in order to save the
duties, at the cost of a longer, a more hazardous, or a more expensive
voyage. The whole of what is thus expended is sheer loss to the nation
and to the world; and a loss, too, of that very kind, which it is the
particular object of the principle of free trade to prevent; loss, by
substituting a less advantageous disposition of capital for a more
advantageous one. It is as if all duties and port charges were to be
abrogated in London, while they continued to be levied at Bristol and
Liverpool. No doubt, this would give to the commerce of London a most
flourishing appearance, since a much larger number of ships, from
America and the West Indies, would resort to London, in order to avoid
the duties; but it is obvious, that the additional expense of the more
circuitous voyage would be a clear and uncompensated loss to the
community.

But even if the remission of duties, instead of being partial, had been
universal, extending to all India, or even to all the world; we should
be prepared to maintain, that the measure was a violation of that
principle of which the doctrine of free trade is a consequence,—the
principle of not disturbing the natural arrangement of capital. That
principle, we contend, absolutely requires that all expenses which are
incurred for commerce should be defrayed by commerce. The natural
distribution of capital is equally disturbed, when any of its
employments is charged with factitious expenses, or when it is relieved
from its own.

The settlements of Singapore, Penang, and Malacca, were established, and
are maintained, solely for the convenience of commerce; and none of them
possesses any resources, independently of commerce, at all adequate to
the liquidation of its own expense. The question now is, whether this
expense, which must be borne by somebody, shall be borne by those who
alone benefit by it, and for whose sake it was incurred; or be charged
upon the community in general of Great Britain or India. We maintain
that the former, both on the principles of justice and on those of
political economy, is the advisable arrangement.

Free trade implies freedom not from restrictions only, but from all
partial encouragement. Why is it that Government never thinks of
erecting, at its own charge, buildings or machinery for any branch of
manufacture—the cotton Edition: current; Page: [8] manufacture, for
example? Not because the removal of any source of expense is not in
itself advantageous; but because, when it can be removed from one class
only by being transferred to another, there is no good reason for giving
a bounty to the consumers of cotton, at the expense of the public in
general, or any other portion of it.

If, instead of buildings, Government were to supply means of conveyance;
if they were to abolish all tolls, and to supply waggons and other
vehicles, free of charge, for carrying from place to place all
descriptions of goods, could they here plead free trade in their
defence? or rather would not such a measure be a direct infringement of
the principle on which free trade is founded? The consumers of goods
brought from a distance, have no claim to receive a premium at the
expense of those who consume goods produced in their immediate vicinity;
and as such a system would inevitably cause goods to be brought from a
distance, which could be obtained cheaper by being produced at hand, the
excess of expense, which would not be taken away, but only be laid upon
other shoulders than those of the consumer, would be a clear loss to the
community.

To take another illustration still more exactly appropriate to the case
in hand: suppose that Government were to purchase the London Docks, and
lay them open, with the warehouses adjoining, to all importing
merchants, free of charge—would this be a proper application of the
public money? Surely not. Let the expense of procuring commodities be
borne by the consumers of those commodities: they will then be the more
frugal in their consumption; and let not the whole public be taxed to
afford, without necessity, a separate advantage to a part.

Such precisely is the case of Singapore, Penang, and Malacca; but with
this great aggravation, that as each of those settlements is confessedly
only an entrepôt, the parties for whose benefit British money is
expended, are, for the most part, not even British subjects. It may be
true that the merchants, who resort thither, are generally subjects of
Great Britain; but the system which exempts them from all share in the
expense incurred specifically for their convenience, is a boon, not to
them, but to the consumers of the goods, of which they are only the
carriers. They are benefitted indeed, but it is only by that extension
of business which proceeds from a diminution of price, and by being
freed from the trouble and annoyance attendant on a custom-house.
Whatever tax might be imposed upon them, would be ultimately paid by
their customers; the people on the east side of the Gulf of Malacca, and
those among the people on the west side, who consume goods brought from
the east. If the duty were one or two per cent, (or whatever else might
be a fair equivalent for the protection given, and the wharfs and
warehouses afforded,) one or two per cent would be added to the price of
European and Indian goods in the Eastern Archipelago, and one or two per
cent to that of the goods carried from thence to Europe and India. The
effect, therefore, of this mistaken application of the principle of free
trade, is merely to occasion to the purchasers of such goods a saving of
that amount. So far as concerns the goods which pass to the Edition:
current; Page: [9] east of the Gulf, being exactly one half of all which
touch at the settlements, the saving is purely to the nations of Eastern
Asia. On the remaining half, our countrymen merely share the advantage
with all other nations trading to the east.

We have entered into a somewhat minute examination of this question, not
so much for the importance of the subject immediately before us, but
rather because we were anxious to clear up the misunderstanding with
respect to the scope and effect of the principle of free trade, by which
Mr. Huskisson seems, in this instance, to have been misled. We earnestly
deprecate the converting any phrase, however unobjectionable in itself,
into a catch-word, because it is sure in that case to find its way into
the mouths of many who do not understand, or do not attend to its
accurate meaning. “Equality,” in a neighbouring nation, and “No Popery”
in our own, originally meant nothing but what was innocent and laudable.
If the inventors of these expressions had taken for their motto a
principle instead of an abbreviation, the one phrase could never have
been made a handle wherewith to exterminate men for being unequal to
their neighbours, by superiority in riches or talents; nor the other a
ground for persecuting the men, whose opinions only it was originally
intended to condemn. Such disastrous effects are not likely to arise
from any abuse of the terms “Free Trade;” but it is necessary, when that
phrase is made use of, always to bear in mind that the real principle of
legislation is that of allowing private interest to regulate wholly the
disposition of private capital, and avoiding to give any factitious
advantage to one employment of it over another. It is by this test alone
that every proposition, be its object to free trade from restrictions,
or to impose them, must ultimately be tried.

Edition: current; Page: [10] Edition: current; Page: [11]





Minute on the Black Act

the petitioners pray that cases of marriage, divorce, and inheritance or
succession, respecting Englishmen, should be removed altogether from the
Company’s Courts, and that in all other civil cases (viz. debt, contract
or trespass) wherein Englishmen are affected either as plaintiffs or
defendants, an appeal should lie to the Sudder Adawlut or to the Supreme
Court, at the option of the appellant.

The first of these prayers might without impropriety be complied with if
the English inhabitants really wish it; because the marriages and
divorces of the English, and the succession to their property, cannot in
any way affect the interests or rights of the natives. On these matters
therefore I, at least, see no reason why the appeal should not lie to
the Supreme Court, or even, if the English wish it, why the Supreme
Court should not have sole cognizance, until the Indian Code is
completed,1 which is all that the petitioners require.

But on the other question the interests and rights of the natives are
most seriously at stake. When an Englishman in India, beyond the bounds
of the Presidency, borrows or lends, or enters into contracts of any
other kind with natives, he must be understood to do so according to the
native laws, the only ones which are known to the parties he contracts
with. The same reasoning applies to those cases of civil injury known by
the name of trespass. An Englishman has no right to go up the country
and say to the natives, I will regulate my transactions with you by the
laws of my own country, and if you think I have injured you, you shall
not have the redress your own laws would give you, but shall be
satisfied with that given by laws you know nothing about. If an
Englishman goes there for his own purposes, it is to be expected from
him that he will make himself acquainted with the institutions and
customs of the country: but it is not to be expected of the natives that
they should, previous to dealing with him, make themselves acquainted
with his laws and institutions: and their passive character and dread of
the name of an Englishman make it necessary to give facilities instead
of interposing difficulties to their resisting fraud or oppression when
attempted to be practised on them by the more powerful race.

But if it be admitted that the English must be governed by the same laws
as the natives, it is absurd to say that the Court which adjudicates
their causes in the last Edition: current; Page: [14] resort, shall be
the Supreme Court, which administers a totally different system of law,
and from which an Englishman might again drag the native he had injured
before the Privy Council.

The principal things to be done in meeting these petitioners are,
certain misrepresentations to be set right and certain principles to be
proclaimed.

First, as to the misrepresentations—

1st. The petition is so framed as to keep out of view the fact that the
Act does not affect Calcutta. It is only when the Calcutta people settle
and acquire property in the Mofussil, that they are placed under the
Company’s Courts and the laws which govern the natives.

2dly. The petition talks invidiously of placing Europeans under native
judges, sinking the fact that native judges have jurisdiction only in
small sums, in which the expense of an appeal to the Supreme Court would
be so out of proportion that it would never be incurred unless to harass
an adversary.

3dly. The petition imputes all sorts of incapacities to the Company’s
judges, in the teeth of facts, and in a manner grossly libellous to the
service, but especially talks of judicial functions confided to
inexperienced young men; forgetting that even if their prayer was
granted, the same young men would continue to judge in the first
instance, and that the question merely is whether the appeal from those
young men shall lie to the Supreme Court or to the Sudder Adawlut: now
the Sudder Adawlut does not consist of inexperienced young men but of
the most able and experienced men who have passed all their lives in the
execution of judicial functions, and are far superior on the average in
judgment and experience to the young or second rate barristers who go
out to be judges of the Supreme Court with all the self conceit and
professional prejudice of men who know their own technicalities and
little else—though there are some honorable exceptions, as Sir Edw.
Ryan.2

Secondly: The principles to be proclaimed—

The first and greatest of these is, that the Natives of India need
protection against the English, and that to afford them that protection
is one of the first duties of the British government in India. To shew
the necessity of this, reference may be had to the many parliamentary
papers which shew the oppression and injustice the natives are subject
to from the indigo planters, and the extreme difficulty of protecting
them from it. The natives may as well have no justice at all, as be told
to look for it to the Supreme Court, probably the most expensive
tribunal in the world, and placed often a thousand miles from them.
Accordingly all parties, the Judges of the Supreme Court included,
joined in recommending that the Court should be divested of its
jurisdiction over the Mofussil, or that that jurisdiction should be very
much curtailed.

Edition: current; Page: [15]
Secondly; it should be proclaimed that the English who resort to India
or any other foreign possession, to make their fortunes, are naturally
inclined to despise the natives and to seek to make themselves a
privileged caste. That this is a pretension which ought to be resisted;
and it is because the Company has always resisted it, that the English
public of Calcutta are as a body, always hostile to the Company’s
government.

Lastly; our empire in India, consisting of a few Europeans holding 100
millions of natives in obedience by an army composed of those very
natives, will not exist for a day after we shall lose the character of
being more just and disinterested than the native rulers and of being
united among ourselves. It is difficult enough for the Govt to watch
sufficiently over the acts of its own servants: but when to these come
to be added a far greater number of Europeans spread over the whole
country, coming into competition and collision with the natives in all
walks of life, and over whom the government has no control but through
the courts of justice; most of them men contemplating only a temporary
residence; many of them needy, and not a few of them profligate; then
unless the control of the courts of justice over these men be strict and
even rigid, the conduct of a large proportion of them is sure to be such
as to destroy the prestige of superior moral worth and justice in
dealings which now attaches to the British name in India: and unless the
government can coerce them with a strong arm, they will form in the eyes
of the natives an English public foreign and often hostile to the
government, and the overawing influence of our power and capacity which
has been derived from our union, will be weakened; and thus our
government in India will gradually lose both its moral supports—and
physical support, independent of those, it has none.

Edition: current; Page: [16] Edition: current; Page: [17]



Penal Code for India

it has been for some time, we suspect, the opinion of all who have paid
much attention to the vexata quaestio of codification, that, from a
question of Theory, it has now passed into one of Practice. The
possibility of making a code (for the possibility only, and not the
advantage, was contested) has long since been as well proved as words
can prove it, and can only be made more evident by actually trying to do
that which, until done, the world will never believe can be done, at
least well enough to be worth doing. And such, in truth, has been the
history of most great improvements in human affairs. That civilization
should exist without slavery, or a great state without monarchical
government, were not generally believed possible, until seen realized.
The multitude, justly distrustful of their own capacity to decide upon
the evidence of general reasoning, turn a deaf ear to all demonstrations
of the practicability of any great thing hitherto undone. And among such
things the reduction of the whole laws of any country into a set of
written enactments proceeding from the direct authority of the
legislature, must as yet be considered. Of the points usually insisted
upon by the later opponents of codification, the one perhaps in which
they have been the most successful is in showing that the Code Napoleon1
(though a prodigious improvement upon the old French law) is no code, in
the genuine sense of the word: for as it does not define the technical
terms it makes use of, but leaves their meaning and extent to be
determined by the decisions of the courts of justice, a real knowledge
of the law can only be obtained, as in England, by a study of precedents
and cases; and it has even been found worth while to reprint large
editions of the old law books,2 for the light which they throw upon the
principles on which the judges proceed in their interpretation of the
so-called code. To frame a body of statute law which should need no such
adventitious aid; which should contain in itself all the law that is
necessary, all that the judge requires to enable him to execute the will
of the legislator when he knows the facts of the particular case; this
would be to construct a code. But this, so far as Edition: current;
Page: [20] we know, has never been the object aimed at in any of the
modern European attempts at codification, anterior to the one now before
us.

It is because the present is an attempt to attain that object, and (so
far as we can yet venture to judge) an eminently successful one, that we
are anxious to invite to it the attention and the criticism of jurists,
and of persons practically conversant with the interpretation of
language. We believe that this proposed Penal Code has solved the
problem; that it has actually done, so far as the penal branch of law is
concerned, that which was denied to be possible, namely, to frame
adequate definitions of offences, expressed in general language:
definitions sufficiently accurate, to leave no doubt that complete
accuracy is attainable. Doubtless, as there are imperfections in all
works, and especially in all such works, examination will not fail to
detect, or experience disclose, cases needful to be provided for, which
the framers of these definitions have overlooked; but the emendations
necessary to include such cases, can be made without disarranging the
plan or disturbing the symmetry of the code; and that is enough.

The Indian Law Commissioners are a body of five persons, appointed under
the authority of the last Charter Act to frame a code of law for the
inhabitants of India.3 The propriety of such a measure at the particular
juncture, appears to have been suggested by the liberty then first
granted to Englishmen, for settling in India without license from the
East India Company. The great influx of Europeans which was expected to
ensue, impressed upon the framers of the Charter Act a sense of the
necessity of so revising the laws and tribunals of India, as on the one
hand to leave Englishmen no just ground of complaint against the
institutions of the country in which they might come to live, and on the
other to afford effectual protection to the natives against their
encroachments. The anomaly of exempting Europeans from the laws and
tribunals of the country, and giving them separate ones of their own,
was utterly indefensible in principle; it had been found productive of
the most serious oppression and denial of justice to the natives, in
cases affecting Europeans, even under the more limited access to the
country which the latter had hitherto enjoyed; and now, when the
government was no longer to have either the privilege of prohibiting the
immigration of persons objectionable in point of character, or that of
supplying the defect of legal control by an arbitrary power of
banishment, it became an imperative duty to withdrawn all legal
immunities from Europeans; to subject them to the only tribunals
accessible to the people, and (so far as possible) to the only laws
which those tribunals were, or could be made, competent to administer.

Edition: current; Page: [21]
Such, therefore, was the more especial and peculiar motive which led to
the creation of this Commission of codification. To this inducement,
however, we believe may be added, without any undue compliment to the
parties concerned, a sense of the importance of the object in itself,
and of the value of any experiment which might tend to accelerate its
successful accomplishment. We are the more inclined to ascribe this
honourable motive to the authors of the measure, inasmuch as Mr. Charles
Hay Cameron, the only gentleman who was sent from England specifically
as a member of the Commission (and whose remarkable qualifications for
such a post, are well known to all who have any knowledge of him and of
the subject) was recommended to the choice of the Court of Directors and
of the ministry, by the complete reform which he, as a Commissioner of
Inquiry, had advised, and her Majesty’s Government effected, in the
courts of justice and judicial procedure of Ceylon.4 Alone of all known
countries, that British colony now actually enjoys a judicial system
constructed on the best conceptions of philosophic jurists—a system in
which, without any servile deference for the authority of Bentham, the
principal improvements made in the theory of the subject by that great
man have been, with due consideration of local circumstances, adopted
and carried into practice.5 The system is understood to have worked
admirably during the few years it has been in operation; and the
introduction of it does honour to the Colonial Office. The operations of
the Indian Law Commission are adding a second instance in support of a
prediction once made, that the foreign dependencies of the empire will
enjoy the benefits of many reforms, long before the much more compact
masses of private interest which oppose themselves to such changes at
home, will permit the mother country to share in them.

It was judiciously considered fitting that, of the five Commissioners
who were appointed to give laws to India, three should be Company’s
servants, of tried abilities and the requisite local knowledge; while
the remaining two should be persons sent from England, and conversant
with the general principles of law-making. Of these two Mr. Cameron was
one; the other was Mr. Macaulay, who, having been appointed a member of
the Legislative Council of India, assumed, in addition to his rather
scanty functions as such, that of President of the Law Commission. Mr.
Cameron’s health having prevented him from taking part in the later
proceedings of the Commission, the letter to the Governor-General in
Edition: current; Page: [22] Council, which accompanies the project of a
penal code, is signed only by the other four members;6 and a greater
share of the labour of completion than was at first anticipated has
devolved upon the accomplished President of the Commission, whose style,
pruned of whatever would be unsuitable to the character of the work in
hand, is distinctly visible in every part of the volume before us, in
which it was possible that style should be discernible.

It is not in its particular application to the circumstances of India,
but as a specimen of codification in general, that this proposed body of
penal law has claims on the attention of the English reader. We shall
therefore omit all consideration of the appropriateness of the
punishments, whether as to quality or quantity, and shall confine our
notice to the definitions of offences, and the nomenclature and
expression of the code at large.

The first four chapters are of a general kind, comprising all those
explanations and directions which may be given once for all;7 and which,
in an unsystematic mass of enactments like the English statute book, are
either said over again in every statute (sometimes even in every clause
of every statute) or left unsaid altogether. Such, for instance, are
these—“The pronoun he is used of any person, whether male or female.”
“The word man denotes a male human being of any age; the word woman
denotes a female human being of any age.” “The words to do a thing
denote omissions as well as acts.” “The word act denotes as well a
series of acts as a single act; the word omission denotes as well a
series of omissions as a single omission.”8 These simple instances, with
many of a more complicated character, compose the first chapter,
entitled “General Explanations.” The remainder of the generalities are
comprised in the three succeeding chapters—“Of Punishments;” “General
Exceptions;” and “Of Abetment.” In these chapters some, though not many
terms, which require definition, are left undefined, the definition in
those instances properly belonging not to the penal, but to the civil
code, which has not yet been commenced; and in general it may be
remarked, that since all offences are such by virtue of their being
violations of rights, the attempt to define offences until rights have
been defined (which is the business of the civil code), must be attended
with peculiar difficulties; but this code has demonstrated the
possibility of surmounting these difficulties in a far greater degree
than could have been anticipated. Under the chapter of “General
Exceptions” we fear that offences by culpable negligence would in many
cases escape punishment; but culpable negligence, when productive of
actual mischief, is itself, in the more serious cases, made a distinct
offence by the subsequent chapters of the code; and Edition: current;
Page: [23] in minor cases it may be presumed to be the opinion of the
Commissioners that liability to a civil action for damages is the
appropriate remedy.

The remaining chapters (chaps. v to xxvi) are those which treat of the
separate classes of offences; and the best mode of exhibiting the
peculiarities and the general execution of the code will be to extract
at length the first section of one of the most important of its
chapters—the section “Of Offences affecting Life.”

294. Whoever does any act, or omits what he is legally bound to do, with
the intention of thereby causing, or with the knowledge that he is
likely thereby to cause, the death of any person, and does by such act
or omission cause the death of any person, is said to commit the offence
of “Voluntary culpable homicide.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.

(a). A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby
causing death, or with the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby
caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on it, falls in, and
is killed. A has committed the offence of voluntary culpable homicide.

(b). A, with the intention or knowledge aforesaid, relates agitating
tidings to Z, who is in a critical stage of a dangerous illness. Z dies
in consequence. A has committed the offence of voluntary culpable
homicide.

(c). A, with the intention or knowledge aforesaid, gives Z his choice
whether Z will kill himself, or suffer lingering torture. Z kills
himself in consequence. A has committed the offence of voluntary
culpable homicide.

(d). A, with the intention or knowledge aforesaid, falsely deposes
before a court of justice that he saw Z commit a capital crime. Z is
convicted and executed in consequence. A has committed the offence of
voluntary culpable homicide.

(e). A is hired to guide Z through a jungle. In the midst of the jungle,
A, no circumstance having occurred to release him from his legal
obligation to guide Z through the jungle, with such intention or
knowledge as aforesaid, leaves Z. Z dies in consequence. A has committed
the offence of voluntary culpable homicide.

(f). A being legally bound to furnish food to Z, who is the mother of a
sucking child, omits to furnish her with food, intending or knowing it
to be likely that Z’s death may be the consequence of the omission. Z
survives, but the child is starved to death in consequence of the
failure of milk, which is caused by A’s omission. Here, even if A did
not know of the existence of the child, he has committed the offence of
voluntary culpable homicide.

(g). A keeps Z in wrongful confinement, and is, therefore, legally bound
(see clause 338) to furnish Z with what he knows to be necessary to
prevent Z from being in danger of death. A knowing that Z is likely to
die if medical advice be not procured, illegally omits to procure such
advice. Z dies in consequence. A has committed the offence of voluntary
culpable homicide.

(h). A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending to
cause, or knowing himself to be likely to cause, Z’s death, induces B to
fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here, B may be guilty of no
offence, or if his firing was, under the circumstances, a rash act, he
may be guilty of the offence defined in clause 304. But A has committed
the offence of voluntary culpable homicide.*

Edition: current; Page: [24]
295. Voluntary culpable homicide is “murder,” unless it be of one of the
three mitigated descriptions hereinafter enumerated; that is to say,

First, Manslaughter;

Secondly, Voluntary culpable homicide by consent;

Thirdly, Voluntary culpable homicide in defence.

296. If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be
likely to cause death, commits voluntary culpable homicide on a person
whose death he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause,
the voluntary culpable homicide committed by the offender is of the same
description of which it would have been if he had caused the death which
he intended or knew himself to be likely to cause.

297. Voluntary culpable homicide is “manslaughter,” when it is committed
on grave and sudden provocation, by causing the death of the person who
gave that provocation.

Explanation.—Provocation is designated as “grave” when it is such as
would be likely to move a person of ordinary temper to violent passion,
and is not given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by
anything authorised by the law of civil or criminal procedure, or by
anything done by a public servant* in the exercise of the lawful powers
of such public servant, or by anything done by any person in the
exercise of the right of private defence,† against the offender.


ILLUSTRATIONS.

(a). A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by
Z, intentionally kills Y, Z’s child. This is not manslaughter, but
murder.

(b). A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and
violent passion by the arrest, and voluntarily kills Z. This is not
manslaughter, but murder.

(c). A appears as a witness before Z, a magistrate. Z says that he does
not believe a word of A’s deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A
is moved to sudden passion by these words, and kills Z. This is not
manslaughter, but murder.

(d). A attempts to pull Z’s nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of
private defence, strikes A. A is moved to sudden and violent passion by
the blow, and kills Z. This is not manslaughter, but murder.

(e). Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a
bystander, intending to take advantage of B’s rage in order to cause Z’s
death, puts a knife into B’s hand. B kills Z with the knife. Here, B may
have committed only manslaughter, but A has committed murder.

(f). Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation,
fires a pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing himself to be likely
to kill Z, who is near him but out of sight. A kills Z. Here, A has
committed manslaughter.

298. Voluntary culpable homicide is “voluntary culpable homicide by
consent,” when the person whose death is caused, being above twelve
years of age, suffers death, or takes the risk of death, by his own
choice:

Edition: current; Page: [25]
Provided,

First, That the offender does not induce the person whose death is
caused to make that choice, by directly or indirectly putting that
person in fear of any injury;*

Secondly, That the person whose death has been caused is not, from
youth, mental imbecility, derangement, intoxication, or passion, unable
to understand the nature and consequences of his choice;

Thirdly, That the offender does not know that the person whose death is
caused was induced to make the choice by any deception, or concealment;

Fourthly, That the offender does not conceal from the person whose death
is caused anything which the offender knew to be likely to cause that
person to change his mind.

Explanation.—Voluntary culpable homicide committed by inducing a person
voluntarily to put himself to death is voluntary culpable homicide by
consent, except when it is murder.


ILLUSTRATIONS.

(a). Z, a Hindoo widow, consents to be burned with the corpse of her
husband. A kindles the pile. Here A has committed voluntary culpable
homicide by consent.

(b). A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a child under twelve years
of age, to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z’s youth, the offence
cannot be voluntary culpable homicide by consent. A has therefore
committed murder.

(c). A, by deceiving Z into a belief that Z’s family have perished at
sea, voluntarily causes Z to commit suicide. Here, on account of the
deception practised by A, the offence cannot be voluntary culpable
homicide by consent. A has therefore committed murder.

299. Voluntary culpable homicide is “voluntary culpable homicide in
defence,” when it is committed by causing death under such circumstances
that such causing of death would be no offence if the right of private
defence extended to the voluntary causing of death in cases of assault
not falling under any of the descriptions enumerated in clause 76, or in
cases of theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not falling under any of
the descriptions enumerated in clause 79.


ILLUSTRATIONS.

(a). Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause
grievous hurt† to A. A draws out a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A,
believing in good faith that he can by no other means prevent himself
from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has committed voluntary
culpable homicide in defence.

(b). Z commits simple theft on A’s horse, and rides away with it. Here A
has a right of private defence which lasts till either Z can effect his
retreat with the property, or till A can recover his horse, but which
does not extend to the infliction of death, inasmuch as A is in no
danger of death or hurt. A pursues Z, and, not being able to overtake
him, shoots him dead. A has committed voluntary culpable homicide in
defence.

(c). Z commits an assault, not of a dangerous description, on A. A,
knowing that he can Edition: current; Page: [26] defend himself from the
assault without killing Z, kills Z. Here, as A’s act would be an offence
even if the right of private defence in cases of assault of the
descriptions not enumerated in clause 76 extended to the voluntary
infliction of death, A has committed voluntary culpable homicide, which
is not voluntary culpable homicide in defence, but which, according to
the circumstances, will be manslaughter or murder.

300. Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or
transportation for life, or rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine.*

301. Whoever commits manslaughter shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description,† for a term which may extend to fourteen years, or
fine, or both.

302. Whoever commits voluntary culpable homicide by consent shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may
extend to fourteen years and must not be less than two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.

303. Whoever commits voluntary culpable homicide in defence shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to fourteen years, or fine, or both.

304. Whoever causes the death of any person by any act or any illegal
omission, which act or omission was so rash or negligent as to indicate
a want of due regard for human life, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or fine,
or both.

305. If the act or illegal omission whereby death is caused in the
manner described in the last preceding clause, be, apart from the
circumstance of its having caused death, an offence other than the
offence defined in clause 327, or an attempt to commit an offence, the
offender shall be liable to the punishment of the offence so committed
or attempted, in addition to the punishment provided by the last
preceding clause.

Explanation.—In cases in which the doing of a certain thing and the
attempting to do that thing are distinct offences, if the offence
defined in the last preceding clause be committed in the attempting to
do that thing, the additional punishment to which the offender is liable
is the punishment not of attempting to do that thing, but of doing that
thing.


ILLUSTRATION.

A uses force to Z, a woman, intending to ravish her. He does not ravish
her, but commits the offence defined in clause 304. Here the term of
imprisonment to which A has made himself liable is to be regulated not
by the term of imprisonment assigned to the offence of attempting to
ravish, but by the term of imprisonment assigned to actual rape, that is
to say, A is liable to rigorous imprisonment for a term of not more than
sixteen nor less than two years.

306. If any child under twelve years of age, any insane person, any
delirious person, any idiot, or any person in a state of intoxication,
commits suicide, whoever previously abets by Edition: current; Page:
[27] aid* the commission of such suicide shall be punished with death or
transportation for life, or rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine.

307. If any person commits suicide, whoever previously abets by aid the
commission of such suicide shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and must not
be less than two years, and shall also be liable to fine.

308. Whoever does any act, or omits what he is legally bound to do, with
such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that if he by
that act or omission caused death, he would be guilty of murder, and
carries that act or omission to such a length as at the time of carrying
it to that length he contemplates as sufficient to cause death, shall be
punished with transportation for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to life, and must not be less than seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.


ILLUSTRATIONS.

(a). A, intending to murder Z by means of a spring gun, purchases such a
gun. A has not yet committed the offence defined in this clause. A sets
the gun loaded in Z’s path, and leaves it there. A has committed the
offence defined in this clause.

(b). A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison, and mixes the
same with food which remains in A’s keeping. A has not yet committed the
offence defined in this clause. A places the food on Z’s table, or
delivers it to Z’s servants to place it on Z’s table. A has committed
the offence defined in this clause.

309. Whoever does any act, or omits what he is legally bound to do, with
such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that if he, by
that act or omission, caused death, he would be guilty of voluntary
culpable homicide, and carries that act or omission to such a length as
at the time of carrying it to that length he contemplates as sufficient
to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description, for a term which may extend to three years, or fine, or
both.


ILLUSTRATIONS.

(a). A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such
circumstances that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of
manslaughter. A has committed the offence defined in this clause.

(b). A lights a pile prepared for a Suttee, under such circumstances
that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of voluntary culpable
homicide by consent. A has committed the offence defined in this clause.

(c). A pursues a thief, and fires at him, under such circumstances that
if he killed the thief he would commit voluntary culpable homicide in
defence. A has committed the offence defined in this clause.

310. Whoever belongs or has at any time belonged to any gang of persons
associated for the purpose of gaining a livelihood by inveigling and
murdering travellers in order to take the property of such travellers,
is designated as a “Thug.”

311. Whoever is a Thug shall be punished with transportation for life,
or imprisonment of either description for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.9

Edition: current; Page: [28]
What first strikes the eye in this long extract, is the happy invention
of appending authoritative examples by way of Illustration, to all those
enactments of the code which require them: an idea by which the
advantages of general language, and those which English statutes vainly
seek to attain by an enumeration of particulars, are happily blended;
and which, besides the greater certainty and distinctness given to the
legislator’s meaning, solves the difficult problem of making the body of
the laws a popular book, at once intelligible and interesting to the
general reader. Simple as this contrivance is, it escaped the sagacity
of Bentham, so fertile in ingenious combinations of detail. As the
Commissioners say, in their introductory letter to the Government—

The definitions and enacting clauses contain the whole law. The
illustrations make nothing law which would not be law without them. They
only exhibit the law in full action, and show what its effects will be
on the events of common life. . . . The illustrations will lead the mind
of the student through the same steps by which the minds of those who
framed the law proceeded, and may sometimes show him that a phrase which
may have struck him as uncouth, or a distinction which he may have
thought idle, was deliberately adopted for the purpose of including or
excluding a large class of important cases. . . . Thus the code will be
at once a statute book and a collection of decided cases. The decided
cases in the code will differ from the decided cases in the English law
books in two most important points. In the first place, our
illustrations are never intended to supply any omission in the written
law, nor do they ever, in our opinion, put a strain on the written law.
They are merely instances of the practical application of the written
law to the affairs of mankind. Secondly, they are cases decided, not by
the judges, but by the legislature, by those who make the law, and who
must know more certainly than any judge can know, what the law is which
they mean to make.10

With what degree of perfection the definitions contained in the section
which we have cited, or in any other part of the code, fulfil the
intentions of the framers, we now leave it to competent judges to
decide. We are sure that all such persons will find, even in the little
we have quoted, enough to satisfy them that their labour will not be
uselessly employed in perfecting a work which is already so considerable
an advance on all which has preceded in its kind. The Indian Government
has caused the code to be printed and widely circulated throughout
India, and has publicly invited criticisms and suggestions from all
parties competent to give them. But in this country also, there is a
Commission for the reform of the criminal law;11 which certainly has not
yet effected anything upon a par with the expectations held out at the
time of its appointment. A direction from the Home Secretary12 to these
Edition: current; Page: [29] Commissioners, to report upon the present
code, would give India the benefit of their criticisms, would put into
their hands a most valuable aid for the performance of their own work,
and would be no inconsiderable test of their fitness to perform it.
Moreover, both Mr. Macaulay, and the ablest of the Indian members of the
Commission, Mr. Macleod (who, we have the best authority for stating,
took a most active part and rendered signal service in the concoction of
the code,) are now in England. A government which should make any new
appointments, either to the Criminal Law Commission, or to any other
body constituted for Law Reform, without ascertaining whether these
gentlemen, or either of them, were willing to serve on it, would do
little honour to its own discernment. Their services, if attainable (of
which we ourselves know nothing), would be secured without delay, by any
government really in earnest about the Reform of the Law.

The notes to the code, containing the reasons for such of its provisions
as seemed to require explanation or defence, are nearly as voluminous as
the text.13 They are very able and valuable essays, and, we think,
rarely fail successfully to vindicate everything in the code, the
propriety of which might otherwise have appeared doubtful. In one case,
we think the defence eminently unsuccessful; and probably other such
cases might be found. By the proposed code, nothing which is true is a
libel; or rather (for the Commissioners do not adopt that most
ill-chosen word from English law) is defamation: no action can be
maintained or penalty inflicted for attacks on reputation, unless the
court, having entered into the evidence of truth or falsehood,
pronounces the imputation to be false.14 And the Commissioners defend
this provision at some length in their notes;15 but in a manner which
fails to convince us. Nothing can be more proper than that the truth of
a charge should be its justification, in all cases in which either a
court of justice or the public are competent judges of the subject. But
in matters which relate to private life, how can either the one or the
other be made cognizant of the circumstances on which the morality or
immorality of the act principally depend? Take the case of a family
quarrel, for example;—who is to blame, and in what degree, are questions
depending upon the previous character and relations of the parties—upon
states of feeling produced perhaps by long trains of circumstances, not
one of which can be given in evidence, or if it were, could be duly
estimated by any one not intimately acquainted with the parties. Let any
candid person ask himself, how far advanced he would be, in any such
case that he is well acquainted with, towards forming a just estimation
of the conduct of the parties, if he knew only such naked facts as would
have admitted of being proved in a court of justice? And this in fact is
the principal reason for leaving any immoralities whatever exempt from
legal punishment. If any sort of act is really blamable, and if the
Edition: current; Page: [30] circumstances which make it such can be so
clearly discriminated and made apparent to third parties, as to be
susceptible of judicial investigation and proof, it would be difficult
to find any sufficient reason for not making that kind of act an offence
under the penal code. But to do justice to this subject would require a
much longer discussion than can properly find a place here.

That many other defects must necessarily be found in this code, its
framers would, we are convinced, be the last persons to deny; and the
first to hail any, even hostile, criticism, which might furnish valuable
suggestions for its amendment. Unfortunately, few of the attacks of
which it has yet been the subject, either from the Calcutta or the
London press, bear, so far as they have come to our knowledge, marks of
any but the worst motives and spirit.16 They mostly appear to proceed
directly or indirectly from that party of English in India, to protect
the natives against whose rapacity and tyranny, is one of the most
difficult but most bounden duties of the Indian Government; and who are
now venting, against what they consider as mainly the work of Mr.
Macaulay, the spleen excited by the part he took in framing what they
call the “Black Act;”17 itself but one, and not a very considerable,
step towards executing the declared intention of Parliament for placing
Europeans and natives under one equal law.18 It gave us much regret that
so upright and able a supporter of the popular cause as Mr. Ward,19
should have made himself, on this subject, the organ in Parliament of a
handful of foreigners attempting to make themselves a privileged
oligarchy in a country of a hundred millions of inhabitants, and who, if
the existence and regulations of the East India Company were not a
perpetual barrier against them, would be in danger, under a conniving or
passive ministry, of establishing a domination as much more tyrannical
than that of the English party in Canada in the worst of former days, as
the Hindoos are a more ignorant and more passive people than the French
Canadians.

Edition: current; Page: [31]





The East India Company’s Charter

what connexion have you had with the Government of India? I am one of
the assistants to the Examiner of Indian Correspondence, in whose office
the greater part of the correspondence with India relating to the
Government is conducted.

For what length of time have you been in that office? Since the year
1823, and nearly the whole of that time in the Correspondence
Department; in fact, I may say the whole of it.

Have you been exclusively in that department, or in others also?
Exclusively in that department.

Have we reason, do you think, on the whole, to feel satisfied with the
general working of the Home Government of India? The present
constitution of the Indian Government, considering the great
difficulties of the case, seems to me to have worked very
satisfactorily.

Will you state more specifically the causes to which you attribute the
satisfactory working of the Government? I conceive that there are
several causes; probably the most important is, that the whole
Government of India is carried on in writing. All the orders given, and
all the acts of the executive officers, are reported in writing, and the
whole of the original correspondence is sent to the Home Government; so
that there is no single act done in India, the whole of the reasons for
which are not placed on record. This appears to me a greater security
for good government than exists in almost any other government in the
world, because no other probably has a system of recordation so
complete.

In those records do you find the records of opinions? To a very great
extent. If the local officer and the Government differ in opinion, or if
the opinions of the different members of the Government differ from one
another, the reasons on both sides, and the discussions that take place,
are put in writing, and reported to the Home Government, who are thus in
possession of all the materials of knowledge that the local authorities
can supply.

What do you think would be the consequence of Parliament interfering
more frequently and more extensively in the government of India? I think
that many bad, and few good consequences would result. The public
opinion of one country is scarcely any security for the good government
of another. The people of one country, whether represented by the public
authorities of this country, or by the nation itself, cannot have the
same acquaintance with the circumstances and interests of the other
country as they may have with their own. The great security Edition:
current; Page: [34] for the good government of any country is an
enlightened public opinion; but an unenlightened public opinion is no
security for good government. The people of England are unacquainted, or
very ill acquainted, with the people and the circumstances of India, and
feel so little interest in them, that I apprehend the influence of
public opinion in this country on the Government of India is of very
little value, because there are very few cases in which public opinion
is called into exercise; and when it is so, it is usually from impulses
derived from the interests of Europeans connected with India, rather
than from the interests of the people of India itself.

Supposing that appeals were permitted freely to the English Parliament
from the decisions of the Governor-general of India, in cases of
resumption, such as have taken place at different times, do you think
that that would tend greatly to impair the power of the Government of
India? I think that anything which causes the people of India to look
beyond the Government of India to any authority here, of which they have
no knowledge, and concerning which they have most indefinite ideas,
would tend to weaken the local Government. Of course that inconvenience
must be submitted to in so far as it has any tendency to increase the
security for good government; but the real security for the good
government of India depends, as it seems to me, upon a careful review of
the Acts of the local Government, grounded on the transmission of all
the recorded proceedings to this country. The proceedings are subjected
to a very rigid examination, not, of course, as to all their details,
but as to their general principles, and the spirit in which those
general principles are applied to particular cases; this seems to me the
only kind of appeal that is of any considerable value in regard to the
government of a country at such a distance, and in the peculiar
circumstances of India.

Will you state the successive checks which operated upon the occasion of
the deposition of the Rajah of Sattara?1 There was first the decision of
the Bombay Government; and then that decision could not take effect
without the concurrence of the Government of India, which was,
therefore, the first check or appeal, as it may be called. In the next
place, that decision was subject to reversal by the joint action of the
Court of Directors and the Board of Control; and, finally, it was open
to any Member of either House of Parliament to bring forward a Motion,
which, if it had been effectual, might have led to a Parliamentary
inquiry, or eventually to a reversal of the Act.

Edition: current; Page: [35]
And to a certain extent there might have been the interposition of the
Court of Proprietors? The Court of Proprietors would have had no power
of reversing what had been done. They have the power of holding a public
discussion, which, as a means of publicity, is not without value.

In regard to the action on that occasion of the Government of Bombay,
was there not a minute recorded of the Governor, and were there not also
minutes recorded of each member of Council? There were. In the first
place, there was the report of the local officer, the Resident at
Sattara; this report was then the subject of discussion in the Council,
and the Governor and each member of Council recorded their opinion. When
they, either unanimously or by a majority, had formed their opinion,
they communicated it in a despatch to the Governor-general in Council,
who issued the final orders—final as far as India was concerned.

When this despatch, accompanied by the recorded minutes, was forwarded
to the Government of India, were there not further minutes written by
the Governor-general and the members of Council, each giving his opinion
separately upon the subject? Whether that was so in that particular
case, I am not certain, but I believe so. In cases of importance it
almost invariably happens that the opinion of each member of Council is
recorded separately.

With his reasons? With his reasons.

All those reports were then forwarded to the Court of Directors? Yes.

And the subject was discussed by the Court of Directors? Yes.

Were there further minutes entered upon the journals of the Court of
Directors upon the same subject? It is not usual to enter on the records
of the Court any minutes of opinions, except dissents.2 After a
resolution is passed, any member of the Court who dissents from the
resolution, if he thinks the matter of sufficient importance, records
his dissent, accompanied with reasons, and those are, as a matter of
course, communicated to the Board of Control.

Are those dissents communicated to the general Court, or to the
Committee? The dissents are recorded on the minutes of the Court, and
have nothing to do with any Committee.

The expression of all those opinions was submitted to the Board of
Control before the ultimate decision was taken upon the subject? Yes; it
does occasionally, but seldom, happen, that the ultimate decision is
taken before the dissent has been sent to the Board.

It is only in cases where the question has been so repeatedly discussed,
that it is thought hardly necessary to send up the dissents; but in the
first instance, all the dissents are sent up? The dissents are sent to
the Board as soon as they are copied; but cases have happened, though
not, I believe, in matters of importance, when the despatch has been
sent back approved by the Board before the dissent reached Edition:
current; Page: [36] them: it is only in those cases that the Board has
not had the advantage of the dissents before its final decision.

Any member of the Court of Proprietors moreover may, if he thinks fit,
raise a question for public discussion, and appeal to the public in
England upon the subject? Any nine members may sign a requisition for a
special meeting of the Court of Proprietors, or any one proprietor may,
at a quarterly meeting, after notice, make a motion on any matter
connected with Indian affairs.

You think that those successive checks operate more beneficially for the
protection of the natives of India than any constant interference of
Parliament on their behalf? No one will deny that it is necessary that
Parliament should be open to appeals on all subjects connected with the
government of any part of the British Empire; but, so far as my
experience goes, I should say that the security for the good government
of India derived from discussions in Parliament is far short of that
derived from the habitual examination of all papers of any importance by
persons specially devoted to that object.

Persons who have no sinister interest? It is next to impossible to form
in one country an organ of government for another which shall have a
strong interest in good government; but if that cannot be done, the next
best thing is, to form a body with the least possible interest in bad
government; and I conceive that the present governing bodies in this
country for the affairs of India have as little sinister interest of any
kind as any government in the world.

Have the natives of India shown a disposition to employ agents in this
country for the prosecutions of appeals against the decisions of the
Governor-general? Yes; and I think with increasing frequency.

If the opinion became prevalent in India that changes of decision on
matters of individual and immediate interest might be readily produced
by such appeals to Parliament, do you think that they would become very
frequent? Those best acquainted with India say, that the natives are
exceedingly averse to giving up any pretension whatever, until they have
tried every resource within their reach for getting a hostile decision
reversed. I think if it were the habit of the people of India to look to
a revision of their cases in England, as a thing which could be procured
by sending vakeels, or delegates, here, they would very frequently do
so, incurring much useless expense, and often ultimate disappointment.
But the proper remedy is, that the Home Government should so act as to
convince the natives of India that if their case is just, they will have
full justice done to them, on a review of the papers, without sending
any one here to represent them; and that if their case is unjust,
however many people they may send, it will do them no good.

Would money be wanting on their part to prosecute such appeals? There
are many natives who have ample means for the purpose.

Can you suggest any improvements in the present Home Government of
India? It is difficult to suggest alterations in a system of Government,
of which the good working, so far as it has worked well, could not have
been predicted beforehand. The present constitution of the Government of
India has been very much the Edition: current; Page: [37] growth of
accident, and has worked well, in consequence of things which were not
foreseen, and were not in the contemplation of those who established it
in a great measure, from causes not provided for in the received
theories of government. So much of the good working of the present
Government being the result of accident, accident would probably have a
great share in determining the operation of any new system which might
be substituted for it; but it would be necessary to keep in view in any
alteration the circumstances, so far as they can be assigned, which have
been the causes of the beneficial working hitherto. Among the first of
those seems to me to be, that those who are sent to administer the
affairs of India, are not sent to any particular appointment; they go
out merely as candidates; they go out when young, and go through the
necessary course of preparation in subordinate functions before they can
arrive at the higher ones. That seems to me the first essential
requisite for the good government of India. A second great advantage of
the present system is, that those who are sent out as candidates to rise
by degrees to the higher offices, are generally unconnected with the
influential classes in this country, and out of the range of
Parliamentary influence. The consequence is, that those who have the
disposal of offices in India have little or no motive to put unfit
persons into important situations, or to permit unjustifiable acts to be
done by them. Any change in the government of India which would bring
the appointment to Indian offices into the ordinary channels of
political or Parliamentary influence would, I think, take away one of
the chief causes of whatever is beneficial in the present working of the
Government of India.

Would the sale of such appointments, in your opinion, operate
injuriously? It would probably bring a much greater proportion of them
than at present into the channels in which political influence flows in
this country, and in so far as it did so I think it would deteriorate
the Indian Government. At present, the civil servants, appointed very
young, and by individual members of the Court, do not usually become
eligible for any very high appointment during the time that the
Directors who appointed them can be supposed to have any influence over
their promotion. Partly from this circumstance, and partly because the
person who gives the appointment is only one of 24, it is my belief
there is hardly any government existing in which there is so little
personal jobbing as in the Government of India.

Is there not a tendency, from the patronage being administered from
private and personal motives, to the service of India becoming a sort of
caste of particular families and particular connexions? I should say not
more than is in the nature of the case, and not to such an extent as to
be an evil. It will happen under any system that persons who have served
in India will look by preference to Indian appointments for their sons;
and they would under any system be likely to have readier access to
Indian than to any other appointments. In whatever manner the Home
Government might be constituted, it would doubtless be partly composed
of persons who have served in India, and, if so, the patronage in their
gift would flow in the same channels as at present.

Is it not generally supposed that the patronage in the hands of the
Directors is Edition: current; Page: [38] made use of to obtain
elections to the Court? I have heard of such things; I do not know how
far that is the case. I have no doubt the directors bestow their
patronage on those who have served them in that, or any other way. But
the main point appears to me to be, that neither a Director, nor any one
else connected with the Home Government, has it in his power to appoint
an unfit person to any situation in India: the only thing he can do is,
to send out a candidate, who will ultimately obtain an important
situation if he is considered fit for it by the local Government; but
since the appointment here is only the appointment of a candidate, who
is to go to India, and make himself fit for an important situation
before he can receive it, the bestowing of this patronage from private
motives is not attended with the evils which would arise from making
appointments to office on private grounds.

Has not the influence of the proprietors, in the bestowal of the
patronage, the effect of distributing the patronage more largely and
more widely among the community? No doubt it has; the general course in
which the patronage flows is among the middle classes.

What do you mean by the middle classes? I mean, in the present case, by
the middle classes, the classes unconnected with politics, or with the
two Houses of Parliament.

It has been frequently observed that a very large proportion of the
servants of the East India Company have been selected from that part of
the kingdom north of the Tweed; is it your opinion that such is the
case, or not? It was the case at one time, from accidental
circumstances. One of the causes was said to be, that the first Lord
Melville was so long President of the Board of Control;3 at present I am
not aware that there is a larger proportion of Scotch in the Indian
service than in other departments of the public service.

It is your opinion that there are not a greater number of Scotchmen in
the East India Company’s service than Englishmen or Irishmen? I do not
think there are.

Do you consider a tradesman to belong to the middle class, or not? I do.

Are there not a great many sons of tradesmen sent to India? I am not
aware what the proportion is; but I have no doubt that there are some.

What circumstance, in your opinion, leads to the appointment of sons of
tradesmen to writerships, or cadetships? I cannot answer that question;
I have no knowledge of the motives which operate on Directors in
disposing of their patronage.

Is it not a curious circumstance that the son of a horse-dealer should
be sent to India as a cadet? The son of a horse-dealer is as likely to
qualify himself in the subordinate situations for succeeding to the
higher as the son of any one else.

But that is not exactly the class from which you would select persons to
be the companions of gentlemen who are to fill honourable professions?
It is not the class Edition: current; Page: [39] from whom cadets or
writers are generally selected; but I see no reason why such persons
should be excluded.

Do you see any reason why the aristocracy should be excluded? I see no
reason for excluding any one; but it does seem to me undesirable that
those who are appointed to situations in India should be persons
permanently connected with political parties, or with Parliamentary
influence at home.

Do not you think that the higher the class of men who are appointed to
fill our civil situations in India, the greater the security for the
connection between India and England? I think that the permanence of the
connection between India and England depends upon our being able to give
good government to India, and to persuade the people of India that we do
so.

Is it your opinion that those persons ought to be excluded from the
Indian service who have any connection with the great political parties
in this country? I would exclude no one; but I think it is a
recommendation of the present system that those appointed under it are
mostly unconnected with the possessors of Parliamentary influence.

You think that that is advantageous to the Government of India? It is
the greatest protection that can be obtained against improper
appointments.

Hitherto there has not been even a suspicion against the manner in which
the Governor-general has exercised his power of selection? The
Governor-general can seldom have any motive to appoint unfit persons to
situations in India, because while the service is taken from one class,
the Governor-general belongs to another, and none of his personal or
political connexions are in the class from which the service is taken.
He has thus no personal interest in appointing persons to situations for
which they are unfit, and I believe it is very seldom that such
appointments take place, except by mistake, or negligence.

Should you think it an extraordinary circumstance if you heard that a
gentleman, on being appointed Governor-general, had, in the course of
ten days, before he could get out to India, no less than 400 letters
asking him for appointments? I should not be surprised to hear of any
number of applications for appointments.

What is the second circumstance to which you alluded as a recommendation
of the existing constitution of the Government of India? The two
circumstances which I mentioned were, in the first place, that those who
are sent out are merely candidates; they are never, or very rarely,
appointed from England to any situation in India. The second
circumstance was, that by the time those candidates come to be eligible
for high situations, it generally happens that the Director from whom
they received their nomination is no longer a Director.

Those circumstances that you have stated have reference solely to the
appointment and promotion of civil servants. Do you see any other
circumstance in the working of the Government at home which would
recommend it to Parliament for renewal? The great reason, as it seems to
me, recommending it for Edition: current; Page: [40] renewal, is the
difficulty, if not impossibility, of forming a system of government
which would be likely to work better.

The late Sir Charles Forbes was not a Director? He was not; but he had a
son a Director at one time.4

He took a great deal of interest in the election of Directors? He had
great influence in the elections.

Was he not connected with a party which hung together with the view of
influencing the election of Directors? I am not aware that he was.

Should you be surprised to hear that Sir Charles Forbes, in the course
of his life, had obtained 40 different appointments, and that he had the
curiosity to have the likeness taken of every young man for whom he
obtained an appointment, and those likenesses were hung round his room?
From his long connexion with the Court of Directors, I should not be
surprised at his having obtained that number of appointments. Those who
were appointed on his recommendation have been as good servants as any
others. If it were only from having a son a Director, he might obtain in
a number of years almost that number of appointments.

Have you ever looked at the list of voters for the election of Directors
for the purpose of seeing how many gentlemen can obtain a majority of
votes?5 I have never examined the list with that particular view.

Should you be surprised if you found, on looking into it, that 413
gentlemen had 910 votes?6 I should not. That might be the result under
any system which gives a plurality of votes on account of the property
held.

Have you looked into the list which has been presented from the India
House of the number of persons having more than one vote, and the number
of voters and the number of votes? I know that there is a considerable
number who have two, three, or four stars opposite to their names. If I
am asked whether I think it would be better to give only one vote to
each elector, I am inclined to think that it would make no practical
difference of any importance. The proprietors are not a body which any
one would have selected à priori for the election of Directors. Any
other body whatever of respectable men would be as likely to elect
proper persons as this, and this as likely as any other. As you cannot
constitute an elective body in this country identified with the
interests of the people of India, it does not appear to me to matter
much what the body is.

Edition: current; Page: [41]
Need the present body be identified with the interests of India, looking
to what the qualification of the elector is beyond this, that it is
their interest to see that the interest of the debt is paid? That is the
only interest they have in India.

Do you think that the existence of the proprietors as an elective body
has the effect of distributing more widely the patronage of the Court of
Directors who now distribute it, than if such proprietory body did not
exist, and had no claim upon the distribution? I cannot answer that
question; I am ignorant what proportion of the patronage of India goes
to the proprietors; and whatever the proportion may be, some
considerable part of it would go into the same channels if no such body
as the proprietors existed.

The more limited the number of persons who distribute the patronage, and
the more limited the claims upon them, the more likely that patronage
would be to pass in narrow channels connected with the individuals who
gave it? It seems to me the primary and essential object that
appointments in India should not be held by persons who have
Parliamentary and political influence at home, that being the source
from which inducements to make bad appointments, or to sanction bad
measures, are most likely to come.

What is there in the constitution of the present Court of Proprietors
which prevents any political party in this country from becoming
proprietors, and, therefore, electors of the Court of Directors? There
is nothing to prevent it; but it has not been the fact, and it is not
likely to be the fact.

Is there any necessary connexion between the possession of a certain
amount of stock, which gives a vote to the party holding it, and
interest in the good government of India; and do you think that it would
be desirable to introduce some more direct connexion with India on the
part of the electors? I think there is a good deal to be said both for
and against any such proposition.

Will you have the goodness to state what the arguments are for and
against it? If the question were put with reference to some particular
proposition, I might be able to answer more satisfactorily.

Is it your opinion that it would be desirable to allow the holders of
the debt in India to vote for the Directors, or to give a right of
voting to the Company’s servants? I think the constitution of the body
of proprietors is of less importance than almost any other question
connected with the Government of India; but the main fault of the
present system is the long and troublesome canvass which is necessary to
enable any person to be appointed a Director; and if there were an
increase of the constituency, it is a question whether it would tend to
make this canvass a greater or a less burden; it might do either the one
or the other.

What objection should you have to Mr. Wynne’s proposal,7 that the Crown
Edition: current; Page: [42] should have the power of appointing Indian
servants as Directors on their return from India to this country? I
think the fact that all Indian proceedings are reviewed by two separate
bodies, independent of one another, is a much greater security for good
government than would exist under any system by which those two bodies
were merged into one. The double revision by persons of a different
class, in a different position, and probably with different
prepossessions, tends greatly to promote a close and rigid examination.

Do you suppose that the present system operates as a sufficient check
upon the President of the Board of Control? To judge of the present
system, it must be compared with some other. If we compare it with the
system of an Indian Minister, who should have both the initiation and
the final decision, he would act under a much less check than he now
does. The Court of Directors, who are the initiating body, not being the
body which finally decides; not being able to act but by the concurrence
of a second authority, and having no means of causing their opinion to
be adopted by that authority, except the strength of their reasons,
there is much greater probability that a body so situated will examine
and weigh carefully the grounds of all proceedings, than if the same
body which had the initiative gave the final order.

On the whole, you conceive that the Court of Directors are the best
administrative body that could be found under the peculiar circumstances
of the Government of India? I would not pretend to say that no better
could be found; but it seems to me they are as good a body as there is
any probability of obtaining. Not having the final power, all the power
which they exercise depends upon the care which they bestow upon the
examination and consideration of the matters committed to them.

Are you acquainted yourself with the details of the correspondence
between the Court of Directors and the Board of Control; can you trace a
letter from the moment when it originates, to its final arrival before
the Board of Control, or does your position enable you to know anything
about it? In most cases it does.

With whom does the letter originate? With the Chairman.

Nominally and officially it originates with the Chairman; but does the
Chairman, in fact, gives instructions for writing the letter? That
depends upon circumstances. There is a vast mass of ordinary business
respecting which the Chairman neither feels called upon to give previous
instructions, nor do those who have the care of the department think it
necessary to ask for them.

In point of fact, does it not frequently happen that the correspondence
is examined by the clerk, or the secretary, and he suggests what the
reply shall be? Sometimes so, and sometimes not. In the course of
business, the papers come first into the hands of the secretary or
clerk, or the person who is in charge of the correspondence; it is his
duty, in bringing those papers to the notice of the Chairman, to be able
to answer all questions concerning them, and it is expected of him that
he shall have formed an opinion upon the subject.

Edition: current; Page: [43]
It is expected that he shall suggest what the answer shall be? It is not
expected; but he is always at liberty to do so.

Is it not the practice? It is not the practice universally; it is the
practice in ordinary matters.

Is it general practice? There is no general practice. It is usual for
the person in charge of the correspondence to ask the previous
instructions of the Chairman, when he thinks there is any doubt of what
the opinions of the Chairman would be.

Does he not write a memorandum first of all of the facts? That is
sometimes done in complicated and important cases.

Is it not done universally; is not the substance of the papers in the
collection stated in a memorandum, for the convenience of the Chairman;
how can he possibly read all the papers himself? It is sometimes stated
in the form of a memorandum, and sometimes in that of a proposed letter.

But in all cases the substance, at least, is stated in some manner to
the Chairman? Yes.

Together with the opinion of the clerk who makes the statement? With an
opinion, or without an opinion. Sometimes the officer who makes the
statement thinks it desirable to ask the Chairman’s instructions first
on the facts merely, without giving any opinion. In some cases again the
Chairman does not wait till he has the facts brought before him, but
sends for the officer, interrogates him on the facts, and gives
instructions for preparing the reply, after calling for whatever papers
he thinks necessary to understand it. The modes of proceeding vary
according to the degree of importance ascribed to the matter, and
according to the degree of interest the Chairman takes in the subject.

Do not they vary according to the business-like habits of the Chairman?
They do; but since the last Charter,8 it has very seldom happened that
the Chairman has not been a man of business.

Is it not a rare circumstance that the view of the Chairman is
disregarded? By no means. On subjects on which a difference of opinion
can fairly exist, it very often happens.

What is the character of the opinion expressed by the clerk; does it
consist in remarks upon the correspondence in the way of censure or
approval? Yes.

Do you know any one measure which has originated at home? It is scarcely
possible to say where measures really originate. In cases of emergency,
such as war, anything done must necessarily depend upon the
Governor-general on the spot; and all that can be done by the home
authorities is to express an opinion upon it after it is done, which may
have an influence on the Government in future cases. But with reference
to internal government, I am not aware of any great measures which have
been adopted until after there has been a great deal of discussion
between the Local Government and the Home Government on the subject; and
Edition: current; Page: [44] though the measure may have originated
nominally with the Government of India, the suggestions may often be
traced to instructions which had been given, or principles laid down in
despatches sent from the home authorities.

At the distance of many years? The despatches from the India House have
in many cases tended greatly to form the opinions of Indian politicians
in India.

In the case of the abolition of the 160 duties in the North-western
frontier in the year 1843,9 did that measure originate here? I am not
conversant with the details of the Revenue department, though I am, of
course, acquainted with its general principles.

Should you not say that the general government of India proceeds on all
great occasions without receiving special instructions from home? I
think a case can hardly happen in which the Government of India is not
tolerably well aware, from previous despatches, whether the course which
is about to be adopted is likely to have the approval of the home
authorities. There is hardly any measure adopted of which the general
principle might not be found discussed in the previous correspondence.

Do not you know whether the abolition of 160 duties upon the
North-western frontier was approved or not? I am not aware whether it
was approved at the time, but it was sanctioned.

You spoke of the working of the Government being, considering the
difficulties, very satisfactory. Can you point out any of the
difficulties to which you allude which would be removable by Parliament?
It is difficult to foresee in what way alterations would work. But any
alteration which placed the control of the Government in some one
authority, instead of leaving it divided between two, would, I think, be
for the worse.

Would you carry the same principle into effect in every case; instead of
having a single Government, do you think it would be convenient to have
a double Government? My opinion, if I were able to form any, would
depend upon the nature of the case. I am inclined to think that such a
double Government would be useful, wherever it was necessary to have a
body of a permanent character specially conversant with a subject not
generally studied by politicians in this country, while, at the same
time, the general Government of the country must also have a voice.

Would you introduce the system of double Government with reference to
the 52 colonies of the Crown? I am not sufficiently acquainted with the
Colonial department to be able to express a positive opinion; but I
should conceive that there might be great advantage from having some
body analogous to the Court of Directors as a Council to assist the
Colonial Minister.

Edition: current; Page: [45]
A Council to represent each colony? It does not follow that there should
be a separate body for each colony, any more than that there should be a
separate body for each Presidency, or each Zillah, in India.10

Between Australia and Canada there is no connexion; one permanent body
would not be able to advise the Minister of the Crown on Australian and
Canadian matters? In Canada and Australia there are local representative
bodies perfectly competent to exercise that antagonistic discussion,
which seems to me an essential element of good government everywhere;
but for India you cannot have any local body which shall produce that
result.

Is there not a good deal of antagonistic discussion between the
Government of India and the authorities at home; are not the Government
of India capable of taking their own part, and giving their reasons for
their measures? Certainly; but the discussion between the Government
here and the Government there, I apprehend, is not sufficient security
where there is nothing else to trust to; where there is no body
representing the people of the country, and no body of persons ex
officio conversant with their interests.

Should you say that the Court of Directors represent the people of
India? Certainly not.

Is not their position directly antagonistic to that of the people of
India? The antagonism which I contemplated was a discussion between
persons who could not be supposed beforehand to be likely to be of the
same opinion; discussion, by persons all of one mind, is of no use;
where you have not the advantages given by a representative Government
of discussion by persons of all partialities, prepossessions and
interests, to secure that the subject shall be looked at in many
different lights, though you cannot have a perfect substitute for this,
still some substitute is better than none. If you can have a body
unconnected with the general Government of the country, and containing
many persons who have made that department of public affairs the
business of their lives, as is the case with the Court of Directors,
there is much better discussion and much better sifting of the matters
committed to their charge, by having such a body in addition to the
Minister of the Crown, than by having the Minister of the Crown without
such a body, or the Minister of the Crown acting as Chairman of the
body.

Edition: current; Page: [46]
Do you think that if the Court of Directors, in its present form, is to
be maintained, advantage would be derived from giving a quasi
representative character to the Court of Proprietors, so that their
representatives might be more identified in feeling with the people of
India? I am not aware how the Court of Proprietors could be so
constituted as to be identified with the people of India.

Could you not give to the Court of Proprietors more knowledge of the
affairs of India: it appears, by a Return which has been presented to
the Committee, that out of 1,760 persons who vote in the election of
Directors, there are but 253 persons who have ever been in the service
of the Government?11 I cannot foresee what would be the effect of making
the circumstance of having served a certain time in India a
qualification for the Court of Proprietors; but I should think it could
not have a bad effect, unless by multiplying the body, and rendering the
canvass more onerous than at present; the difficulty of the canvass has
prevented some of the most eminent servants of the Company from seeking
a place in the Court of Directors.

Might not the Court of Proprietors be so extended in number, as to
render a canvass impossible; and might it not be so improved in its
composition, as to give the means of knowing the respective
qualifications and claims of the several candidates who desired to
belong to the Direction, having served in India? It is difficult to say;
there is no popular election at present, however public in its
character, in which there is not a canvass; and in this case it is
probable that the canvass would always continue onerous.

For instance, do you think that the 899 ladies who have votes, exercise
a sound discretion in the selection of the individuals, knowing their
qualifications and claims? I do not believe any portion of the Court of
Proprietors exercise much discretion of that kind; I do not believe that
to any great degree the election by the proprietors is determined by
public grounds. I believe, however, that those who are influential among
the proprietors are sufficiently before the public, and are themselves
sufficiently interested in Indian affairs, not to use their influence on
behalf of persons who would be considered discreditable. That is the
extent to which there is now a security, and I doubt whether more would
be obtained under any system, because I do not think there are the means
of forming an electoral body sufficiently identified with the interests
of India to afford much security for a good choice.

Do you think the English and foreign Jews, who hold a large amount of
stock, exercise a sound discretion in the election of Directors, with
reference to the good government of India? I have already said that I do
not think the elections of the Court of Directors are made on public
grounds; they are mainly the result of private influence; but those who
possess the influence, exercise it under a sufficiently Edition:
current; Page: [47] strong sense of responsibility to the public to
prevent them from selecting any person very objectionable. The security
at present depends rather on the kind of persons who are candidates,
than on the kind who are electors. The candidates being, as a general
rule, persons of Indian experience, who wish to keep up their connexion
with Indian affairs, that is in itself some evidence of their not being
wholly unfit for the station, inasmuch as persons who have gone through
the Indian service, and retired from it, are not likely to retain a
taste for Indian employment, unless they retain in some degree their
fitness for it.

Has the tendency of the elections in the last 20 years of the Court of
Proprietors, as at present constituted, been to strengthen the connexion
of the Court of Directors with India, or otherwise? Nearly all the
Directors chosen since the last renewal of the Charter have been persons
who have served in India; but that I attribute not to the constitution
of the Court of Proprietors, but to the fact, that since the Company has
ceased to be commercial, there are not the same inducements as formerly
to the merchants and bankers of London either to hold stock, or to
become Directors, and in consequence few such have been elected.

Has not the circumstance of the Company having ceased to trade, and
having ceased to transact all the business which was connected with that
trade, increased the number of the Directors who take part in the
consideration of the general Government of India? Very much so; it has
rendered the personal participation of the whole of the 24 Directors in
the general business of India much more complete than it was before.
Under the former constitution of the Company, the administration of
India rested, with the exception of the Chairs, entirely with the
Committee of Correspondence, composed of the nine senior Directors, the
remainder of the Directors having no voice in that portion of the
business of the Court; of course they had a voice in the deliberations
of the Court itself; but not having been previously prepared, by
examination of papers and discussion in Committee, they had not so much
influence, and were, besides, occupied with other things. The Committee
of Correspondence, composed of the senior Directors, and, therefore,
necessarily including any members of the Court who might be
superannuated, were extremely overladen with business, and made a much
more cursory examination of the papers than the Committees do now. At
present the Government of India being the only business of the Court, it
is divided among three Committees, to all of which every Director is
eligible, and the consequence is, that every Director takes a more
active part than formerly in the consideration of the draft despatches
that are laid before them by the Chairs.

Has not one effect of that been that the Chairs have much less authority
than they used to have in the Court? I think it has.

Has it not produced, whether for good or evil, a great practical
revolution in the system of government; formerly the business having
been conducted through the Chairs by a small body of persons who had the
cognizance and general transaction of political cases; and now the 24
Directors take part in the discussions? There is Edition: current; Page:
[48] generally a great indisposition to oppose the Chairs; and they are
never opposed, except where there is fair ground for a difference of
opinion.

Is it not the fact, that in former times, before the commencement of the
present Charter Act, when the President of the Board of Control had
settled any matter with the Chairs, it was practically a final
settlement, and the view taken by the Court, was not in fact different
from theirs; but now a settlement between the Chairs and the President,
by no means brings after it, as a matter of course, the acquiescence of
the Court? I am not aware whether or not there is so great a difference
as the question seems to contemplate: there is certainly some
difference, and there is a much more active part taken by individual
Directors than formerly.

Is not that, again, a great practical alteration in the system of
Government? I do not think it is a great practical alteration; it is
some practical alteration.

So that we have now to consider whether it is expedient to retain a
Government very different from that which existed in 1834? I should not
say very different; in some degree it is different.

Does not the addition of three-fourths to a cabinet, which is the change
that has been made, produce a very great change in the mode in which
cases are judged of and discussed; are not cases now judged of and
discussed as they would be in a popular assembly? On great questions
which are likely to lead to a difference of opinion between the Court of
Directors and the Board of Control, I doubt whether there is any
difference; because on questions which were interesting to the
collective body of the Court, all the Directors would at any time have
given their minds to the subject, and the opinion expressed would have
been the opinion of the collective body; I think the difference which
has been produced is in the details; it happens much more frequently now
that the draft despatches submitted by the Chairs undergo alterations of
details in Committees, or the Court; but these are seldom of a kind that
materially alter the Government of India.

Does not the influence of the Chair depend very much upon the individual
Chairman? Yes.

This change goes, to a certain extent, to diminish the value of the
previous communications? There still is very great advantage in the
previous communications.

With regard to the active participation taken by the whole body of
Directors in the transaction of the business, what is your opinion of
that part of the law which requires one-fifth of the Court to go out
annually?12 I think it makes very little difference for either good or
harm; I have no decided opinion about it.

With this active part taken by those 24 gentlemen, might it not happen
that, merely on account of rotation, a member connected with a
department of public business, for which he was peculiarly qualified,
might be obliged to go out, and the Court might be deprived of his aid
in the transaction of that business? Yes; but that happens much more
seldom than might be supposed, because it is always Edition: current;
Page: [49] endeavoured to conclude the business of the year within the
year. Subjects are begun at such times that they shall not be under
discussion at the time of the renewal of the Directors, as in the case
of the Session of Parliament, except that there is no interval, as in
that case.

Whatever inconvenience exists in that case, your opinion is that care is
taken to diminish that inconvenience? I think so.13

* * * * *

Are there any circumstances in the relations between England and India
which require that the machinery for the government of India should be
differently constituted from that of the other dependencies of Great
Britain? I think there are very important differences; principally two.
In the first place, India is a peculiar country; the state of society
and civilization, the character and habits of the people, and the
private and public rights established among them, are totally different
from those which are known or recognised in this country; in fact the
study of India must be as much a profession in itself as law or
medicine. In the other dependencies of Great Britain the people are for
the most part English, and whoever is fit to deal with English people
here, is fit to deal with them there. But in the case of India, even if
a person of the greatest knowledge of the world and the most cultivated
mind were sent to be Governor-general, he would still have an
apprenticeship to serve. This makes it essential that the administration
of India should be carried on by men who have been trained in the
subordinate offices, and have studied India as it were professionally. A
second consideration, not less important is, that the public of India
afford no assistance in their own government. They are not ripe for
doing so by means of representative government; they are not even in a
condition to make effectual appeals to the people of this country; they
cannot even make their circumstances and interests and grievances known
and intelligible to people so different and so unacquainted with India
as the people, and even the Parliament, of this country. The discussion
here of Indian subjects, when there is any, is carried on not by persons
representing the people of India, but chiefly by Englishmen who have
personal interests or connexions in India, generally almost as ignorant
of the people and the interests of India as the English public, and
having mostly other objects than the interest of the people of India in
view. Since, therefore, the great security for good government—public
discussion—does not exist for India, as it exists for this country and
for its other dependencies, the only means of ensuring the necessary
discussion and collision of opinions is provided within the governing
body itself. The British colonies, of which the people are mostly
English, and in most of which there are representative bodies composed
of English people, have ample means of discussion, and ample means by
which, if they think themselves aggrieved by any act of the Government,
they can appeal home; and when such an appeal is made, the people of
this country, although often extremely ill informed as Edition: current;
Page: [50] to colonial matters, are much more capable of judging of them
than they are of Indian affairs.

What do you think would be the probable effect of carrying on the
government of India like that of the colonies, by means of a Secretary
of State for India? I should think it would be the most complete
despotism that could possibly exist in a country like this; because
there would be no provision for any discussion or deliberation, except
that which might take place between the Secretary of State and his
subordinates in office, whose advice and opinion he would not be bound
to listen to; and who, even if he were, would not be responsible for the
advice or opinion that they might give.

How could it be a despotism when Parliament would have the control of
the conduct of the Secretary of State? Undoubtedly Parliament would have
the control; but Parliament not having sufficient knowledge of India and
its people, would exercise its control with very imperfect information;
and it seems to me of the utmost importance to make provision in the
constitution of the Government itself, for compelling those who have the
governing power, to listen to, and take into consideration, the opinions
of persons who, from their position and their previous life, have made a
study of Indian subjects, and acquired experience in them.

But though Parliament might be imperfectly informed, Parliament would
not think it was imperfectly informed? That would be one of the evils I
should apprehend.

Would it be possible for Parliament to have sufficient cognizance of the
facts connected with the administration of the Secretary of State for
India, to enable them to act as a check upon his administration? It
cannot be said that Parliament and publicity are no check; but I think
they are a very insufficient one.

Would it be possible to give such publicity as would enable them to act
as a check? It would be possible to give any degree of publicity; but it
would not be possible to secure the requisite interest in the subject,
or the requisite instruction.

Do you think that, under such a system of Government, the continual
change of policy, which would be likely to take place, arising from the
change of parties, would be fatal to the Government of India? It would
be a great evil if it really happened; possibly, however, it might not
happen, and the Government of India might continue to be carried on in
much the same way under all parties; but there would not be the same
security for this which there is at present. I conceive that there would
be two great inconveniences: in ordinary cases there would be apathy and
indifference on the part of Parliament and the public; the Secretary of
State for India would be able to do exactly as he liked, and to omit any
part of his duty if he were too indolent or too ignorant to perform it;
but whenever it did happen that interest was excited in Indian
questions, they would become party questions; and India would be made
(which I should regard as a great calamity) a subject for discussions,
of which the real object would be to effect a change in the
administration of the Government of England.

Edition: current; Page: [51]
Why do you think that greater apathy would exist upon questions relative
to the interests of India, than upon questions relating to the interests
of the colonies? Because the colonies have the means of making their
grievances heard; the colonies are much more closely connected with
England; there are many more English people who have interests there;
and there are also in the colonies local popular bodies, which is of
itself a very great check, independently of any check afforded by
Parliament. If there were a possibility at present of establishing a
similar check in India, by any form of local representative government,
I should think the constitution of the organ of Government in England
much less important; but at present the only security for the good
government of India is in constituting the Government here with as
little imperfection as possible.

Do you think it would be possible to recognise any body in India which
should be competent to express an opinion upon measures relating to that
country? I do not think that India has yet attained such a degree of
civilization and improvement as to be ripe for anything like a
representative system. It would certainly be possible for the Government
to take natives into its counsels much more than at present; but this I
think would be better done by cultivating a greater degree of
intercourse between intelligent natives and the members of the
Government, or the holders of public offices, rather than by forming a
body of persons selected by the Government and considering them as the
representatives of the people of India, who, probably for the very
reason of their being selected by the Government, would not be inclined
to recognise them as their representatives.

It has been stated by some witnesses, that great advantage has resulted
in India from the preliminary promulgation of proposed laws, which has
had the effect of eliciting opinions from the natives, so as to enable
the Government to form an opinion whether the law might be
advantageously carried into effect or not;14 do you think that is a
useful practice? I have no doubt that it has been a very useful and
indeed a necessary practice. The Court of Directors, in the instructions
issued after the last renewal of the charter, pointed out that, in the
absence of the security against precipitate legislation derived from
public discussion by a numerous body like the Legislature of this
country, it was necessary to make some other provision for deliberation
and previous information; and therefore to interpose a certain delay
between the first proposing and the passing of any Act, and to invite,
in every way in which it could conveniently be done, suggestions and
information in the meanwhile.15

Edition: current; Page: [52]
What are the advantages of the division of the home Government of India
into two distinct bodies, the Court of Directors and the Board of
Control? It affords, I think, a great additional security for discussion
and consideration. By rendering the consent of two distinct authorities
necessary, you, in the first place, secure discussion between those two.
The initiative being given to one body and a veto to the other, and the
body over which the veto can be exercised, having in reality no
substantial power, except that which it derives from the force of its
reasons, it is under very strong inducements to put reason on its side
if it can. If the despatches which originate with the Court of Directors
are not well grounded in reason, they carry no weight with the Board.
The Court of Directors does not and cannot exercise any effective share
in the government except in so far as it takes care to have reason on
its side. Having this instrument of power and no other, it has the
strongest motive to use that instrument to the utmost; and in doing so,
it is a most efficient check upon the body which has the ultimate power,
because that body being sure to have all subjects brought before it,
with the result of the full consideration and concentrated judgment of a
body which, from its constitution, has commonly that special knowledge
and information which the President of the Board of Control in general
has not, the President is under great inducement not to set aside the
judgment of this comparatively well-informed body, unless he can give as
strong or stronger reasons on the contrary side.

Is it not the case, that even in addition to the ordinary forms of
conference and communication between the Chairs, as they are called, and
the President of the Board, if there should be any difference between
them, the President has the power of consulting the other members of the
Court, and frequently does so through the Chairs, and in fact has
recourse to any documents which the Chairs may have it in their power to
lay before him, so as to strengthen the view which they have put before
the President? The President can call upon the Chairs to produce any
papers upon the subject which they may have omitted to bring before him.

Is it not the case, that independently of the legal power of the
President, where different communications have taken place between the
President and the Chairs, they are in the habit of laying before him any
additional documents which they think will strengthen the views which
they have put before the President? Yes, and of discussing all subjects
on which there is any difference of opinion.

Is not the Court of Directors specially interested in appointing the
very ablest officials? They are; and they exert themselves to obtain the
ablest persons they can to conduct the correspondence under them. Their
position gives them a very strong interest in doing this, since they can
only expect that their draft despatches will be adopted by the Board of
Control, if they are such as to carry the weight of reason and knowledge
with them.

Would the same benefits be realized, in your opinion, if India were to
be governed by the two bodies merged into one, and by endeavouring to
form a single body which should unite the advantages of both, such as a
Council of India, presided Edition: current; Page: [53] over by a
Minister of the Crown? I think that such a system would be far
preferable to a Government merely by a Secretary of State; but that the
advantages now derived from the division of the governing body into two
parts, the one having the initiative and the other the ultimate control,
would not be obtained under the system of a Minister and Council. In the
first place, there is now not only an examination by two authorities,
but successive examinations by two sets of competent subordinates. If
the body were but one, there would be only one set of subordinates; and
that is not a trifling consideration, but in practice a very important
one. In the next place, if the Minister of the Crown were President of
the co-ordinate body, whether it were called the Court of Directors or
Council of India, he would have, not as at present substantially a mere
veto, but substantially the initiative, as the Chairman now has; and in
that case the Council would not be under anything like the same
responsibility, and would not exercise anything like the same power that
the Court of Directors do. When the Council are obliged to consider the
subject first, and to make up their minds upon it, and to write, or
cause to be written, the strongest justification they can make of their
opinion, the mind of this body is much more effectually applied to the
subject, and a much more painstaking and conscientious decision is
likely to be arrived at by them, than if they were only considered as
the advisers of, or as a check upon another initiating authority. Of
course, under the system suggested in the question, it cannot be meant
that the power of decision should rest in the Minister and his Council
jointly. The ultimate decision would rest with the Minister only, and
his Council would be merely a Council. Now, when the Minister had thus
both the ultimate power of decision and the initiative, it seems to me
that the functions of the Council would be reduced to comparative
insignificance, and there would be great danger of their becoming
nominal.

If the plan suggested in the last question were adopted, would not the
Government of necessity cease to be a double Government, and be a single
Government, consisting of combined parts, which from their nature and
their functions would be liable to constant collision? They are now
liable to collision; but any prolonged conflict is provided against by
giving to one of the two authorities—the Minister of the Crown—the
ultimate deciding power: and I imagine that in any new system that could
be proposed, this provision would be adhered to.

Although there is a liability at present to come into collision, is not
that collision, and are not the consequences of such collision, better
guarded against by the present system than they would be by that
proposed? I conceive that under the alteration proposed, the specially
instructed body would not have power enough; in the first place, because
the initiative would fall habitually into the hands of the President,
and consequently the members of the Council would not be under nearly
such strong inducements as the Court of Directors are to form a careful
opinion, and to stand up for it. In the next place, they would not be
nearly so much Edition: current; Page: [54] in the public eye. The Court
of Directors are at present the ostensible Government of India; they
reap a very large proportion of the credit of good government, and of
the discredit of bad; and it seems to me of great importance that they
should still do so; because that is what places them, with no instrument
in their hands but reason, under such strong inducements to employ that
instrument to the utmost.

In fact you consider that the present system is a very convenient
fiction? I do not think it is fairly described as a fiction, since it is
acknowledged, that not only the Board of Control but the Cabinet, when
of a different opinion, sometimes think it right to defer to the opinion
of the Court of Directors: no doubt because they feel that the Directors
are more competent to form an opinion than themselves. As the Court of
Directors can have no power but what they derive from that belief, it is
greatly for their interest that the belief should be justified.

Is it a fiction to say that the Government of India resides in the Court
of Directors? It is practically by no means a fiction, since it does not
happen once in a hundred times that a despatch, prepared by the Court of
Directors, undergoes alteration in principle and substance by the Board
of Control. It is true that this is in a great measure to be accounted
for by the constant communication kept up between the Chairs and the
President; so that, unless the Chairs are anxious to have a contest with
the Board, in order to place on record an important difference of
opinion, they seldom send up a proposed despatch which they know is
contrary to the President’s opinion, and therefore will not pass. Still,
however, in practice, the preparation of despatches rests substantially
with the Court of Directors, and not with the Board of Control.

You think it is not fairly to be called a fiction; but do you not think
that the general notion which people have of their power attributes to
them much greater power than they really have? Undoubtedly the habit of
speaking of the Court of Directors as the Government of India, causes
the controlling power exercised over them to be very much lost sight of,
and causes much less of the moral responsibility of the Government of
India to rest upon the Minister of the Crown than is really his fair
share. But even this has its advantages, because it brings the feeling
of responsibility to bear more strongly upon those who possess the
requisite knowledge, and whose examination is much more effectual than
any examination that can be exercised by persons less acquainted with
the subject. It therefore seems to me important that the Court should
not be led to consider themselves, or be considered by the public and by
the people of India, as a subordinate, but as a co-ordinate authority.

Do they not, under the power they have of initiating all despatches,
virtually exercise a principal part in the general administration of the
Government of India? In as far as that can be said of the home
Government at all, I think they do. I think that those who deliberately
consider all subjects in the first instance, recording their opinion,
and who do this in such a manner, that in a great majority of cases
Edition: current; Page: [55] their opinion is adopted by the controlling
power, have a full share, and virtually the largest share in the
administration.

Do not they practically furnish the knowledge by which the Government of
India is conducted? They furnish much more than the Board of Control.

Is it not the fact that the Board of Control furnish none? The Board of
Control furnish none but the knowledge which their officers have
acquired by experience in the office.

What means of resistance, on the part of the Court of Directors, have
the Legislature provided, for preventing the Board of Control from
usurping the entire power, and reducing the Court of Directors to a
nullity? The main security is, that the Board of Control cannot
themselves initiate any instructions to India (except in the Secret
Department, which is limited by law to matters of war and negotiation)
unless by calling upon the Court to do so; it is only if the Court fail
to do so within a certain time, that the Board of Control can initiate a
despatch, and compel the Court to send it out; and this shows that it
was the intention of the Legislature, that the Board should be a
controlling rather than an originating power.

Have not the Court of Directors a further power, by having a virtual
veto upon the nomination of the Governor-general by the Crown? They
have; and I may say, on that subject, that I think the present mode of
appointing the Governor-general, namely, by the Court of Directors
ostensibly, but with the approbation of the Crown, is the only means by
which the Court of Directors could obtain so much as a veto; everybody
is aware that the Crown really appoints the Governor-general; but if the
Crown were ostensibly to do so, if the nomination were to vest in the
Crown, then, even if a veto were nominally given to the Court of
Directors, they would not have a real veto. To refuse their sanction to
an appointment once made, would appear to them so strong a measure, that
it must be a very bad appointment indeed, much worse than is likely to
happen, which they would feel called upon so to resist; whereas, by
making it in legal form necessary that they should initiate the
appointment, you do not secure to them, what I think it is not desirable
that they should have, the real appointment, but you give them a real
veto; you prevent the Crown from being able to force upon them any
Governor-general to whom they have a decided objection. I think that a
very important power.

Do you think it is as important, for the maintenance of their authority,
that they should have the power of recall? I think it is proper and
necessary.

Are there not circumstances under which the nomination of the
Governor-general will fall to the Crown? If the Court of Directors make
no appointment within two months.

Would it be desirable to place modifications of the same nature upon the
power of recall; that is to say, by requiring certain notice of the
intention of the Court to exercise the power? I see no particular
advantage in that; because it is not to be supposed that the Directors
would seriously contemplate a recall, unless they Edition: current;
Page: [56] intended to persevere in it; it is not probable that they
would raise the question unless their opinion was thoroughly made up.

Have you ever referred to what took place between the Government and the
Court of Directors in the time of Lord Wellesley?16 I have no particular
recollection of the history of those transactions.

Have you ever referred to it? I have.

Are you under the impression that the Court of Directors never wished to
recall Lord Wellesley? I am under the impression that they did wish, but
not so strongly as to take a measure which they knew would be extremely
disagreeable to the Government of the time.

It was rather a strong Government, that of Mr. Pitt, at that time, was
it not?17 It was.

Is not there a further power of resistance on the part of the Court of
Directors, by refusing to send out a certain despatch, and compelling
the Board of Control to appeal to public opinion in open court, and
forcing them by means of a mandamus in the Court of Queen’s Bench? That
is only the power which anybody possesses of compelling discussion by
resisting a legal authority. The Court would no doubt never think
themselves justified in resorting to such an extremity, unless they had
such strong conscientious objections to the thing proposed, as to
outweigh the objection to refusing obedience to a lawful order.

Do you recollect any instance in which that remedy has been resorted to
by the Court? I remember one instance,18 and I think there have been two
within my recollection.

In which it was successfully exercised? In one of the cases it was
successfully exercised; I am not certain about the second.

Does the Court of Directors ever resist by avoiding to form a sufficient
quorum to sign a despatch? The Court have no occasion to avoid forming a
quorum; because no individual can be forced to sign, even if there is
quorum, unless by process of law. In one of the cases mentioned, several
of the Directors were fully prepared to go to prison, rather than sign
an order which they thought grossly unjust.

Was that resistance successful? It was.

Edition: current; Page: [57]
Have not the Directors the power of appealing to the Court of
Proprietors, and producing such documents as they may think necessary
for instructing the public mind, and thus communicating a knowledge of
those measures of which they disapprove, without at the same time
appealing to party prejudices, as would be the case were that appeal
made to the House of Commons? No doubt the Court of Proprietors afford
means of publicity, but not greater than would be obtained by a motion
for papers in the House of Commons.

Would not there be this disadvantage in a motion for papers in the House
of Commons, that they must act through some party, and the question
would at once assume a party character? There are usually members of the
Court of Directors in the House of Commons, any one of whom can move for
papers.

Would it not be a great disadvantage if Indian matters were made the
subject of party conflict? It is necessary that the last resort of an
appeal to Parliament should be open; but I have already remarked, that I
think the security which that affords for good government is not great,
because there is generally no interest in the subject, unless it can be
made a party subject; and if it be made a party subject, it is in danger
of being decided by party interests.

Then do you consider it to be just as advantageous for the Directors to
appeal to the House of Commons, as to appeal to the Court of
Proprietors? I do not think the appeal to the Court of Proprietors is of
any value except as an instrument of publicity. It is plain that they
might have a perfect power of publicity given to them, without appealing
either to the Court of Proprietors or to Parliament.

How? They might have the liberty of printing and producing papers, and
it might be in their power to lay papers before Parliament.

Have they not that power at present? Only if they are moved for.

If papers were moved for in Parliament, would not a conflict most
probably arise upon the subject of those papers? It might, certainly,
although papers are very often moved for with no such intention, and
with no such effect.

Is it in your opinion desirable that the Court of Proprietors should
have the power of calling for papers under the present constitution of
the Government of India? I think anything which leads to the production
of papers or to the discussion of any questionable matter, is always
useful, although I do not think the discussions in the Court of
Proprietors afford much advantage in the way of good government. They
occur rarely, and when they do occur the matter is commonly discussed
without much knowledge of the subject, and commonly from other interests
than those of the people of India.

Have the Court of Proprietors at the present moment any interest in the
prosperity of the people of India further than as it may be connected
with their dividends? None whatever.

Is not it desirable that they should have the power to call in question
the actions of the Court of Directors and of the Government of India?
The Court of Proprietors is a mere public meeting, at which persons of a
particular class are admitted to Edition: current; Page: [58] speak and
vote, and I think any public discussion on a public subject has the
chance of doing more good than harm.

Would it, in your opinion, be desirable that the papers and
correspondence of the Secret Committee should be laid before the Court
of Proprietors? There are many transactions of Government, and
particularly those of war and diplomacy (the peculiar functions of the
Secret Committee), which until the transactions are completed never are,
and generally cannot be, consistently with the public interest, laid
before the public.

That is an exception to the general benefit which you propose to be
derived from public discussion? Yes; but in European matters it is usual
to give publicity even to this class of transactions after the emergency
has ceased; and this is equally advantageous in Indian affairs. In fact
it is usually done; for it hardly ever happens that the papers relating
to Indian wars and treaties are not published almost as soon as they
conveniently can be.

That is, through the medium of Parliament? Yes, generally.

When those secret papers are ultimately laid before the Court of
Directors, are they not laid in extenso? Sometimes.

Not always? Not always.

Sometimes important papers relating to a transaction are withheld
altogether, are they not? Sometimes.

What advantage is derived from the power of the Court of Proprietors to
call for any papers? It sometimes causes papers to be made public sooner
than they otherwise would be, or which, perhaps, might not have been
made public at all; but the papers might have been called for by
Parliament, if they had not been called for by the Court of Proprietors.

Does not it give to the Court of Directors the power of giving to the
world any papers that they may wish to be circulated? No doubt it does.

In that way is it not very useful to the Court of Directors, whenever
they wish to make an appeal to public opinion? I think it might be
useful. It certainly affords them the means of doing so without the
imputation of wishing to make a party opposition to the Government.

In point of fact, is not it their great object in general to avoid the
production of such papers? I think there is no unwillingness whatever on
their part to produce papers.

Do not the Court of Directors generally try to check such a motion on
the part of the Court of Proprietors? Not at all, as far as I have
observed, unless the papers relate to transactions still under
consideration. In that case, as in similar cases in Parliament, it is
often thought desirable that the papers should not be produced till the
final decision of the public authorities has been come to.

That is in all pending negotiations? There is often an indisposition to
give papers as long as the subject is under consideration; but when a
decision has been passed, and the transaction completed, I am not aware
that there is ever any Edition: current; Page: [59] objection made to
lay the papers before the Proprietors, if the Proprietors desire to have
them.

What is the usual number of persons attending a Court of Proprietors?
The quarterly courts are commonly not very numerously attended, being
mostly for routine business, unless notice has been given of some motion
which excites general interest; but special courts I have known very
numerously attended.

When you say “very numerously,” what number of persons do you mean? I do
not know that I ever counted the number, but I think I must have seen as
many as 200 or more.

But usually it is a very small number? Perhaps at quarterly courts there
may not be more than 50 or 60; and sometimes a discussion has been kept
up when there were (exclusive of the Directors) not more than eight or
ten Proprietors in the room.

Are those discussions generally conducted by persons who have an Indian
reputation, and who have been connected with the service in India, or by
gentlemen who appear to have bought their qualification for the purpose
of giving them an opportunity of making speeches and having them
reported? There are marked instances of both.

Is not the latter the more common case? I should say, I think, that when
motions have been brought forward hostile to the proceedings of the
Government of India, they have been oftener by persons who had been
previously connected with India, than by persons whose connexion with
India Stock may be supposed to have been formed for that purpose.

Assuming that two such bodies as the Court of Directors and the Board of
Control ought to exist, is it, in your opinion, desirable that the
patronage of India should reside in the body which is inferior in
authority? As between the two, it is in the Court of Directors, the
weaker body, that I think the patronage should reside, for the reasons
which I have already given. It seems to me very important, and at the
same time difficult, that a body, every act of whom connected with the
Government of India may be overruled, should nevertheless feel
themselves, and be felt by others, to have a very important part in the
Government, and a very important share of the responsibility of good or
bad government. I do not see how they could keep their position, or be
considered as the Government of India at all, if the patronage of India,
such as it is, that is, the appointment of youths to rise through the
lower to the higher offices, were taken away from them to be given to
the other authority. If the authority which had the patronage were that
which gives the final orders, the Board of Control would be considered
as the Government, and the Court of Directors would have no influence at
all.

Would there not also be a danger in that case that the appointments
would have a political character, which you consider it so extremely
desirable to avoid? That is also a very strong objection to vesting the
patronage in the Minister of the Crown.

Edition: current; Page: [60]
If the patronage were withdrawn from the Court, in what way should it be
disposed of, in your opinion? I think in that case the only proper
system, and one which I should myself consider as intrinsically the
best, would be to bestow it by public competition; by concours, as some
offices are given in France; to give it to the best qualified among all
persons of requisite age and education who might compete for it.

By public examination? By public examination.

By the sale of commissions, or without sale? Certainly not by sale.

If you had such competition as that, you could not have only one Board
of Examiners for so many different classes of offices, amounting
sometimes to 400 or 500 to be given in one year; but it would be
necessary that you should have different Boards of Examiners; and in
that way persons rejected by one Board might be admitted by another.
Would there not be great danger of not getting the best men by that
process? No doubt such a Board might make mistakes; but probably not
more than are made, for instance, in the classification of candidates
for honours at the Universities, which is generally supposed to be
conducted very fairly.

But there it is done by a single Board; but you could not bring 400 or
500 gentlemen before the same Board, and bring them all into one place?
Not at one time; but I see no impossibility in even a larger number
being examined by the same Board in the course of a year.

This is not a change which you suggest, but you think it would be the
best system if any change were made? If there were a change I think that
would be the best change, and I think it desirable in itself if it could
be done without interfering with the position of the Court of Directors,
or of some body similar to them, as a substantive part of the Indian
Government.

Do you think it would be desirable to give any portion of the existing
patronage to be competed for in the way you have described? I think the
more the better.

Supposing it to be considered best to keep the patronage in the hands of
the Court of Directors, do you think it would be desirable to set off
any portion of that patronage to be competed for in the way you have
described? I am not prepared to give a decided opinion. There would be
advantages, perhaps preponderating ones, in such an arrangement,
provided the Court of Directors retained sufficient patronage to make
them be still considered substantially the Government of India.

When you speak of competition, do you mean a bonâ fide public
competition open to all the world, or would you require any particular
qualifications or previous course of education on the part of the
candidates? I would admit persons to compete in whatever manner they had
been educated, and at whatever place.

And in whatever condition of life they might be? And in whatever
condition of life.

By whom and in what manner is it desirable, in your opinion, that the
Governor-general should be appointed? I think the present mode
unobjectionable. Edition: current; Page: [61] I think that the
Governor-general should be nominated, as he is, by the Crown, and not by
the Court of Directors, but subject to a substantial negative voice on
their part. It is a great security against jobbing in India, that
appointments to office are not made by the same persons who appoint the
candidates. They are made by a great officer who has no previous
connexion, or a very slight one, with the service, and is scarcely under
any private motive to favour individuals; and I believe that in
consequence the appointments are generally made with a remarkable degree
of integrity and purity.

Would you think it inexpedient to appoint the Lieutenant-governors of
Bombay and Madras from the civil service; and would you consider it more
expedient that they should continue to be appointed by the Crown in the
same manner in which you think it desirable that the Governor-general
should be appointed? That is part of the question what should be the
constitution of the subordinate governments. There are at present two
systems of subordinate government on trial in India: the old system of a
Governor in Council at each Presidency, and the system now on trial at
Agra of a Lieutenant-governor.19 There is hardly experience yet to judge
which of those systems ought to be finally adopted.

But as long as you continued to leave a considerable amount of patronage
at the disposal of those Governments at the different Presidencies, do
you think it would be expedient to select the Governors out of the civil
service of the Company? I think they should be selected by the Crown as
long as the present Governments of Bombay and Madras are continued. It
does not follow that civil or military servants of the Company may not
be appointed; in fact, a large proportion of the governors of Madras and
Bombay have been servants of the Company, though appointed by the Crown,
and they have been some of the very best.

Are there any special reasons for maintaining an exclusive body, such as
the civil service of India, from whom all the higher offices in the
administration of the Government, except the heads of the different
Governments must be selected? What is to be said in favour of an
exclusive service, is the necessity of special professional training:
the necessity that those appointed to higher situations should have
served in the lower, and should have risen by degrees. In fact, there is
no other mode of training properly qualified officers. To take a person
fresh from Europe, and appoint him to one of the higher situations,
would be as objectionable as taking a person from the army, or from a
merchant’s counting-house, and making him at once a Judge of the Court
of Queen’s Bench.

Do you think that civil offices should be thrown open to Europeans not
in the regular service; that is, to uncovenanted servants? As a general
rule, I think not; Europeans not in the regular service can hardly be
competently qualified. The maintenance of a sort of professional body
called the Civil Service, is Edition: current; Page: [62] recommended by
the necessity of a training in the subordinate offices, and if persons
are often appointed who have not gone through that training, the object
is sacrificed. In fact, the appointment of Europeans not in the regular
service, unless quite exceptional, would be tantamount to giving up the
principle of sending out young men as candidates, instead of sending
persons out to fill particular offices.

Do you happen to be acquainted with the services of the late Mr.
Greenlaw, who was an uncovenanted servant, and who died in the year
1844?20 I know his name, but I am not particularly acquainted with his
services. He held an office to which uncovenanted servants have not
usually been appointed.

Are you aware that he was a man of very great ability, and of very
eminent public service? I believe he was.

To what grade in the service can uncovenanted servants rise? I am not
aware how much of the restriction upon their employment is the effect of
law, and how much only of practice, nor am I aware how far the exclusion
in practice extends, especially as it has of late been in many instances
relaxed; but generally speaking, the European uncovenanted servants are
not eligible to anything beyond what would be here considered as
clerkships, not to offices of importance and authority.

Not to judgeships? Certainly not; the natives are very largely eligible
to judicial offices.

Do you think that the indiscriminate admission of uncovenanted Europeans
to civil appointments would interfere very much with the employment of
the natives? Very much.

Would it not be liable to this further objection, that the
Governor-general would have the selection, as well as the promotion of
Europeans in office? I presume that if uncovenanted servants were
appointed at first to inferior situations, they would usually be in the
first instance selected by heads of offices, rather than by the
Governor-general.

Have you ever considered the expediency of filling the subordinate
offices in the Foreign Department, with trustworthy Europeans? I presume
clerkships are meant; undoubtedly it is of very great importance that
the officers so employed should be trustworthy. I believe there is no
restriction on the employment either of Europeans, half-caste, or
natives to those offices; their qualifications depend upon the care
taken by heads of offices in selecting them.

Was it not necessary on one occasion to make almost a clearance of the
persons employed? I have no such instance in my recollection, but I
cannot say that it was not so.

Are high civil offices thrown open to Europeans in the military service?
Many high offices are so; I think the distinction which is made is a
very just one; the offices to which military servants are not, except in
very rare cases, appointed, are Edition: current; Page: [63] those
connected with the administration of the existing somewhat elaborate
system of Regulations, for which a person is incompetent, unless he has
in the subordinate offices acquired a technical and precise knowledge of
the system. But in all offices which do not require this, military men
are now largely employed; they are very much employed in the Political,
that is, the Diplomatic Department, and also in the civil administration
of countries which have not been brought regularly under our laws; and
when a territory is newly acquired, and it is necessary rather to
ascertain the existing state of the country, and improvise rules for its
temporary management, or to frame a system for the future administration
of such countries, than to administer a previously existing system; then
military men of known ability are very commonly selected, as is the case
at present in the Punjaub, where the President of the Board of
Administration, Sir Henry Lawrence, is a military man, and as was the
case with Sir Thomas Munro, and many others.21 Very large use is thus
made of military men with talents for civil administration; I have known
instances of their being even made Collectors in the Regulation
provinces; but those cases are rare, and I believe the motive to them
was, that there were not at the time a sufficient number of civil
servants in the Bombay Presidency. At that time Sir Henry Pottinger,
Major Barnewall, and Colonel Robertson were made Collectors.22 Generally
speaking, the situations to which military men are not appointed, are
those which require a previously acquired special knowledge of the
existing Regulations, and the existing modes of administration.

Would you admit the natives of India to the covenanted civil service? I
think it of the greatest importance to admit the natives to all
situations for which they are fit; and as they are constantly becoming
fit for higher situations, I think that they should be admitted to them;
but it would probably be better to do this without appointing them to
the regular service. The covenanted service, from its constitution, is a
service of gradual rise. A member of that service is not appointed to a
particular situation to remain in it during his whole period of service,
but looks for promotion after a certain time, and hopes to rise to the
highest appointments; therefore, as long as the natives are not
considered fit for the highest appointments, it would be hardly
desirable to admit them to the regular covenanted service, Edition:
current; Page: [64] because, if their promotion stopped short while that
of others went on, it would be more invidious than keeping them out
altogether. It seems preferable that the covenanted service should not
be considered as having an exclusive right to appointments. If a native,
being qualified in point of integrity, and having, as many of them have,
a previous knowledge of that which a European has to learn, is fit for
one of the higher appointments, let him have it without going through
the covenanted service.

Is not a native rendered eligible for any appointment under the last
Charter Act?23 The last Charter Act took away all legal disabilities;
but there is a practical exclusion, and so there must be, until the
natives are very much improved in character.

But legally a native of India is eligible for any appointment? He is.

He is not excluded because he is a native of India, but he is excluded
because he has not passed through Haileybury?24 That would exclude him
from the covenanted civil service.

Do you think that the natives of India are admitted to as large a share
in the civil government of the country as they ought in their present
state of education and knowledge to possess? There is a great and
growing desire to admit them to all offices for which they are
considered sufficiently qualified in point of trustworthiness. Hitherto
they have not been admitted to any situations in which there is not a
controlling European authority over them; but there is hardly any
situation, admitting of that control, to which they are not now
eligible; or if there be any such, there is a constant tendency to open
such situations to them. They have now, especially in the Bengal and
Agra provinces, almost the whole of the administration of justice in the
first instance, subject to appeal to Europeans. They are also largely
employed as deputy collectors, that is, in the branch of the Government,
on which the prosperity of the country depends more than on any other;
and those situations are sought for by natives of the highest rank and
connexions. There was a remarkable proof of this some years ago in the
North West Provinces. When the Nawab of Rampoor died, who was the
descendant of Fyzoolla Khan, the chief who ruled over the portion left
in existence of the Rohilla power, which was crushed by Warren Hastings,
when this Nawab died, leaving no direct heirs, the collateral, who was
next in succession, was a deputy collector in our provinces,25 and two
other near relations of the deceased Nawab happened to be deputy
collectors also. Edition: current; Page: [65] The new Nawab went from
being a deputy collector under our Government, to succeed to his own
principality, and he immediately commenced introducing the improvements
which he had learned under our system.

Have those native officers of the Government Europeans placed under
them? As deputy collectors they have no Europeans under them as
subordinate officers, but only natives.

If the natives of India were to occupy a very large portion of the
higher civil and military appointments of the country, do you suppose
that we should continue to maintain the dependence of India upon this
country? If the natives were allowed to wield the military force of
India, I think it would be impossible to maintain British ascendency
there; but I think it would be perfectly possible to open to them a very
large share of the civil government without its having any such effect.

Without having any European supervision? I do not think you could make a
native Governor-general, but I think natives might in time be appointed
to many of the higher administrative offices.

Do you think they might be members of Council? Not, I should think, at
present; but in proportion as the natives become trustworthy and
qualified for high office, it seems to me not only allowable, but a duty
to appoint them to it.

Do you think that in those circumstances the dependence of India upon
this country could be maintained? I think it might, by judicious
management, be made to continue till the time arises when the natives
shall be qualified to carry on the same system of Government without our
assistance.

Would you make any change in the functions of the Governor-general, with
a view of relieving him from any portion of his duties? I would relieve
him from all details; certainly from the government of Bengal. It
appears to me that the proper function of the Governor-general is rather
to superintend the Government of India in all its departments than to
carry on any portion of it in detail. I would give him only the external
relations of India, and the business of legislation, along with a
general power of receiving appeals from the subordinate Governments, and
of interfering, whenever necessary, in the higher departments of their
administration, with such portion of the higher patronage as it may be
desirable for him to possess.

Would you establish a separate government for Bengal, or would you put
it on the same footing as that of the North West Provinces, leaving the
Lieutenant-governor in the nomination of the Governor-general? It is
difficult to give a positive opinion at present. If I were to recommend
either plan, it would be the Agra system, which works extremely well.

Is not there this reason for the Agra system having worked very well,
that during the portion of it which we had immediately under our eye,
namely, the latter portion since the year 1844, it has been administered
by a man of acknowledged superior ability and activity, Mr. Thomason?26
It is more particularly during the time of Mr. Thomason that it has been
administered with such eminent success; Edition: current; Page: [66] and
the expediency of continuing the system depends upon the possibility, as
may be shown by experience, of providing a succession of such men.
Unless this can be provided, I think it would be desirable that all the
subordinate Governments should have Councils.

If the Lieutenant-governor of Agra were selected on the same grounds on
which the members of Council are selected, would there not be very great
danger of the Government not being equally well conducted? The members
of Council are selected from the same class of persons as the
Lieutenant-governors.

When Mr. Thomason was appointed Governor, was not he taken quite out of
his turn, and was he not a much younger man than those who would be
named members of Council? He was; no doubt, because there was nobody
senior to him who was thought so well qualified.

No one would have been named a member of Council so young as Mr.
Thomason? Probably not.

Do you think it expedient to assimilate the Governments of Bombay and
Madras to that of Agra? Either that, or to assimilate the Government of
Agra to them.

Do you think it desirable that the Governor-general should be attended
by his Council when he removes from Calcutta? If the practice which has
existed for some years were to continue, that the Governor-general
should be a much larger portion of time absent from Calcutta than
present there, I think decidedly the Council ought to go with him; and
in that case it would become a serious question whether the seat of
Government should not be transferred to the interior. If the absence of
the Governor-general from Calcutta were only to be occasional, I see no
reason why the present system should not continue.

Do not you think there would be great advantage in sending out
Governors-general very much younger than they have usually been—men who
might be expected to remain 15 or 20 years in the country? It is to my
mind doubtful. One of the advantages of the present mode of appointing
the Governor-general is that he takes out with him the latest English
ideas and sentiments. He is under the influence of the most recent,
which in politics are generally the best opinions.

Would he not have the same, if he went out at thirty instead of at
fifty? He would; but if he remained a longer time, he would perhaps not
retain the advantage.

If he remained a longer time, would he not have the advantage probably
of acquiring the language, and the means of communicating personally
with individual natives; and would he not, if he were successful in his
administration, acquire very great weight and influence throughout
India, particularly with the native states? I think he has all the
influence now with the native states that he thinks fit to exercise; I
think he can do anything he pleases with them.

Might he not possibly obtain more influence than would be desirable? His
permanent interests would always be in this country; I am not
contemplating the case of his being able to usurp an independent
Government there, certainly; but I do not think that danger much to be
apprehended.

Edition: current; Page: [67]
Not if he were to remain there a great number of years, and thereby very
much to increase his influence? I should think the danger not great of a
European, who might at any time be recalled, acquiring a degree of
influence over the army and the natives, which would enable him to set
up an independent government.

Is not that, to a certain degree, the case in all countries similarly
situated? I am not aware of any parallel instance.

Does not his influence, in point of fact, mainly depend upon the great
power of the country which he is known to represent? He is considered
the representative of the irresistible English power.

Would you still maintain the Legislative Member of Council, and if you
maintained him, would you assign to him the same duties? It seems to me
very important to maintain that office, that there may be at least one
person to devote himself specially to so important a part of the
business of government as Legislation.

Do you think there would be any advantage in having for administrative
purposes, a fifth member of Council sent from England, holding such a
position as an Under Secretary of State, and who should remain there for
about as long as the Governor-general himself remains? I see no
necessity for such an officer, in addition to the Governor-general; the
appointment of the Governor-general is intended to contribute European
ideas to the Government, and the ordinary members of Council contribute
Indian ideas; if the Governor-general is properly appointed, I do not
see any use in sending out another officer for administrative purposes.

Is it not the practice for the new Governor-general, when he goes out,
to take out with him a private secretary, who may be of very great
assistance to the Governor-general in the mere details of his office?
Sometime it is; sometimes the private secretary is elected in India.

Would you think it desirable to add to the Council of India civil
servants from Madras and Bombay? That would depend upon the nature of
the functions assigned to the Supreme Government; if the
Governor-general in Council were to exercise a general superintendence
over all the Presidencies, without conducting the administration of any;
if he were regarded as a supreme authority, to be referred to in cases
of difficulty who should have the power of interfering in the affairs of
the subordinate Governments, and should receive general reports of their
proceedings, but should not be necessarily a part of the ordinary
government of India, except as to legislation and great political
transactions; in that case I think it would be important that all the
Presidencies should be represented in the Supreme Council; that there
should be a member from Madras, and another from Bombay, as well as from
Bengal and Agra. For the purposes merely of legislation, I am not sure
that there is any necessity for this addition to the number of the
Council. On any enactments which relate particularly to Madras and
Bombay, it is usual for a reference first to be made to the Madras and
Bombay Governments; if indeed the Edition: current; Page: [68] whole
proposition does not originate with them, by a draft Act being sent up
by them, as it often is, for the approval of the Council.

Is it necessary that the Government of India should have some local
knowledge in the decision of questions of pecuniary outlay relating to
the subordinate Presidencies? It is necessary, no doubt, that they
should have local knowledge; but that knowledge should be supplied to
them by the Report sent by the local Governments, or elicited by the
inquiries which the Supreme Government has power to make. All that is
necessary as a qualification for the members of Council, is the habit of
considering questions of a similar kind.

Would not it be desirable that the Council itself should be inspired by
some local interest, to enable it to give full weight to the several
reasons and arguments sent up from the subordinate Presidencies? That
depends upon the degree to which the interference of the general Council
at Calcutta extends. If Bombay and Madras continue to have local
Governments which exercise a considerable amount of power, and the
members of which deliberate in common, recording their opinions on the
administration of their respective Presidencies, it does not seem to me
necessary that there should be members from Madras and Bombay to advise
the Supreme Council; but if there were merely lieutenant-governors at
Madras or Bombay, it would be necessary.

Are you aware that no sum beyond 5,000 rupees can be expended by the
local Governments without the consent of the Government of India, and
that, moreover, not even a shifting and a change in the salaries of a
Board can take place which involves an increase of salary to any one of
the members, though the sum upon the whole should not exceed for the
Board the sum which was before paid? I am not prepared to say, not
having considered the subject, whether those restrictions are carried
too far. Their object is partly to preserve uniformity of system as to
salaries and establishments throughout India, in order that one portion
of the service may not have reason to complain that others are treated
better than themselves; and partly for the sake of the general finances
of India; since the duty of keeping the expenses within the means rests
with the authority which controls the affairs of all India, and not with
any sectional department.

Do you think it would be conducive to the general public service, if the
Court of Directors were to make this alteration (which they might do of
their own authority) as regards the composition of the Council, namely,
always to have in the Council a military member, and another member who
had been engaged in the Judicial Department, and another who had been
engaged in the Revenue Department; and in making provisional
appointments, to make the succession provisional dependent upon the
coming away, or upon the death of the member whom they particularly
wished to replace by the person to whom the provisional appointment was
given; so that a revenue member would succeed a revenue member, and a
military member would succeed a military member; and the Council would
always represent those three great departments? The point would be well
worth Edition: current; Page: [69] consideration; but it must be
remembered that many members of the service had both revenue and
judicial experience. In fact, as a general rule, almost all persons who
rise to be members of Council have in some degree combined both those
functions.

Must not considerable public inconvenience be caused by this state of
things which once happened, that the military member of the Council
died, and he was succeeded by a gentleman taken from the judicial
department who had a provisional appointment, and the Council was left
without a military member, while it had two who were acquainted with
law? I think the suggestion involved in the question has much to
recommend it; but I am not prepared to give a positive opinion.

Must it not have been so originally, because formerly the members of
Council consisted of the heads of departments? That was according to the
first constitution of the Council, when it was much more numerous.27

Was not it at that time a Council consisting of the heads of
departments, and were not they in the Council only because they were the
heads of departments? I believe it was so, but only under a very ancient
constitution of the Council; certainly not since the time of Warren
Hastings.

Would you think it desirable to re-establish the Law Commission?28 I
would. I think it of great importance, not only to have an officer
forming part of the Government whose business it should be to attend to
legislation pro hâc vice, but also that what the Legislature certainly
intended in the last Charter Act should not be left uncompleted. The
intention of the Legislature in appointing the Law Commission was, that
the whole law of India and the constitution of the courts of justice
should be deliberately considered, and, as far as necessary, remodelled;
that great improvements should be made in the procedure of the courts,
and that the substantive laws should be consolidated and reduced to a
code. This has been in a very small degree performed as yet, because
there has not, I think, been sufficient importance attached to it by any
of the authorities. I think it very desirable that the subject should be
revived.

The home Government at this moment exercise an absolute control over the
Government in India. Within what limits do you think that control should
be exercised? There are very few acts of the Government of India which
it is possible for the authorities here to set aside when they are once
done. Some very important things they can do: they can put a stop to
pecuniary jobbing when they detect it; they can cancel improper
appointments, and control salaries and establishments; and they can, and
often do, redress the grievances of individuals. But in most of the
political measures of a general character, they have very little power
of interfering with effect or advantage, after the thing is done. They
have, however, a great Edition: current; Page: [70] power of making
useful comments, which may serve as instructions for subsequent cases of
the same kind; and it seems to me the greatest good that the home
authorities can do is to comment freely on the proceedings of the local
authorities, to criticise them well, and lay down general principles for
the guidance of the Government on subsequent occasions.

Do they exercise that function at present as frequently and as
successfully as they have done heretofore? I think the defect, perhaps a
natural one in a Government constituted like that of India (and it is a
defect of most Governments), is that there is an aversion to lay down
any principle that goes beyond the particular occasion. Governments are
almost always disinclined to commit themselves to opinions, except on a
specific point, and as narrow a one as possible; but when an opinion is
given, even confined to a specific point, and reasons are assigned for
it, they necessarily involve some principle, and that principle, whether
expressly stated or involved by implication in the decision, must serve
as some guidance for future occasions.

Do you think that the home Government are more disinclined to laying
down general principles than they used to be? I think, perhaps, they
are; I think there is less disposition to lay down general principles
than there was formerly, perhaps in consequence of the greater interest
now taken by individual members of the Court in the proceedings, and the
greater application of their minds to them than formerly; for that very
reason, there is a greater number of objections, and it is more
difficult to frame any statement of principles that shall command a
majority.

Are there any further improvements in the constitution of the
legislative and administrative body at Calcutta which you can suggest? I
am not prepared to make any other suggestions.

Do you see any difficulties likely to accrue from the unlicensed liberty
of the press? I think both the dangers and the advantages of the free
press in India have been very much overrated: that the dangers were
overrated is proved by the fact; it was anticipated by many people, that
if full license were allowed to the press, it would drive us out of
India altogether.

Do not you believe that there is this difference in the character of the
Indian press, as compared with the press of this country, that whereas
in this country the tone of the press is decidedly superior to that of
ordinary conversation on the subjects of which it treats, in India it is
the exact reverse of that; and that if any one were to form an opinion
of the general state and tone of European society from the comments made
by the Indian press, he would form a very unfair estimate of the general
character of European society in the country? I cannot speak from much
actual knowledge of the Indian press; my impression certainly is, that
the English newspapers in India are of very little use to good
government, except in promoting inquiry, and drawing the attention of
the Government to facts which they might have overlooked. From the
little knowledge I have of the Indian newspaper press, I should say that
its comments are seldom of any value.

Edition: current; Page: [71]
Is not the style such as does not prevail in good society; would not it
give to those who read habitually the leading articles in those papers
an impression that the tone of society is very inferior to what it is? I
am not sufficiently acquainted with the Indian press to be able to
answer the question.

Are you aware that in point of fact, the tone of society in India is as
good as it is in this country? I know nothing to the contrary.

You said that not only were the dangers that were expected to accrue
from the establishment of a free press in India exaggerated, but also
that the expected advantages were exaggerated. Is that your opinion? It
is. As long as the great mass of the people of India have very little
access to the press, it is in danger of being an organ exclusively of
individual interests. The English newspaper press in India is the organ
only of the English society, and chiefly of the part of it unconnected
with the Government. It has little to do with the natives, or with the
great interests of India.

Does not the Government of India labour under this particular
disadvantage, that they have no means of defence against unworthy
imputations which the press throws out; not being represented in the
press? Certainly. It is the practice of the Indian authorities both in
India and in England to look on while their proceedings are the subject
of unmeasured obloquy by the newspapers and in public discussions,
without taking any means of getting a correct statement made of their
measures, and of the grounds upon which they have been adopted.

Is there not this difference in India as compared with England, that
whereas in England, if an attack is made upon the Government, there is a
Government paper that undertakes to rebut it; in India there is no such
opportunity of stating the truth? I think the same observation applies
to attacks upon the Indian administration in this country; it is very
seldom that any portion of the press takes up the cause of the Indian
Government.

Do you not think, with reference to the Court of Proprietors, that it
might be some advantage if it was necessary that a quorum should be
present previously to allowing any public discussion to go on, namely,
that there should be, say 40 persons present, instead of having only
five, as is the case sometimes now; would it not put some restriction
upon their meetings? I have not much considered what would be the effect
of such a regulation; but I apprehend that when it is important that a
discussion should take place, it would seldom be difficult to obtain as
many as 40, or some rather smaller number to be present.

In the course of your examination yesterday you spoke of it as a merit
of the Government of India, that it was very much a Government of
record, and that everything that was done was to be found upon paper.29
Have you ever heard it objected that that system of record and putting
everything upon paper at length, is carried to an extent that is
practically inconvenient and cumbersome? It is only Edition: current;
Page: [72] cumbersome in the sense of making a very great mass of
records; but the system of indexing is so perfect that it is easy to
refer to everything.

Is it not the fact that it does not necessarily increase the quantity of
writing; but it causes all that is written to be sent home? Indian
functionaries are obliged to write so quick, that they generally write
at great length.

Does not it entail a very large staff of clerks and manual assistants?
No doubt it must cause a considerable increase in the establishments,
but the expense is amply compensated by the advantage.

Are you acquainted with the manner in which the business is conducted at
the Government offices in this country? I have no practical acquaintance
with it.

Do you believe that the number of hands compared with the amount of
business transacted, and consequently the expense of conducting the
business, is much greater in proportion, in the Indian offices, than it
is in the offices of the Crown? I am unable to judge. But as the natives
in India are paid at a much lower rate than Europeans in England, the
number of hands may be much greater without causing greater expense.

Must there not of necessity be a great deal more writing, in consequence
of the double Government, and the necessity of keeping a reserved copy
in case of any accident happening to the other? Certainly.

Has not the direction given about the year 1829 or 1830, that every
gentleman who wrote a letter should write an abstract of it in a book,
failed of producing any effect in diminishing the size of the letters?
It has made very little, if any, difference.

Is not the present system very nearly identical with that of the Foreign
Office in this country, or, at least, ought it not to be so, according
to the order given? I am not acquainted with the system of the Foreign
Office.

Is it not the practice in the Indian correspondence to collect
discussions upon a number of subjects into one letter? The system of
separate letters has been much more resorted to in the last 20 years, in
consequence of orders sent out when Lord Ellenborough was President of
the Board;30 it has, however, been prescribed to the Governments of
India, that they should, in addition to separate letters on subjects of
sufficient importance to require them, also write quarterly letters,
reporting miscellaneous subjects on which there have been no separate
reports, because it was found that previous to that time, many subjects
went unreported altogether; and the only way to insure a report of them
was, by requiring that there should be letters written which should
embrace everything not separately reported.

Has the effect of that rule been that letters which deal with
multifarious business Edition: current; Page: [73] are the exceptions,
and that letters on separate business are the rule? There is a much
greater number of letters on separate subjects, than of miscellaneous
letters; but the miscellaneous letters often extend to a greater number
of paragraphs.

Is it your opinion that the education adopted in this country, for the
civil servants of the Indian Government, is the best that could be
adopted? I have great doubts of the necessity or expediency of an
exclusive system of education for the civil service. I should be much
more inclined to fix a standard of qualification, and admit all persons
to receive appointments, if upon examination they are found to come up
to that standard, placing the standard high, but allowing them to
acquire the knowledge in any way and at any place.

You are not inclined to think that it should be a necessary preliminary
that the candidates should have been educated at Haileybury? I am
inclined to think the contrary.

Would there be the same facilities of acquiring the requisite knowledge
at other places, which there are at Haileybury? If qualifications were
required which could be obtained best at Haileybury, there would still
be sufficient inducements to seek them there; but I would not make it
compulsory. I am not aware of anything necessary for the candidates that
can be learned nowhere except at Haileybury.

Does not Haileybury afford particular facilities for obtaining the
necessary qualifications? It affords facilities, but they are so costly
that it would be possible to obtain them at less expense elsewhere. I
speak with deference to the opinions of persons who know more of
Haileybury than I do; but my opinion is decidedly against, in any case,
requiring as a qualification for employment that the person should have
acquired his knowledge at some particular place or in some particular
way. I would raise the standard of acquirements as high as possible; but
having done that, I would admit a person who possessed the knowledge, in
whatever manner he had acquired it.

Would your observation equally apply to the necessity of military
education at Addiscombe,31 or would you think that, in the case of
military officers, it would be desirable still to continue that system?
As it is necessary to have a special professional education for military
purposes, it has been thought necessary everywhere to have institutions
for the purpose; and some of the necessary professional qualifications
perhaps cannot be acquired except by something like a college. But I
would allow a person to acquire it at any institution at which it can be
acquired; for instance, at Sandhurst, and at Woolwich.

All that you would require is, that there should be a certain degree of
excellence to which they should come up, leaving the parties examined to
have had their preliminary education where they may deem it expedient?
Certainly.

Edition: current; Page: [74]
Are you of opinion that the education acquired at Addiscombe is of a
very superior kind? I have every reason to think so.

Do you consider that the acquaintances formed in consequence of persons
educated for India belonging to the same college are advantageous, by
affording facilities of communication in carrying on their duties in
after life? It does not at all follow that they are placed in contact
with one another afterwards; if they are, it is accidental, and there is
the counterbalancing disadvantage that they begin too soon to associate
exclusively with one another.




The Petition of the East-India Company

To the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, in Parliament assembled,

aHumbly sheweth,

Thata your Petitioners, at their own expense, and by the agency of their
own civil and military servants, originally acquired for this country
its magnificent empire in the East.

That the foundations of this empire were laid by your Petitioners, at
that time neither aided nor controlled by Parliament, at the same period
at which a succession of administrations under the control of Parliament
were losing to the Crown of Great Britain another great empire on the
opposite side of the Atlantic.

That during the period of about a century which has since elapsed, the
Indian possessions of this country have been governed and defended from
the resources of those possessions, without the smallest cost to the
British Exchequer, which, to the best of your Petitioners’ knowledge and
belief, cannot be said of any other of the numerous foreign dependencies
of the Crown.

That it being manifestly improper that the administration of any British
possession should be independent of the general Government of the
empire, Parliament provided, in 1783, that a department of the Imperial
Government should have full cognizance of, and power of control over,
the acts of your Petitioners in the administration of India;1 since
which time the home branch of the Indian Government has been conducted
by the joint counsels, and on the joint responsibility of your
Petitioners and of a Minister of the Crown.

That this arrangement has at subsequent periods undergone
reconsideration from the Legislature, and various comprehensive and
careful Parliamentary inquiries have been made into its practical
operation; the result of which has been, on each occasion, a renewed
grant to your Petitioners of the powers exercised by them in the
administration of India.2

Edition: current; Page: [78]
That the last of these occasions was so recent as 1853, in which year
the arrangements which had existed for nearly three-quarters of a
century, were, with certain modifications, re-enacted, and still
subsist.3

That, notwithstanding, your Petitioners have received an intimation from
Her Majesty’s Ministers of their intention to propose to Parliament a
Bill for the purpose of placing the government of Her Majesty’s
East-Indian dominions under the direct authority of the Crown,4—a change
necessarily involving the abolition of the East-India Company as an
instrument of government.

That your Petitioners have not been informed of the reasons which have
induced Her Majesty’s Ministers, without any previous inquiry, to come
to the resolution of putting an end to a system of administration, which
Parliament, after inquiry, deliberately confirmed and sanctioned less
than five years ago, and which, in its modified form, has not been in
operation quite four years, and cannot be considered to have undergone a
sufficient trial during that short period.

That your Petitioners do not understand that Her Majesty’s Ministers
impute any failure to those arrangements, or bring any charge, either
great or small, against your Petitioners. But the time at which the
proposal is made, compels your Petitioners to regard it as arising from
the calamitous events which have recently occurred in India.

That your Petitioners challenge the most searching investigation into
the mutiny of the Bengal army, and the causes, whether remote or
immediate, which produced that mutiny. They have instructed the
Government of India to appoint a commission for conducting such an
inquiry on the bspot.5 Andb it is their most anxious wish that a similar
inquiry may be instituted in this country by your [Lordships] Honourable
House;6 in order that it may be ascertained whether Edition: current;
Page: [79] anything either in the constitution of the Home Government of
India, or in the conduct of those by whom it has been administered, has
had any share in producing the mutiny, or has in any way impeded the
measures for its suppression; and whether the mutiny itself, or any
circumstance connected with it, affords any evidence of the failure of
the arrangements under which India is at present administered.

That, were it even true that these arrangements had failed, the failure
could constitute no reason for divesting the East-India Company of its
functions, and transferring them to Her Majesty’s cGovernment. For,c
under the existing system, Her Majesty’s Government have the deciding
voice. The duty imposed upon the Court of Directors is to originate
measures and frame drafts of instructions. Even had they been remiss in
this duty, their remissness, however discreditable to themselves, could
in no way absolve the responsibility of Her Majesty’s Government, since
the Minister for India possesses, and has frequently exercised, the
power of requiring that the Court of Directors should take any subject
into consideration, and prepare a draft despatch for his approval. Her
Majesty’s Government are thus in the fullest sense accountable for all
that has been done, and for all that has been forborne or omitted to be
done. Your Petitioners, on the other hand, are accountable only in so
far as the act or omission has been promoted by themselves.

That, under these circumstances, if the administration of India had been
a failure, it would, your Petitioners submit, have been somewhat
unreasonable to expect that a remedy would be found in annihilating the
branch of the ruling authority which could not be the one principally in
fault, and might be altogether blameless, in order to concentrate all
powers in the branch which had necessarily the decisive share in every
error, real or supposed. To believe that the administration of India
would have been more free from error had it been conducted by a Minister
of the Crown without the aid of the Court of Directors, would be to
believe that the Minister, with full power to govern India as he
pleased, has governed ill because he has had the assistance of
experienced and responsible advisers.

That your Petitioners, however, do not seek to vindicate themselves at
the expense of any other dauthority. Theyd claim their full share of the
responsibility of the manner in which India has practically been
governed. That responsibility is to them not a subject of humiliation,
but of pride. They are conscious that their advice and initiative have
been, and have deserved to be, a great and potent element in the conduct
of affairs in India. And they feel complete assurance that the more
attention is bestowed and the more light thrown upon India and its
administration, the more evident it will become that the government in
which they have borne a part has been not only one of the purest in
intention, but one of the Edition: current; Page: [80] most beneficent
in act, ever known among mankind; that, during the last and present
generation in particular, it has been, in all departments, one of the
most rapidly improving governments in the world; and that, at the time
when this change is proposed, a greater number of important improvements
are in a state of more rapid progress than at any former period. And
they are satisfied that whatever further improvements may be hereafter
effected in India can only consist in the development of germs already
planted, and in building on foundations already laid, under their
authority, and in a great measure by their express instructions.

That such, however, is not the impression likely to be made on the
public mind, either in England or in India, by the ejection of your
Petitioners from the place they fill in the Indian administration. It is
not usual with statesmen to propose the complete abolition of a system
of government, of which the practical operation is not condemned, and it
might be generally inferred from the proposed measures, if carried into
effect at the present time, that the East-India Company, having been
intrusted with an important portion of the administration of India, have
so abused their trust as to have produced a sanguinary insurrection, and
nearly lost India to the British empire; and that having thus crowned a
long career of misgovernment, they have, in deference to public
indignation, been deservedly cashiered for their misconduct.

That if the character of the East-India Company were alone concerned,
your Petitioners might be willing to await the verdict of history. They
are satisfied that posterity will do them justice. And they are
confident that even now justice is done to them in the minds, not only
of Her Majesty’s Ministers, but of all who have any claim to be
competent judges of the subject. But though your Petitioners could
afford to wait for the reversal of the verdict of condemnation which
will be believed throughout the world to have been passed on them and
their government by the British nation, your Petitioners cannot look
without the deepest uneasiness at the effect likely to be produced on
the minds of the people of India. To them, however incorrectly the name
may express the fact, the British Government in India is the Government
of the East-India Company. To their minds the abolition of the Company
will, for some time to come, mean the abolition of the whole system of
administration with which the Company is identified. The measure,
introduced simultaneously with the influx of an overwhelming British
force, will be coincident with a general outcry, in itself most alarming
to their fears, from most of the organs of opinion in this country as
well as of English opinion in India, denouncing the past policy of the
Government on the express ground that it has been too forbearing and too
considerate towards the natives. The people of India will at first feel
no certainty that the new Government, or the Government under a new
name, which it is proposed to introduce, will hold itself bound by the
pledges of its predecessors. They will be slow to believe that a
Government has been destroyed only to be followed by another which will
act on the same principles and adhere to the same measures. They cannot
suppose that the existing organ of Edition: current; Page: [81]
administration would be swept away without the intention of reversing
any part of its policy. They will see the authorities, both at home and
in India, surrounded by persons vehemently urging radical changes in
many parts of that epolicy. Ande interpreting, as they must do, the
change in the instrument of government, as a concession to these
opinions and feelings, they can hardly fail to believe that, whatever
else may be intended, the Government will no longer be permitted to
observe that strict impartiality between those who profess its own creed
and those who hold the creeds of its native subjects which hitherto
characterized it; that their strongest and most deeply-rooted feelings
will henceforth be treated with much less regard than heretofore; and
that a directly aggressive policy towards everything in their habits, or
in their usages and customs, which Englishmen deem objectionable, will
be no longer confined to individuals and private associations, but will
be backed by all the power of Government.

And here your Petitioners think it important to observe, that in
abstaining as they have done from all interference with any of the
religious practices of the people of India, except such as are abhorrent
to humanity, they have acted not only from their own conviction of what
is just and expedient, but in accordance with the avowed intentions and
express enactments of the Legislature, framed “in order that regard
should be had to the civil and religious usages of the natives,” and
also “that suits, civil or criminal, against the natives,” should be
conducted according to such rules “as may accommodate the same to the
religion and manners of the natives.”7 That their policy in this respect
has been successful, is evidenced by the fact, that during a military
mutiny, said to have been caused by unfounded apprehensions of danger to
religion, the heads of the native states, and the masses of the
population, have remained faithful to the British Government. Your
Petitioners need hardly observe how very different would probably have
been the issue of the late events, if the native princes, instead of
aiding in the suppression of the rebellion, had put themselves at its
head, or if the general population had joined in the revolt; and how
probable it is that both these contingencies would have occurred, if any
real ground had been given for the persuasion that the British
Government intended to identify itself with fproselytism. Andf it is the
honest conviction of your Petitioners that any serious apprehension of a
change of policy in this respect would be likely to be followed, at no
distant period, by a general rising throughout India.

That your Petitioners have seen with the greatest pain the
demonstrations of indiscriminate animosity towards the natives of India,
on the part of our countrymen in India and at home, which have grown up
since the late unhappy Edition: current; Page: [82] events. They believe
these sentiments to be fundamentally unjust; they know them to be fatal
to the possibility of good government in India. They feel that if such
demonstrations should continue, and especially if weight be added to
them by legislating under their supposed influence, no amount of wisdom
and forbearance on the part of the Government will avail to restore that
confidence of the governed in the intentions of their rulers without
which it is vain even to attempt the improvement of the people.

That your Petitioners cannot contemplate without dismay the doctrine now
widely promulgated that India should be administered with an especial
view to the benefit of the English who reside there; or that in its
administration any gadvantageg should be sought for Her Majesty’s
subjects of European birth, except that which they will necessarily
derive from their superiority of intelligence, and from the increased
prosperity of the people, the improvement of the productive resources of
the country, and the extension of commercial intercourse. Your
Petitioners regard it as the most honourable characteristic of the
government of India by England, that it has acknowledged no such
distinction as that of a dominant and a subject race; but has held that
its first duty was to the people of India. Your Petitioners feel that a
great portion of the hostility with which they are assailed, is caused
by the belief that they are peculiarly the guardians of this principle,
and that so long as they have any voice in the administration of India,
it cannot easily be hinfringed. Andh your Petitioners will not conceal
their belief that their exclusion from any part in the Government is
likely at the present time to be regarded in India as a first successful
attack on that principle.

That your Petitioners, therefore, most earnestly represent to your
[Lordships] Honourable House, that even if the contemplated change could
be proved to be in itself advisable, the present is a most unsuitable
time for entertaining it; and they most strongly and respectfully urge
on your [Lordships] Honourable House the expediency of at least
deferring any such change until it can be effected at a period when it
would not be, in the minds of the people of India, directly connected
with the recent calamitous events, and with the feelings to which those
events have either given rise or have afforded an opportunity of
manifestation. Such postponement, your Petitioners submit, would allow
time for a more mature consideration than has yet been given, or can be
given in the present excited state of the public mind, to the various
questions connected with the organization of a government for India; and
would enable the most competent minds in the nation calmly to examine
whether any new arrangement can be devised for the Home Government of
India uniting a greater number of the conditions of good administration
than the present; and, if so, which among the numerous schemes Edition:
current; Page: [83] which have been, or may be, proposed, possesses
those requisites in the greatest degree.8

That your Petitioners have always willingly acquiesced in any changes
which, after discussion by Parliament, were deemed conducive to the
general welfare, although such changes may have involved important
sacrifices to themselves. They would refer to their partial
relinquishment of trade in 1813;9 to its total abandonment, and the
placing of their Commercial Charter in abeyance, in 1833;10 to the
transfer to India of their commercial assets, amounting to £15,858,000,
a sum greatly exceeding that ultimately repayable to them in respect of
their capital, independent of territorial rights and claims;11 and to
their concurrence, in 1853, in the measure by which the Court of
Directors was reconstructed, and reduced to its present number.12 In the
same spirit, your Petitioners would most gladly co-operate with Her
Majesty’s Government in correcting any defects which may be considered
to exist in the details of the present system; and they would be
prepared, without a murmur, to relinquish their trust altogether, if a
better system for the control of the Government of India can be devised.
But, as they believe that in the construction of such a system there are
conditions which cannot, without the most dangerous consequences be
departed from, your Petitioners respectfully iand deferentiallyi submit
to the judgment of your [Lordships] Honourable House their view of those
conditions; in the hope that if your [Lordships] Honourable House should
see reason to agree in that view, you will withhold your legislative
sanction from any arrangement for the Government of India which does not
fulfil the conditions in question in at least an equal degree with the
present.

That your Petitioners may venture to assume that it will not be proposed
to vest the home portion of the administration of India in a Minister of
the Crown, without the adjunct of a Council composed of statesmen
experienced in Indian affairs. Her Majesty’s Ministers cannot but be
aware that the knowledge necessary for governing a foreign country, and
in particular a country like India, requires as much Edition: current;
Page: [84] special study as any other profession, and cannot possibly be
possessed by any one who has not devoted a considerable portion of his
life to the acquisition of it.

That in constituting a body of experienced advisers to be associated
with the Indian Minister, your Petitioners consider it indispensable to
bear in mind that this body should not only be qualified to advise the
Minister, but also, by its advice, to exercise, to a certain degree, a
moral check. It cannot be expected that the Minister, as a general rule,
should himself know India; while he will be exposed to perpetual
solicitations from individuals and bodies, either entirely ignorant of
that country, or knowing only enough of it to impose on those who know
still less than themselves, and having very frequently objects in view
other than the interests or good government of India. The influences
likely to be brought to bear on him through the organs of popular
opinion will, in the majority of cases, be equally misleading. The
public opinion of England, itself necessarily unacquainted with Indian
affairs, can only follow the promptings of those who take most pains to
influence it, and these will generally be such as have some private
interest to serve. It is, therefore, your Petitioners submit, of the
utmost importance that any council which may form a part of the Home
Government of India should derive sufficient weight from its
constitution, and from the relation it occupies to the Minister, to be a
substantial barrier against those inroads of self-interest and ignorance
in this country from which the Government of India has hitherto been
comparatively free, but against which it would be too much to expect
that Parliament should of itself afford a sufficient protection.

That your Petitioners cannot well conceive a worse form of government
for India than a Minister with a Council whom he should be at liberty to
consult or not at his pleasure, or whose advice he should be able to
disregard, without giving his reasons in writing, and in a manner likely
to carry conviction. Such an arrangement, your Petitioners submit, would
be really liable to the objections, in their opinion, erroneously urged
against the present system.13 Your Petitioners respectfully represent
that any body of persons associated with the Minister, which is not a
check, will be a screen.14 Unless the Council is so constituted as to be
personally independent of the Minister, unless it feels itself
responsible for recording an opinion on every Indian subject, and
pressing that opinion on the Minister, whether it is agreeable to him or
not; and unless the Minister, when he overrules their opinion, is bound
to record his reasons, their existence will only serve to weaken his
responsibility, and to give the colourable sanction of prudence Edition:
current; Page: [85] and experience to measures in the framing of which
those qualities have had no share.

That it would be vain to expect that a new Council could have as much
moral influence, and power of asserting its opinion with effect, as the
Court of Directors. A new body can no more succeed to the feelings and
authority which their antiquity and their historical antecedents give to
the East-India Company, than a legislature under a new name, sitting in
Westminster, would have the moral ascendancy of the Houses of Lords and
Commons. One of the most important elements of usefulness will thus be
necessarily wanting in any newly constituted Indian Council, as compared
with the present.

That your Petitioners find it difficult to conceive that the same
independence in judgment and act, which characterizes the Court of
Directors, will be found in any Council all of whose members are
nominated by the Crown. Owing their nomination to the same authority,
many of them probably to the same individual Minister, whom they are
appointed to check, and looking to him alone for their re-appointment,
their desire of recommending themselves to him, and their unwillingness
to risk his displeasure by any serious resistance to his wishes, will be
motives too strong not to be in danger of exercising a powerful and
injurious influence over their conduct. Nor are your Petitioners aware
of any mode in which that injurious influence could be guarded against,
except by conferring the appointments, like those of the Judges, during
good behaviour; which, by rendering it impossible to correct an error
once committed, would be seriously objectionable.

That your Petitioners are equally unable to perceive how, if the
controlling body is entirely nominated by the Minister, that happy
independence of Parliamentary and party influence, which has hitherto
distinguished the administration of India and the appointment to
situations of trust and importance in that country, can be expected to
continue. Your Petitioners believe that in no government known to
history have appointments to offices, and especially to high offices,
been so rarely bestowed on any other considerations than those of
personal fitness. This characteristic, but for which in all probability
India would long since have been lost to this country, is, your
Petitioners conceive, entirely owing to the circumstance that the
dispensers of patronage have been persons unconnected with party, and
under no necessity of conciliating parliamentary support; that,
consequently, the appointments to offices in India have been, as a rule,
left to the unbiassed judgment of the local authorities; while the
nominations to the civil and military services have been generally
bestowed on the middle classes, irrespective of political
considerations, and, in a large proportion, on the relatives of persons
who had distinguished themselves by their services in India.

That your Petitioners, therefore, think it essential that at least a
majority of the Council which assists the Minister for India with its
advice, should hold their seats independently of his appointment.

Edition: current; Page: [86]
That it is, in the opinion of your Petitioners, no less necessary that
the order of the transaction of business should be such as to make the
participation of the Council in the administration of India a
substantial one. That to this end, it is, in the opinion of your
Petitioners, indispensable that the despatches to India should not be
prepared by the Minister and laid before the Council, but should be
prepared by the Council and submitted to the Minister. This would be in
accordance with the natural and obvious principle that persons chosen
for their knowledge of a subject should suggest the mode of dealing with
it, instead of merely giving their opinion on suggestions coming from
elsewhere. This is also the only mode in which the members of the
Council can feel themselves sufficiently important or sufficiently
responsible to secure their applying their minds to the subjects before
them. It is almost unnecessary for your Petitioners to observe, that the
mind is called into far more vigorous action by being required to
propose than by merely being called on to assent. The Minister has
necessarily the ultimate decision. If he has also the initiative, he has
all the powers which are of any practical moment. A body whose only
recognized function was to find fault, would speedily let that function
fall into desuetude. They would feel that their co-operation in
conducting the Government of India was not really desired; that they
were only felt as a clog on the wheels of business. Their criticism on
what had been decided without their being collectively consulted would
be felt as importunate, as a mere delay and impediment; and their office
would probably be seldom sought but by those who were willing to allow
its most important duties to become nominal.

That with the duty of preparing the despatches to India, would naturally
be combined the nomination and control of the home establishments. This
your Petitioners consider absolutely essential to the utility of the
Council. If the officers through whom they work are in direct dependence
upon an authority higher than theirs, all matters of importance will in
reality be settled between the Minister and the subordinates, passing
over the Council altogether.

That a third consideration, to which your Petitioners attach great
importance, is, that the number of the Council should not be too
restricted. India is so wide a field, that a practical acquaintance with
every part of its affairs cannot be found combined in any small number
of individuals. The Council ought to contain men of general experience
and knowledge of the world; also men specially qualified by financial
and revenue experience, by judicial experience, diplomatic experience,
military jexperience. Itj ought to contain persons conversant with the
varied social relations and varied institutions of Bengal, Madras,
Bombay, the North-Western Provinces, the Punjab, and the native states.
Even the present Court of Directors, reduced as it is in numbers by the
Act of 1853, does not contain all the varieties of knowledge and
experience desirable in such a kbody. Neither,k your Petitioners
Edition: current; Page: [87] submit, would it be safe to limit the
number to that which would be strictly sufficient, supposing all the
appointments to be the best possible. A certain margin should be allowed
for failures, which, even with the most conscientious selection, will
sometimes occur. Your Petitioners, moreover, cannot overlook the
possibility that, if the nomination takes place by Ministers at the head
of a political party, it will not always be made with exclusive
reference to personal qualifications; and it is indispensable to provide
that such errors or faults in the nominating authority, so long as they
are only occasional, shall not seriously impair the efficiency of the
body.

That while these considerations plead strongly for a body not less
numerous than the present, even if only regarded as advisers of the
Minister, their other office, as a check on the Minister, forms, your
Petitioners submit, a no less forcible objection to any considerable
reduction of the present number. A body of six or eight will not be
equal to one of eighteen, in that feeling of independent self-reliance
which is necessary to induce a public body to press its opinion on a
Minister to whom that opinion is unacceptable. However unobjectionably
in other respects so small a body may be constituted, reluctance to give
offence will be likely, unless in extreme cases, to be a stronger
habitual inducement in their minds than the desire to stand up for their
convictions.

That if, in the opinion of your [Lordships] Honourable House, a body can
be constituted which unites the above enumerated requisites of good
government in a greater degree than the Court of Directors, your
Petitioners have only to express their humble hope that your endeavours
for that purpose may be successful. But if, in enumerating the
conditions of a good system of Home Government for India, your
Petitioners have in fact enumerated the qualities possessed by the
present system, then your Petitioners pray that your [Lordships]
Honourable House will continue the existing powers of the Court of
Directors.

That your Petitioners are aware that the present Home Government of
India is reproached with being a double Government; and that any
arrangement by which an independent check is provided to the discretion
of the Minister will be liable to a similar reproach. But they conceive
that this accusation originates in an entire misconception of the
functions devolving on the Home Government of India, and in the
application to it of the principles applicable to purely executive
departments. The Executive Government of India is, and must be, seated
in India itself. The Court of Directors is not so much an executive, as
a deliberative body. Its principal function, and that of the Home
Government generally, is not to direct the details of administration,
but to scrutinize and revise the past acts of the Indian lGovernmentsl;
to lay down principles, and issue general instructions for their future
guidance, and to give or refuse sanction to great political measures,
which are referred home for approval. These duties are more analogous to
the functions of Edition: current; Page: [88] Parliament, than to those
of an Executive Board: and it might almost as well be said that
Parliament, as that the Government of India, should be constituted on
the principles applicable to Executive Boards. It is considered an
excellence, not a defect, in the constitution of Parliament, to be not
merely a double but a triple Government. An executive authority, your
Petitioners submit, may often with advantage be single, because
promptitude is its first requisite. But the function of passing a
deliberate opinion on past measures, and laying down principles of
future policy, is a business which, in the estimation of your
Petitioners, admits of, and requires the concurrence of more judgments
than one. It is no defect in such a body to be double, and no excellence
to be single; especially when it can only be made so by cutting off that
branch of it which by previous training is always the best prepared, and
often the only one which is prepared at all, for its peculiar duty.

That your Petitioners have heard it asserted that, in consequence of
what is called the double Government, the Indian authorities are less
responsible to Parliament and the nation, than other departments of the
Government of the Empire, since it is impossible to know on which of the
two branches of Home Government the responsibility ought to rest. Your
Petitioners fearlessly affirm, that this impression is not only
groundless, but the very reverse of the truth. The Home Government of
India is not less, but more responsible, than any other branch of the
administration of the State; inasmuch as the President of the Board of
Commissioners,15 who is the minister for India, is as completely
responsible as any other of Her Majesty’s Ministers, and in addition,
his advisers also are responsible. It is always certain, in the case of
India, that the President of the Board of Commissioners must have either
commanded or sanctioned all that has been done. No more than this, your
Petitioners submit, can be known in the case of the head of any
department of Her Majesty’s Government. For it is not, nor can it
rationally be supposed, that any Minister of the Crown is without
trusted advisers; and the Minister for India must, for obvious reasons,
be more dependent than any other of Her Majesty’s Ministers, upon the
advice of persons whose lives have been devoted to the subject on which
their advice has been given. But in the case of India, such madvisersm
are assigned to him by the constitution of the Government, and they are
as much responsible for what they advise as he for what he ordains:
while in other departments the Minister’s only official advisers are the
subordinates in his office—men often of great skill and experience, but
not in the public eye; often unknown to the public even by name;
official reserve precludes the possibility of ascertaining what advice
they give, and they are responsible only to the Minister himself. By
what application of terms this can be called responsible government, and
the joint government of your Petitioners and the India Board an
irresponsible government, your Petitioners think it unnecessary to ask.

Edition: current; Page: [89]
That without knowing the plan on which Her Majesty’s Ministers
contemplate the transfer to the Crown of the servants of the Company,
your Petitioners find themselves unable to approach the delicate
question of the Indian Army, further than to point out that the high
military qualities of the officers of that army have unquestionably
sprung in a great degree from its being a principal and substantive
army, holding Her Majesty’s commissions and enjoying equal rank with Her
Majesty’s officers, and your Petitioners would earnestly deprecate any
change in that position.

That your Petitioners, having regard to all these considerations, humbly
pray your [Lordships] Honourable House, that you will not give your
sanction to any change in the constitution of the Indian Government
during the continuance of the present unhappy disturbances, nor without
a full previous inquiry into the operation of the present system. And
your Petitioners further pray that this inquiry may extend to every
department of Indian administration. Such an inquiry your Petitioners
respectfully claim, not only as a matter of justice to themselves, but
because, when, for the first time in this century, the thoughts of every
public man in the country are fixed on India, an inquiry would be more
thorough, and its results would carry much more instruction to the mind
of Parliament, and of the country, than at any preceding period.

Edition: current; Page: [90]





Memorandum of the Improvements in the Administration of India during the Last Thirty Years

at this time, when a calamity unexampled in the history of British India
has excited an unusual amount of interest in Indian affairs, while the
statements publicly made, and the opinions expressed, concerning the
administration of the Indian Government, strikingly manifest the
deficiency of correct information on the subject; a brief survey of the
principal measures which have been of late adopted for improving the
internal government of the country, and the physical and mental
condition of its inhabitants, may be serviceable in removing false
impressions, and in supplying materials for a deliberate judgment.

It may be thought that this survey would most fitly commence from the
last renewal of the powers of the East-India Company, with some
modifications, in 1853;1 and it must be said that the years which have
since elapsed have been marked by a degree of activity in every
description of public improvement, not only greater than that exhibited
previously, but unsurpassed, it is believed, in any country and in any
age. An interval, however, of only four years is evidently too short to
afford an intelligible view of a course of progressive improvement. The
foundation of all the great measures which were in active progress
during that interval, was laid at an earlier period: and the new
measures which have been initiated during that brief term have not yet
had time to exhibit tangible results. It is therefore necessary to trace
the stream of Indian improvement from a point much higher up in its
course; beginning at the origin of the measures which have contributed
most, in each department, to give to the administration of India its
present enlightened character.


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION, AND RIGHTS OF THE RURAL POPULATION


Connection of the Revenue System with the Rights and Condition of the People

In a country like India, the departments of public business on which the
good government of the country, and the security and contentment of the
people, Edition: current; Page: [94] principally depend, are the revenue
administration and the judicial administration. The importance of a good
and easily accessible administration of justice is the same in India as
elsewhere; but the manner in which the entire economical condition of
nearly the whole population is determined by the management of the
revenue department, cannot, by persons unacquainted with India, be
understood without special explanations.

Everywhere, indeed, it is of first-rate importance to a people that the
taxes should be of moderate amount; that they should be certain, not
arbitrary; and that they should be so assessed and levied as neither to
favour one person or class at the expense of another, nor to interfere
injuriously with industry. These requisites, too, are obviously of more
than their ordinary importance, where the bulk of the tax-paying
population consists of persons depending for subsistence on their own
exertions in tilling the soil. But these general considerations afford
only an imperfect conception of the relation of the tax-paying
cultivator in India to the revenue system. Throughout the greater part
of India, there is no intermediate landlord between the immediate
cultivator and the State. The cultivator does not pay rent to one person
and taxes to another: his taxes are his rent (or a part of his rent);
and his condition is affected by the good or bad quality of the fiscal
administration, in every way in which the condition of a European
tenantry can be affected by a good or a bad landlord. And there is an
additional fact, of greater importance than all the rest. The titles to
land, and to all rights issuing out of land, (that is, to all the
property of the country, except a small percentage), are in India a
branch of the revenue administration. The revenue records, which show
who were the persons held responsible for the revenue by the officers of
former governments, are the general register of title. They always
constitute the principal, and in many cases the sole, reliable evidence
of right to the land. While the British Government confined itself, as
it necessarily did on the first acquisition of any district, to annual
or short settlements, it had no need to look beyond the fact of actual
possession; but when it began to grant leases or settlements for long
terms of years, it was bound to ascertain that the persons whom it
admitted to these engagements were those really entitled to the land.
This could only be done by minute local inquiries; and justice required
that these should be judicially made, and a full hearing given to all
parties on the spot. The revenue officers of Government being thus under
the necessity, for revenue purposes, of investigating and ascertaining
all titles to land, it has been deemed proper that the adjudication so
performed should have the force of a judicial decision; though, if any
of the persons interested considers himself aggrieved by the decision,
he can seek redress by a suit in the regular courts. It is hence
apparent, that in India every revenue officer is also, in the most
important sense of the word, a judicial officer. The security of the
most important and extensive class of proprietary rights throughout the
country, depends upon the manner in which the revenue branch of the
Government performs its judicial functions; and the history of the
revenue Edition: current; Page: [95] administration of India is the
history of its landed property, and of the economical condition of the
whole agricultural population.


Permanent Settlement of the Lower Provinces of Bengal

An important mistake, committed with the most generous intentions by the
administration of Lord Cornwallis towards the end of the last century,2
has divested the Government, in the oldest and most fertile of its
Indian possessions, of this great power of influencing beneficially the
condition of the cultivators of the soil. In the provinces of Bengal and
Behar, to which were subsequently added Benares, and some districts of
the Madras Presidency, the Government gave away its rights over the soil
to private landlords, reserving only from each estate an annual payment,
which it solemnly bound itself never to increase. It is not necessary
here to enter into the disputed questions respecting the original
character and rights of these landlords or zemindars. There is no doubt
that many of them were persons of hereditary influence and station in
the country, and that their connection with the lands, of which they
were now recognized as the proprietors, had in general been of a
permanent character. But their position was nevertheless essentially
that of middlemen; collecting the revenue, not for themselves, but for
the Mogul Government; accounting to that Government for their receipts,
and remunerated by a percentage (generally ten per cent) of the
collections. It is now universally admitted that they never had the
power of disposing arbitrarily of the land. There were, everywhere, at
least large classes of tenants, whom they could not lawfully eject,
except for non-payment of revenue, and from whom they could not lawfully
exact more than the customary payments.

These rights of the occupying tenants it was the full intention of Lord
Cornwallis to preserve. But the Government demand being now fixed in
perpetuity, and claimable from the landlord only, the revenue officers
had no longer any power of interposing in favour of the tenantry; and
their rights were henceforth left for protection solely to the courts of
justice. But the courts of justice could proceed only by regular suit,
on the complaint of the injured party. The poverty of the people, their
passive character, and the extreme difficulty of proving by legal
evidence, before a distant tribunal, what were the customary rates, have
rendered this protection illusory; the rights of the Bengal ryots have
(as has been said) passed away sub silentio,3 and they have become, to
all intents and purposes, Edition: current; Page: [96] tenants at will.
These facts are not adverted to for the purpose of casting blame on a
generation long gone by, whose mistakes are sufficiently explained and
excused by the short experience they had then had of India, and the
extreme difficulty which persons nurtured only in English ideas and
institutions, have in correctly apprehending a state of facts so
entirely unlike anything which ever existed in England, as the whole
framework of Indian society presents. But justice to the subsequent
Governments of India requires it to be understood, that in the most
fertile and valuable portion of the Indian territory, they inherited
from their predecessors an agrarian system, consisting of great
landlords and cottier tenants, forming as close a parallel as the
difference between Europe and Asia will admit, to the condition of
Munster and Connaught; and that the Government has had, during the last
sixty years, no more power of correcting the evils of this system, than
the Government of the mother country had, during the same period, of
remedying the evils of a similar system in Ireland. The tenacity,
however, of old impressions, which characterizes the Hindoos, has kept
alive the idea of a right still existing in the actual cultivator to
hold his land at a rent fixed by custom, not by arbitrary will; and this
traditionary feeling, from which the landlords themselves are not
exempt, must form the basis of anything that can be hereafter done to
improve the tenure of the Bengal ryot.


Present Improvements in Bengal

What the Government had it in its power to do, for alleviating the
operation of the existing system, it has done. It takes systematic
measures for the education of zemindars who are wards of Government. It
has made imperative on the landlords to give to every tenant a written
engagement, specifying the amount of rent and the conditions of tenure;
and it has made these engagements legally binding.4 It has done more.
Owing to the hasty and careless mode in which the permanent settlement
was in the first instance conducted, the boundaries both of estates and
of villages or townships were undefined, and not only the litigation but
the affrays, occasioned by boundary disputes, had grown into a public
evil. The revenue officers were so ill informed on the subject, that in
some cases estates advertised for sale on account of arrears of revenue,
were purchased, and possession was demanded, when it was found that the
estate existed only in the collector’s books, having been swept away by
the changes in the bed of the river, or absorbed by the encroachments of
the neighbouring landholders. To remedy these evils, a survey was
determined on, and has been for several years in progress, for the
purpose of ascertaining what estates are in existence, and determining
their boundaries. This survey has already produced very appreciable
benefit, and holds out the promise of much more.*

Edition: current; Page: [97]
The Governments which have administered Indian affairs in the present
generation, have abstained from imitating elsewhere the errors which
were committed in the permanent settlement of Bengal. Their object has
been, as new provinces were successively brought under British rule, to
ascertain accurately the persons, and classes of persons, who by law or
usage had a beneficial interest in the land, and the nature and extent
of the beneficial interest of each; and having thus determined who were
the persons with whom the settlement of the revenue should be concluded,
to define the demand of Government on each, and limit it to the smallest
amount consistent with the public necessities.

The subsequent revenue administration of India is a succession of
conscientious endeavours to fulfil these duties; endeavours which, in a
large portion of India, have been rewarded by signal success, and in the
remainder are in rapid progress towards it.


Ryotwar System in Madras

Nearly the whole territory of the Madras Presidency became part of the
British possessions at a period subsequent to Lord Cornwallis’s
permanent settlement; and its revenue system was principally founded by
two of the ablest men who have ever taken part in the government of
India—Colonel Reade5 and Sir Thomas Munro. Under this system, the land
is not made over to great landlords, but the actual cultivator, the
peasant himself, is regarded as the proprietor of the soil, subject to
the payment of the Government demand. He has the option annually of
increasing or diminishing his holding; and, in the words of the Madras
Government in their last general report, “has all the benefits of a
perpetual lease, without its responsibilities, inasmuch as he can, at
any time, throw up his lands, but cannot be ejected as long as he pays
his dues.”6 He also receives assistance, by remission of assessment in
unfavourable seasons. The practical operation of this, which is known as
the ryotwar system, evidently depends on the certainty and moderation of
the Government demand. For many years these two conditions were very
insufficiently realized. The extreme difficulty, to a European revenue
officer, of ascertaining the real capabilities of each petty holding,
and his unavoidable dependence, for much of his information, upon native
subordinates, made it inevitable that great errors should be committed
in the first assessments. Some were unnecessarily low, but a much
greater number were too high; and if not so at first, many afterwards
became so, when the security which our rule had given from the ravages
of war and internal depredation, had produced its natural effect in the
Edition: current; Page: [98] extension of cultivation, and consequent
lowering of the price of agricultural produce; whereby, notwithstanding
the increased well-being of the ryots, the same money rent became a
burthensome exaction, which was comparatively little felt when the
produce bore a higher price. These circumstances were, as justice
required, allowed for, and reductions made, but not always sufficiently
early, nor to a sufficient amount. And so long as the Government demand
was too heavy, it was also uncertain, owing to the necessity of an
annual inquiry to test the justice of claims to remission.

Up to this time, it could not be said that the British Government in
India had anywhere succeeded in establishing the revenue administration
on a sound basis. But inquiries and discussions of the utmost importance
were going on, and knowledge was being acquired, the want of which at
former periods had led to all the mistakes. It was in the settlement of
the North-western Provinces that the fruits of this increased knowledge
were first gathered in.


Settlement of the North-western Provinces

The greater part of what are called the North-western Provinces became
part of the British dominions through the consequences of Lord
Wellesley’s Mahratta wars, in the first years of the present century.7
For a considerable number of years after the conquest, the revenue
arrangements were of necessity provisional. Such serious consequences
having been experienced in Bengal from hastening to establish a
permanent system, when the knowledge acquired was not sufficient for
framing it rightly, there need be no wonder if, in a new field,
considerable time was in the first instance devoted to becoming
acquainted with the capabilities of the country, and the prescriptive
rights of the different classes of its inhabitants. The delay was amply
justified by its results. The settlement of the North-western Provinces,
commenced and completed between 1834 and 1844, by some of the most
distinguished of the Company’s servants, among whom the most conspicuous
in merit was Mr. Robert Mertens Bird, is the first great monument which
the British rule in India has exhibited, of wise, deliberate, but
thorough reform, grounded on complete knowledge of the subject, and
equally efficacious in removing present evils and in providing for
future improvement.8

It is now known that in the greater part of India, and without doubt
originally throughout the whole, the property in the land (so far as
that term is applicable at all in India) resides neither in the
individual ryot, nor in the great officers who collected revenue for the
former native governments, but in the village Edition: current; Page:
[99] communities. The village community is not co-extensive with the
cultivating inhabitants of the village: it consists of the descendants
or representatives of those by whom the village was, at some remote
period, conquered, or reclaimed from waste. In most cases these
proprietors are a part, and in some the whole, of the agricultural
population of the village. When they are only a part, the remainder
consists of persons, or the descendants of persons, who have taken up
their residence in the village at later periods, and had no other
original right than the permission of the proprietors; but some of whom
have, by grant or prescription, acquired a fixity of tenure, while
others have remained tenants at will. The village proprietors formed
prescriptively the municipal government of the village; a fact of great
importance, village government being the only institution, properly so
called, which the Hindoos possessed.

It was with the village communities, as thus defined, that the
settlement of the North-western Provinces was made; with a reservation
and definition of all rights which had been acquired by any of the ryots
under them. The time occupied in the operation was about ten years, and
the expense incurred in it was upwards of £500,000. It comprehended a
detailed survey of a country about 72,000 square miles in extent,
containing a population of more than twenty-three millions. The
difficulty and complication of the process will appear from the appended
note.*

The proprietary rights, as ascertained and recorded at the survey, were
confirmed in perpetuity; but the Government assessment was fixed, in
some cases for twenty, generally for thirty, years. In a few of the
districts, the term of settlement has expired, or is on the point of
expiring. On resettlement, the assessment is liable to revision, and may
be increased if the net produce of the land has augmented, but not
proportionally to the increase of the net produce; and a pledge has
besides been given, that a liberal consideration will be allowed for
“improvements attributable only to the efforts of the tenant himself,
and especially with regard to such as are of a comparatively recent
date.”9

The effect of the settlement upon the general pressure of the Government
demand was to remove irregularities, and in general to lighten the
aggregate burthen; the only exceptions being Goruckpore and Azimgurh, in
which districts, though they are known to be still lightly taxed, a
considerable increase was effected. The beneficial results may be traced
in the improved condition of the population, and the ease and
punctuality with which a revenue of more than £4,000,000 is collected,
as evidenced by the small amount of outstanding balances, and the great
diminution in the number of coercive processes for the enforcement of
payment.

Edition: current; Page: [100]


Settlement of the Punjab

After this great economical and social reform had been for some years in
operation, the important territory of the Punjab became, by the event of
the Sikh war, a part of British India. This took place in 1849. And now
was seen the full value of the superior knowledge of native rights and
institutions, which had been acquired since the period of Lord
Cornwallis’s settlement. The task of bringing the Punjab under British
rule was confided to men wisely selected from the body of public
servants who had effected and administered the settlement of the
North-western Provinces. The principles of the settlement, being
grounded on a correct knowledge of the prescriptive rights of all
classes, were found equally applicable to the adjacent territory of the
Punjab. In India, as in other countries, great reforms have usually been
of slow introduction. Our revenue improvements, so long as they were
merely tentative, were necessarily slow. But their authors were now able
to proceed with the ease and decision of men who thoroughly understood
their work. There is something striking in the rapidity with which the
latest and best principles of Indian policy, both in revenue and
judicial administration, were at once applied to the Punjab by the
consummate administrators to whom the discernment of the Marquis of
Dalhousie had committed the government of the province.10 Before a year
had elapsed from the first acquisition of the country, great progress
had already been made in the introduction of the system of the
North-western Provinces, with its most recent improvements. The greater
part of the Punjab in extent, and by far the greatest in point of
importance, has since been settled for terms of years. The leases were
usually shorter than in the North-western Provinces; but the assessment
was lowered, as compared with that of the native Government, by Rs.
72,37,244, or £723,724; being not less than twenty-five per cent. It has
been ascertained that the Government demand does not exceed one-fifth of
the gross value of the produce in rich tracts, and one-sixth, or
one-eighth, or even less, in poor tracts. The result has been a peace
and security never before known in the province; a rapid increase of
cultivation and production; and a contentment with our rule, which has
enabled this newly-conquered territory, inhabited by the most warlike
population of India, to become the base of our operations for the
recovery of our older territories, and has made the Sikhs, so lately in
arms against us, an important part of our strength for subduing the
general revolt of the Bengal army.


Bombay Ryotwar Reform

While these great improvements were taking place in the north of India,
a reform of equal magnitude was being inaugurated in the west and south.
The Edition: current; Page: [101] reformed revenue administration of
those territories is not grounded on the village, but on the ryotwar
principle. The ryotwar system, or that which recognizes the actual
cultivator of the soil as its proprietor, and collects the Government
revenue directly from him, is the general system of the South of India.
Circumstances already mentioned had, during many years, prevented this
system, even under the able management of Sir Thomas Munro, from
operating beneficially on the prosperity of the people. As, in Northern
India, the territories latest acquired were those which first had the
benefit of our improved knowledge and experience; so, the earliest
example of a successful ryotwar system was in the districts (forming the
greater part of the Bombay territories) which came under British
government at the close of Lord Hastings’s Mahratta war, in 1818.

The village communities still existed in those territories; and if the
village system had been as well understood in 1818 as it was in 1838,
the settlement of the Deccan would probably have been made on the same
principles as that of the North-western Provinces. Such, however, was
not the case: Sir Thomas Munro’s principles were then in the ascendant;
the settlement was, for the most part, ryotwar; and until about twenty
years ago, little had been done to improve the fiscal administration of
these territories, beyond the removal occasionally, as they were brought
to notice, of vexatious and oppressive taxes, which had been added to,
or incorporated with, the land revenue, during the declining period of
the Mahratta power. The assessments which we found in force were
generally, even after these reductions, excessive; and large remissions
were annually required, which necessitated every year an inquisitorial
investigation into the affairs of each ryot who claimed a share in the
remissions. The agricultural population, being always liable to be
called on for an amount of rent which could only be paid in the most
prosperous seasons, were constantly in arrear, and were therefore
without any incentive to improve their condition.

To remedy these evils, a survey of the country and general revision of
the assessment, were undertaken.11 The operation commenced in the Deccan
and Southern Mahratta country, where it is now nearly, if not quite,
completed; and it is gradually being extended to the northern districts
of the Presidency, as the experienced officers, European and native, who
have been trained to this difficult duty, can be spared for the purpose.
In the northern districts, however, the progress of the survey has been
retarded by the greater complication of the landed tenures there
prevalent, and by the existence of various classes of middlemen, who,
like the talookdars of Oude, are hostile to our improvements, because,
though preserving to them their pecuniary rights, they interfere with
their power.

Edition: current; Page: [102]
Where any ancient proprietors, either middlemen or village communities,
were found in existence, and in possession of their proprietary rights,
at the time of the survey, those rights have been respected; but in
general, the principle of the reformed Bombay system is ryotwar. The
land, cultivated and waste together, is divided into portions called
fields, the extent of a field being for the most part fixed at the
quantity of land which can be cultivated with one yoke of bullocks. On
each field the Government demand is fixed, for a period of thirty years,
at a very moderate rate. While the contract is binding on the
Government, the ryot, on his side, can throw up the land at pleasure;
and he is not required to pay the assessment for any year, on any field
which he has not cultivated, or undertaken to cultivate, in that year.
The appended note explains the details of the process.*

The fixation of the Government demand for thirty years would have been
of little service to the ryot, if the demand had remained so high as to
require, almost every year, remissions of uncertain amount. But it has
been fixed on a very low scale, the reduction of the assessment
generally exceeding considerably the average amount of remissions and
balances under the former system. The effect of this reform is visible
in the large increase of cultivation which has always taken place after
the completion of the survey of a district; in the realization of the
revenue, with scarcely any balance remaining in arrear (in some years
with absolutely none); and in the fact, that in all the surveyed
districts lands are frequently underlet. These important results have
been purchased by an immediate sacrifice of revenue; but the
encouragement which a fixed and moderate assessment gives to the
occupation of waste land, is gradually making up to Government for the
loss; and in some of the surveyed districts, the revenue under the new
settlement already exceeds that under the old.

The eminent success of the reformed ryotwar system of Bombay has
established the fact, which many Indian authorities trained in a
different system had doubted, that the ryotwar, or peasant-proprietary
system, may be so organized, and so worked, as to be neither oppressive
nor arbitrary; and that, when so organized and worked, it brings the
motives to exertion, and to the exercise of intelligence, which property
gives, to bear upon those on whom the prosperity of agriculture most
depends—the actual cultivators of the soil. In all those parts of India,
therefore, in which the village communities have been broken up by the
distracted state of the country for generations, or in which the
exclusive title of the representatives of the old proprietors has been
superseded by the prescriptive rights acquired by the actual
cultivators, ryotwar is now the recognized system of revenue management.


Madras Improvements

In the Madras Presidency, considerable improvements in the detail of the
revenue system preceded the steps recently taken for a general revision.
The most important of these are the two following. In 1837, it was
adopted as an universal Edition: current; Page: [103] rule, that no land
should be more heavily taxed, in consequence of its being applied to the
cultivation of a more valuable description of produce.12 The demand was
thenceforth fixed on a general estimate of the productive power of the
land, with reference to the staple productions of the country; and the
ryot was left perfectly free to cultivate whatever he pleased, without
being in any case liable, on that account, to an increased demand. From
this time, therefore, there has not been even the semblance of
foundation for the statement often made, that the land assessment is a
discouragement to the growth of the more valuable products, and, in
particular, of cotton. To go any further would be to demand a lower rent
from lands on which cotton is grown, than from land devoted to other
cultivation: which would be to give a bounty on the production of
cotton.

The other great improvement was the establishment of the rule, that no
ryot should be required to pay an additional tax (or rent) for his land,
in consideration of increased value derived from improvements made by
himself.13 If, therefore, a proprietor, by labour or outlay of his own,
sinks wells, constructs tanks, or plants valuable trees, he enjoys, not
for the duration of any settlement, but in perpetuity, the full benefit
of the increased value which he has given to the land; an assurance
which no private tenant in any country, even of Europe, has obtained.*

Large reductions of the assessment have also been made in the most
heavily-taxed districts, which have in general produced so great an
extension of cultivation, that the revenue has scarcely suffered.


Ryotwar Reform in Progress at Madras

In 1855, the present enlightened Governor of Madras submitted a plan for
a survey and revised assessment of the whole of the Madras territory, on
the Bombay principle, to the consideration of the Governor-General in
Council.14 Having obtained the approval of that authority, it was laid
before the Court of Directors, and received their formal sanction in a
despatch dated the 17th of December, 1856; in which also several
improvements were indicated, of which the scheme appeared to be
susceptible.15 A commencement has thus been made in removing the last
remaining blot in the administration of the land revenue of British
India; for the Edition: current; Page: [104] social and economical
condition of the Lower Provinces of Bengal is, for reasons already
explained, no longer dependent upon the revenue system.

Under both the reformed modes of revenue administration, the village
system of the North-west Provinces and the Punjab (the introduction of
which into the more recent acquisitions of Nagpore and Oude has been
sanctioned) and the ryotwar system of the Bombay and Madras
presidencies, the agricultural population either have, or will shortly
have, the benefits of tenures and rights perfectly defined and secured,
and moderate rents fixed for a sufficient term to afford, in full
strength, the natural incentives to improvement. It should be remembered
also, that on the expiration of the thirty years settlements, the
holders will not be liable to be ejected. They will only be liable to a
revision of the amount of the rent paid to Government; and it is the
declared intention of the authorities, that not merely the same; but a
still greater degree of moderation, shall be observed in the future,
than in the past, settlements.

A further exemplification of the manner in which the Indian authorities
now take advantage of the latest experience for purposes of improvement,
is afforded by recent proceedings in two limited portions of the
territory of India. Cuttack is a portion of the Lower Bengal Provinces,
to which the permanent settlements of Lord Cornwallis were never
extended. The revenue system of Cuttack is ryotwar; but the attempt has
latterly been made to combine the advantages of the ryotwar principle,
with a portion of those of the system of the North-west Provinces. The
assessment is made on each holding, and the payment to be made by each
ryot is fixed, by the Government officers; but the collection of it from
the individual ryots by native revenue officers, with the opportunities
it affords for vexation and corruption, is done away with: the ryots
elect a few of their number to represent the rest; these become
responsible to Government for the whole revenue of the village, and take
on themselves the recovery from the other ryots of their portion of the
payment, according to the terms of the settlement; having recourse to
the tribunals, if (which is not a common occurrence) such aid is
required. This mixed system of ryotwar and village management, having
been successful in Cuttack, is in course of introduction into one of our
latest acquisitions, the districts made over to our permanent
administration by the Nizam; and the plan has been recommended by the
home authorities to the attention of the Madras Government, with a view
to eventual application to that presidency.


Fiscal System of India

After this review of the present revenue administration of India in its
bearing on the social relations, proprietary rights, and economical
condition of the mass of the people, it remains to speak of it as a
merely fiscal system.


Land Revenue

Nearly two-thirds of the revenue of India consist of the rent of land.
So far as this Edition: current; Page: [105] resource extends in any
country, the public necessities of the country may be said to be
provided for, at no expense to the people at large. Where the original
right of the State to the land of the country has been reserved, and its
natural, but no more than its natural, rents made available to meet the
public expenditure, the people may be said to be so far untaxed; because
the Government only takes from them as a tax, what they would otherwise
have paid as rent to a private landlord. This proposition undoubtedly
requires modification in the case of a ryot or peasant cultivating his
own land; but even in his case, if the Government demand does not exceed
the amount which the land could pay as rent if let to a solvent tenant
(that is, the price of its peculiar advantages of fertility or
situation), the Government only reserves to itself, instead of conceding
to the cultivator, the profit of a kind of natural monopoly, leaving to
him the same reward of his labour and capital which is obtained by the
remainder of the industrious population.

Any amount whatever of revenue, therefore, derived from the rent of
land, cannot be regarded, generally speaking, as a burthen on the
tax-paying community. But to this it is of course essential that the
demand of revenue should be kept within the limits of a fair rent. Under
the native Governments, and in the earlier periods of our own, this
limit was often exceeded. But under the British rule, in every instance
in which the fact of excessive assessment was proved by large
outstanding balances and increased difficulty of realization, the
Government has, when the fact was ascertained, taken measures for
reducing the assessment. The history of our government in India has been
a continued series of reductions of taxation; and in all the improved
systems of revenue administration, of which an account has been given in
the preceding part of this paper, the object has been not merely to keep
the Government demand within the limits of a fair rent, but to leave a
large portion of the rent to the proprietors. In the settlement of the
North-west Provinces, the demand was limited to two-thirds of the amount
which it appeared, from the best attainable information, that the land
could afford to pay as rent. The principle which has been laid down for
the next settlement, and acted on wherever resettlement has commenced,
is still more liberal: the Government demand is fixed at one-half,
instead of two-thirds, of the average net produce; that is, of a fair
rent. The same general standard has been adopted for guidance in the new
assessment of the Madras territory. In Bombay no fixed proportion has
been kept in view; but the object has been, that land should possess a
saleable value. That this object has been attained throughout the
surveyed districts of Bombay, there is full evidence: and as the ryots
have been secured from increase of revenue for the space of thirty
years, the value of land may be expected, from the progress of
improvement, to be constantly on the increase.


Opium

It has been shown above, that by far the largest item in the public
revenue of India is obtained virtually without taxation, because
obtained by the mere interception of a payment, which, if not made to
the State for public uses, would Edition: current; Page: [106] generally
be made to individuals for their private use. A similar remark though
for a different reason, is applicable to the second in amount of the
sources of Indian revenue,—that of opium. The opium revenue is not
derived from the taxation of any class of her Majesty’s subjects, but is
(as far as this can be truly said of any impost) paid wholly by
foreigners. It cannot reasonably be contended that this is an improper
source of revenue, or that the burthening of an article considered to be
noxious, with an amount of taxation which has sometimes caused it to be
sold for its weight in silver, can be liable to objection as encouraging
the consumption of the article. Whether this revenue, of between four
and five millions sterling, should be levied as it is at present in
Bengal (though not in Bombay) by a Government monopoly, or in the more
usual form of an excise duty, is a question of detail on which opinions
differ, and which is open to consideration. The former mode has hitherto
been retained, under the belief that the unrestricted production and
sale of the article would give such facilities to smuggling, as would
render the realization of anything like the present amount of revenue
impossible. It might, however, be practicable—though this is doubtful—to
maintain the price in the foreign market by restrictions on exportation;
but it is matter for serious consideration whether any system involving
the free cultivation of the poppy, would not expose India itself, which
has hitherto been comparatively free from this kind of hurtful
indulgence, to be flooded with the article at a low price.


Salt

The third item, in point of amount, of the revenue of India, is that
from salt. This is the only considerable tax existing in India which can
be regarded as objectionable in principle, and the entire abandonment of
which, if financially practicable, would be a benefit to the people at
large. It is impossible, however, to look upon this impost in the same
light in which it would deserve to be considered if it were levied in
addition to other heavy burthens. We must bear in mind, in extenuation
of the objections to a tax on salt, that it is, speaking generally, the
only tax which the labouring ryot of India pays.

The revenue from salt is commonly said to be obtained by means of a
monopoly. This, however (as will be seen by the appended note,* is
strictly true only of the Madras Presidency; and even there the monopoly
is of a very qualified description, since the importation of the
commodity is free, subject to a duty considered equivalent to the profit
charged by Government on the salt produced by it. In the Bombay
territory there never has been a monopoly, or even a Government
manufacture. There is an excise duty, imposed to compensate for other
more objectionable taxes, yielding a far greater amount of revenue,
which have been abolished. The Government of India, in 1844, fixed this
excise duty at one rupee per maund of 82 2/7 lbs.; but before this rate
had come into operation, it was Edition: current; Page: [107] reduced by
the Court of Directors to twelve annas (three-fourths of a rupee).16 In
the same year, and for a similar reason—namely, to compensate for other
taxes then abolished—the Government of India fixed the selling price of
the monopoly salt in the Madras Presidency, at one and a half rupees per
maund; but the Court of Directors immediately reduced it to one rupee.17

In Bengal, up to 1836, there was a real monopoly. In that year, in
anticipation of the subsequent recommendation of a Committee of the
House of Commons, the Bengal system was fundamentally modified.18 The
present system is, to ascertain the actual cost to Government of all
descriptions of salt manufactured at the Government works, and to issue
it to dealers in any quantity applied for, at a price equal to the cost
with the addition of a fixed duty. Importation is free, subject to the
payment of the same duty. The duty has been gradually lowered from three
sicca rupees per maund (equivalent to 3 1/4 Company’s rupees) to 2 1/2
Company’s rupees (about three farthings per pound); while the Madras
duty is only 7/8 of a rupee, and the Bombay only 3/4 (less than a
farthing per pound). The reduction in Bengal, not having been attended
with the hoped-for increase of consumption, has not been carried
further. Even if the revenue derived from salt were not required for the
necessary purposes of government, it is still conceived that more good
would be done to the people by retaining the tax, and expending its
proceeds in roads and works of irrigation, than could possibly be done
by its remission.

Within the last three years, the manufacture of salt in the districts
round Calcutta has been laid open to all who are willing to engage in
it, subject to excise regulations. Very little use, however, has been
made of this liberty, the quantity of salt manufactured under license
having only amounted to from 20,000 to 25,000 maunds. It is hoped that
the quantity will increase, and that private enterprise may in time
supersede Government agency. But the small amount of response made to
the encouragement held out, is a presumption that the Government
arrangements for the manufacture and sale afford as marketable an
article, at as low a cost, as could be produced by private
manufacturers.


Tobacco Monopoly abolished

The tobacco monopoly which formerly existed in the Malabar provinces of
the Madras Presidency, and which yielded an annual revenue of about six
lacs of Edition: current; Page: [108] rupees (£60,000), was abolished in
1852, without equivalent:19 and this article is now wholly untaxed.


Customs

The customs, in India, are not a very productive source of revenue, the
classes who consume any considerable amount of foreign productions being
comparatively limited. There is no branch of taxation in which the
burthens of the people have been more conspicuously lightened by the
British Government. The most important taxes levied on commodities by
the native Governments of India, were the inland customs, or transit
duties. Every petty chief whose territory was situated on any of the
great lines of commerce, made use of his position to extort from traders
the largest sums which they could be induced to pay. In the British
territories, these duties have been entirely abolished: in the Lower
Bengal Provinces as early as the administration of Lord Cornwallis
(reimposed in a modified form in 1801, and finally abolished in 1836);20
in the North-western Provinces from 1834 to 1836;21 in the Bombay
Presidency in 1837;22 in Madras in 1844;23 and in our other possessions
immediately after their acquisition. This was not a small sacrifice of
revenue. The transit duties in Madras alone yielded a net revenue of
about thirty-one lacs of rupees, or £310,000 sterling. Several of the
native princes have, with praiseworthy liberality, followed the example
of the British Government, by abolishing, or greatly lowering, their
transit duties;24 and the diplomatic influence of our Government is
freely used to encourage this policy. In cases in which the duties
levied by some particular chief have been an obstruction to important
lines of mercantile communication, and in which it was not probable that
the chief would be indemnified for their loss by the increase of his
other sources of revenue, our Government has even purchased his assent
by pecuniary compensation.

Besides these duties, the sale of goods was, under the native
Governments, hampered by innumerable exactions, laid on under various
pretences, most of which we have, on every occasion of coming into
possession of a new territory, abolished or commuted. But some taxes on
internal trade still remained even in the British territories. The last
of these has been swept away less than two years ago, Edition: current;
Page: [109] by an order from the home authorities, bearing date the 5th
November 1856, for the abolition of the Mohturfa, or tax on houses,
trades, and professions, in the Madras Presidency.25 There are now no
internal customs in British India, except, in some cases, town duties;
and these, not for general, but for local purposes, and as far as
possible under local management; though the exertions of the Indian
Governments to foster a municipal spirit, and induce the inhabitants of
towns to take an active part in the management of town affairs, are only
beginning, and very slowly, to be successful.

There has been similar activity in reducing the duties on the external
commerce of India, and extending the principles of free trade. In the
recent acquisitions of Sind and the Punjab, the frontier duties have
been entirely abolished, and those territories are outside our customs
line. On the frontier line between the Punjab and the North-western
Provinces, customs are paid on salt and sugar only. In Southern India
the land tariff is the same as that on imports by sea. The
discriminating duties on goods carried in foreign vessels were abolished
in 1848; and in 1850 the coasting trade was thrown open to the ships of
all nations.26 In thus abolishing the navigation laws, the Government of
India preceded the Imperial Government.27 The three presidencies were
formerly, in regard to commerce, treated as distinct settlements, and
the trade between them subjected to the same duties as that between
India and Great Britain. In 1848 this trade was completely thrown
open.28 and the whole of British India treated, for customs purposes, as
one empire; and great success has attended the efforts of the Company to
obtain for the produce of native states in dependent alliance with us,
the privilege of admission into the ports of the United Kingdom at the
rates of duty chargeable on goods of British origin. The duty levied on
British goods imported into India is five per cent ad valorem. There is
still a distinctive double duty on many articles imported from foreign
countries; and a general export duty of three per cent (from which
however cotton is exempt) on the produce and manufactures of India.
These are admitted defects; and the export duties were marked out by the
home authorities, in a despatch of 1846, to be dispensed with at the
earliest period which financial considerations may permit.29

Edition: current; Page: [110]


Post-office

The post-office in India, as in England, is maintained more for public
convenience than as a source of revenue. Its improvement in India has
fully kept pace with that in England. Reductions of postage, and the
removal of practical impediments and imperfections, may be said to have
been constantly in progress; and the great change recently made in the
post-office system of this country has been imitated, with equal
success, in India.30 The principle of uniform postage, without reference
to distance, has been adopted, and letters and newspapers are conveyed
from Cape Comorin to Peshawur at the same charge as for the shortest
distance. The lowest rate is half an anna, or three farthings, for a
letter a quarter of a tola in weight (equivalent to about one-tenth of
an ounce); it having been found by experiment that the average weight of
native letters is considerably below this limit. There is an ascending
scale of charges up to twelve tolas, above which weight letters are not
conveyed by the ordinary post; but a parcel post is also maintained by
Government, which they are prepared to abandon whenever the duty shall
be undertaken by private enterprise. Newspapers are conveyed at a charge
of one anna, or three halfpence each. The postage on letters and
newspapers must be prepaid by stamps, under penalty of double postage on
delivery. There is also a book post, at a minimum rate of one anna per
twenty tolas (about half a pound), and an ascending scale up to 120
tolas, or three pounds. Arrangements have been made with her Majesty’s
Government for the conveyance of letters, newspapers, and books, from
any part of England to any part of India, at low rates of postage,
payable in one sum, either on despatch or receipt. The Post-office
department for all India is under the control of a Director-General at
Calcutta, immediately under the Government of India. The progress of
improvements in every branch of the details has been very striking, and
it is believed that the department will not suffer by a comparison with
that of any other country.

The pecuniary results of the change to a low uniform postage have been
as satisfactory as in England. It had been doubted whether such a
population as that of India would take advantage of the facilities
afforded for correspondence, to the extent necessary to make up, in any
considerable degree, to the revenue, for the diminution of the rate. At
the close, however, of 1855-56 (the first complete year of the new
system), the number of chargeable letters had increased 101 per cent as
compared with the preceding year, and 142 per cent as compared with
1849-50. The loss of revenue, which, if there had been no increase of
correspondence, would have been Rs. 9,12,000, is only Rs. 3,01,869, and
may be expected yearly to diminish.


General Prosperity

The general result of all these improvements in administration, combined
with the security which our rule has for the first time given to
property against the Edition: current; Page: [111] ravages of war and
fiscal rapacity, has been a great and rapid growth of general
prosperity. Besides the remarkable increase of cultivation and
population, the cheapening of agricultural produce, and the recovery of
the revenue after great reductions, which have been already
commemorated, there has been an enormous increase in the external
commerce of India. The exports have risen from £7,993,420 in 1834-5, to
£23,039,268 in 1855-6, being 188 per cent. The export of cotton amounted
in the former year to 98,320,050 lbs., and in the latter to 237,179,949
lbs., being an increase of 141 per cent; but the quantity exported to
England has increased in a much greater ratio, namely from 38,268,402
lbs. to 170,771,510 lbs., or 346 per cent. The export of rice, chiefly
from the east coast of the Bay of Bengal, has so vastly increased that
labour can scarcely be found to transport it to the coast; the wages of
labourers have risen to an unexampled height, and the agricultural
population of large districts are, for the first time in memory, out of
debt to money-lenders and to their landlords. During the same period of
twenty-one years, the imports into India have risen from £4,261,106 to
£13,447,027, or upwards of 227 per cent; the great excess of exports
above imports being regularly liquidated in silver.


JUDICATURE AND LEGISLATION


Judicial arrangements of Lord Cornwallis

The history of the judicial administration of British India bears a
striking analogy to that of the revenue administration. It began with
well-intended, but premature and ill-considered measures, which produced
many evils, and but a small part of the good which their authors
expected from them. When experience had disclosed the faults of the
system at first adopted, similar errors were avoided, and a better
system introduced into our later acquisitions; while palliatives of
great value, though falling short of the full exigencies of the case,
were adopted in the older provinces. Last came the plans, now in an
advanced stage of their progress, for effecting a complete reform.

At the period at which the judicial arrangements of Lord Cornwallis were
made, the ideas of civil judicature entertained in England still partook
of an almost barbarous character. The English courts of law were still
encumbered with all the technicalities, and disgraced by all the delay
and expense, which had descended from the middle ages, or grown up in
the attempt to make the institutions of the middle ages suffice for the
wants of modern society; and unfortunately these courts, far from being
considered defective, were looked upon as the models to be imitated in
every other place, departure from which was regarded as an imperfection,
in all cases to be regretted, though not always to be avoided. The
Legislature, however, had recognized that forms of procedure more simple
and expeditious might possibly be necessary in India; and power had been
given to the Edition: current; Page: [112] judges of her Majesty’s
Supreme Court to modify the procedure of that court, so as to meet the
exigency:31 but the power was never acted on. It is, therefore, not
surprising that Lord Cornwallis’s courts were greatly infected (though
in a far less degree than the courts in England then were) with
technicalities of procedure, calculated both to defeat justice, and to
obstruct the access to it by needless delay and expense. But the
arrangements had a still more fatal defect: the judicial establishment
was totally inadequate to the wants of the country. The attempt to
administer justice (except in the most trifling cases) wholly by
European agency, made it impossible to defray the expense of the number
of courts necessary to render justice accessible: and if the benefits of
judicature were to be afforded at all to the mass of the people, the
intrusting, under proper securities, of the greatest portion of it to
native functionaries, was not a question of expediency, but of
necessity.


Subsequent Improvements

The creation of native courts of justice, and (as the experiment
succeeded) the progressive extension of their powers, has been the
greatest practical improvement made in the administration of justice in
our older provinces during the last and present generation. The
foundation for the present extensive employment of uncovenanted and
native agency in the judicial department, was laid by the administration
of Lord William Bentinck in 1831.32 At present, in the Bengal and Bombay
Presidencies, the entire original jurisdiction in civil suits is in the
hands of the native judges, the covenanted Europeans being only judges
of appeal; and the same thing is true of the Madras Presidency, in
regard to all suits below the value of 10,000 rupees. The employment of
uncovenanted agency has also been greatly extended in the administration
of criminal justice, and in the revenue department. Deputy magistrates
(in some instances exercising judicial powers equal to those of the
district magistrate) and deputy collectors, discharge important
functions, and afford material assistance to the head authorities of the
district. Most of these are natives, and some of them natives of high
rank and influence.

The movement towards reform in legal affairs generally, also dates from
the administration of Lord William Bentinck. At Bombay, indeed, the
Regulations of Government, comprising the penal law and the law of
procedure actually in force, and as much of the civil law as had been
introduced by our own Government, had already, under Mr. Elphinstone’s
administration, been consolidated into what is Edition: current; Page:
[113] called the Bombay Code.33 But it was on the recommendation of Lord
William Bentinck’s Government that, by the Act of 1833, the present
ample legislative powers for all India were conferred on the
Governor-General in Council; a barrister appointed from England being
added to the Council, for the express purpose of aiding the Government
in its legislative functions.34 By the Act of 1853, the Legislative
Council was further enlarged by the addition of the Chief Justice and
one puisne judge of her Majesty’s Supreme Court, two members
representing Madras and Bombay, and selected by those Governments, and
two representing Bengal and the North-western Provinces, and appointed
by the Lieutenant-Governors; to whom the Governor-General has the power
of adding two other civil servants of Government, selected at his
discretion.35 The Legislative Council now holds its sittings in public,
and its debates are regularly reported and published.

Since the first institution of the Legislative Council, few years have
passed in which there have not been one or two legislative measures for
the improvement of the procedure of the civil courts. The object of some
has been to facilitate the progress of suits through their various
stages; of others, to secure the correct recording of the judgment, by
prescribing that it shall be made by the judge himself; of others, to
insure a more speedy and certain execution of judgments; of others, to
render more efficient the systems of regular and special appeals.
Legislative measures have also been taken for reforming the law of
evidence; for the abolition of Persian as the language of record; and
for putting the office of native pleader on a more efficient and
respectable footing. The defects of the criminal courts have likewise
largely engaged the attention of the Legislature, and much has been done
for their improvement. But notwithstanding these partial amendments, it
cannot be said that the courts, in what are called the Regulation
Provinces, have yet been freed from their radical defects. The principal
impediments to a good administration of justice, are the complicated and
technical system of pleading in the civil courts, and in the criminal
courts the character of the police.


The New Codes

By the Act of 1833, a Law Commission was appointed to sit in Calcutta,
and inquire into the jurisdiction and procedure of the courts of justice
and police establishments, and into the operation of the laws, civil and
criminal.36 The Edition: current; Page: [114] declared purpose of
Parliament in creating the Law Commission, as well as in the new
constitution given at the same time to the Legislative Council, was to
facilitate measures for bringing Europeans and natives under the same
courts of justice, civil and criminal.37 The machinery constructed for
this purpose has been employed to lay the foundation for correcting all
the principal defects of the laws and of the tribunals. The Commission
prepared a penal code of great merit, and made many reports full of
valuable suggestions on other branches of legal administration, some of
which have been acted on. But it was important that any new system,
before being brought into practical effect, should be well understood by
those who would have to apply it, and should be approved by those whose
authority would carry the greatest weight. Opinion could not be expected
to ripen all at once on so great a subject as the reconstruction of the
legal and judicial system of a vast country; and the suggestions of the
Law Commissioners, being referred to various authorities, elicited great
varieties of judgment. By the Act of 1853, a Commission was appointed to
sit in London, for considering and reporting on the recommendations of
the Indian Law Commissioners.38 The wants of India as to codes, both of
substantive law and of procedure, civil and criminal, have been fully
considered by the Commissioners so appointed. They have recorded a
strong recommendation in favour of the preparation of a code of civil
law for India; and they have prepared complete codes of civil and
criminal procedure, grounded on a rare combination of appropriate local
knowledge with the matured views of enlightened jurists.39 These codes,
together with the penal code passed by the earlier commission,40 are in
progress through the Legislative Council of India, and would probably by
this time have been law, but for the calamitous events by which the
attention of all Indian authorities has of late been engrossed.

These codes, when enacted, will constitute the most thorough reform
probably ever yet made in the judicial administration of a country. The
code of civil procedure entirely sweeps away the present cumbersome and
complicated system of pleading, and substitutes the vivâ voce
examination of the parties;41 and in all other respects, as compared
with the previous practice, it is of great simplicity, and eminently
free from delay and expense. As Mr. Colvin, the Lieutenant-Governor of
the North-western Provinces, observed in his last general report,

Edition: current; Page: [115]
It is not alone, as the Lieutenant-Governor apprehends, that by the new
code of procedure, the practice of the courts will be made more simple
and rapid, and the costs of a suit be diminished; it is because, as he
hopes, the judges will be brought much more frequently into direct
communication with the parties in suits and their witnesses, without any
intervention of agents or pleaders, that he looks to the public becoming
satisfied that the courts are to be trusted as a means for obtaining
substantial justice, and not dreaded as an engine capable of being
readily perverted to the working of fraud and wrong under the forms of
law. It is not, he fears, to be denied that low classes of practitioners
and unscrupulous habits of chicane have grown up about our courts, with
their old complex and artificial pleadings and rules: and this being the
case, it cannot be matter of surprise that among a population so
generally ignorant and helpless, discredit and dislike should have
extensively attached to our judicial institutions.42

Under the new code, if not materially altered by the Legislative
Council, India is likely to possess, so far as judicial institutions can
secure that blessing, as good and as accessible an administration of
civil justice, as the lights of the age are capable of conferring on it.


Judicial System of the Non-Regulation Provinces

It was only the Regulation Provinces which stood in need of such a
reform; for the Non-Regulation Provinces have had (generally from their
first acquisition) the benefit of a cheap, accessible, and expeditious
administration of justice, free from all such formalities and
technicalities as either defeat justice, or add needlessly to the
difficulty and expense of obtaining it. The following are the terms in
which the eminent Sir John Lawrence, in his last general report,
describes the judicial system of the Punjab, which has been the model of
those introduced into all the other recently-acquired territories, as
well as into our older possessions of Saugor and Bundelcund:

In former reports it has been shown how the system of civil judicature
in the Punjab has been founded and erected; how that no effort has been
spared to render justice cheap, quick, sure, simple, and substantial;
how every other consideration has been rendered subordinate to these
cardinal points. We are, indeed, without elaborate laws, but we have
brief rules, explaining, in an accessible form, the main provisions of
the several systems of native law on such matters as inheritance,
marriage, adoption, testamentary or other disposition of property; and
setting forth the chief principles to be observed in other branches of
law; such as contracts, sale, mortgage, debt, commercial usage. We have
the most open and liberal provisions for the admission of evidence. We
have complete arrangements for reference to arbitration, and for the
ascertainment of local custom. We have a procedure, without any
pretension to technical exactitude; but a procedure which provides for
the litigants and their respective witnesses being confronted in open
court, for a decision being arrived at Edition: current; Page: [116]
immediately after this brief forensic controversy, and for judgment
being delivered to the parties then and there. We have a method of
executing decrees, which, while it allows no door to be opened for
evasion or delay on the part of defendant, and thus renders a decree
really valuable to plaintiff, as being capable of ready enforcement, and
gives him his right free from lien, encumbrance, or doubt; yet, on the
other hand, prevents the defendant from being hastily dealt with, or
from being placed at the mercy of his creditor. We have Small-cause
Courts scattered all over the country, and several regular courts at
every central station; so that everywhere justice is near. Our civil
system may appear rough and ready; whether it would be suited to other
provinces, in a different stage of civilization and with a different
machinery at command, may be a question; but in the Punjab it attains
the broad and plain object aimed at, and without doubt gives
satisfaction to the people.

But in order to regulate the administration of justice, a complete
system of reporting has been established. Month by month, the reports of
every court are transmitted to the judicial department at head-quarters,
and are there criticised. At the close of each year, these reports, and
the figures embodied in them, are collated, averages are struck,
division is compared with division, and district with district, and the
general result, with a brief critique by superior authority, indicating
the defects to be avoided and the reforms to be emulated, is published
for the information of all officers concerned. It is believed that many
improvements in the working of the courts are traceable to this system.
Every court works under a constant sense of supervision, and with the
great objects to be aimed at perpetually in view, and standing out in
strong relief.

In respect of speed, the average duration of a suit in 1854 was
twenty-eight days, and in 1855 twenty-three days. This average has been
becoming laudably lower year after year; it is now nearly as low as it
can be, consistently with due inquiry and deliberation; and as the above
average includes all those cases which for any special cause may be
protracted, it is evident that the trial of most suits can only extend
over a very few days. In respect to cheapness, the cost averaged only
5r. 0a. 1p. per cent on value of suits during 1854, and 4r. 13a. 3p. per
cent during 1855. As a proof of the entire absence of technicalities, it
is to be observed that only 5.19 per cent of the suits were nonsuited
during 1854, and 5.42 per cent during 1855. The small number of nonsuits
which are ordered are probably real and honest ones.43


Prison Discipline

In the course of the last few years the system of prison discipline in
India has undergone a complete and most salutary revolution. The origin
of this reform may be dated from the report of a committee appointed in
Calcutta in 1838, composed chiefly of the principal members and
secretary of the Indian Law Commission.44

Up to this time, those inmates of jails who were under sentence of
labour, were employed almost exclusively (in fetters) on the roads:
which rendered prison discipline almost impossible, as the prisoners
could nearly always, by the connivance of their guards, command
intercourse with friends and relations; and the engineer officers, in
their anxiety to obtain efficient work, fed them highly, and Edition:
current; Page: [117] treated them in other respects with an indulgence
entirely inconsistent with the purposes of punishment. At the same time,
the mortality from exposure and unhealthy localities was great. The
committee showed that the State were absolute losers by employing
convict labour on the roads; that it would be a positive saving to keep
them in idleness in the jails, as the cost of extra superintendence and
guards considerably exceeded the expense at which the work they did
could be executed by hired labour. Since this time out-door convict
labour has been abandoned, and the prisoners are employed within the
jails in various manufactures; and this employment, which commenced in
1843, has every year become more profitable, until, in 1855-56, the
profit in the fifty-five jails of the Lower Provinces of Bengal reached
the large sum of Rs. 1,11,582 (£11,000). This profit now forms a fund
for the execution of the public works formerly performed by the convicts
themselves. The jail manufactures, too, are of such improved quality,
that some of them have acquired a high character in foreign markets; and
public exhibitions of them are now held in the Town Hall of Calcutta.

Prisoners sentenced for long terms of years are now removed to large
central jails; and the change has been attended with great improvement
in general management and discipline. There is an inspector of jails for
each presidency and sub-presidency. These officers are most active in
discovering and correcting defects, and increasing the effectiveness of
the jails, both as reformatories and as places of punishment.

The reform of the police of India is not yet in so advanced a state; but
the present disturbances found the authorities in the very crisis of
their deliberations on the subject. The police has hitherto remained the
most faulty part of our system in India, and it is the part which it is
by far the most difficult to reform effectually. The peculiar difficulty
of administering criminal justice in India arises from the character and
habits of the people. In most countries, the voluntary and active
co-operation of the people may be looked for in bringing criminals to
justice. In India, rather than incur the trouble and annoyance of
appearing as a prosecutor or as a witness, a man will even forswear
himself to screen the man who has robbed him. The injury he has suffered
is looked upon as the decree of destiny, and he has no disposition to
add to the inconvenience by incurring exertion and expense, and perhaps
exposing himself to the further vengeance of the criminal. Among such a
people there is only the police who can be looked to for bringing
criminals to justice. The great powers which must be intrusted to the
police of such a country, and that police necessarily composed
principally of natives, give rise, when combined with the passive and
slavish character of the people of many parts of India (especially of
Bengal), to evils with which the Government has hitherto struggled with
very imperfect success.


Police

The police of India, up to a very recent date, consisted of native
establishments, Edition: current; Page: [118] under the control and
orders of the European magistrate. Each zillah, or judicial district, is
formed into subdivisions (more or fewer, according to the size of the
district) each of which is under the charge of a local stipendiary
police, consisting of a head native officer and his subordinate clerks,
sergeants, and constables. The native police in the Bengal Presidency is
(with the partial exception of the tehsildars in the North-western
Provinces) separate from the body of revenue officers. In the Presidency
of Madras, the same officers discharge both revenue and police
functions; and, until recently, this was also the case at Bombay.

The recognized defects of the system are, the low rate of pay, and the
consequent inferiority of the class of men who enter the police, and
also the disproportion of the strength of the force to the density of
the population, and to the extent of country committed to their charge.
With a view to the correction of these evils in Bengal, higher grades of
subdivisional police officers have of late years been created, and their
pay has been increased. Deputy magistrates have also been appointed, and
invested with the judicial and police charge of subdivisions. The former
measure has been productive of some good, by inducing a more trustworthy
class to enter the service; the latter has not yet been carried to a
sufficient extent to effect any practical improvement of a general
character.

The state of the police of the North-western Provinces had deeply
engaged the attention of the late Lieutenant-Governor, the lamented Mr.
Colvin. That distinguished functionary conducted, through the district
commissioners, a general revision of the local police establishments;
reducing the number of officers in some of the districts, but increasing
the salaries, and holding out the sure prospect of promotion as the
reward of good conduct and efficient service. These measures were the
best that could be adopted with the then available materials; but they
did not at all touch the essential constitution of the police. With
regard to the village police, the ancient and indigenous police of the
country; in the North-western Provinces, its proper maintenance by the
villages themselves is provided for by the conditions of the settlement.
In the Lower Provinces, the terms of the permanent settlement have
unfortunately deprived the Government of the power of enforcing this
obligation. An Act has, however, been passed for the maintenance of an
improved city police, by an assessment on the occupiers of houses;45 and
this plan has been introduced into several large cities and towns.

It is in the Bombay Presidency that the greatest improvements have been
actually effected in police administration. The measures for this
purpose were commenced under Sir George Clerk’s administration, in
1848.46 Under the new Edition: current; Page: [119] system, revenue and
police functions have ceased to be combined in the same native officers.
The powers of punishment previously exercised by police officers have
been taken away. To each district has been appointed a European
superintendent of police (either a military or an uncovenanted officer),
under whose command the police force of the district, both village and
stipendiary, is placed, and who exercises the functions of an assistant
to the magistrate in his police duties. This functionary, again, has the
aid, in each subdivision under his orders, of an officer called joint
police amildar, who has the more immediate charge of the preservation of
the public peace, and the preliminary investigation into crimes of a
serious nature. Active measures have been set on foot for reorganizing
the village police, by ascertaining the assignments formerly made in
lands and money for the purpose, and requiring that the duties for which
these assignments were the remuneration, be really performed. The
general control and direction of the police of the whole presidency,
except the island of Bombay, is concentrated in one chief officer, under
the title of Commissioner of Police. These measures are believed to be
already effecting a great improvement in the police of the presidency.

In the Punjab, a police system had to be, not reformed, but created; and
this task has been fulfilled with the same efficiency with which every
other part of the administration of that territory has been organized.
As the Punjab police may not improbably form a model for other parts of
India, it is well to note the general features of its constitution.

The police establishments consist of two parts; the preventive police
with a military organization, and the detective with a civil
organization.

The preventive police consists of foot and horse; each regiment has its
own native commandant, and the whole force is superintended by four
European officers. Both arms of the service are regularly armed and
equipped, and are ready at a moment’s notice to reinforce the civil
police.

The civil police consists, first, of a regular establishment, paid by
the State; secondly, of the city watchmen, paid from a fund raised by
the levy of town duties; and, thirdly, of the village police, nominated
by the landholders, confirmed in their offices by the magistrate, and
paid by the villagers.

The infantry of the military preventive police furnish guards for jails,
treasuries, frontier posts, and city gates, and escorts for treasure.
The cavalry are posted in detachments at the civil stations; and smaller
parties, stationed at convenient intervals along the grand lines of
road, serve as mounted patrols. The general duties of the civil police
consist in reporting crimes, tracking and arresting criminals, and
procuring evidence against them.

The police of the Punjab have been eminently successful in repressing
crimes of a violent nature, in breaking up gangs of murderers and
robbers, and in bringing criminals to justice; and in no part of India
is the authority of the Government more thoroughly respected than in the
Punjab.

Edition: current; Page: [120]
In 1856, the Court of Directors, in a despatch which has been laid
before Parliament, discussed at some length the defects of the police of
India, and the means available for their correction, and proposed for
the consideration of the Government of India a plan of thorough reform,
grounded on the three principles, of European command, unity of action
throughout the country, and complete separation between revenue and
police duties.47

This plan has undergone careful deliberation from the Government of
India. The various members of that Government, and the
Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, have individually recorded their
sentiments, in minutes characterized by a frank recognition of existing
defects, an earnest desire of improvement, a remarkable amount of
knowledge and understanding of the subject, and great ability in the
statement and discussion of the merits and defects of the various plans
advocated.48 For the present, so far as regards the Bengal Presidency
(including the North-western Provinces), the recommendations of the
Government of India are limited to a better choice and ampler
remuneration of the native police, and to the aiding and strengthening
them, in certain localities, by police corps of a semi-military
character.49 These measures have been sanctioned; and until their effect
has been tried, the Court of Directors have consented to put in abeyance
the more fundamental changes which they had recommended. But authority
has at the same time been given to the Government of India, should the
present state of the country in their opinion render it expedient, to
organize the police of Bengal on the model of that of the Punjab.50

In the Madras Presidency, the opinion of the local Government was
favourable to the Court’s original views; and in September last
authority was finally given to that Government for the thorough
reorganization of the police system. The leading features of the scheme
which has been sanctioned are as follows:

The appointment of a chief commissioner of police for the whole
presidency, in whom will be vested, in direct communication with the
Chief Secretary to Government, the direction, discipline, and internal
economy of the police force;

Edition: current; Page: [121]
The appointment in each district of a European deputy commissioner of
police, with a sufficient number of subordinate officers and peons or
constables;

The entire separation of the police from all connection with the revenue
branch of administration, and of the magistrate (who will now be a
purely judicial officer) from the properly police duty of the prevention
and detection of crime;

And, finally, measures for reorganizing, and, it may almost be said,
reviving, the village police, which, from its close connection with the
localities, must necessarily constitute the last (and a most important)
link in any police system really efficient, or willingly supported by
the people.51


Thuggee and Dacoitee Suppression

The imperfections of the general police of India have not prevented some
results from being attained in the way of suppression of crime,
sufficiently remarkable to have attracted an amount of European notice
seldom accorded to Indian affairs. The most memorable of these is the
suppression of the Thugs. This singular association, which, though
recruited from all castes, and even from Mussulmans, was held together
by a religious tie, and a common worship of the Hindoo goddess of
destruction, infested all the roads in India; and from their universal
practice of murdering all they robbed, it was not only almost impossible
to obtain evidence for their conviction, but the extent of their crimes
was greatly underrated, and their very existence in many parts of India,
disbelieved in. A separate police was organized specially against them.
The gangs were broken up in the only manner in which this could possibly
have been effected—by encouraging some of them to denounce the rest.
From the narratives of these approvers, taken separately from one
another and with the utmost precautions against the possibility of
concert, lists of all the Thugs in India were obtained, and the
particulars of the crimes committed by each. These were then traced to
their haunts, identified, tried, and convicted, on the evidence of their
accomplices, confirmed by the finding of bodies, the identification of
property, or other corroborative evidence. Many suffered death, a much
greater number transportation for life, and, in a few years from the
commencement of the operations, all India was cleared of these
criminals. The pardoned accomplices remain under surveillance at
Jubbulpore, in Central India, where they and the children of the
captured Thugs have been taught several useful branches of manufacture.
The Jubbulpore School of Industry now supplies to Government and the
public many valuable carpets and linen cloths, and a great proportion of
all the tents used in India.

When the work of the Thuggee Suppression Department was nearly completed
as far as regarded the Thugs, its operations were extended to the still
more prevalent crime of dacoity, or robbery and burglary on a large
scale by organized gangs of professional banditti. The mode of breaking
up the gangs by means of Edition: current; Page: [122] approvers, which
had been so successful against the Thugs, has been put in practice with
equal success against dacoits; and this crime, so far as it was
perpetrated by large associations ranging over a wide extent of country,
has now been almost as completely rooted out as Thuggee. Dacoitee had
been almost entirely suppressed in the North-western Provinces and in
Bombay, before the occurrence of the recent disasters. In the Lower
Provinces of Bengal the crime has been greatly reduced within the last
three or four years. In seven large districts surrounding Calcutta,
where it was lamentably prevalent, the number of dacoitees has been
progressively reduced from 524 in 1851, to 111 in 1855. In some of the
districts of the Madras Presidency, dacoitees of a local character, by
small gangs, to which the approver system is not equally applicable, are
still frequent; but the improvement in the police, and other measures in
contemplation, will, it is hoped, speedily reduce their number.


Suppression of Piracy

The piracies which formerly made the navigation of the Arabian seas
unsafe for commerce, have been so effectually suppressed by the
East-India Company’s cruisers, that there is now hardly any part of the
world in which trading vessels are more secure against depredation. The
formerly piratical tribes have been bound by engagements to abstain not
only from piracy, but from maritime war, which affords opportunities and
pretexts for piracy: and, for the first time probably in history, a
perpetual peace, guaranteed by treaties and enforced by superior naval
strength, reigns in the Persian Gulf.


Infanticide

Equal vigour has been displayed against many barbarous usages of the
natives. Special measures have been carried on during a long series of
years for the suppression of female infanticide, a crime which had
become a positive custom among several of the higher castes in various
parts of India, from motives, not of religion, but of family pride. The
co-operation of the native princes has been urgently invited, and to a
great extent obtained, for the suppression of this practice. In the
places, and among the castes, in which the practice was ascertained to
exist, means were taken to obtain an annual census of female children. A
report of all births, of all deaths of infants, and of the causes of
deaths, was required, under stringent regulations and penalties.
Engagements were taken from the influential persons of the castes to
preserve their own children, and to aid in enforcing the same conduct on
others. Honorary rewards and marks of distinction have been conferred on
chiefs and others who have exerted themselves for the promotion of the
object. By great efforts of persuasion and address, the heads of castes
and tribes have been prevailed on to agree to a limitation of that
favourite subject of vanity, Edition: current; Page: [123] marriage
expenses; and grants of money are regularly made to poor persons of the
castes, in aid of the marriages of their daughters. These efforts have
been rewarded by a continual diminution of the number of infanticides,
evidenced by a constant increase in the number of females in existence,
of the formerly delinquent castes.


Suttee

Suttee, or the voluntary burning of widows on the funeral piles of their
husbands, after having been long discouraged by every means short of
positive prohibition, was finally made a criminal offence in all who
abetted it, by a legislative Act of Lord W. Bentinck’s administration,52
and has now entirely ceased in the provinces subject to British
administration. Unremitting efforts have been used to induce the native
princes to follow the example, and have been at last successful with all
of them except one, the Maharana of Odeypore,53 the representative of
the oldest and proudest dynasty in India: and this prince professes
himself willing to abolish the rite, when the cessation of existing
differences between himself and his feudatory chiefs shall enable him to
obtain their concurrence in the measure. Various other modes of
self-immolation practised in India,—by drowning, burying alive, or
starvation,—have been, with equal success, prohibited and suppressed.


Witchcraft

The pretence of supernatural powers was a source of great evil in India,
not only as a means of extortion and intimidation, but also by the
numerous murders perpetrated on persons suspected of practising on the
lives or health of others by magical arts. These acts of fancied
retaliation have been, with a gentle but powerful hand, repressed, and
great progress has been made towards their extinction. The fraudulent
pretence is now punished as a substantive crime.


Tragga

The insecurity of rights, and the imperfection of the tribunals, under
the native Governments, had introduced, on the part of those who were,
or believed themselves to be, injured, a singular mode of extorting
redress. They hired a person of one of the religious classes to threaten
that unless the demand, whatever it might be, was complied with, he
would kill or wound himself or some one else; thereby, it was supposed,
entailing the guilt of murder or of wounding on the person whose alleged
injustice was the original cause of the act. If the threat Edition:
current; Page: [124] proved ineffectual, the honour of the threatener
was engaged to carry it into practical effect; and many suicides or
murders were committed from this cause. This barbarous practice, known
by the name of Tragga, has been almost entirely suppressed, partly by
penal laws, and partly by affording more legitimate means of enforcing
just claims.


Meriah Sacrifices

Among the barbarous tribes who occupy the hill tracts of Orissa, on the
south-west frontier of Bengal, human sacrifices prevailed until a very
recent period. By a well-devised and judicious series of conciliatory
measures, worthy of a more lengthened record than can be given to them
in this place, the extinction of this enormity has been effected.


Abolition of Slavery

After a full consideration of the subject of slavery in India, by the
Indian Law Commissioners and by the Government of India, an Act was
passed in 1843, which entirely abolished slavery as a legal status.54
The courts of justice are forbidden to recognize it; no fugitive,
claimed as a slave, can be forcibly restored; and every act which would
be an offence if done to a free person, is now equally an offence when
done to the persons formerly considered slaves.


Wet Begaree, or Forced Labour

One of the most oppressive of the burthens on the agricultural and
labouring classes under the native Governments, was compulsory labour,
not only for the repair of roads where any existed, but for the purpose
of carrying the abundant baggage of Government officers or powerful
individuals when journeying from one place to another. This practice has
been abolished. The last vestige of it, in a licensed form, is believed
to have been in the construction of the Thibet road through the Himalaya
Mountains, and orders have recently been issued for its discontinuance
there.


Civil Rights of Religious Converts

By an Act passed in 1850, the principle already laid down in a Bengal
Regulation of 1832, that change of religion should not involve loss of
property or Edition: current; Page: [125] civil rights, was extended to
the whole of the territories subject to the British Government of
India.55 The religious and civil laws of the Hindoos have in this point
been completely set aside; and converts to Christianity have been
shielded, as far as law can shield them, against temporal ill
consequences from their change of faith.


Re-marriage of Widows

By an Act passed in 1856, another great inroad has been made on Hindoo
prejudices, by legalizing the re-marriage of widows.56


Discontinuance of Connection with the Religious Ceremonies of the Natives

An Act passed in 1840 gave effect to instructions issued by the home
authorities in 1833, on the subject of pilgrim taxes, and the
superintendence of native festivals.57 The instructions directed that
the interference of British functionaries in the interior management of
native temples, in the customs, habits, and religious proceedings of
their priests and attendants, in the arrangement of their ceremonies,
rites, and festivals, and generally in the conduct of their interior
economy, should cease; that the pilgrim tax should everywhere be
abolished; and that in all matters relating to their temples, their
worship, their festivals, their religious practices, and their
ceremonial observances, our native subjects be left entirely to
themselves. Property held in trust for religious uses of course cannot
be diverted from them by any act of the Government; but if such trusts
are infringed, redress must be sought, as in all other cases, from the
tribunals. In 1841 the home authorities sent out further instructions,
that no troops or military bands of music be called out, and no salutes
fired, in honour of native festivals; and all such acts have since been
regarded as strictly prohibited. When any case of infringement of these
principles is found to have been overlooked, it is, on being brought to
notice, immediately corrected.


IMPROVEMENT OF THE COUNTRY BY PUBLIC WORKS

The measures which have now been briefly described, for fixing and
moderating the demands of Government on the tax-paying population, and
securing to every Edition: current; Page: [126] one the full enjoyment
of the fruits of his industry, are in themselves the most effectual
means which could have been adopted for improving the productive
resources of the country. In a country like India, however, the direct
aid of Government to industry is required, for a variety of purposes
which, in more advanced countries, are sufficiently, and even better,
provided for by private enterprise. The principal of these are,
irrigation, and the means of communication by roads and canals.


Irrigation Works

The British Government in India has frequently been charged with
niggardliness in incurring expense for these purposes. There was some,
at least apparent, ground for the charge, in former generations; though
even then, the truth fell far short of the current representations. It
is often asserted that the country is covered with the remains of tanks
and other works of irrigation, which the native rulers constructed, and
which the British Government has allowed to decay. The fact is
overlooked, that most of these were already in a state of decay before
the country came into our possession; long periods of disorder and
military devastation having destroyed the funds which should have
repaired them, and the security which would have admitted of their
repair. Many works which are supposed to have fallen into decay, never
were completed: many were allowed to decay by the native sovereigns; for
it was only occasionally that a prince, of unusual talents and vigilant
economy, had funds to spare for such purposes; and the same prince who
would commence new works with which his own name was to be connected,
would often neglect to keep up those of his predecessors. Whether it is
a just subject of censure, that the restoration of these old works was
not commenced earlier, is a question depending on many and various
considerations; but the activity in this department for many years past
has been exemplary.


Jumna Canals

The Western and Eastern Jumna canals were of ancient construction, but
had fallen into disrepair and become useless to the country, until again
brought into activity by the labours of the Company’s officers at a
sufficiently early date to admit of a full estimation of the benefits
which the country has reaped from their restoration. The main line of
the Western Jumna Canal is in length 445 miles. In the famine year,
1837-38, the gross value of the crops saved by the water of this canal
was estimated at £1,462,800; of which about one-tenth was paid to
Government as land and water rent; while the remainder supported, during
a year of devastating famine in other districts, the inhabitants of
nearly 500 villages.

The works originally projected for the restoration of the Eastern Jumna
Canal were completed in 1830; but considerable improvements have been
effected since that date at a large expense. In 1853, the Court of
Directors sanctioned an Edition: current; Page: [127] expenditure of
£15,276 for improving this canal, so as to economize the water,
facilitate its distribution, and correct the malarious state of the
country on its banks. It is stated, that on the 1st of May, 1852, the
clear profit to Government on this canal had been £9,759.

Up to 1847-48, the expenditure incurred on these and some minor works in
the North-western Provinces had amounted to about £557,000, while the
amount received in direct canal revenue was in all £546,000. The
quantity of land brought under the influence of irrigation was 1,300,000
acres, yielding produce of the annual value of £2,500,000, and
supporting a population of 600,000 souls.


Ganges Canal

The history of the Ganges Canal, the greatest work of irrigation ever
constructed, belongs to a more recent period. The employment of the
water of the Ganges for irrigation purposes appears to have been first
contemplated by Colonel Colvin, who, on delivering charge of his office
of superintendent of canals to his successor, the present Sir Proby
Cautley, recommended the project to his consideration.58 Colonel Cautley
carefully examined the country through which the canal would pass, and
the scheme was, in 1841, brought under the consideration of the home
authorities, who gave it their cordial support,59 subject to a further
examination of the project by a committee of engineer officers. The
committee’s report was favourable;60 but various difficulties
intervened, and the work cannot be said to have been fairly commenced,
on a scale commensurate with its importance, till the year 1848.

The total length of the Ganges Canal and its branches, when completed,
will be 898 1/2 miles, and it will furnish abundant irrigation for an
area of 4,500,000 acres. The canal, in the words of the
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-western Provinces, “presents a system
of irrigation unequalled in vastness throughout the world; while the
dimensions of the main channel, and the stupendous works of masonry
which occur in its course, more particularly in the section between
Roorkee and Hurdwar, render the work eminently one of national
distinction and honour.”61 The amount expended on it up to the 1st of
May 1856, had reached the sum of £1,560,000; and when completed, the
total cost will fall little short of £2,000,000. The canal has but just
begun to be brought into operation; but it is Edition: current; Page:
[128] estimated by Colonel Baird Smith, the director, that the annual
produce of the land already watered by it is of the value of from
£150,000 to £200,000; and that when the canal is in full operation, the
value will ultimately reach the enormous sum of £7,000,000.62

On the 30th April, 1856, the canal had been carried so far that the
water flowed continuously through 449 1/2 miles of the main trunk and
terminal branches. The extent of main channels of distribution
(rajbuhas) completed, was 435 1/2 miles, and 817 miles more were in
active progress.

The canal is fitted also for purposes of navigation, but it has not yet
been made available to the public for this purpose, although extensively
used by the Government for the transport of materials. Colonel Baird
Smith states that the canal closes its first year of work (1855-56) with
an aggregate revenue, from all sources, of rather more than Rs. 60,000,
having watered during the year about 55,000 acres of land, and having
placed beyond the risk of serious damage from drought, an area of
cultivation extending over about 166,000 acres, distributed among 1,134
villages.


Punjab Canals

In the Punjab, the canals are of two kinds, inundation canals and
permanent canals. The inundation canals are cuts from the rivers, which
are empty during the winter, because the water is not then high enough
to enter them; but as the water rises in the spring, from the melting of
the snows, these channels fill, and remain full until late in autumn.
The fertility of the South-western Punjab mainly depends on these
canals, and in a former age they appear to have been conducted from all
the rivers; their course being traceable by the ruins not only of
villages but of cities and public buildings, which depended for
existence on their fertilizing influence. Such of these canals as were
found in working order at the annexation, have been maintained,
improved, and enlarged; and plans and estimates have been formed for the
restoration of others. As yet, however, the greater part of the funds
which could be spared for the purpose, have been devoted to the
construction and improvement of permanent canals. In 1849, the
enlargement and extension of the Huslee Canal, stated to be capable of
irrigating 70,000 begahs of land, was sanctioned, and it is now in good
working order.63 But this will ultimately be superseded by the Baree
Doab Canal for irrigation and navigation.64 The length of Edition:
current; Page: [129] this new work is about 450 miles; the original
estimate of the cost was £530,000; but more extensive works than were at
first expected having been found necessary, and the rates of labour
having proved much dearer than those calculated, the ultimate cost will
fall little short of a million sterling. In May 1856, more than 325
miles had been excavated; and it was hoped that the canal would be
opened in 1859. The expected return is 12 lacs of rupees, or £120,000
per annum.


Sind Canals

The cultivation of the province of Sind is dependent on the rise of the
river Indus, whose waters are distributed over the face of the country
by a network of canals of greater or smaller dimensions. About two and a
half lacs (£25,000) are annually expended in clearing these canals from
the deposits of silt left in them by the receding waters. The principal
works which have received special sanction, are the widening and
deepening of the Begaree Canal in Upper Sind, at a cost of £13,000
(expected return £11,900 per annum), and the improvement and extension
of the Foolalie Canal, at a cost of £15,083.

In the Madras Presidency, the means of artificial irrigation are chiefly
obtained by the construction of tanks or reservoirs for preserving the
monsoon rains, and storing them up for use in the dry season, and of
“anicuts,” or dams across the beds of rivers, by which the waters are
maintained at a level higher than that of the country, in order to be
from thence conducted over its surface. Of the latter class of works,
the most worthy of notice are those which have been constructed on the
Coleroon, the Godavery, and the Kistna.


Coleroon Works

The commencement of the Coleroon works is said to be traceable to the
second century of our era. Imperfectly executed in the first instance,
they were found, when the country came into our possession in 1801, to
be very defective; and notwithstanding the remedial measures adopted,
the bed of the river continued to rise, from the deposit of silt; the
extent of land which the means of irrigation could reach, diminished;
the revenue fell off, and the condition of the people was gradually
deteriorating. This state of things appears to have reached its acme
about 1829-30. Plans and estimates were then framed, and from 1836 the
work was regularly and vigorously prosecuted.65 The total expenditure on
the Upper and Lower Coleroon anicuts, up to their completion, amounted,
as far as can be ascertained, to upwards of £80,000. In addition to this
sum, subsidiary works for conveying irrigation over the districts of
Tanjore, and portions of Trichinopoly and South Arcot, were constructed,
at a cost of about £100,000.

Edition: current; Page: [130]
The average quantity of land watered annually from the Coleroon and
Cauvery prior to 1836, is given at 630,613 acres. Since the
improvements, the average (up to 1850) was 716,524 acres; being an
increase of 85,911. The annual increase of revenue has been about
£44,000; and it may be assumed that the agricultural community have
benefited to the extent of at least £66,000 per annum, from the
extension of the area of irrigation. It is further calculated that at
least an equal amount is added to the value of the annual produce, by
the better irrigation of the lands which the waters already reached.


Godavery Anicut

An expenditure of £47,575 for the construction of the Godavery anicut
was sanctioned in 1846. It was then anticipated that the total cost,
with compound interest at 5 per cent, would be recovered in ten years,
and that thenceforward a clear profit would be returned of at least
£9,000 per annum.66 The work has, however, proved much more costly than
was expected. Up to 1852, the amount expended was £130,000, and a
further outlay of £110,000 was expected to be required, which, with
£24,000 allowed for annual repairs during its completion, would raise
the total expenditure on the works (including a system of roads and an
important line of inland navigation) to £264,000. The amount expended
has, it is stated, been already repaid by the increased receipts; and
the Madras Public Works Commissioners of 1852 (to one of whom, Colonel
Cotton, the merit of this important work is in a great measure due)
estimate that when the works shall be in full operation, the total
increase of revenue will not be less than £300,000 per annum, while the
gain to the people, by enabling them to cultivate the more valuable
products, such as sugar-cane, rice, etc., instead of the ordinary dry
crops, will exceed £3,000,000 per annum.67


Kistna Anicut

The anicut across the Kistna river was commenced in 1853. The original
estimate of the cost was £155,000;68 but it is probable that this amount
will be to some extent exceeded. It is intended, by 290 miles of
irrigation channels distributed on both sides of the river, to supply
water sufficient for 280,000 acres of rice cultivation, or 350,000 of
rice, sugar, and possibly cotton, combined. The Edition: current; Page:
[131] results anticipated are, an increase of £60,000 in the revenue of
Government, and a gain of £90,000 per annum to the agricultural
community.


Palar Anicut

In 1854, sanction was given to an expenditure of £86,611 for the
construction of an anicut across the Palar river, in North Arcot, and of
the works subsidiary to it. The expected increase of revenue was stated
at £18,470 per annum, or, deducting ten per cent for repairs, £16,623.

Very large sums have in the aggregate been spent in the construction of
new, and still more in the repair and restoration of old, tanks and
wells, both in the Madras Presidency and in the other parts of India
which depend on works of that description for water supply. In some hill
districts, ravines have been dammed up, and a head of water obtained for
the irrigation of the adjacent valleys or plains. This was the plan of
Colonel Dixon’s irrigation works in Mhairwarra;69 and a system of such
works had begun to be executed in Bundelcund, when the disturbances
broke out.

A disposition has been of late shown to form companies for the execution
of profitable works of irrigation, on certain conditions to be granted
by the State. In September last, the Indian Governments were directed to
take this subject into deliberate consideration, and to frame rules
under which the aid of private companies in the construction of such
works might most beneficially be employed; and readiness was expressed
to give to such companies a guarantee of interest, on the same footing
as railway companies.70


Roads and Navigable Canals

Next in importance to irrigation works, are the means of internal
communication. Whatever may have been the degree of care bestowed by the
Hindoo and Mahomedan Governments on the former object, it has not been
pretended that they did anything for the latter. It was never their
practice to lay out money in the construction of permanent roads, or in
the formation of canals for navigation. The plains of India are
traversable by carts, and even by armies, without made roads, throughout
the dry season; and neither (in general) military movements, nor
commercial transport, were carried on during the rains. Roads,
therefore, in India, were not, as in some countries, a matter of
absolute necessity; and in this respect, whatever has been done at all,
has been done by the British Government.

Edition: current; Page: [132]


Grand Trunk Road

The most important line of road in India is the Grand Trunk Road from
Calcutta to Delhi, through Hooghly, Burdwan, and Benares, and including
either in the main line, or by means of branches, all the principal
cities of the North-west Provinces. This road, 837 miles in extent, has
been gradually brought to its present state of a thoroughly well-formed
road, metalled and bridged, except a few of the larger rivers, which are
still crossed by ferries; but over all these (it is believed), except
the Ganges and the Soane, bridges are in course of construction. This
road, with its continuation to Kurnal (and now to Lahore, which is in
course of completion), has been divided into different portions, each
under the charge of a separate engineer officer, with an establishment
for the purposes of construction, or of maintenance and protection, as
the case may be. The cost of the Grand Trunk Road as far as Delhi had
been, up to the year 1848, £489,100, and the annual expense of
maintaining it was then estimated at £35,000.

Since the annexation of the Punjab, a continuation of the Grand Trunk
Road from Lahore to Peshawur, a distance of 275 miles, has been in
progress. This road also is to be completely metalled and bridged
throughout. The cost was estimated, when the work was sanctioned in
1852, at £154,848. By means of this road a direct line of communication
will have been established between Calcutta and the extreme boundary of
the British territory to the north-west, a distance of 1,500 miles.
Besides this, many other roads in the Punjab, and among them roads from
Jullundur to Lahore, and from Lahore to Mooltan, have been undertaken.

The sea has been mainly relied on for communication with Madras; but
roads are now in course of formation, which will provide a line of
continuous communication by land.


Great Deccan Road

The land communication with Western India is carried on by way of the
Grand Trunk Road to Benares, onward by Mirzapore and Jubbulpore to
Nagpore, and thence to Bombay. The road beyond Mirzapore, under the name
of the Great Deccan Road, was commenced thirty years ago, but was kept
up only as a fair-weather road till within the last few years, when
arrangements were made for its being thoroughly raised, metalled, and
bridged. The distance from Mirzapore to Nagpore or Kamptee, is nearly
four hundred miles. Estimates amounting to £11,659 were sanctioned by
the Court of Directors in 1856, for bridging the portion of road between
Mirzapore and Jubbulpore, which had been already metalled; £25,084 were
also sanctioned for raising and metalling the portion between Jubbulpore
and Kamptee, and measures were further authorized to bridge this portion
of the road.


Agra and Bombay Road

Another great and important line, the Agra and Bombay road, 735 miles in
Edition: current; Page: [133] length, was commenced in 1840. In 1854,
the Court sanctioned an annual expenditure of £9,880 for the maintenance
and improvement of the portion of this road between Agra and the
frontier of the Bombay Presidency.


Dacca and Chittagong Road

After the annexation of Pegu, roads were projected by way of Dacca to
Arracan, from which province a road was to be carried over the mountains
to Prome. Great difficulty was experienced in laying out a road from
Calcutta to Dacca, and it is probable that this part of the project will
not be carried into effect; the traffic of this district, so intersected
by tidal channels, being left to be carried on by water, unless it shall
be found practicable to form a railway. A road to Jessore (the line of
communication with Assam and Burmah) was however sanctioned, at a cost
of £41,720 on a rough estimate. From Dacca to Chittagong, considerable
progress has been made in the formation of a road, or rather in the
completion, as a first-class road, of the road which, though in a most
inefficient state, previously existed. From Arracan into Pegu, the task
of forming a road across the mountains by the Toungoop Pass has been
most successfully accomplished by Lieutenant Forlong.71


Pegu Roads

In Pegu itself, no time was lost after the acquisition of the province,
in commencing improved means of communication. The sanction of the home
authorities was sought and given to roads from Rangoon to Prome, a
distance of nearly two hundred miles, at an estimated cost of £160,000,
and from Martaban to Toungoo viâ Sitang.


Miscellaneous Roads

Besides the great lines of communication above enumerated, a multitude
of shorter lines have been constructed, at the entire cost of
Government, in Bengal, the North-western Provinces, and the Punjab,
while considerable sums have annually been expended in the two former
divisions of territory from local funds. Among the roads either
completed or under construction at the expense of Government, is one
from a point on the East-India Railway to Darjeeling (roughly estimated
at about £200,000); another from Doobee, on the Grand Trunk Road, to
Patna (cost £115,000); numerous roads in the Saugor and Nerbudda
territories; and a road from the plains to Simla and the other hill
stations, continued through the mountains to Chini in Thibet. The
district roads were, until within the last few years, maintained from
the profits of the ferries kept up by Government; but there are now also
appropriated to this purpose, in Bengal, the surplus tolls on the
Edition: current; Page: [134] Nuddea rivers and the Calcutta canals,
amounting altogether to £50,000, and the surplus proceeds of various
local funds established for other purposes. In the North-western
Provinces, one per cent on the land revenue is contributed in equal
portions by the Government and by the landowners, for the purpose of
district roads; the landowners being thus freed from the obligation
which previously lay on them, of keeping in repair the public roads
which passed through their lands. In these provinces, as in Bengal, the
ferry funds are appropriated to district roads, and they amount to about
£20,000.


Madras Roads

The first step to the systematic prosecution of road-making in the
Madras Presidency was taken in 1845, by the appointment of an officer to
the charge of the main or trunk lines of road, and the appropriation to
the maintenance and improvement of the roads, of the annual sum of
£40,000. The roads under the charge of the superintendent were, the
Western Road, to the Mysore frontier towards Bangalore (200 miles); the
Southern Road, to Trichinopoly (205 miles); the Northern Road, to the
Bengal frontier, with a branch to Cuddapah (785 miles); and the Sumpajee
Ghaut Road, from the western frontier of Mysore to Mangalore (105
miles). Up to May 1851, £37, 121 had been expended on the Western Road,
exclusive of the cost of superintendence; and the road had been made
passable for travelling-carriages at the rate of six miles an hour.
Besides the road department under the charge of the superintendent, the
Civil Engineers of districts were charged with the improvement of the
district roads, under the orders of the Collectors; and the care of
roads in some districts was under the officers of the Military Board.
The expenditure on roads, bridges, and ghauts, under the Madras
Presidency, increased in the five years from 1846 to 1850, from an
average of £16,179 to one of £42,076. The expenditure in 1849, 1850, and
1851, was respectively £45,149, £58,197, and £59,680. In the succeeding
year the department came under an improved organization; and the outlay
in 1855-56, the last year for which it can be ascertained, was £193,930;
to which may be added £30,957 for navigable canals,—in all, £224,887.

Among the works in progress in the Madras Presidency for the improvement
of the means of communication, is the formation of the East Coast Canal,
to be effected by the junction of the various back-waters, and of the
local canals which in several places already exist, completed by
entirely new channels to be excavated. The expenditure on this work, up
to 1855-56, amounted to £14,171.


Bombay Roads

The made roads in the Bombay Presidency, twenty-five years ago, were
almost entirely limited to the presidency town and its immediate
neighbourhood; the road from Bombay (or rather Panwell, on the other
side of the harbour) to Poonah, being the only road to a distant place
on which any considerable expenditure had Edition: current; Page: [135]
taken place. This road has since been greatly improved, and supplied
with bridges. The Bhore Ghaut, or pass, on this road, formerly
accessible only to bullocks, and coolies (or porters), had in 1830, at
an expense of about £13,000, been made easy for carriages: the Thull
Ghaut, on the Bombay and Agra road, has since been similarly improved;
and roads over the Khoonda Ghaut, the Tulkut Ghaut, and the Koomtudee
Ghaut, to the southward, have since been put under construction, to
facilitate the communications between the coast and the interior of the
country.

The portion of the Agra and Bombay road within the jurisdiction of the
Bombay Government is 270 miles in length: the expenditure on it had
amounted, in 1848, to £75,390; and since that time a considerable outlay
has taken place, especially on the improvement of the Thull Ghaut and
the road below it.


Sind Roads

A system of roads for Sind, at an estimated cost of from £20,000 to
£30,000, received the sanction of the home authorities in 1854, and is
in progress.


New Organization of Public Works

From the preceding details it will be seen that very considerable sums
had been expended on the construction and improvement of roads in India
at a much earlier period than is frequently represented. But the
extraordinary activity with which these operations have been carried on
dates from 1850. In January of that year, the home authorities, being
dissatisfied with the progress made in the prosecution of public works
throughout India, deliberately reviewed, in a despatch to the Government
of India, the system under which such works had, up to that time, been
carried on, and found, in the division of responsibility and the absence
of unity of action, ground for the opinion that a great change was
required.72 In consequence of the orders contained in that despatch, a
Commission was appointed in each presidency, to consider and report on
the subject. Their investigations have led to the formation of a
separate department of Public Works in each presidency, based on one
uniform plan, and to the addition of a secretary in the department of
Public Works to the secretariat of the Government of India. From this
period to the commencement of the present unhappy disturbances, the
activity of the department has been incessant; the engineer officers of
the three Indian armies supplying the higher order of professional
skill, and the subordinate European superintendence being afforded by
numerous non-commissioned officers possessing the requisite
qualifications, and latterly by a considerable number of civil
engineers, engaged in England, who have proved in many cases of the
greatest value to the department.

Edition: current; Page: [136]


Colleges of Civil Engineering

As a means of supplying well-qualified subordinates for the purpose of
public works, a college for instruction in civil engineering was
established in 1847. It was fixed at Roorkee, near the head of the
Ganges Canal, the works and establishments at that place affording
peculiar facilities for combining practical with theoretical
instruction. The plan of the college was greatly enlarged in 1852; and
its annual charge is about £7,000. The establishment of colleges of
civil engineering at Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, has subsequently been
sanctioned.73


Railways

The preceding statements relate only to works constructed by public
money. The construction of railways is carried on by private capital,
with a guarantee of interest by the Government. It is proper to give a
brief summary of the railway-works which have been sanctioned and
commenced.

Four thousand one hundred and fifty-eight miles of railway have been
sanctioned, and measures are being taken for their construction under a
guarantee of interest, viz.:

By the East-Indian Railway Company, from Calcutta to Delhi, with
branches from Burdwan to Raneegunge, and from Mirzapore to Jubbulpore,
1,400 miles.

By the Eastern Bengal Railway Company, from Calcutta to the Ganges at
Koostree, near Pubnah (130 miles), being the first section of a line to
Dacca, with a branch to Jessore; which, when completed, will form the
basis of a system of railways for Eastern Bengal.

By the Madras Company, from Madras to the western coast at Beypore, 430
miles; and

From Madras, viâ Cuddapah and Bellary, to meet a line from Bombay at or
near the river Kistna, 310 miles.

By the Great Indian Peninsula Company, from Bombay to Callian,
thirty-three miles, with extensions,

North-east to Jubbulpore, to meet the line from Mirzapore, with a branch
to Oomrawuttee and Nagpore, 818 miles; and south-east, viâ Poonah and
Sholapore, to the Kistna river, to meet the line from Madras, 357 miles.

By the Sind and Punjab Company, from Kurrachee to a point on the Indus,
at or near to Kotree, 120 miles; and from Moultan to Lahore and Amritsir
in the Punjab, 230 miles.

By the Bombay, Baroda, and Central India Company, from Bombay to Surat,
Baroda, and Ahmedabad, 330 miles.

Edition: current; Page: [137]
The following statement shows the amount of capital which, it is
estimated, will be required for the above extent of lines, and the
amount of capital already issued:

  ----------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  RAILWAY COMPANY                     Estimated outlay required to complete the several Lines sanctioned   Total amount of Capital at present issued with the sanction of the East-India Company
  East Indian                         £12,731,000                                                          £8,731,000
  Eastern Bengal                      1,000,000                                                            1,000,000
  Madras                              6,000,000                                                            4,000,000
  Great Indian Peninsula              10,000,000                                                           6,333,300
  Sind and Punjab                     2,500,000                                                            1,000,000
  Bombay, Baroda, and Central India   2,000,000                                                            1,750,000
                                      £34,231,000                                                          £22,814,000
  ----------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In addition to this assistance by way of guarantee, the land for the
railways (including compensation for all buildings thereon), and for
their termini, has been given by Government. The value of this may be
estimated at more than £1,000,000 for the above extent of line.

The lines in course of construction have been chosen for commercial,
quite as much as for military and political, objects. In every case the
existing channels of trade have been followed. The chief
cotton-producing districts are provided with railway accommodation; and
in one or two instances, such as the railway which connects the great
cotton-field of Berar with Bombay, and the railway through Surat and
Guzerat, the principal object is to develop the agricultural resources
of those districts, and to bring their produce into communication with
the sea.

At present only a small section is open in each Presidency, making about
400 miles in all; but 3,600 more are being constructed almost
simultaneously. The following statement will show the sections now open,
the periods at which other sections are to be opened, and at which the
whole will be completed: [See pp. 138-9.]

The works for the trunk lines above described have been made suitable
for locomotive engines, and are of a solid and permanent character, so
that an uninterrupted communication will be maintained throughout the
year.

The mileage cost of the lines which have been completed has been:

East Indian.—Calcutta to Raneegunge, 121 miles (including double line to
Burdwan, and terminal stations), about £12,000 per mile.

Madras.—Madras to Arcot, sixty-five miles, about £5,500 per mile.

The data in respect to the line now open in the Bombay Presidency,
constructed by the Great Indian Peninsula Railway Company, are not
sufficiently complete to enable the actual mileage cost to be
ascertained.

It is, perhaps, premature to judge of the success of Indian railways as
commercial undertakings; but the line from Calcutta to Raneegunge is
already

Edition: current; Page: [138]
*Delays have occurred in this district, in consequence of the Sonthal
insurrection and the subsequent disturbances in Bengal
†Would have been opened by December, 1857, but for delays occasioned by
the mutiny.
RAILWAY COMPANY
Total length of Lines
Experimental Line
Periods at which it is estimated that the remaining Works on the Lines
will be completed
EAST INDIAN:—
Miles
Calcutta to Burdwan, and branch to Raneegunge, 121 miles; commenced
1850, completed 1855
Burdwan to Rajmahal (130 miles), 210 from Calcutta; December, 1859*
Between Rajmahal, and Allahabad, 440 miles; 1860
Between Allahabad and Cawnpore (1st section N. W. P. division), 126
miles; nearly ready for opening†
Cawnpore to Delhi, 260 miles; October, 1858 (excepting the bridge over
the Jumna)
Calcutta to Delhi . . . say
1,100
Mirzapore to Jubbulpore (_a_)
300
(_a_) Note—No period yet specified for the completion of the line
1,400
N. E. LINE
GREAT INDIAN PENINSULA:—
Bombay to Callian
33
Bombay to Callian, 33 miles; commenced 1850, completed 1854 Sections
N.E. to Wassind (16 miles) and S.E. to Campoolie (38 miles) have
subsequently been opened. Now open, 87 miles
Callian to Bhosawul, 241 miles; October, 1859
Bhosawul to Oomrawuttee, 125 miles; December, 1860
Oomrawuttee to Nagpore, 138 miles; March, 1861
Bhosawul to Jubbulpore; not yet estimated, probably the end of 1861
Callian to Jubbulpore, with branch to Nagpore, _viâ_ Oomramuttee
818
Callian to the Krishtna, _viâ_ Poonah and Sholapore
357
S. E. LINE
Callian to Poonah, 91 miles; February, 1858
Poonah to Sholapore 165 miles; 1860
Sholapore to Krishtna; not estimated, probably the end of 1861
1,208
MADRAS:—
Madras to Beypore
430
Madras to Vellore, 81 miles, commenced 1853, completed to Arcot 1856,
and to Vellore in 1857
Vellore to Vaniembaddy, 125 miles from Madras, January, 1858. To Beypore
on the Western coast, March, 1859
The line to the Krishtna not yet estimated, probably to Bellary in 1861,
and to the Krishtna in 1862
Madras, _viâ_ Cuddapah and Bellary, to the Krishtna, about
310
740
SIND:—
Kurrachee to the Indus, at or near to Kotree
120
Estimated to be completed by October, 1859
BOMBAY, BARODA, AND CENTRAL INDIA:—
Bombay to Surat, Baroda, and Ahmedabad
330
Estimated to be completed from Surat to Baroda in 1858, and to Ahmedabad
in 1859. The section between Bombay and Surat not yet estimated

Edition: current; Page: [140]
earning a profit of nearly seven per cent, being two per cent beyond the
guaranteed rate of interest. The following table will show the extent of
traffic on the East-Indian Railway for the year ending 31st December,
1856:

PERIOD
Number of Passengers conveyed
1st Class
2nd Class
3rd Class
Total
Six Months ending
30th June, 1856
6,466
23,256
402,599
432,321
Six Months ending
31st December, 1856
6,639
25,877
432,605
463,121
13,105
49,133
835,204
895,442

PERIOD
Goods
Receipts
Tons
_£._
_s._
_d._
Six Months ending
95,188
16
4
30th June, 1856
33,010 }
Six Months ending
31st December, 1856
44,675 }
77,685
95,188
16
4

It may be observed that these are the results of the traffic on a line
where the amount of merchandise conveyed is very small, compared with
what it will become when the railway is continued to the Ganges at
Rajmahal.

The numbers stated under the head of “Third Class,” in the above table,
will in some degree indicate the extent to which the natives use the
railway. The receipts from this class are nearly four times as great as
from the two higher classes combined; the receipts from passenger
traffic in the half-year ending 30th June 1856, having been:

  ----------- ----- ----------
  1st Class   Rs.   27,986
  2nd Class         29,589
  3rd Class         1,99,883
  ----------- ----- ----------

In addition to the lines specified above, the Court have sanctioned the
construction of one by the Calcutta and South-eastern Railway Company,
from Calcutta to the Mutlah river, upon the same terms as to the
provision of land, but without any guarantee of interest.


Electric Telegraph

Even more important as a means of communication than railways, is the
electric telegraph; the use of which, at the commencement of the late
disturbances, may be Edition: current; Page: [141] said with scarcely
any exaggeration to have saved our empire. Having already, in a
wonderfully short space of time, connected the seats of the different
Governments by lines of telegraph upwards of three thousand miles in
length, the Government of India is now engaged in establishing
additional lines of about the same extent, through which the most
important places will be brought into communication with each other by
alternative routes.

The lines established, and in course of construction, are:

1st. From Calcutta, viâ Benares, Cawnpore, Agra, Meerut, Delhi,
Umritsir, and Lahore, to Peschawur; with a branch to Lucknow.

2nd. From Bombay to Agra, viâ Indore and Gwalior.

3rd. From Bombay to Madras, viâ Sattara, Bellary, and Bangalore.

4th. From Bombay along the coast, by Vingorla and Mangalore, to
Cananore.

5th. From Bangalore to Ootacamund and Mahableshwar.

6th. From Benares, through the centre of the Peninsula, by Mirzapore,
Jubbulpore, Nagpore, and Hyderabad, to Bellary.

7th. From Bombay, by Surat and Baroda, to Kurrachee.

8th. From Kurrachee, by Hyderabad (Sind) and Moultan, to Lahore.

9th. From Calcutta, by Dacca, Akyab, and Prome, to Pegu and Rangoon.

10th. From Calcutta to Madras, by the coast; and—

11th. From Madras, along the coast, by Pondicherry, Tranquebar, and
Ramnad, to Ceylon.

The lines already established have cost, upon an average, about £50 per
mile. Besides their inappreciable value to the Government for political
and military purposes, they are freely used by the mercantile community.
Though the charges are very moderate, the revenue, in the first year of
working the lines, exceeded the expenses, and since then the receipts
have been steadily increasing.


EDUCATION


Early Educational Proceedings

The first measures of the English Government for aiding education in
India were directed to the preservation of Oriental learning from decay;
and several institutions, supported or endowed by Government, were
maintained for that special purpose. A secondary object was the training
for the service of Government, of men acquainted with the systems of law
followed by the various religious communities, and constituting on
certain subjects the rule binding on our tribunals.

The views of the Government, however, gradually underwent a great
change; and, partly from the spontaneous action of the Government and
its officers, partly by directions from home, the basis of the
Government measures for promoting Edition: current; Page: [142]
education was greatly widened, on the one hand by introducing the study
of English into all the higher places of instruction under Government
influence, and on the other by giving a much wider range and greater
practical utility to the studies carried on in the vernacular or other
Oriental languages.


Government Colleges

All the Government educational institutions in Bengal have been either
gradually brought within the scope of these principles, or were
originally founded on them. Those institutions consisted, previously to
1854, of the Hooghly, Dacca, and Kishnaghur provincial colleges, with
the schools attached to them: to these has since been added a college at
Berhampore. At Calcutta itself, the Government contributed to the funds
for the support of the Hindoo College and of the Mahomedan Madrissa, but
there was no institution at the Presidency town open to all classes and
creeds, at which an education of a high order was imparted. This
deficiency was supplied in 1854, an arrangement being made by which the
Hindoo College, as an exclusive institution, was abolished, and a
Presidency College established, calculated to afford an education of the
highest order, and open without restriction to all sections of the
community.74 The cost of this institution will amount to above £10,000,
when all the arrangements shall be complete. It amounted in 1855-56 to
between £7,000 and £8,000. In addition to general education, provision
is made in this institution for instruction in law and jurisprudence:
medicine and civil engineering are otherwise provided for.

The Government colleges in the North-western Provinces consisted, in
1854, of those at Benares, Agra, Delhi, and Bareilly. In these, as at
the Bengal colleges, education was imparted through the medium both of
English and of the vernacular. The education given was of a very
efficient character, and the students generally obtained employment in
the service of Government, in which many of them fill situations of
responsibility.


Village Schools

For a considerable period, the direct aid of Government to education,
both in Bengal and in the North-western Provinces, was principally
confined to the Government colleges, and to the schools which were
attached or affiliated to them for the purpose of supplying them with
students. In 1846, however, Mr. Thomason, the Lieutenant-Governor of the
North-western Provinces, proposed a plan for the establishment
throughout those provinces of a system of village Edition: current;
Page: [143] schools, by means of an assignment of land by Government for
the support of a schoolmaster in each village.75 In 1848 Mr. Thomason
submitted amended proposals, confined to the establishment by Government
of one school in each tehseel, as a model for the village schools, and
the institution of a visiting agency, which, with a visitor-general at
its head, should not only superintend the Government schools, but visit
the village schools generally, for the purpose of assisting and aiding
the masters, and rewarding the most deserving.76 The cost of this
scheme, for all the districts of the North-western Provinces, was
estimated at upwards of £20,000; but it was considered best to introduce
the plan experimentally in eight districts, at a cost of £3,600 per
annum (exclusive of the salary of the visitor-general): and this measure
proved so successful in the selected districts, that its extension to
all the thirty-one districts of the North-western Provinces was
subsequently sanctioned, at a total cost of £17,207.77


Hulkabundee or Circle Schools

But valuable as were the general results of this scheme, and useful as
were the tehseel schools to the inhabitants of the towns, the village
schools (though the numbers attending them had considerably increased)
did not improve as had been hoped; and a new plan was accordingly
devised, with the best prospects of success, to meet the wants of the
agricultural population. This is the establishment of hulkabundee or
circle schools. Several villages conveniently situated for the purpose
are grouped together, and in a central situation a school is
established, at the joint cost of all the villages, none of which is
more than two miles from the central school. For the support of these
schools, the consent of landowners was sought to the appropriation of a
small percentage on the amount of the Government revenue (one per cent
being the amount fixed), of which half is contributed by Government and
half by the landowners. The assent of the landowners to this plan has
been obtained in many districts; and it will be made a condition of all
future settlements, and has been so made as resettlements have taken
place. It is estimated that when all the districts shall have been
resettled (which will not be till 1874), £40,000 per annum will be thus
available; of which £20,000 will be at the expense of Government, and
£20,000 at that of the landowners.

In Bengal, the establishment of 101 vernacular schools had been
authorized by Edition: current; Page: [144] the Government in 1844,78
shortly before the first proposals of Mr. Thomason. The schools were
established at the places where they were thought most likely to
succeed; but, except in a very few cases, they failed to attract
scholars, the old indigenous schools, where nothing worthy of the name
of education was afforded, proving more popular. In 1853 and 1854,
accordingly, this system was superseded, in favour of the plan already
adopted in the North-western Provinces, of a visitorial staff, model
schools, and aid and encouragement to indigenous schools. The estimate
for the plan, on the experimental scale proposed, amounted to about
£7,000 per annum.79


Schools for Teachers

There was a normal school for the masters of vernacular schools at this
time at Agra, which was working very well. At Calcutta, the Sanscrit
College furnished a considerable number of masters suited for village
schools.

Thus stood the arrangements of the Government for native education in
India, when a new impulse was given to the subject by the orders from
home in 1854.80 Before adverting to these, something must be said of
what had previously been done in the two subordinate presidencies.

The history of education at Madras, up to a recent period, presents
little beyond a record of failures. A plan was proposed by Sir Thomas
Munro in 1822, and approved by the home authorities, for the
establishment of provincial, district, and tehseel schools, throughout
the Presidency, at an estimated cost of £5,000 per annum.81 Schools were
established, but they proved failures, and were abolished. The
University of Madras was nominally established by Lord Elphinstone’s
Government;82 but in the only department of it which was really
proceeded with—the lower department, or “High School”—the success was by
no means Edition: current; Page: [145] great, and the number of pupils
was quite disproportionate to the expense. The whole subject of
education came under reconsideration in 1852, when a plan was laid down
by the Government, which provided for the education of all classes in a
way very much in accordance with that which has since been laid down for
adoption throughout India; comprising a central institution at the
Presidency, provincial colleges or high schools, zillah and tehseelee
schools, with a system of inspection or visitation, and grants in aid.83
The University at Madras was at once remodelled; but little progress had
been made, up to 1854, in carrying out the other parts of the plan,
beyond the establishment of provincial schools at Cuddalore and
Rajahmundry.


Colleges and Schools in Western India

The principal places of education in the Bombay Presidency are the
Elphinstone Institution at Bombay, and the College at Poonah. These
institutions, partly founded by native subscriptions and partly by the
Government, were designed to afford a collegiate education of a high
class, through the medium of the English language, a staff of professors
being maintained for giving instruction in mathematics, English
literature, natural philosophy, logic, mental and moral philosophy,
political economy, etc. A high school was attached to the Elphinstone
Institution, and a Sanscrit department to the Poonah College. In 1854-55
there was only one district of the Presidency in which there was not a
Government English school. Vernacular schools had been established in
many places at the expense of Government, but as the plan had not long
been adopted of requiring any part of the cost to be defrayed from local
resources, operations in this direction had been much limited by want of
funds. Under a plan brought into operation shortly before 1854, the
establishment of a school by Government was made conditional on a
portion of the expense being defrayed by the inhabitants;84 and under
this rule vernacular education was in course of steady extension up to
1854. A normal class for masters of Mahrattee schools existed at Poonah,
and one for masters of Guzerattee schools at Surat.


Education Despatch of 1854

It is now time to advert to the despatch from the home authorities of
the 19th of July 1854, which was designed to give as great an additional
impulse to the Edition: current; Page: [146] operations of Government in
the promotion of education, as had already been given to the department
of Public Works. This despatch directed that the previous Boards of
Education, which consisted of private persons and of Government officers
in their private capacity, should be abolished, and that a department of
Education, under a director, should be appointed in each Presidency and
sub-Presidency. The limits which had previously been placed upon the
total expenditure of each Government for educational purposes, were
removed. The establishment of universities at the Presidency towns was
directed, and minute instructions were given respecting the mode of
their constitution. A great extension of vernacular education was
contemplated, and orders were given for introducing the system of grants
in aid to private institutions, dependent on the quality of the secular
instruction given, as ascertained by a Government inspection.


Directors of Public Instruction

Effect was immediately given to these instructions, so far as regards
the formation of the controlling establishments. Directors of Public
Instruction were appointed in Bengal, the North-western Provinces,
Madras, Bombay, and the Punjab, and under them inspectors and
sub-inspectors of different grades, and in numbers proportioned to the
territories to be superintended.


Grants in Aid

Rules for regulating grants in aid have been laid down,85 and
considerable grants have been made under all the Governments. The amount
of these grants was at first limited by the authorities in India to a
certain percentage on the expenditure on Government institutions; but
this limit has been taken off by instructions from home.86


Universities

Universities have been constituted, under acts of the Legislature of
India, at Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay.87 Measures are also in progress
for carrying out the objects of the despatch of 1854, as regards
vernacular education in Bengal, Madras, and Bombay. In the North-western
Provinces it has only been necessary to give greater extension, as had
been previously intended, to the measures already introduced.

Edition: current; Page: [147]


Medical Schools and Colleges

In addition to the institutions for giving a general education to the
different classes of the community, either through English or the
vernacular, colleges or schools for several branches of professional
education are maintained at the different presidencies. Of the
engineering colleges mention has already been made. Medical schools had
from an early period been maintained at all the presidencies, to train
persons for employment in the subordinate branches of the medical
service, as compounders, dressers, native doctors, etc. These
institutions were gradually raised in character, and for many years past
have held the rank of colleges, in which medical education of a
first-class character is afforded. They have, in consequence, received
the “recognition” of the College of Surgeons in London; and the
graduates of these colleges are entitled to all privileges which are
conferred by the College of Surgeons on the members of the colonial
medical institutions recognized by them.


Native Medical Service

The graduates almost invariably enter the service of Government, though
some few, especially at Bombay, prefer private practice. To afford
encouragement to the graduates of the colleges, and meet the want of
well-qualified medical officers for the service of Government, a special
native medical service has been created, under the title of
Sub-Assistant Surgeons, for which a degree in one of the medical
colleges of India is a necessary qualification. These officers are
divided into three grades, promotion being regulated by the joint
consideration of length of service and professional qualification, as
ascertained by special examination. The principal use which has been
made of this class, has been in connection with the Government
dispensaries; but some few have been appointed to the charge of the
smaller stations. Their professional qualifications are, in many cases,
of a high order; and the triumph which has been effected over the
religious prejudices of the natives, in popularizing the dissection of
dead bodies, is a proof that this indirect mode of correcting their
superstitions, by the influence of useful knowledge, is a highly
effectual one.


School Books

The important subject of school books has been for many years attended
to. In the North-western Provinces a very large number of vernacular
books, either originals or translations, have been prepared under the
auspices of the Director of Education; and a highly efficient system is
in force for their sale and distribution among the schools of all
classes. At Calcutta and Bombay, much has also been Edition: current;
Page: [148] done; and arrangements have more recently been made for the
supply of school books in the difficult vernacular languages of the
Madras Presidency.


Educational Test for Public Employment

As a powerful stimulus to the general population to avail themselves of
the means of education now placed so generally within their reach, rules
have been laid down absolutely requiring a certain amount of education
in all persons employed in the public service, except in situations of
the lowest class.88 Even for those lower employments, the officers
intrusted with the appointments are expected to select persons capable
of reading and writing, provided they are qualified in other respects;
and returns are required, under most of the Governments, of appointments
made, with special reference to this point.


Female Education

An inroad has begun to be made upon native prejudices even in the
department of female education. The late Mr. Drinkwater Bethune89
benevolently established a school for Hindoo girls at Calcutta, which,
after his death, was adopted by the Marchioness of Dalhousie,90
supported by the Marquis of Dalhousie until he left India, and is now
maintained as a Government institution under the special orders of the
home authorities.

A highly satisfactory commencement of female education in the
North-western Provinces was made in 1856, by the exertions of a
meritorious native functionary, the sub-inspector of schools, Pundit
Gopal Sing.91 By his influence ninety-seven female schools were
established in the city and district of Agra, and each school was
attended on an average by twenty pupils. The good example has been
followed by the formation of female schools in the zillahs of Muttra and
Mynpooree. In the Bombay Presidency, schools for females have been
established by natives at Poonah, which are stated to be in satisfactory
operation; and some native ladies of wealth and influence at Ahmedabad
have lately endowed a female school at that city.

Female education is included within the operations of the enlarged
Government scheme of education, and it is hoped that progress will be
gradually made in its diffusion.

Edition: current; Page: [149]


MISCELLANEOUS IMPROVEMENTS

Various important measures have been adopted within the last twenty
years, both for the improvement of the productions of India and for the
introduction of new products.


Cotton Experiments

In 1840, ten experienced cotton-planters from the United States were
engaged, and proceeded to India to conduct, on account of Government,
the experimental cultivation of superior kinds of cotton. In the
majority of the districts the experiment failed from unsuitability of
climate, but in parts of South-western India it was successful, and a
large cultivation of American cotton in those districts now takes place.
It is to be remarked that these districts are near the coast, and united
with it by improved roads; and, indeed, with the exception of Berar
(into the heart of which a line of railway will shortly be carried), all
the principal cotton districts of India have ready access to
water-carriage, and are not materially impeded by the remaining
imperfections of the internal communications.

A most complete body of information on the cotton cultivation of India,
and on the suitableness of the various local soils and climates to the
cultivation both of the native and the foreign varieties of the plant,
has been obtained through the exertions of the American planters and of
the servants of Government, and has been condensed and made public in
the two works entitled, On the Culture and Commerce of Cotton in India,
and Review of the Measures which have been adopted in India for the
improved Culture of Cotton, by an eminent officer of the East-India
Company, the late lamented Dr. Royle;92 so distinguished as a man of
science, and whose thorough knowledge and understanding both of the
Indian climates, and of general climatology in its relation to vegetable
productions, has never been excelled, if equalled.


Indian Fibrous Productions

The same eminent authority, in his work entitled, The Fibrous
Productions of India, has made known an amount of internal resources, of
the greatest value to this country (especially in the contingency of a
Russian war), of which no one, Edition: current; Page: [150] even of
those who had the strongest private interest in the subject, had a
suspicion.93 The collection of raw products, brought together from all
parts of India for the Paris Exhibition of 1855, has vastly extended the
knowledge accessible to manufacturers and merchants, of the numerous
articles suited to the European market, and capable of being imported in
any quantity, which only await the necessary attention and the necessary
funds on the part of enterprising individuals. An Industrial Museum has
recently been formed at the India House for the reception of these and
other choice specimens of Indian produce and manufactures.


Tea Cultivation

The Assam tea has been brought into regular cultivation; and the teas of
China have been introduced as a staple product of agriculture, at the
expense of Government, into the parts of the Himalayas which are
suitable in point of climate. Mr. Fortune was employed in China to
obtain a large quantity of the best seeds, and to engage Chinese
experienced in the growth and preparation of the article.94 There is
already a considerable production of the higher qualities of tea in
these mountains; large tracts of waste land suited to the cultivation
are now placed at the disposal of persons desirous of engaging in it,
and seeds and plants are given largely and gratuitously from the
Government experimental establishments, to all who apply for them with a
view to cultivation.


Hospitals and Dispensaries

The Indian Governments have long been active in placing the means of
medical relief within reach of the population. The rules in force
provide for the establishment of a civil hospital or a dispensary, in
every town the inhabitants of which have shown their appreciation of the
benefit by either providing funds for the erection of a building, or
contributing towards the support of the necessary establishments, or by
having for some time actually supported a dispensary on a limited scale
from their own resources. These institutions are mostly managed by
natives trained at the medical colleges; a general superintendence
resting with the civil surgeons of the different stations. Their success
has been very great. The Edition: current; Page: [151] number of
hospitals and dispensaries, and of the patients treated in them, during
the last year for which returns have been received, was as follows:

  ---------------------- ------------------------ --------------------
                         Number of Institutions   Number of Patients
  Bengal                 43                       153,161
  North-west Provinces   47                       245,171
  Madras                 35                       184,069
  Bombay                 17                       88,793
                         142                      671,194
  ---------------------- ------------------------ --------------------


Vaccination

Measures have also been taken for many years, and with much success, for
the diffusion of vaccination, not only in the British territories, but
also in the native states.


Libraries

Of late years, the establishment of public libraries in the provincial
towns has been commenced. The assistance of Government is usually given
in the form of a donation of books, and a regular supply of the
publications issued by Government, which now include all the most
interesting and important papers on the public records, relating to the
condition and administration of the country.


Improvement of Native States

Independently of what has been done for the benefit of our own subjects,
much has also been effected, through the influence of the British
Government and its diplomatic officers, to improve the administration of
native states. It is hardly possible to exaggerate the disorder and
confusion in which most of these were plunged at the time when they
first became connected with the British Government. Those among the
Mahratta states which had any considerable military strength, made
annual expeditions, called Mooluckgheery circuits, for the purpose of
conquering or devastating the possessions of their weaker neighbours;
and hordes of undisciplined adventurers, known by the name of
Pindarries, ranged with fire and sword from one end to the other of the
part of India which was under native rule, occasionally invading and
ravaging even the British possessions. All this is at an end. The native
states are as safe from one another, and from invaders and plunderers
from without, as the British dominions. The princes and chiefs are
Edition: current; Page: [152] bound by treaties to refer to our
arbitration all their differences;95 and experience has given them the
fullest reliance on our impartiality and justice. Boundary disputes
between villages of different states, and complaints from the subjects
of one against those of another for robberies or other injuries, are
adjudicated either by a British officer, or by Courts of Vakeels,
composed of representatives of the neighbouring chiefs, presided over by
a British functionary. In some parts of India, and particularly of
Guzerat, which are divided among a great number of petty chiefs, too
weak or too little civilized to control effectually their turbulent
subjects, Criminal Courts have been established, consisting of a British
diplomatic officer and assessors selected from among the native chiefs
or nobles, for the trial of offences against the general peace of the
country. These courts are a powerful agent of civilization. They are
gradually weaning a very backward portion of the natives of India from
their barbarous usages. They have nearly suppressed all the classes of
crimes which arose out of a generally disturbed state of society; and in
dealing with offences which originate in real or supposed grievances,
they make due allowance for provocation, and redress the wrongs even of
those whom they are obliged to punish for seeking justice by unlawful
means. In the more considerable native states, our influence is exerted
on the side of good, in every mode permitted by positive engagement. Not
only have the British representatives incessantly, and to a great degree
successfully, incited native princes to prohibit and suppress the
barbarous usages which we have ceased to tolerate in our own
territories; but defects have been pointed out, and improvements
suggested, in their revenue and judicial administrations. Financial
disorder and general misgovernment have been the subject of grave
remonstrance, followed up by such positive marks of displeasure as were
consistent with the respective treaties. The minorities, which so often
occur in native states, have been made use of to appoint capable
ministers, to reform abuses, and restore the country in an improved
condition to the young chiefs; who, having been in the mean time for the
most part educated in European knowledge, and initiated into public
business under the eye of a British officer, are often grateful for the
care taken of their interest, and continue, after their accession to
power, the improved systems commenced during their minority. The present
Scindia and Holkar, and the Rao of Kutch, as well as many others, may be
cited as instances.96 One native ruler, the late Nuwab of Rampore, had
actually been a deputy-collector in the service of the British
Government.97 Another, the Rao of Ulwur, on his accession, invited some
of our Edition: current; Page: [153] native functionaries to conduct his
administration, and reform it after the English model.98 The Rajpoot
states, formerly almost in a state of chronic anarchy, have been
rendered peaceful and prosperous, by judicious mediation between the
princes and their feudatories, and judicious guidance of both, through
advice and influence.


Protection and Improvement of the Oppressed Races

There still remain to be commemorated a set of proceedings, among the
most interesting and the most honourable to our Government, which have
distinguished the present century—the measures for raising and
civilizing the oppressed races.

There are numerous hill tribes in various parts of India, known under
the names of Bheels, Coolies, Goands, Mhairs, Meenas, Mhangs, Ramoosees,
and others, who are believed to have been the aboriginal population of
the country, driven from the plains by the invasion of the Hindoos.
These people had been treated like wild beasts by the native
Governments, and, by a natural consequence, had become the scourge of
the country. Whenever the Government was weak, they destroyed all
security in the neighbouring plains by their depredations, and had
universally acquired the character of irreclaimable robbers.

The first person who is known to have tried the effect of justice and
conciliation on any of these tribes, was Mr. Cleveland, an officer high
in the civil service of the Company, in the latter part of the last
century.99 The scene of his benevolent exertions was the Bhaugulpore
Hills, in the north-east of Bengal; and the feelings which he left
behind him among the rude people of the district were such, that they
long continued to pay religious honours to his tomb. The example thus
set has been largely followed in the present generation. One of the
first signal instances of success was in the case of the Mhairs, who
inhabit a hill district near Ajmere. Colonel Hall, now on the Company’s
retired list, originated the movement, and it was worthily carried on by
Colonel Dixon, recently deceased.100 In Western India, the honour of the
initiative belongs to Mr. J.P. Willoughby, then a very young officer,
who by similar means established peace and order among the Bheels of
Rajpeepla, a wild district of Guzerat.101 The next instance was that of
the Bheels of the Adjuntee range, in Southern Candeish, through the
agency chiefly of Colonel Ovans, and of the present Sir James Outram;102
and the measures which Edition: current; Page: [154] proved successful
with these Bheels, were successively extended to many similar tribes in
different parts of Central India. Another example is that of the Khoonds
in Orissa, among whom a policy of the same general character was carried
into practice by Major Macpherson.103 This was the tribe who, as
mentioned in a previous part of the present paper, have been induced to
abolish human sacrifices.

The mode in which these objects were accomplished was in all cases
fundamentally the same. They were effected by the admirable power of
individual character. Into fastnesses, through which bodies even of
disciplined troops had vainly endeavoured to force their way, these
officers penetrated, in some cases almost unattended. They trusted
themselves to the people. By their courage and frankness they gained
their confidence. They made them understand that they were not
considered as wild animals to be hunted down; that nothing but their
good was intended; and the object which had for years been vainly sought
by force, was accomplished by explanation and persuasion. The robber
tribes were induced to settle as peaceful cultivators. Lands were
assigned to them, tools supplied, and money advanced, for cultivation.
In Mhairwarra the Government also constructed important works of
irrigation. The more daring spirits were formed into irregular corps,
under British officers, and employed to preserve the peace of the
districts of which they had once been the principal disturbers. In no
single instance has this policy failed. The agricultural colonies
composed of these people have all prospered, and the districts which
they formerly devastated have become, and remained, among the most free
from crime to be found in India. In the late disturbances, not one of
the corps composed of these people is known to have mutinied. The
Mhairwarra battalion has not only remained faithful, but is, in the
present crisis, a valuable part of our local military strength; and
there has been no disturbance whatever in that district. Among the
Bheels of Candeish there has been a rising, which, by showing that the
predatory spirit is not yet thoroughly extinct, enhances the merit of
the system of measures by which, for nearly a quarter of a century, it
has been kept dormant. But the corps formed from among these very people
by Sir James Outram has done useful service to Government in the present
emergency.

The last great example of the success of this policy was given by
Colonel John Jacob in Sind, and only differs from the others because the
tribes with whom he had to do were not oppressed aborigines, but the
proud and warlike mountaineers of the Afghan and Beloochee frontier.104
The success has been among the most striking yet experienced. For some
time after the conquest of Sind, the frontier forays of these tribes
kept the country in a perpetual state of disturbance. The Edition:
current; Page: [155] attempts to retaliate on them in their hills had
been failures, sometimes almost disasters, but had laid the foundation
of that knowledge of our power, which enabled subsequent conciliatory
measures to have their full effect. Colonel Jacob applied to these
people the principles of Mhairwarra and Candeish. He settled on land
those who were willing to cultivate, and organized from among the
remainder a local military police. The effect is, that in the frontier
districts, what was lately a desert waste, is now in great part a
thriving agricultural country, yielding a rapidly increasing revenue.
For some years there has been scarcely a crime of magnitude on the
entire Sind frontier; and the corps which was raised partly from the
former devastators of the country, is the celebrated Jacob’s Horse.

The preceding review of the improvements in Indian administration,
completed or commenced during the present generation, cannot more
properly terminate than with this interesting piece of history. It is
not pretended that the enumeration approaches to completeness. The
instances given are merely some of the most important achievements of a
Government, of which perpetual striving towards improvement is the vital
principle. But it is believed that even so imperfect a summary is
sufficient to justify the assertion, that few governments, even under
far more favourable circumstances, have attempted so much for the good
of their subjects, or carried so many of their attempts to a successful
and beneficial issue. A Government of foreigners, over a people most
difficult to be understood, and still more difficult to be improved,—a
Government which has had all its knowledge to acquire, by a slow process
of study and experience, and often by a succession of failures
(generally, however, leading to ultimate success)—has a right to take
pride to itself for having accomplished so much; and most certainly
cannot be justly reproached, by any existing Government or people, with
not having effected more.


APPENDIX A: BENGAL SURVEY

In answer to inquiries made by the Court of Directors in 1854 respecting
the effects hitherto produced by the survey on litigation, crime, and
the value of landed property, the Sudder Court say, in regard to “those
classes of offences which would be likely to be influenced by the
completion of the survey,” that “it is satisfactory to observe” the
“concurrent testimony” of the criminal judges “to the diminution which
has taken place in this description of crime.” This result is partly
attributed to the successful operation of Act IV of 1840, which enables
the magistrate to give an effectual remedy in cases of dispossession or
ejectment;105 but, they add, “the evidence of the survey papers must
have greatly facilitated the Edition: current; Page: [156] proceedings
of the magistrate, whose proceedings under the Act in question are
determined solely by possession.”

In regard to the effect on litigation, the judges say, “The ordinary
result of the survey has been to elicit many local differences and
disputes which were lying dormant, until the survey award presented an
opportunity to gain an advantage over his adversary;” “but as, under Act
XIII of 1848,106 such suits must be instituted within three years from
the final award of the revenue authorities, the litigation thus
incidentally raised is afterwards almost entirely brought to an end.”

On the question as to the “result of the survey in giving further
security to the titles of estates, and generally increasing the value of
landed property, the opinions of the local officers are, on the whole,
satisfactory. The testimony of all is strongly in favour of the
additional security now given to title; and the judge of Shahabad
observes, that on the whole the survey is felt to be a blessing to the
community.”

The Board of Revenue, Lower Provinces, state that “it is quite clear
that the value of the survey records as a basis for butwarrah and
settlement proceedings is generally acknowledged. In some districts,
butwarrah is applied for without any new measurement, solely on the data
furnished by the survey. Their utility in the decision of boundary
disputes, also, is universally admitted.” In regard to the effect of the
survey on the repression of affrays, the Board quote the opinion of Mr.
Elliott, Commissioner of Burdwan,107 that, “by removing the cause of
affrays, the survey cannot fail to produce an effect greater even than
the most stringent legislation.”

In the province of Cuttack (not permanently settled) the survey and
settlement operations were combined, and there “the improvement is very
perceptible. In Cuttack the value of landed property is said to have
increased twenty-five per cent, and fifty per cent in Balasore; but
Pooree,* owing to frequent droughts and inundations, is an exception.”
“The survey,” the Commissioner (of Cuttack) remarks, “is worth much more
to Government and the people than it has cost.”108


APPENDIX B: SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES

The objects of the survey were, first, to fix on each mehal or estate an
assessment “calculated so as to leave a fair surplus profit;” and “for
the punctual payment of that sum, the land is held to be perpetually
hypothecated to the Government;” Edition: current; Page: [157] secondly,
to determine who are the “person or persons entitled to receive this
surplus profit. The right thus determined is declared to be heritable
and transferable, and the persons entitled to it are considered the
proprietors of the land, from whom the engagements for the annual
payment of the sum assessed by Government on the mehal are taken.”109
The proprietors, when there are more than one, being jointly and
severally responsible for the sum assessed on each mehal, it also became
necessary to determine the rule according to which they should share the
profits, or make good the losses on the estate. When the proprietors
were numerous, as was generally the case, engagements were taken only
from a few of the body (lumberdars) who, for themselves and their
co-proprietors, undertook to manage the mehal, and pay the sum assessed
on it.

The first step in the process was to adjust the boundaries of each
mouzah, or village, and to prepare a map, showing each field comprised
in the mouzah. This being completed, the settlement officer proceeded to
determine the assessment to be fixed on the land, by estimating, with as
near an approach to accuracy as the means at his disposal would permit,
what might be expected to be the net produce* to the proprietor during
the period of settlement; and of this amount about two-thirds was fixed
as the demand of Government. The village was then offered on these terms
to the proprietors, and if they considered them too high, and declined
to engage, the Government either leased the estate to a farmer, or
collected the rents direct from the cultivators; the excluded
proprietors being entitled to a percentage (called malikana) at not less
than five per cent on the revenue, and also having the right, at the
expiration of twelve years, of claiming to be readmitted to the
management.

The fiscal operation of fixing the amount of revenue to be paid by the
village being completed, the next process was to ascertain and record
the rights possessed by all parties, whether called proprietors or not.
When discordant claims were put forward, the question at issue was
determined judicially on the spot. Provision is also made for
maintaining the “Record of Rights” in a correct condition, by causing
registers of all changes in the village to be kept by the putwarree, or
village accountant, copies of which are annually forwarded to the
collector’s office.110


APPENDIX C: SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF THE BOMBAY TERRITORY

The first step in the process is to determine the boundaries of the
village. The area is then measured and mapped off into survey-fields. If
the land is unoccupied, no Edition: current; Page: [158] division of a
field is afterwards permitted. When a survey-field actually occupied is
owned by several proprietors or sharers, no joint responsibility is
admitted, but the sharers of each are separately shown in the map, and
the separate proprietorship continues until one of the sharers dies
without heirs, or otherwise vacates his share; on which event the
vacated share must be taken up by the remaining sharers, or, on their
refusal, the whole field must be relinquished. The object of these rules
is to consolidate the small holdings, and set limits to the minute
subdivision of landed property naturally arising from the Hindoo law of
inheritance. But it is believed that, in practice, no difficulty has in
such cases been found in inducing the remaining sharers to undertake the
responsibility.

The fields of the village being thus measured and mapped, the next
process is that of classification, for the purpose of determining the
relative values of the fields into which the land is divided. After a
minute examination of the physical characters of the soil, its depth,
composition, etc., the following considerations are taken into account
as regards the fields of the same village; viz. “their natural
productive capabilities; their position with respect to the village, as
affording facilities or otherwise for agricultural operations; and, in
the case of garden or rice lands, the supply of water for
irrigation.”111

The measurement of the fields having been completed, and their
classification determined, the amount of the assessment is next to be
fixed. This operation is not performed by inquiring into the actual
produce of the fields, but rather by an examination into the previous
fiscal history of such groups of villages as are distinguished by
similar physical characteristics. The statements of former collections,
remissions, and balances, are collated, and compared with the existing
rates of assessment. The “climate, position with respect to markets,
agricultural skill, and the actual condition of the cultivators,”112 are
taken into account; and from a consideration of these combined
circumstances, rates are determined for each class of land; the object
being to keep those rates within the limit of the natural rent.

The rates, being thus fixed, have only to be applied to the surveyed
fields. Thus a field of eight acres, in a class rated at twelve annas an
acre, is assessed at six rupees. The assessment thus fixed is declared
to be not liable to increase for “thirty years, during which period the
full benefit of every improvement, such as the conversion of dry into
irrigated land by the digging of wells and tanks, the planting of
fruit-trees, etc., will be secured to the incumbent of the land, and no
extra assessment levied on that account.”113

The registered occupiers of fields are held to be the proprietors, so
long as they pay the fixed assessment. They have full liberty annually
to resign any portion of Edition: current; Page: [159] their holdings,
or to increase them by the occupation of waste fields, on giving due
notice, and are thus enabled to extend or contract their cultivation
according to their means of tillage. In either case, they are
responsible only for the assessment of the fields which they actually
hold, those relinquished by them being at the disposal of Government, to
assign to any one willing to engage for them.

The annual settlement, as it is called, which still takes place in the
surveyed districts of the Bombay Presidency, is now limited to an
inspection of the fields by the village officers, to ascertain how many
are cultivated and how many not. All those that are engaged for, whether
cultivated or not, are liable to the payment of the assessment, and
those not engaged for, if cultivated, are also liable. The plan of
giving remissions for failure of crops, for lands taken but unsown,
etc., is abolished; and it is now expressly made known that remissions
are not claimable in individual cases, and will never be allowed unless
under circumstances of calamity affecting whole districts.


APPENDIX D: EXEMPTION OF LANDS IMPROVED BY THE RYOTS FROM EXTRA ASSESSMENT

The general rule in force for many years in the Madras Presidency, was
to make, in each case of a ryot improving his lands by digging a well or
otherwise, an arrangement under which no increase of assessment was
imposed until the expiration of a term sufficiently long, not only amply
to compensate, but liberally to reward him for the labour and
expenditure he might have applied.

After considerable correspondence, however, the Court of Directors
determined (2nd June 1852) “to allow to the ryots the full benefit of
their own improvements; the lands so improved being subjected to no
additional assessment on that account, so long as the general rates of
the district remain unaltered.”114

The Circular Order of the Madras Government, publishing this rule, and
announcing that in any general revision of the rates, “any modification
in the assessment of lands so improved will be irrespective of the
increased value conferred upon them by their holders,”115 was approved
by the Court on the 20th April 1854.

A rule proposed by the Board of Revenue, requiring ryots proposing to
sink wells, to give notice to the collector, was disallowed, as tending
“to cause delay and obstruction, and to give an opening for exaction to
the native servants.”116

Edition: current; Page: [160]


APPENDIX E: SALT REVENUE

The system actually in operation throughout India is as follows, viz.:

Lower Provinces of Bengal. Rate of duty 2 1/2 rupees per maund of 82 2/7
lbs. avoirdupois; Government salt sold to the people at cost price added
to the duty; importation unrestricted, and facilities given to persons
willing to manufacture salt under excise regulations.

North-western Provinces. Manufacture (from saliferous earths)
prohibited. Duty on passing the frontier line, Rs. 2 per maund, and 8
annas additional on crossing the Allahabad special line of chokeys.

Punjab. Salt-mines worked by the Government, and the salt sold at the
mines at Rs. 2 per maund.

Fort St. George. The manufacture of salt a Government monopoly, the
price charged to purchasers being one rupee per maund. Importation
permitted, on payment of a duty of 14 annas (seven-eighths of a rupee)
per maund, supposed to be equivalent to the profit obtained on the
monopoly of salt.

Bombay. No manufacture on the part of Government. An excise duty of 12
annas per maund levied on home-made salt, and a customs duty of equal
amount on imported salt.

Edition: current; Page: [161]




At a Court of Directors of the East-India Company, held on Tuesday, the
6th April, 1858:

The Chairman, drawing the Court’s attention to the two Bills now before
Parliament relating to the Government of India, submitted the Draft of a
proposed Report to the General Court of Proprietors on the subject;
Whereupon,

It was agreed, that the same be referred to the consideration of a
Committee of the whole Court.

The Court being resumed, and a Report from the Committee being read:

Resolved,—That this Court approve the said Draft of a Report, as altered
by the Committee; and that the same be laid before the General Court of
Proprietors to be held to-morrow.

At a Special General Court of the East-India Company, held at the
East-India House, on the 7th April, it was ordered, That the said Report
be printed.

The two bills referred to are “A Bill for the Better Government of
India,” 21 Victoria (12 Feb., 1858), PP, 1857-58, II, 267-86, and “A
Bill to Transfer the Government of India from the East India Company to
Her Majesty the Queen,” 21 Victoria (26 Mar., 1858), PP, 1857-58, II,
287-312. Unsigned. Not republished by Mill. Identified in his
bibliography as “A report to the General Court of the E.I. Company from
the Court of Directors upon the Two Bills Now before Parliament,
relating to the Government of India; printed by the E.I. Company and
also laid before the House of Lords and forming No. 87 of the Lords
Papers of the Session of 1858” (MacMinn, 91).

Edition: current; Page: [163]


Report to the General Court of Proprietors, Drawing Attention to the Two Bills Now before Parliament Relating to the Government of India

it is the duty of your Directors to lay before the Proprietors the two
Bills which have been introduced into Parliament by the late and by the
present Ministry, for divesting the East-India Company of all
participation in the government of India, and framing a new scheme of
administrative agency.1

On former occasions when the Ministers of the Crown have submitted
measures to Parliament for altering, in any manner, the constitution of
the Indian Government, the substance of the measures has been officially
communicated to the Court of Directors, and an opportunity allowed to
them of offering such remarks as their knowledge and experience in
Indian affairs might suggest. The correspondence being afterwards laid
before the Court of Proprietors, formed the most appropriate report
which the Directors could make to their constituents on the measures
under consideration by the Legislature. In the present instance, this
opportunity not having been afforded to them, it appears desirable that
they should adopt the present mode of laying before the proprietary body
the observations which it is entitled to expect from its executive
organ, on the Bills now before Parliament, and on the present posture of
the Company’s affairs.

The Directors cannot but advert with feelings of satisfaction to the
altered tone which public discussion has assumed in regard to the
character of the East-India Company, and the merits of the
administration in which the Company has borne so important a part. The
intention of proposing the abolition of the Company’s government was
announced in the midst of, and it may be surmised, in deference Edition:
current; Page: [164] to, a clamour, which represented the government of
India by the Company as characterized by nearly every fault of which a
civilized Government can be accused, and the Company as the main cause
of the recent disasters.2 But in the parliamentary discussions which
have lately taken place, there has been an almost universal
acknowledgment that the rule of the Company has been honourable to
themselves and beneficial to India; while no political party, and few
individuals of any consideration, have alleged anything seriously
disparaging to the general character of the Company’s administration. So
far, therefore, the stand made by the Company against the calumnies with
which they have been assailed, may be considered to have been
successful.

But the admission generally made, and made explicitly by the proposers
of both the Bills, that the existing system works well, has not had the
effect of inducing doubt of the wisdom of hastily abolishing it. Neither
does it seem to have been remembered, that if the system has worked
well, there must be some causes for its having done so, and that it
would be worth while to consider what these are, in order that they
might be retained in any new system. If the constitution which has made
the Indian Government what it is, must be abolished, because it is
thought defective in theory, what is substituted should at least be
theoretically unobjectionable. But the constitution of the East-India
Company, however anomalous, is far more in accordance with the
acknowledged principles of good government than either of the proposed
Bills.

The nature of the case is, indeed, itself so anomalous, that something
anomalous was to be expected in the means by which it could be
successfully dealt with.

All English institutions and modes of political action are adapted to
the case of a nation governing itself. In India, the case to be provided
for is that of the government of one nation by another, separated from
it by half the globe; unlike it in everything which characterizes a
people; as a whole, totally unacquainted with it; and without time or
means for acquiring knowledge of it or its affairs.

History presents only two instances in which these or similar
difficulties have been in any considerable degree surmounted. One is the
Roman Empire; the other is the government of India by the East-India
Company.

The means which the Bills provide for overcoming these difficulties
consist of the unchecked power of a Minister. There is no difference of
moment in this respect between the two Bills. The Minister, it is true,
is to have a Council. But the most despotic rulers have Councils. The
difference between the Council of a despot and a Council which prevents
the ruler from being a despot is, that the one is dependent on him, the
other independent; that the one has some power of its own, Edition:
current; Page: [165] the other has not. By the first Bill, the whole
Council is nominated by the Minister; by the second, one-half of it is
nominated by him.3 The functions to be intrusted to it are left, in
both, with some slight exceptions, to the Minister’s own discretion.4

The Minister is indeed subject to the control of Parliament and of the
British nation. But though Parliament and the nation exercise a salutary
control over their own affairs, it would be contrary to all experience
to suppose that they will exercise it over the affairs of a hundred
millions of Hindoos and Mahomedans. Habitually, they will doubtless be
hereafter, as they have been heretofore, indifferent and inattentive to
Indian affairs, and will leave them entirely to the Minister. The
consequence will be, that in the exceptional cases in which they do
interfere, the interference will not be grounded on knowledge of the
subject, and will probably be for the most part confined to cases where
an Indian question is taken up from party motives, as the means of
injuring a Minister; or when some Indian malcontent, generally with
objects opposed to good government, succeeds in interesting the
sympathies of the public in his favour. For it is not the people of
India, but rich individuals and societies representing class interests,
who have the means of engaging the ear of the public through the press,
and through agents in Parliament. And it is important to remark, that by
the provisions of either of the Bills the House of Commons will be
rendered even less competent, in point of knowledge of Indian affairs,
than at present, since by both Bills all the members of the Council of
India will be excluded from it.

The government of dependencies by a Minister and his subordinates, under
the sole control of Parliament, is not a new experiment in England. That
form of colonial government lost the United States, and had nearly lost
all the colonies of any considerable population and importance. The
colonial administration of this country has only ceased to be a subject
of general condemnation since the principle has been adopted of leaving
all the important colonies to manage their own affairs,—a course which
cannot be followed with the people of India. If the control of
Parliament has not prevented the habitual mismanagement of countries
inhabited by Englishmen like ourselves, who had every facility for
representing and urging their grievances, it is not likely to be any
effectual protection to Musselmans and Hindoos.

All governments require constitutional checks; but the constitutional
checks applicable to a case of this peculiar kind, must be found within
the governing body itself.

Though England as a whole, while desiring nothing but to govern India
well, is necessarily ignorant of India, and feels, under ordinary
circumstances, no particular interest in its concerns, there are in
England a certain number of persons who possess knowledge of India, and
feel an interest in its affairs. It seems, Edition: current; Page: [166]
therefore, very desirable, for the sake of India, that England should
govern it through, and by means of, these persons. This would be the
case if the organ of government principally consisted of persons who
have passed a considerable portion of their lives in India, or who feel
that habitual interest in its affairs which is naturally acquired by
having aided in administering them; and if this body, or a majority of
it, were periodically elected by a constituency composed of persons in
England who have served the Government for a certain length of time in
India, or whose interests are connected with that country by some
permanent tie. It would be an additional advantage if this constituency
had the power of requiring information, and compelling a public
discussion of Indian questions. These are conditions which, to a
considerable extent, the existing constitution of the East-India Company
fulfils.

The other great constitutional security for the good government of India
lies in the forms of business. This is a point to which sufficient
importance is not generally attached. The forms of business are the real
constitution of India.

From the necessity of the case, recognized in both the proposed
measures, the administration must be shared, in some proportion, between
a Minister and a Council. The Council may consist of persons possessing
knowledge of India. The Minister, except in very rare cases, can possess
little or none. He is placed in office by the action of political party,
which is governed by considerations totally unconnected with India, and,
in the common course of politics, he is removed from office by the time
he has been able to learn his duty. Even in the unusual case, of which
present circumstances are an example, when the Minister has made himself
acquainted with India through the discharge of high functions in India
itself,5 his knowledge is but the knowledge of one man; and one man’s
knowledge of a subject like India, until corrected and completed by that
of other men, is, it may safely be affirmed, wholly insufficient, and if
implicitly trusted, even dangerous. The good government, therefore, of
India, by a Minister and a Council, depends upon the amount of influence
possessed by the Council; and their influence depends upon the forms of
business.

However experienced may be the Council, and however inexperienced the
Minister, he will have the deciding voice. The power will rest with one
who may know less of the subject than any member of the Council, and is
sure to know less than the Council collectively, if they are selected
with ordinary judgment. The Council will have no substantive power, but
only moral influence. It is therefore all important that this influence
should be upheld. Unless the forms of business are such as to insure
that the Council shall exercise its judgment on all questions; that all
matters requiring decision shall be considered by them, and their views
recorded in the initiatory stage, before the Minister has committed
himself to an opinion, they will possess no more weight or influence
than the same number of Edition: current; Page: [167] clerks in his
office (whom also he can consult if he pleases), and the power of the
Minister will be practically uncontrolled.

In both the Bills these considerations are entirely disregarded. The
first Bill does not establish any forms of business, but leaves them to
be determined by the Minister and his Council; in other words, by the
Minister.6 Even, therefore, if the Minister first appointed should be
willing to establish forms which would be any restraint upon himself, a
subsequent Minister would have it in his power to alter the forms in any
manner he pleased.

The second Bill, unlike the first, does establish forms of business; but
such alone as would effectually prevent the Council from being a
reality, and render it a useless pageant.

To make the Council a merely consultative body, without initiative,
before whom subjects are only brought after the Minister has made up his
mind, is already a fatal inroad upon its usefulness. But by the second
Bill the Council are not even a consultative body. The Minister is under
no obligation to consult them. They are not empowered to hold any
regular meetings. They are to meet only when the Minister convenes them,
or on a special requisition by six members. He may send orders to India
without their knowledge when the case is urgent, of which urgency he is
the sole judge. When it is not urgent, his orders must be placed in the
council-room for the perusal of the members for seven days, during which
they are not required, but permitted, to give their opinion, not
collectively, but individually. Their only power, therefore, is that of
recording dissent from a resolution not only taken, but embodied in a
despatch. And as if this was not enough, provision is made that an
office always invidious, shall be incapable of being fulfilled in any
but the most invidious manner. The members of Council must come forward
individually in declared opposition to the Minister, by volunteering a
protest against his announced intentions, or signing a requisition for a
meeting of Council to oppose them.7 Such a Council is fitted to serve as
a shield for the Minister’s responsibility when it may suit him to seek,
and them to accord, their adhesion, rather than as a restraint on his
power to administer India according to his individual pleasure.

The Directors are bound to admit, that the first of the Bills contains
several provisions indicative of a wish to assure to the Council a
certain, though small, amount of influence. The administration is to be
carried on in the name of the President in Council, and not, as by the
second Bill, in that of the Secretary of State alone.8 The Council, as
well as the President, has a voice in the appointment of the home
establishment; while in the second Bill all promotions and all
appointments to the principal offices under the Council, rest with the
Secretary of State, Edition: current; Page: [168] exclusively, a
provision which divests the Council of all control or authority over
their own establishment.9 Again, by section XII of the first Bill, no
grant involving increase of expenditure, and no appointment to office or
admission to service, can be made without the concurrence of half the
Council. This, as far as it goes, is a real power, but its value is much
diminished by the consideration that those by whom it is to be
exercised, are the nominees of the Minister, dependent on him for their
continuance in office after a few years.

In some other points the provisions of the second Bill seem to have the
advantage. Its Council is more numerous;10 to which, however, little
importance can be attached, if the Council has no substantial power. It
also recognizes that the whole of the Council ought not to be nominated
by the Minister, and that some part of it should be elected by a
constituency specially qualified by a knowledge of India.11 But even in
these, the best points of the Bill, it is, in the opinion of the
Directors, very far from unexceptionable. The nomination of even half
the Council by the Minister, takes away all security for an independent
majority. It may, indeed, be doubted whether there is any sufficient
reason for the Minister’s nominating any portion, except the supposed
reluctance of some eligible persons to encounter a canvass. The
proportion of one-third, whom the Minister now nominates to the Court of
Directors, seems the largest which, consistently with full security for
independence, can be so appointed.

The provision that each of the members nominated by the Crown shall be
selected as the representative of some particular branch of the service
in India, is still more objectionable. Not only would it preclude the
nomination of the most distinguished man, if the seat in Council
appropriated to the department in which he had served were not at the
time vacant, but it would introduce a principle which cannot be too
strongly deprecated,—that of class legislation. The Council should
comprise the greatest attainable variety of knowledge and experience,
but its members should not consider themselves as severally the
representatives of a certain number of class interests.

The clause which continues to the Proprietors the power of electing some
portion of the Council is, so far, deserving of support; and the
principle of enlarging the constituency by the addition of persons of a
certain length of Indian service and residence, is, in itself,
unexceptionable;12 but unless guarded by provisions, such as have never
yet been introduced into any electoral system, so large and scattered a
constituency as that proposed would greatly add to the inconvenience of
canvass, especially as it is not certain that the new electoral body
would adopt, from the old, the salutary custom of re-electing, as the
general Edition: current; Page: [169] practice, whoever has been once
chosen, and has not, by misconduct or incapacity, deserved to forfeit
their confidence. The duties of a Member of Council would be entirely
incompatible with a continually-recurring canvass of the constituency.

Respecting the proposition for giving the choice of five Members of
Council to the Parliamentary constituencies of five great towns,13 the
Court of Directors can only express a feeling of amazement. It is not
the mere fact of election by a multitude that constitutes the benefits
of the popular element in government. To produce those benefits, the
affairs of which the people are enabled to control the management must
be their own affairs. Election by multitudinous bodies, the majority of
them of a very low average of education, is not an advantage of popular
government, but, on the contrary, one of its acknowledged drawbacks. To
assign to such a constituency the control, not of their own affairs, but
of the affairs of other people on the other side of the globe, is to
incur the disadvantages of popular institutions without any of the
benefits. The Court of Directors willingly admit the desirableness, if
not necessity, of some provision for including an English element in the
Council of India; but a more objectionable mode than the one proposed of
attaining the object, could scarcely, in their opinion, be devised.

Besides the provisions which relate to the organ of Government in
England, the Bills contain provisions relating to India itself which are
open to the strongest objection.

The appointments to the Councils at Calcutta and at the subordinate
Presidencies, which are now made by the Court of Directors, with the
approbation of the Crown, are transferred by both Bills to the
Governor-General, and to the Governors of Madras and Bombay.14 The Court
of Directors are convinced that this change would greatly impair the
chances of good government in India. One of the causes which have most
contributed to the many excellences of Indian administration, is that
the Governor-General and Governors have always been associated with
Councillors selected by the authorities at home from among the most
experienced and able members of the Indian service, and who, not owing
their appointments to the head of the Government, have generally brought
to the consideration of Indian affairs an independent judgment. In
consequence of this, the measures of a Government, necessarily absolute,
have had the advantage, seldom possessed in absolute Governments, of
being always preceded by a free and conscientious discussion; while, as
the head of the Government has the power, on recording his reasons, to
act contrary to the advice of his Council, no public inconvenience can
ever arise from any conflict of opinion. These important officers, who,
by their participation in the Government, form so salutary a restraint
on the precipitancy of an inexperienced, or the wilfulness of a
despotically-tempered, Edition: current; Page: [170] Governor-General or
Governor, are henceforth to be appointed by the great functionary whom
they are intended to check. And this restraint is removed, when the
necessity for an independent Council will be greater than ever, since
the power of appointing the Governor-General, and of recalling him, is
taken away from the Company, and from the body which is to be their
substitute.15 It may be added, that the authorities at home have had the
opportunity of being acquainted with the conduct and services of
candidates for Council from the commencement of their career. The
Governor-General or Governor would often have to nominate a councillor
soon after their arrival in India, when necessarily ignorant of the
character and merits of candidates, and would be entirely dependent on
the recommendation of irresponsible advisers.

Another most objectionable provision demands notice, which is to be
found only in the second Bill. A commission, appointed in England, is to
proceed to India, for the purpose of inquiring and reporting on the
principles and details of Indian finance, including the whole revenue
system, and, what is inseparably involved in it, the proprietary rights
and social position of all the great classes of the community.16 The
Court of Directors cannot believe that such a project will be persisted
in. It would be a step towards the disorganization of the fabric of
government in India. A commission from England, independent of the local
government of the country, deriving its authority directly from the
higher power to which the local government is subordinate, and
instructed to carry back to the higher power information on Indian
affairs which the local government is not deemed sufficiently
trustworthy to afford, would give a most serious shock to the influence
of the local authorities, and would tend to impress all natives with the
belief that the opinions and decisions of the local government are of
small moment, and that the thing of real importance is the success with
which they can contrive that their claims and objects shall be advocated
in England. Up to the present time it has been the practice of the Home
Government to uphold in every way the authority of the governments on
the spot; even when reversing their acts, to do so through the
governments themselves, and to employ no agency except in subordination
to them.

From this review of the chief provisions of the Bills, which embody the
attempts of two great divisions of English statesmen to frame an organ
of government for India, it will probably appear to the Proprietors,
that neither of them is grounded on any sufficient consideration of past
experience, or of the principles applicable to the subject; that the
passing of either would be a calamity to India; and that the attempt to
legislate while the minds of leading men are in so unprepared a state,
is altogether premature.

The opinion of your Directors is, that by all constitutional means the
passing of Edition: current; Page: [171] either Bill should be opposed;
but that if one or the other should be determined on for the purpose of
transferring the administration, in name, from the East-India Company to
the Crown, every exertion should be used in its passage through
committee to divest it of the mischievous features by which both Bills
are now deformed, and to maintain, as at present, a really independent
Council, having the initiative of all business, discharging all the
duties, and possessing all the essential powers of the Court of
Directors. And it is the Court’s conviction, that measures might be so
framed as to obviate whatever may be well founded in the complaints made
against the present system, retaining the initiative of the Council, and
that independence of action on their part which should be regarded as
paramount and indispensable.




A Constitutional View of the India Question

the proposal to extinguish the East-India Company,1 and to place the
whole administration of India in the hands of a Minister and a Council,
without any substantial power, is an ominous advance in that
centralisation of all the functions of Government in the hands of the
Cabinet, so justly deprecated by the soundest thinkers, whether of
Liberal or Conservative opinions.

Next to a national representation, the most important of all political
principles is, that the only affairs directly administered by the
Imperial Government should be the general affairs of the nation; and
that all local affairs, whether they be those of any particular part of
the United Kingdom or of any foreign dependency, should, if possible, be
administered by some intermediate body, constituted expressly for the
purpose.

The general concerns of the empire are sufficient to occupy the whole
time and thoughts of her Majesty’s Ministers. They cannot possibly make
themselves properly acquainted with the affairs of every separate
locality or dependency of the empire. They are not, and cannot be,
appointed to office on account of their knowledge of the affairs of
localities or dependencies.

Besides, it is admitted that the only security for the good conduct of
any portion of the national affairs which is entrusted to Ministers,
lies in the control of Parliament. And with regard to the general
affairs of the empire, this control is efficacious. But Parliament, no
more than Ministers, has time either to study or to deliberate on local
affairs; and it is not in the nature of things that more than a few
members of Parliament should be well acquainted with, or feel any strong
interest in, the affairs of any particular locality. Local affairs,
therefore, unless when private interests were concerned, would generally
be left entirely to Ministers; and not only would they be almost sure to
be mismanaged, but the power and patronage which their management would
confer, and the habit engendered of looking entirely to the Ministers of
the Crown as the source of all authority, would be dangerous to the
liberty and safety of the nation.

These are not new doctrines, but the acknowledged principles of the
Edition: current; Page: [176] Constitution. All sound thinkers in other
countries are sensible of their value, and declare with one accord that
the power which the central Governments of the Continent exercise in
local affairs, and the dependence upon the Government of every
intermediate body which discharges important administrative functions,
are the great cause why the principal nations of the Continent, among
all their revolutions, have never yet succeeded in acquiring liberty.2

In England this evil has hitherto been avoided. The English people have
always managed their local affairs for themselves, without the
interference of the Government. Almost all the British Colonies have,
from their first foundation or acquisition, enjoyed in a great degree
the same advantage. They have had local Parliaments for their domestic
administration; and though a Minister in London long continued to
control and thwart the action of those local bodies, each colony as it
advanced in prosperity showed such a determination to emancipate itself
from the interference of the Imperial Government in affairs not of
Imperial interest, that they at last succeeded in attaining their
object.

The greatest dependency of the Crown, India, is, by general admission,
not capable of administering its own affairs by a representative system.
This, however, does not diminish, but increases, the mischief and danger
of its administration by the unchecked power of a Cabinet Minister.
There is far more danger in India than in any Colony, of the ignorant or
corrupt misuse of Ministerial power; because India is less understood
than any Colony, because its people are less capable of making their
voice heard, and because it is more difficult for Parliament to
interfere in its administration with adequate knowledge, than in the
affairs of any Colony.

India has hitherto been administered, under the general control of
Parliament, by a body, who holding aloof from the party conflicts of
English politics, devoted their whole time and energies to Indian
affairs. The great Corporation, which gained India for this country, has
hitherto been considered the best qualified to conduct its
administration, under the authority of the Crown, subject, when
necessary, to the veto of the Board of Control.

It is now proposed to abolish this intermediate body, and to impose upon
India the exclusive government of a Cabinet Minister, which every
important Colony has found it impossible to bear. The yoke of the old
Colonial Office, which the Colonies, one after another, have rejected
and thrown off, is to be laid upon India.

The reason assigned is, the supposed evil of double government and
divided responsibility.

Without discussing what is the value of these objections in the case of
India, it is sufficient to observe that they are applicable to every
British institution, under Edition: current; Page: [177] which any of
the affairs of the public are administered by an authority independent
of the Cabinet.

Already the management of the Light-houses of Great Britain by the
Corporation of the Trinity-House, a management which is the admiration
of Europe, is assailed as a “double government,” by (among others) a
member of the late Administration.3 The Trinity-House is apparently
marked out as the next victim.

The management of the poor, and the control of the poor-rates, are
shared between a Government Board and the local Boards of the various
Poor Law Unions.4 Double government; divided responsibility. Abolish the
Boards of Guardians. Concentrate all power in the Central Board. Let the
Crown appoint all overseers; and let them, under the Board’s orders, fix
the parochial rates, and exclusively control their expenditure.

The sanitary administration of towns is shared between a Government
Board, and the Corporations and other local authorities.5 Double
government; divided responsibility. Give all the power to the Board of
Health; allow the Board to construct works and establish sanitary
regulations at its pleasure, and to tax the inhabitants of the towns for
defraying the expense.

The popular education of the country is partly administered by the
Committee of Council for Education, and partly by private trustees or
voluntary associations.6 The schools of the country are mostly supported
by the one authority, and inspected by the other. Double government;
divided responsibility. Let no trustees or voluntary associations have
anything to do with schools. Place the whole responsibility on the
Committee of Council: let them maintain schools for the whole country,
levy school-rates to pay their expenses, appoint the teachers, and fix
the course of instruction.

There was lately a Railway Board; and its powers still exist, though
transferred to the Board of Trade.7 The general Government interferes
largely in the affairs of railway companies. Parliament sanctions the
lines, and fixes a maximum of rates. A Government officer inquires into
all accidents, and no line can be opened until declared safe by a
Government engineer. Double government; divided responsibility. Let the
Government take possession of all the railways; or let it appoint the
Edition: current; Page: [178] chairman of every railway company, and let
him govern, consulting or not the directors and proprietors, as he
pleases.

The highways, the gaols, the county rates, and the administration of
justice at sessions, are conducted by intermediate bodies—the Justices
of Peace. These are already nominated by the Minister (on the
recommendation of the Lord Lieutenant), and removable by him; but as it
is not usual to remove them except for proved misconduct, they are
practically independent, and in the exercise of their functions they are
not obliged to be the instruments of a Minister. This, in the opinion of
the enemies of double government, must be a great evil. Why should not
magistrates be appointed for six years only? Why should not the chairman
of sessions be appointed by the Crown, and all county business be
transacted by him and a few clerks; the other magistrates being only
summoned when he thinks fit, and, when summoned, their opinion being
only attended to if he chooses?

The general administration of justice is shared between a judge
appointed by the Crown, and a jury of citizens. Double government;
divided responsibility. Let the judge alone decide: if he pleases, he
may consult a jury; and if he pleases, he may adopt their verdict.

It is superfluous to carry the illustration further. If the cry of
Double Government is to prevail, none of the free institutions of this
country, except perhaps the House of Commons, are safe; and we may be
thankful if the principle is not applied to Parliament too. All
government, except the single government of one man, is double
government, or treble government, or quadruple government; and if the
people of England, in a case of such magnitude as India, allow this plea
to be successful, and the intermediate body which administers that
country under the Crown to be superseded by the undivided power of a
Minister and his subordinates, they will sanction a principle and
establish a precedent which they may before long have reason to regret.


Observations on the Proposed Council of India

the house of commons has virtually decided that the home administration
of India shall be carried on by a Minister of the Crown with the
assistance of a Council.

It is still to be determined in what manner the Council shall be
composed.

The three principal leaders of sections in Parliament, have proposed as
many different plans for the composition of the Council.

Lord Derby proposes that it should be partly nominated by the Minister,
and partly elected by a constituency.1

Lord Palmerston proposes that it should be wholly nominated by the
Minister, and that each member should hold office for only six years,
unless reappointed.2

Lord John Russell proposes that it should be wholly nominated by the
Minister, but that the members should hold office, like the judges,
during good behaviour, that is, virtually for life.3

Which of these is the preferable scheme?

The answer depends on whether it is intended that the Council to be
associated with the Minister, should be a check, or a screen.4 It will
necessarily be either the one or the other.

If it is intended to be a screen, Lord Palmerston’s plan deserves the
preference. The Council should be selected by the Minister, and should
be dependent on him for remaining in office.

But if it is to be anything else than a screen, independence must be
secured to it. For this purpose it is best of all, that either every
member of Council, or a preponderant majority, should be elected. But if
nominated, then it ought not to be in the power of any Minister to
remove them.

If any one thinks that it is a matter of small importance whether the
Council is independent or not, he must think that it is of small
consequence whether there is a Edition: current; Page: [182] Council or
not. For it is better there should be no Council at all, than a sham
Council.

But to suppose that the existence and the independence of the Council
are of little importance, is to overlook all the essential circumstances
of the case. The good government of India will entirely depend upon the
Council. If India is well governed, it will be because the Council will
be capable of well governing it: for the Minister, as distinguished from
the Council, usually will not.

All the requisites for the good government of India will be found in the
Council, if rightly composed. None of the requisites are likely to be
often found in the Minister to whom the tactics of party may transfer
the Indian Department.

The members of Council may be, and are intended to be, chosen for their
knowledge of India. The Minister is chosen because he has a
Parliamentary position, either from his rank, or from his powers of
speaking, which are more likely to have been exercised on any other
subject whatever than on India.

The Minister, before he has had time to learn his business, is out of
office. The Council may be, and ought to be, a permanent body.

Even while the Minister is in office, India will be one of the smallest
of his concerns. The maintenance in power of the Ministry and the party
to which he belongs, and the support of the general policy of the
Ministry and of the party, will be at all times his principal objects.
And these objects will not be much promoted by good government in India,
nor much impeded by bad; because neither the English Parliament, nor the
English public, will generally know anything either of the one or of the
other.

There is one point in which the Minister’s position is supposed to be
more favourable to good government than the position of the Council;
responsibility. But there cannot be a greater error. The sort of
responsibility to which the Minister is subject, is no security at all
for good government. The only way to make responsibility of any use, is
to impose the responsibility on the Council.

The Council, in the first place, has nothing to do with the general
business of the empire. It is concerned with India, and India only. All
its thoughts must be given to India. All the credit it can hope for,
must be derived from India only.

The Council, moreover, is or ought to be a permanent body. Its interest,
then, is identified with the permanent results of the mode in which
India is governed. Its estimation, its position in opinion, perhaps its
tenure of office, depend on permanent results. This is not the case with
the Minister. He will have ceased to be in office long before the
permanent results of his policy can disclose themselves; and when they
do disclose themselves, it will hardly be remembered, and perhaps will
hardly be distinguishable, whether his acts, or those of his
predecessors or successors, are accountable for them.

The responsibility of the Minister, therefore, will not depend on the
general results of his policy. He will seldom have either the credit of
them if they are good, or the discredit if bad. What is called his
responsibility to Parliament, will not be of Edition: current; Page:
[183] the kind which would maintain him in well-doing. It will operate
in a totally different manner. Its principal tendency will be, to make
him afraid of doing anything which any person who has the ear of the
House of Commons, opposes; or of opposing anything which any such person
demands. His responsibility will not be to Parliament, but to a few
speakers in Parliament. It will mean, liability to a debate in the House
of Commons. To get rid of a debate, by every sort of concession, will be
the course to which his responsibility will prompt him; for he will have
no reason to expect that he will be the person to answer for the
ultimate consequences of the concession. And on these occasions, it is
always the people of India who will be sacrificed. The people of India
have no means of interesting any one in standing up for them; while all
who prey upon the people of India have. It may be said, the Minister may
be a man of principle; he may disregard these considerations, and follow
his own conviction of right. But if he does so, it will not be in
consequence of his responsibility. It will be in spite of his
responsibility. It will be because he cares less for his responsibility
than for his duty.

It is believed that an examination of several recent instances in which
the responsibility for measures has been transferred from a Board out of
Parliament, to a Minister in it, would show, that the result has been
not to accelerate, but on the contrary, to arrest improvement. The
permanent Boards were identified with the general success of their
administration. The Minister is only responsible for keeping on good
terms with all individuals and all interests powerful enough to give him
trouble.




Practical Observations on the First Two of the Proposed Resolutions on the Government of India

1. that, as the territories under the government of the East-India
Company are by law to remain under such government only until Parliament
shall otherwise provide;

from the terms of this resolution it might be supposed that the renewal
of the Company’s powers in 1853 was a mere temporary arrangement, and
that the phrase “until Parliament should otherwise provide,”1 was the
expression of an intention on the part of Parliament to provide
otherwise, at some not remote period. But this is not the fact. As is
well known, the words were only used to show that the powers of the
Company were renewed for an indefinite period, and not, as on former
occasions, for a definite period of twenty years.

It is no peculiarity of the East-India Company’s authority, that it
exists only until Parliament shall otherwise provide. This is the case
with all our institutions; and is no more a reason for abolishing the
East-India Company, than for abolishing the courts of justice, or trial
by jury.

The first clause of the resolution thus appears to have for its object
to excuse the proposed change, by giving to be understood that its
expediency was duly considered and affirmed by a former Parliament,
though no such consideration or affirmation took place.

this House is of opinion that it is expedient that the transfer of such
government to the Crown should now take place,

The transfer of the “government” of India to the Crown is an improper
expression. The government of India, like that of all the rest of the
empire is already in the Crown. The Edition: current; Page: [188] power
of the Crown, when actually exercised, is more absolute in India than in
any other part of the British dominions, except perhaps Gibraltar, or
some other mere military position without any local institutions.

It is the administration, not the government of India, which is carried
on by the East-India Company; and the Company conducts it for and under
the Crown. It is the administration of India which it is proposed should
be taken from the Company, and made over bodily to a Minister of the
Crown; contrary to the whole practice of the Constitution, according to
which direct administration by the cabinet is limited to the general
affairs of the empire, all local affairs being, wherever possible,
administered by some intermediate body, constituted for the purpose, and
exclusively devoted to it.

in order that the direct superintendence of the whole empire may be
placed under one executive authority.

The superintendence of the empire by the Crown, so far as concerns
India, is as direct and complete already, as any change could make it.
The proposal is, that the superintendence should cease to be
“superintendence,” and should become direct administration. The word
superintendence, as used in the Resolution, only serves to shelter the
substitution of one idea for another totally distinct from it.

Is it true that the direct administration of all the affairs even of
England, is “under one executive authority”? On the contrary, it is
shared by a multitude of authorities.

The currency and paper credit of the country are, like all other great
national concerns, under the superintendence of the Crown. But they are
administered by the Bank of England.

The protection of the navigation of the country, by lighthouses, buoys,
etc., is a matter of far too great national importance not to be
superintended by the Crown; but it is administered by the corporation of
the Trinity House.

Edition: current; Page: [189]
The civil and criminal justice of the country is superintended by the
Crown, and in part even administered by judges whom the Crown nominates,
but whom it cannot remove. Justice however is also administered, not
only by the county magistrates, but by independent juries, in whose
appointment the Crown has no voice.

The public provision for the poor, and the levy and expenditure of the
poor-rates, are superintended by a Commissioner who is one of her
Majesty’s Cabinet Ministers; but they are administered by the Boards of
Guardians throughout the country, and by the parochial officers, under
the orders of the Boards of Guardians.

The railway communication of the country is superintended by her
Majesty’s Board of Trade; but it is administered by the Boards of
Directors of the various railway companies, under the provisions of
their several Acts of Parliament.

Finally, the colonies are superintended by the governors appointed by
the Crown; but, with some insignificant exceptions, they are
administered by local cabinets virtually chosen by the parliaments of
those colonies, and responsible to them, in the same manner as the
Cabinet of the British empire is responsible to, and is virtually chosen
by, the British Parliament.

So far therefore is the administration of India for and under the Crown
by an independent body, from being an exception to the general practice,
and an anomaly in the Constitution, that the exception and the anomaly
would lie in its being administered in any other manner. There is
scarcely a single department of the business of the empire, except the
army and navy, in which the authority of the cabinet is not shared and
in some degree checked, by some intermediate body. To establish the
authority of a Cabinet Edition: current; Page: [190] Minister single and
unchecked, over so vast a country as India, will be the introduction of
a new practice, dangerous in the extreme to the stability of our free
institutions, and subversive of the existing securities for the good
government of the empire.

2nd. That for this purpose it is expedient to provide, that her Majesty,
by one of her Principal Secretaries of State, shall have and perform all
the powers and duties relating to the government of India, which are or
may be now exercised and performed by the East-India Company, or by the
Court of Directors or Court of Proprietors of the said Company, either
alone or with the approbation of the Commissioners for the Affairs of
India.

This Resolution asserts two distinct propositions as if they were one
and the same. One is that her Majesty, by one of her Secretaries of
State, should have all the powers now held by the East-India Company.
The other is, that the Secretary of State should perform all the duties
now performed by the Company.

The first proposition is nothing new, and requires no new legislation.
The President of the Board of Control already has, with a few
exceptions, all the powers of the East-India Company. Whatever act the
Company can do, he also can do, except, in some cases, to incur expense;
and whatever act the Company does, can only be done with his assent,
except the recall of a Governor-General.

But, from possessing all the powers of the Company, to performing all
its duties, there is a wide interval. The duties of the Company consist
in initiating all Indian business, appointing all the highest
functionaries in India, and preparing all orders and despatches to India
for the approval of the Indian Minister. If Parliament resolves that
these duties ought to be performed by the Crown, it resolves that the
Minister of the Crown shall have the initiative, in addition to (what he
already possesses) the ultimate decision. It resolves that there shall
be no intermediate body which shall have any responsible share in the
administration of India. It reduces the council which is provided for in
the succeeding Resolutions, to a body of mere assessors, who may be
consulted or not, as the Indian Minister pleases, and who will, at most,
have no power but that of recording an unavailing dissent.

Edition: current; Page: [191]
The great and fatal change in the government of India, from a government
of constitutional checks to the autocracy of a Minister, will thus be
effected by the first two Resolutions. If these pass, whether the
remaining twelve are passed or not, will make very little practical
difference.

These considerations forcibly suggest the propriety of postponing the
first two Resolutions, until the other Resolutions shall have been
discussed. The first two pledge the House to transfer the whole duty of
administering India to an officer of the Crown. By the other
Resolutions, the House will be asked to provide aids, and frame rules,
to guide the officer of the Crown in the performance of the duty thus
intrusted to him. Would it not be wise in the House to begin by assuring
itself that these aids and rules are sufficient, before pledging itself
to confide the entire administration of a great portion of the British
empire to a single Minister?

The preamble of a Bill is usually the last part voted. In the present
case, the first two Resolutions are virtually a preamble; except that if
passed they would be binding on the House even if all the other
Resolutions were rejected; whereas the preamble of a Bill which does not
pass, is never considered binding.

The first Resolution will pledge the House to abolish the present organ
of Indian administration, before the House has begun to consider whether
it can frame any new organ preferable to the present. The House will
have bound itself to destroy the existing structure, before it has been
asked to decide what shall be the plan of the new.

The second Resolution will decide that the new scheme of administration
shall be the centralization of all functions in one man; before the
House has had an opportunity of Edition: current; Page: [192]
considering whether by any subsidiary organization, it can be made
possible for one man to fulfil all these functions, or safe to intrust
them to him.

The postponement therefore of the first two Resolutions, until the House
shall have discussed every provision of the new organization proposed by
the remaining Resolutions, seems called for by every consideration of
good sense and prudence.




The Moral of the India Debate

the proceedings at home, consequent on Lord Canning’s proclamation,1
have a most important bearing on the intended changes in the mode of
administering India. They are a timely warning, how a Minister governs
India, when he is under no check but responsibility to Parliament, and
how Parliamentary responsibility, when really enforced, is likely to
work.

In writing his despatch, Lord Ellenborough was in the position, in which
the Minister for India will always be, under the proposed new
constitutions.2 He was without a Council: or rather, he passed over his
Council. The despatch was in the Secret Department, that is to say, it
was not brought before the Court of Directors. There was no compulsion
on Lord Ellenborough to write on this subject in the Secret Department.
It would have been perfectly regular to lay the papers before the
Directors, and allow, or if necessary require them, to prepare a
despatch to the Governor-General on the proposed proclamation. But no
such despatch as Lord Ellenborough’s could have passed the Court of
Directors; nor could such a despatch have been substituted for theirs by
his authority as President, without giving rise to remonstrances and
protests which no Minister would have liked to see produced in
Parliament.

This despatch is therefore a fair specimen of what a Minister may do,
when he is at liberty to disjoin himself from his Council. Let us now
for a moment consider the despatch itself.

Observe, that it is the production of a man who is a favourable specimen
of an Indian Minister. He is not such a man as we may generally expect,
ignorant of India, appointed because a Cabinet office must be found for
him, and because public opinion will not allow him to be placed in any
other than that of Indian Minister. Again, the despatch was written with
the very best intentions. Not only Edition: current; Page: [196] was its
purpose good, but its principles were sound. Its principles were, to
stigmatize confiscation, and condemn vindictive severity against a
conquered enemy.

Wherein then did the despatch err? Its epigrammatic style was a minor
fault, to which importance was only given by the publication of the
despatch. Its errors were substantial and serious.

In the first place it gave Lord Canning no benefit from his
well-ascertained and dearly-earned character for mercy. It did not allow
the presumption drawn from the whole of his past conduct, to count in
explanation of the particular act incriminated. If instead of firmly
resisting the ravenous cry for blood, which by its effects has nearly
rendered the good government of India impossible for a generation to
come, Lord Canning had implicitly yielded to that savage howl, a worse
interpretation could scarcely have been put on his intentions, than Lord
Ellenborough hastened to put upon a single unexplained act of the man
who had merited the designation of “Clemency Canning.”

But the despatch had another fault no less grave, and which would have
been equally a fault, even if Lord Canning had been less deserving of
consideration. In a time of emergency, it arrested a policy in
mid-course. There could be no doubt that Lord Canning had made a
deliberate choice among several modes of action, each of which had its
peculiar advantages. Lord Ellenborough might think that he had not
chosen the best; but unless he was totally unfit to be Governor-General,
the course he selected must have had some considerable recommendations,
some chances, to say the least, of attaining the object. To have
instructed him beforehand not to adopt that course, would have been one
thing, which might have been either wise or foolish. But to stop him
when he had adopted it, and committed himself to it, but before it had
produced its results, was to throw away the chances of good which that
course held out, without gaining those of any other. It was as if the
Minister, under the belief that it would have been better to clear
Rohilcund before attacking Oude, had by telegraph recalled Sir Colin
Campbell from the gates of Lucknow.3

Contrast with this the conduct of the Court of Directors.

A few days after the date of Lord Ellenborough’s despatch, but without
being aware of it, they framed instructions to Lord Canning respecting
the treatment of the Oude insurgents, which have been laid before
Parliament, and which embodied all the sound and humane principles of
the despatch, without its irritating language.4 As soon as they were
made acquainted with the unmerited censure passed on Lord Canning, they
recorded a vote of undiminished confidence Edition: current; Page: [197]
in his merciful intentions.5 They thus combined the inculcation of what
is admitted to be the right rule of conduct, with full justice to the
functionary who was prematurely charged with having infringed it.

This is what took place under the calumniated double government. Lord
Ellenbourgh’s despatch exemplifies the single government of a Minister
responsible only to Parliament.

Let us now consider the second lesson to be derived from these
proceedings; the light which they throw on the natural working of the
boasted Parliamentary responsibility. For, through the rare accident
that a Ministry is in office which does not possess a majority in the
House of Commons, the present has happened to be the one case in a
thousand in which the responsibility is real. The Minister really has
lost office in consequence of his despatch.6 Now see at what price this
result has been obtained.

In the first place, the greatest practical evil of the despatch arose
from the publicity given to it. As long as its existence was a secret
between Lord Canning and the Minister, it might have tied his hands in
an emergency, but it could not have impaired his influence in India, and
his justification might have arrived in time to change the reproof into
approbation. But the publication of the despatch, which the Government
itself condemns, and which all agree in regarding as the worst part of
what has taken place, is the direct consequence of the accountability to
Parliament. But for that accountability, Mr. Bright would not have asked
for the despatch,7 nor would Lord Ellenborough have produced it. Neither
was this premature publicity a casual consequence. It will be a natural
and frequent one, when there is no check upon the administration of
India except the control of Parliament. If the Minister is to be called
to account there for the mistakes he commits in governing India, it must
be done immediately. What Minister ever was censured by Parliament for
the part he took in events long past and gone? His party opponents will
seize on the subject while the public mind is intent on it; and unless
he is strong enough to defy responsibility, all he has done or written
will be published then, and will then become the text of criminatory or
defensive declamation; while the effect of the publicity on the
interests of India, or on the security of our empire there, will be
secondary to the important question, whether one man, or another much
the same as he, shall sit for a while on the Treasury bench.

The accountability of Ministers to Parliament was carried into effect in
this instance by a debate of one night’s duration in the House of Lords,
and three nights Edition: current; Page: [198] in the House of Commons.8
A full half of the discussion, and the whole of the result, turned not
upon India, but upon whether Members of Parliament desired, for English
purposes, that Lord Derby’s Government should or should not continue in
office. Had it been known beforehand which of these was the desire of
the majority, the issue of the debate could have been predicted. It
issued in nothing at all, because neither party knew, and both shrunk
from having it brought to the test of a division, whether there was a
majority or not for turning Lord Derby out of office. This fortunate
uncertainty has prevented great mischief. For if the debate had ended in
any vote, that vote would have been understood in India either as a
condemnation of clemency, or as a condemnation (followed probably by the
resignation) of Lord Canning, the patron of clemency. Even as it is, the
mischief is not trifling. On those great questions relating to the
future government of India on which it was of the utmost importance that
England should seem to be unanimous, she has been held forth as divided.
Our enemies in Europe have been supplied with a fresh stock of calumnies
against us from our own lips; while all Indian malcontents have had
arguments put into their mouths which they themselves would never have
dreamt of, and have been encouraged to hope that they may make or find a
party in Parliament. All respect and fear of England as a nation will be
materially weakened in the East; for, that there may be firm action
notwithstanding divided councils, or that a government can be really
formidable which allows itself to be bearded and its acts railed at to
its face, is a truth which it requires a much higher civilization than
that of Orientals to understand or credit.

All these things are necessary results of the play of the machinery
through which Parliamentary responsibility operates. And if all other
checks are taken away, these results may be expected more and more. No
one denies it to be necessary that Parliamentary responsibility should
exist in reserve; but the object should be, to dispense as much as
possible with the need of actual recourse to it, by providing another
restraint; a restraint acting before the mischief is done, not after,
and producing its effect not by acrimonious controversy in the face of
the world, but by peaceful discussion in a council-room. This can only
be done by giving the Minister an independent Council, having the
initiative of business, and by making it impossible for him to take any
important measure without first listening to their advice.


A President in Council the Best Government for India

there are two political functions devolving on the British nation. It
has to provide for its own government; and for the government of the
much more extensive and populous countries which are dependent on it.

The majority however of its dependencies it has, wisely and necessarily,
divested itself of the duty of governing; having found, after long
trial, that it was unable to govern them satisfactorily. The only great
outlying possession of the British Crown which is not now left
substantially to its own government, is India.

The question is, in what manner Great Britain can best provide for the
government, not of three or four millions of English colonists, but of
150 millions of Asiatics, who cannot be trusted to govern themselves.
This is evidently a far more difficult task, than the one which the
British nation acknowledges itself to have failed in. It is not likely
that the very plan which has failed everywhere else, should be perfectly
sufficient and satisfactory in the case in which the difficulties are
the greatest. One would say, even before the subject is considered, that
if success can be attained in such a case, it must be by some
arrangement much more carefully and nicely adapted to the purpose.

Consider in what way the government of England itself is conducted. The
English people may be supposed to know something of their own affairs.
It may also be reasonably presumed that they feel an interest in them.
They have every possible means of making their necessities, their
grievances, and their opinions, known. When they have any wish in regard
to their own Government, they usually demonstrate the wish in a thousand
channels, by the press, petitions, and public meetings, before the
Government takes the first step on the subject. And if the Government
adopts any measure which the people, or even any fraction of the people,
consider injurious to their interest, the first announcement causes it
to be at once questioned in the press and in the House of Commons, and
if general opinion is unfavourable there is time for the measure to be
stopped before it has come into practical effect. These securities, as
we know and lament, do not always prevent bad measures; but they do, for
the most part, suffice to prevent inconsiderate ones. No Government
feels it safe, in the home affairs of England, to take any step likely
to lead to serious consequences, without previous weighing and
deliberation. The checks do not operate so quickly in foreign affairs,
and therefore it is generally felt Edition: current; Page: [202] that
foreign, much more than home affairs, are conducted according to the
individual and private preferences of the Minister, and much less
according to either the interests or the wishes of the nation.

But in the government of India by a Parliamentary Minister, none of the
checks exist at all. The public are never likely to hear of what is
meditated, until actually done. When done, they seldom hear of it until
the mischief, if there be mischief, is in part accomplished, and its
reversal may be attended with greater evils than that of allowing it to
subsist. Even when they do hear of it, they scarcely ever obtain, until
long afterwards, the materials for judging whether the measure was right
or wrong. There would be all these difficulties in controlling the
Minister, even if the public and Parliament were deeply interested and
intent on Indian affairs. But, on the contrary, all except a few are in
general entirely without interest in the subject, because they have no
knowledge of it, and because their time and attention are taken up by
things nearer at hand. Among the few who do attend to the subject,
neither the public nor Parliament have the means of distinguishing those
who, from character and knowledge, have the best claim to be followed as
guides. A Minister, probably very little acquainted with the questions
which he is to decide, has nothing to compel him either to study them
and deliberate on them in his own mind, or to attend to the suggestions
of those who have already studied them, except a nominal responsibility
to a body who have no means of accurate knowledge, and who are in
general too indifferent to the subject to apply to it even such
knowledge as they might obtain.

It is in circumstances like these that Parliament is asked to give over
India to the sole government of a Minister, usually altogether ignorant
of it when first appointed, and changed every two or three years. And it
is gravely said that we need not fear to confide absolute power to
absolute ignorance, in reliance that if the natural effects follow,
Parliament will punish the Minister for his misconduct.

As it cannot be desired that the policy of the Indian Government should
be a policy of ignorance, or that it should be changed every time a
Minister is promoted or turned out; and as there is no public or
Parliament to supply knowledge of Indian affairs, as knowledge of
English affairs is in some measure supplied, the knowledge must be
furnished to the Minister in his own office. There must be in the
department itself a body which knows India, and is the guardian and
conservator of the principles of administration which experience has
approved, or which knowledge sanctions. Those who object to a Council
constituted for the purpose, must intend that the clerks in the office
should be this body. But the proposal to confide the habitual Government
of India to persons whom the public generally do not know even by name,
and never know whether their advice is taken or not, is rather
remarkable as coming from the zealots for responsibility. The real
friends of responsibility are those who would have this function
exercised by a Council, who can be made responsible.

But a Council which the Minister need not consult, will be little
better, if not worse, than leaving him with no other competent advisers
than the clerks in his Edition: current; Page: [203] office. He cannot
shelter his own responsibility behind the clerks. They cannot serve him
as a screen. The Council may. And if it is left to him to determine
their functions, that is the chief use to which he will probably apply
them. In no one of the three plans brought before the House of Commons
by its accustomed leaders,1 is there any inducement given to the
Minister for consulting the Council, if he has reason to expect that
they will differ from him in opinion. Lord Ellenborough has very truly
and laudably said, that the Minister will want their support, to protect
India from the mistakes of Parliament and of English opinion.2 But India
needs protection also against the Minister’s own mistakes. Parliament,
however misled, can only exert its power slowly, and after discussion:
the Minister, in half an hour, may issue a despatch, the evil
consequences of which years may not suffice to cure. If the Council is
fit to support the Minister when he is right, it will be fit to check
him when wrong. And its support is not likely to carry any weight when
it agrees with him, if it is not allowed to differ, or is not asked its
opinion unless willing to agree.

To make the Council a real security for good government, all business
which requires deliberation, or admits of difference of opinion, ought
to be transacted by the Minister in Council. It is on this principle
that the British Government in India itself is constructed, and it works
most effectively. The Governor-General, or the Governor of a Presidency,
performs his manifold duties in conjunction with Councillors, not of his
own nomination. They are appointed, theoretically, by the same authority
which appoints himself; but practically by a different authority, the
Governor-General or Governor being in fact selected by the Queen’s
Minister, the Members of Council by the Court of Directors. As an
ordinary rule, all questions are decided in Council according to the
opinion of the majority; but their opinion is not binding on the head of
the government. When he pleases, he can, recording his reasons, set
aside the opinion of the Council, and act on his own sole
responsibility; but he must go through a particular form for that
purpose, which gives a deliberate, and in some degree a solemn,
character to the act. On this system the members of Council feel
themselves a real and substantial element in the government; their best
thoughts are given to every question which presents itself, their
opinion is recorded and has its just weight, while they have no power of
authoritatively opposing themselves to the deliberate opinions and
purposes of the head of the government.

The same principle, applied to the home administration, would give
probably the Edition: current; Page: [204] best organ of Government for
India, which circumstances admit of. The authority should be that of the
President, but of the President in Council. The deliberation should be
as much that of the whole body, as if the body and not the head had the
power of deciding in the last resort. The general practice in that case
would probably be, to decide, (as at Calcutta,) according to the sense
of the majority, the President’s vote only counting for one. But he
would have the power, after he had consulted his Council, on declaring
his intention in a prescribed form, and recording his reasons, to act on
his own separate opinion in opposition to theirs. According to this
plan, the ordinary conduct of business falls by the natural working of
things, without any special provision for the purpose, into the hands of
those who know most of the subject; and the minds which really determine
what is done, are associated, as they ought to be, in the
responsibility. Yet the Minister’s responsibility, even for the ordinary
business, would never be felt to be impaired, no more than the
responsibility of Lord Wellesley or Lord Dalhousie was impaired by the
advisers with whom they were associated; while the Minister would be
subjected to an additional and special responsibility, when he chose to
set aside his Council. And this is surely right. If there be any case
whatever in which deliberation, and a sense of responsibility, are
peculiarly necessary, it is when one man, often not qualified by special
training, assumes to be a better judge of a subject, than a body of men
expressly selected for their knowledge of it, and their competency to
advise on it.




Letter from the East India Company to the President of the Board of Control

my lord,

1. Although the Bill which has been newly brought in by Her Majesty’s
Ministers “for the better government of India”1 has not yet been
formally communicated to the Court of Directors, the Court, influenced
by the desire which they have already expressed to give all aid in their
power towards rendering the scheme of government which it is the
pleasure of Parliament to substitute for the East India Company as
efficient for its purposes as possible, have requested us to lay before
your Lordship, and through you before Her Majesty’s Government, a few
observations on some portions of the Bill.

2. Having in documents which have been presented to Parliament expressed
their sentiments fully on all the general features of the subject,2 the
Court refrain from offering any further arguments on points upon which
the Government and the House of Commons seem to have pronounced a
decided opinion. The joint government of a minister and a council,
composed in majority of persons of Indian experience, deriving their
appointments only partially from ministerial nomination, and all of them
holding office on a tenure independent of the minister, is a combination
which fulfils, to a considerable extent, the conditions of a good organ
of government for India. The Court would have much preferred that in the
constitution of the Council more extensive recourse had been had to the
elective principle. But if they cannot hope that this course will be
adopted, they see many advantages in the provision by which one-half the
number, instead of being named by the Government, will be selected by a
responsible body, intimately connected with India, to whom the
qualifications of candidates will in general be accurately known, and
who will be under strong inducements to make such a choice as will tend
to increase the credit and consideration of the body.3

3. With regard to the qualifications prescribed for members of council,
the Edition: current; Page: [208] Court desire to offer a suggestion.
Her Majesty’s present Government have, on many occasions expressed a
desire to secure the Crown appointments against the evils of abuse of
patronage. The security against such abuse has hitherto consisted in the
strict limitation of the appointments to persons who have served a
considerable number of years in India. While the Court fully agree with
Her Majesty’s Government in recognising the desirableness of an English
element, it does not seem to them advisable that this element should
extend to nearly half the Council, only a bare majority being reserved
for persons of Indian experience. Knowledge of India is, after all, the
most important requisite for a seat in the Indian Council: while it is
chiefly in the English nominations that there is any present danger lest
appointments should be obtained through political or parliamentary
influence; from which influence, unless introduced through that channel,
the Council, like the Court of Directors, may be expected to be
altogether free. The Court, therefore, recommend that the qualification
of ten years’ Indian service or residence4 be made imperative on at
least two-thirds instead of a mere majority of the fifteen members of
council. They also think it questionable if the interests of India will
be promoted by the exclusion of the whole of the Members of the Council
from seats in Parliament.5 These are the only modifications which we are
requested to suggest in the provisions respecting the composition of the
Council.

4. But we lament to see that the clauses which define its functions are
liable to far greater objections. From the sentiments which have been
publicly expressed both by your Lordship6 and by other Members of the
Administration, as well as from the terms of clause 19, which declare
that the Council, under the direction of the Secretary of State, is to
“conduct the business transacted in the United Kingdom in relation to
the Government of India and the correspondence with India,” the Court
are persuaded that Her Majesty’s Government regard the Council, not as a
body without regular functions or duties, whom the Minister is at full
liberty habitually to disregard, but as a substantive part of the
working organ of government. It is therefore incumbent on the Court to
represent to your Lordship that the details of the Bill not only do not
carry out this conception, but would appear to be inconsistent with it.

5. It is hardly necessary to remark that the Council cannot “conduct the
business transacted in the United Kingdom in relation to the Government
of India and the correspondence with India,” unless provision be made
for their meeting regularly at short intervals to dispose of the
business as it arises. The Bill, however, makes no provision for any
regular or periodical meetings of the Council, but leaves the time of
convening it, and even the convening it at all, to the entire discretion
of the Secretary of State, saving the case necessarily exceptional of a
requisition in Edition: current; Page: [209] writing by five members,
which would impose on the requisitionists the necessity of appearing to
place themselves in a posture of opposition to him.7

6. By the 16th clause the Council are denied all power over the
establishment, beyond the first appointments to junior clerkships and
inferior offices, all promotions being made by the Secretary of State
alone, and the appointment of secretaries or assistant secretaries and
heads of departments being wholly reserved to him. While the officers,
including those whose duty it is to prepare drafts of despatches, are
thus entirely withdrawn from the control of the Council; the Bill does
not even provide that the drafts, when prepared, shall, as a matter of
necessity, be considered and discussed in Council. It only provides that
they shall, seven days before being sent to India, be placed in the
Council room for inspection by the Members, to afford them an
opportunity for the invidious office of recording objections; and this
power of dissent from a measure or a document already sanctioned by the
Minister, is the only positive function which the Bill secures to the
Council.8 It is obvious that the same comments which, if made in the
early stage of the proceedings, before the Minister has made up his
mind, have the character of cordial and zealous co-operation, will, if
delayed until his intentions have been declared, assume the aspect of
opposition or remonstrance, and are therefore much less likely either to
be made at all, or if made, to be of any efficacy, unless by way of a
protest.

7. The Court submit that the only mode by which the direct action of the
Minister and the substantive existence of the Council as a co-operating
body, can be brought into complete harmony, would be by enacting that
all ordinary business, and as far as possible all business, shall be
transacted by the Minister in Council. A perfect and most successful
example of this mode of transacting business is afforded by the Local
Government of India. All business is as a matter of course transacted by
the Governor-General, or Governor in Council, and, as a general rule,
the decision is according to the vote of the majority. But the
Governor-General, or Governor, has the power of setting aside the
decision, on assuming the formal responsibility and recording his
reasons. No inconvenience of any kind has ever been experienced from
this arrangement; it has never been found either to hamper the
discretion, or in any degree impair the responsibility of the head of
the Government. It cannot be doubted that the Minister for India would
find the same advantage from this principle in superintending the
Administration, which a Wellesley and a Dalhousie found in conducting it
in all its complicated details.

8. The Court see no reason for withdrawing from the deliberation and
knowledge of the Council even such subjects as are at present disposed
of through the Secret Committee. It is their conviction that the power
of carrying into effect Edition: current; Page: [210] measures of the
highest importance without the advice, or even the knowledge of the
Court of Directors, has been the source in times past of some of the
greatest errors, and of the greatest calamities, which are recorded in
our Indian history; and they earnestly recommend that a barrier be
raised against the future exercise of this dangerous power, and that
since it may be presumed that the Council will possess the confidence of
Her Majesty’s Ministers, the right and duty of advice be vested in the
Council on all subjects of Indian administration, without excepting, as
hitherto, from their cognizance, some of the most important of all.

9. The Court are of opinion that, on all questions regarding
expenditure, the Council should have more than a consultative voice, and
that these questions should be an exception to the power which the
Secretary of State will in all other cases possess, of setting aside
their opinion. The disposal of the entire revenues of India by the mere
fiat of a minister, freed from the necessity of the assent of any
co-ordinate authority, would, the Court conceive, be neither consistent
with the principles of the constitution, nor conducive to the good
administration of the Indian finances. The propriety of allowing to the
Council in this one department a negative voice, was recognised in one
of the Bills introduced into Parliament,9 and the omission to include
such a provision in the present Bill is, the Court hope, only the effect
of inadvertence.

10. The Court think it of great importance that the Council should be
associated with the Minister in deciding on appointments to the higher
as well as the inferior situations of the establishment, and on the
position and the remuneration of the officers. They deem this important,
both for securing the due influence of the Council over the
establishment, and for promoting the legitimate interests of the
officers themselves, with whose merits and services the Council, being a
permanent body, is likely to possess a more intimate and detailed
acquaintance than will generally be possessed by the Secretary of State.

11. The Court would also suggest that the Vice-President, who is to
preside over the Council in the absence of the Secretary of State,
should be chosen periodically by the Secretary of State in Council, but
not by the Minister alone, it being of importance that this officer
should possess the confidence of the Council, and should be their
representative with the Minister in the intervals of their sittings.

12. There are other provisions not connected with the functions of the
Council which the Court greatly regret to see transferred from the
former into the present Bill. By one of these, forming clause 29, the
Governments in India itself are radically altered in constitution, and
their most characteristic excellence destroyed. Instead of a
Governor-General or Governor and an independent Council, appointed by
the authority to which he is himself responsible, the Government is now
to consist of the Governor-General or the Governor, and advisers
selected by himself. The Court have reason to believe that this proposal
has met with Edition: current; Page: [211] unanimous reprobation in
India, and they would regard its adoption as one of the most fatal blows
which could be struck against good government in that country. The
association of the head of the government with advisers not of his own
choice, but chosen for him by superior authority, has given to a
government, necessarily absolute, an advantage rarely possessed by
absolute governments, and the absence of which in India would be
peculiarly mischievous; that of free, unrestrained, and conscientious
discussion and deliberation. This advantage would be entirely sacrificed
if the head of the government selected his constitutional advisers.
Advisers who will merely echo his own opinions he can never want; what
he is in need of are advisers who will think for themselves; who by the
collision of judgments will cause subjects to be examined in a variety
of lights; who will correct his mistakes, complete what is imperfect in
his information, and whose very errors will be useful by being of a
different kind from his own. Such are not the colleagues whom, even with
the best intentions, that high functionary can safely be relied on for
selecting; not to mention that for some time after his first arrival he
will not be in a condition to distinguish such persons, even if he looks
out for them.

13. The 48th clause proposes the appointment by the Crown of an auditor
of the home accounts; a provision which, if carried into effect, must
materially interfere with the independent action of the new government,
and the necessity of which is completely obviated by the existing system
both of pre-audit and post-audit, which is recognised and apparently
approved in the 47th clause of the Bill, and which system would be
greatly weakened by the introduction of a distinct auditor, acting under
another authority.

14. The Court regret that it should be contemplated by the 50th clause
to send a Commission to India to inquire and report to Her Majesty, on
many important branches of Indian administration, passing over the local
governments. It is impossible that such persons, however judiciously
chosen, should collect in three years a tithe of the information which
already exists so abundantly on the records of the Home Government, and
is daily added to by the labours of the ablest functionaries in India;
while their appearance in the country will be considered as opening up
for re-consideration all the vital questions included in “the
collection, receipt, and management of the revenues,” as well as “the
application of such revenues and public moneys in India:”10 the first,
embracing the whole subject of the landed tenures and proprietary and
possessory rights of the agricultural population, the other, the entire
economy of the public resources, whether in relation to civil or
military administration, public works, the contraction or liquidation of
debt, or any other of the multifarious matters which require to be
decided by a finance minister. The Court are as desirous as Her
Majesty’s Government that all practicable and well devised improvements
should be made in Edition: current; Page: [212] these branches of
administration, and many such have been, and are even now being, made;
but they are convinced that the proper mode of making these improvements
is through the Governments on the spot, by whose instrumentality alone
India can be governed or held, and whose ascendancy it is of the utmost
importance to maintain, by making all orders and all benefits which
proceed from the supreme authority, flow through them as the
intermediate channel.

15. The Court are also apprehensive that the effect of clause 34 may be
to remove from the Military College at Addiscombe the education of
cadets for the engineers and artillery. That College has, during a long
course of years, been most successful in training highly qualified
cadets for the scientific branches, a result greatly attributable to the
earnest competition for engineer and artillery appointments which exists
within the College amongst the cadets appointed to it; and the Court
would consider any change which involved the transfer of the education
for these branches from the Military College to private establishments
as being injurious to the public service.

16. These are the observations which, by the desire of the Court, we
take the liberty of submitting to your Lordship, and we hope to be
favoured with a communication from your Lordship of the intentions of
Ministers on the several points hereinbefore adverted to, at a
sufficiently early period to admit of their taking any further measures
which may be necessary for bringing their views before Parliament.




Maine on Village Communities

this book is an important contribution to a branch of knowledge in which
the author is as yet unrivalled—the philosophy of the history of
institutions. It pursues into ulterior developments (at least in one
great department, that of property) the line of research and speculation
so brilliantly commenced in Ancient Law: its Connection with the Early
History of Society, and its Relation to Modern Ideas.1 It is superfluous
at this time of day to say anything either in the way of information or
of recommendation, concerning a treatise which has already become
classical; but we may remark that its title indicates the double aspect
of the important vein of thought which it has opened—the historical
aspect, and the practical: the light which it throws on the ancient
condition of mankind, and the intimate connection which it establishes
between “the early history of society” and “modern ideas,” through the
connection of both of them with “ancient law,” the great transmitter
(next to religion) of influences from a barbarous age to a civilised
one. Political thinkers, who at one time may have been over-confident in
their power of deducing systems of social truth from abstract human
nature, have now for some time shown a tendency to the far worse
extreme, of postponing the universal exigencies of man as man, to the
beliefs and tendencies of particular portions of mankind as manifested
in their history. But if so much weight is attached to these historical
characteristics, it is most essential to inquire how they came to be
what they are; which of them are grounded in permanent necessities of
humanity, and which are but relics of facts and ideas of the past, not
applicable to the present. In this point of view, the historical truths
brought into so strong a light by Mr. Maine have more than an historical
value. Though assuredly not written with a view to any such purpose, his
Ancient Law is a most powerful solvent of a large class of conservative
prejudices, by pointing out the historical origin not only of
institutions, but also of ideas, which many believe to be essential
elements of the conception of social order.

The lesson is not less instructive, when the result of the researches is
to prove, not that institutions and ideas belonging to past times have
been unduly prolonged into an age to which they are unsuitable, but that
old institutions and ideas have been set aside in favour of others of
comparatively modern origin. For this result, as much as the other,
strikes at the tendency to accept the existing order of things as
Edition: current; Page: [216] final—as an indefeasible fact, grounded on
eternal social necessities. The question is opened whether the older or
the later ideas are best suited to rule the future; and if the change
from the one to the other was brought about by circumstances which the
world has since outgrown—still more if it appears to have been in great
part the result of usurpation—it may well be that the principle, at
least, of the older institutions is fitter to be chosen than that of the
more modern, as the basis of a better and more advanced constitution of
society. A question of this nature in regard to property in land is
raised by Mr. Maine’s new work; which has clearly shown that the
absolute ownership, which constitutes the idea of landed property as
commonly conceived in England, is both modern as to time and partial as
to place.

Having been called, subsequently to the publication of Ancient Law, to
take part in legislating for a country far less widely removed than
civilised Europe from that early state of society which it is usual to
call “primitive,” Mr. Maine found that the state of things in regard to
landed property which exists in India wherever it has not been disturbed
by British legislation, is strikingly in accordance with that which
recent historical investigations prove to have once existed in what are
now the most advanced communities. The obstinate persistence of custom
in India makes that country “the great repository of verifiable
phenomena of ancient usage and ancient juridical thought” (p. 22), well
worth studying, therefore, by all students of human nature and history,
and by all English lawyers who consider “the study of historical and
philosophical jurisprudence” not alien to their pursuit. The value of
Mr. Maine’s book for this purpose is the greater, since much of his
materials has not yet found its way into books, but is derived from the
“large and miscellaneous official literature” in the records of the
Indian Government, and from “the oral conversation of experienced
observers who have passed their maturity in administrative office.”

The inferences suggested [says Mr. Maine] by the written and oral
testimony would perhaps have had interest for few except those who had
passed, or intended to pass, a life in Indian office; but their
unexpected and (if I may speak of the impression on myself) their most
startling coincidence with the writers who have recently applied
themselves to the study of early Teutonic agricultural customs, gives
them a wholly new value and importance.2 It would seem that light is
pouring from many quarters at once on some of the darkest passages in
the history of law and of society. To those who knew how strong a
presumption already existed that individual property came into existence
after a slow process of change, by which it disengaged itself from
collective holdings by families or Edition: current; Page: [217] larger
assemblages, the evidence of a primitive village system in the Teutonic
and Scandinavian countries had very great interest; this interest
largely increased when England, long supposed to have had since the
Norman Conquest an exceptional system of property in land, was shown to
exhibit almost as many traces of joint ownership and common cultivation
as the countries of the north of the Continent; but our interest
culminates, I think, when we find that these primitive European tenures
and this primitive European tillage constitute the actual working system
of the Indian village communities, and that they determine the whole
course of Anglo-Indian administration.

(Pp. 61-2.)

The ancient Teutonic cultivating community, as it existed in Germany
itself, appears to have been thus organised. It consisted of a number of
families, standing in a proprietary relation to a district divided into
three parts. These three portions were the Mark of the Township or
Village, the Common Mark or waste, and the Arable Mark or cultivated
area. The community inhabited the village, held the Common Mark in mixed
ownership, and cultivated the Arable Mark in lots appropriated to the
several families.

(P. 78.)

Of these the Village Mark was the only one of which the several portions
were individual property in the modern English sense. The ownership of
the Common Mark was “a strict ownership in common, both in theory and in
practice. When cattle grazed on the common pasture, or when the
householder felled wood in the common forest, an elected or hereditary
officer watched to see that the common domain was equitably enjoyed.”
(P. 79.) But it will be more of a surprise to many readers to learn that
the arable land also was held and cultivated on the same principle of
common ownership. The Arable Mark “seems always in theory to have been
originally cut out of the Common Mark, which, indeed, can only be
described as the portion of the village domain not appropriated to
cultivation” [p. 79]; and the Arable Mark “was occasionally shifted from
one part of the general village domain to another” (p. 81).

The cultivated land of the Teutonic village community appears almost
invariably to have been divided into three great fields. A rude rotation
of crops was the object of this threefold division, and it was intended
that each field should lie fallow once in three years. . . . Each
householder has his own family lot in each of the three fields, and this
he tills by his own labour, and that of his sons and his slaves. But he
cannot cultivate as he pleases. He must sow the same crop as the rest of
the community, and allow his lot in the uncultivated field to lie fallow
with the others. Nothing he does must interfere with the right of other
households to have pasture for sheep and oxen in the fallow and among
the stubbles of the fields under tillage.

(Pp. 79-80.)

The evidence seems to show “that the original distribution of the arable
area was always into exactly equal portions, corresponding to the number
of free families in the township. Nor can it be seriously doubted, upon
the evidence, that the proprietary equality of the families composing
the group was at first still further secured by a periodical
redistribution of the several assignments.” (P. 81.) This periodical
redistribution has continued to our own day in the Russian villages, and
“there appears to be no country inhabited by an Aryan race” in which
traces of it do not remain [p. 82].

It is to “the school of German writers, among whom Von Maurer is the
most Edition: current; Page: [218] eminent” (p. 21), that we are
indebted for the establishment of this important portion of the ancient
history of society in relation to the Teutonic countries. Its extension
to England is mainly the work of Professor Nasse, of Bonn, whose
valuable treatise is about to be made, by translation, conveniently
accessible to the ordinary English reader.3 But the simple statement of
the ancient practice of Teutonic cultivation brings at once to the mind
of any one acquainted with English rural usages, the traces of a similar
village constitution in England. The remains of the former collective
ownership of the lands of a village still linger among us under the
denominations of Common Fields and Lammas lands.

Our law books trace all landed tenures in England to a feudal grant.
From such grant, either actual or presumed, they all technically
proceed; and the law writers seldom trouble themselves with anything
anterior. But there were landed possessions and landed rights in England
before there was feudality. The feudal lords were the successors of
former holders; and in order to know what the lord could either claim
for himself or grant to others, it is necessary to know whose rights he
succeeded to. In this there is now no obscurity. The feudal lord took
the place of the collective village community; the Mark system passed by
transformation into the Manorial. The rights which had belonged to the
village as a collective body, became the rights of the lord; the
customary rights which the several households of the village could claim
from the collective body, were not lost, but remained valid against the
lord. The Common Mark became the lord’s waste; but the village families
retained their rights of pasture and of turf or wood cutting over it. Of
the Arable Mark, a great though a gradually decreasing portion continued
to be cultivated under much the same rules as before.

The lands which represent the cultivated portion of the domain of the
ancient Teutonic village communities are found more or less in all parts
of England, but more abundantly in some counties than in others. They
are known by various names. When the soil is arable, they are most
usually called “common,” “commonable,” or “open” fields, or sometimes
simply “intermixed” lands. When the lands are in grass, they are
sometimes known as “lot meadows,” sometimes as “Lammas lands,” though
the last expression is occasionally used of arable soil. The “common
fields” are almost invariably divided into three long strips, separated
by green baulks of turf. The several properties consist in subdivisions
of these strips, sometimes exceedingly minute; and there is a great deal
of evidence that one several share in each of the strips belonged
originally to the same ownership, and that all the several shares in any
one strip were originally equal or nearly equal, though in progress of
time a good many have been accumulated in the same hands. The
agricultural customs which prevail in these common fields are singularly
alike. Each strip bears two crops of a different kind in turn, and then
lies fallow. The better opinion seems to be that the custom as to the
succession of crops would not be sustained at law; but the right to feed
sheep or cattle on the whole of one strip during the fallow year, or
among the stubbles of the other two strips after the crops have been got
in, or on the green baulks which divide the three fields, is generally
treated as capable of being legally maintained. This right has in some
cases passed to the Edition: current; Page: [219] lord of the manor, but
sometimes it is vested in the body of persons who are owners of the
several shares in the common fields. The grass lands bear even more
distinct traces of primitive usage. The several shares in the arable
fields sometimes, but very rarely, shift from one owner to another in
each successive year; but this is frequently the rule with the meadows,
which, when they are themselves in a state of severalty, are often
distributed once a year by casting lots among the persons entitled to
appropriate and inclose them, or else change from one possessor to
another in the order of the names of persons or tenements on a roll. As
a rule, the inclosures are removed after the hay harvest; and there are
manors in which they are taken down by the villagers on Lammas day (that
is, Old Lammas day) in a sort of legalised tumultuary assembly. The
group of persons entitled to use the meadows after they have been thrown
open is often larger than the number of persons entitled to inclose
them. All the householders in a parish, and not merely the landowners,
are found enjoying this right. The same peculiarity occasionally, but
much more rarely, characterises the rights over common arable fields;
and it is a point of some interest, since an epoch in the history of
primitive groups occurs when they cease to become capable of absorbing
strangers. The English cultivating communities may be supposed to have
admitted new-comers to a limited enjoyment of the meadows, up to a later
date than the period at which the arable land had become the exclusive
property of the older families of the group.

(Pp. 85-7.)

The minutely exact agreement of this description with what has been
ascertained by quite independent evidence to have been the ancient
custom of village communities in the countries from which our ancestors
came, leaves no doubt that originally ownership of land was conceived in
the same manner in both cases. And the rights which still survive in our
own country over the lands which were once the collective property of
the village—the rights of commoners over the common land, and of those
who are entitled to the joint use of Lammas lands or common fields—are
older than any manorial rights, older than any grants from a feudala
superior, and can claim more of the sacredness which the friends of
existing land institutions consider to attach to prescription.

How dear these rights were to the people is strikingly shown by their
persistency through many centuries, notwithstanding the powerful causes
which have been at work during the whole time for their destruction.
Beneficent and noxious influences conspired to favour the conversion of
collective into individual property. On the one hand, the rigid customs
which prevailed in the cultivation of the common fields provoked
opposition by their tendency to perpetuate a bad system of agriculture;
and as to the waste, then occupying so large a portion of the soil of
the island, it was thought to be for the public good to promote almost
any arrangement by which it could be brought into cultivation. This was
the honourable side of the movement. There is a deeply disgraceful side
which remains to be mentioned. The great landed proprietors, and owners
of manorial rights, were the rulers of the country. From 1688 downwards
they ruled it through the Parliament; but before the Parliament became
absolute ruler of the State, each of them ruled his own neighbourhood
with a power almost above legal control. Edition: current; Page: [220]
Among the consequences were perpetual encroachments by the great
landholders, not only on the customary rights of the people in the land,
but even on their separate properties: encroachments sometimes by abuse
of the processes and forms of law, sometimes altogether lawless. bIn the
words of the great Sir Thomas More, tenants were “got rid of by force or
fraud, or tired out by repeated injuries into parting with their
property.” Bishop Gilpin “complained that the great landowners scrupled
not to drive people from their property, alleging that the land was
theirs, and turning them out of their shelter like vermin.”* When even
the separate properties of the peasantry were thus treated, no wonder
that their rights of common were taken from them, in many cases without
any compensation.b This dreary history is not to be found in Mr. Maine’s
work, but it has been related in other books, and recently by Mr. Cliffe
Leslie, in his instructive volume on the Land Systems of England,
Ireland, and the Continent.

Yet, notwithstanding the constant tendency of these customary rights to
extinction, sometimes by usurpation and sometimes by voluntary
agreement, the great extent of them as late as the early part of the
present century is attested by Marshall, a writer of that period, of
high authority on the statistics of agriculture, and whose facts have
been largely used in the work of Professor Nasse. According to Marshall,
“In almost all parts of the country, in the Midland and Eastern counties
particularly, but also in the west—in Wiltshire, for example—in the
south, as in Surrey, in the north, as in Yorkshire,” there were still,
in his time, “extensive open and common fields. Out of 316 parishes in
Northamptonshire, 89” were in this condition; “more than 100 in
Oxfordshire; about 50,000 acres in Warwickshire; in Berkshire, half the
county; more than half of Wiltshire; in Huntingdonshire, out of a total
area of 240,000 acres, 130,000 were commonable meadows, commons, and
common fields.” (Maine, pp. 88-9.)4 Mr. Maine adds: “The extent of some
of the fields may be inferred from the fact, stated to me on good
authority, that the pasturage on the dividing baulks of turf, which was
not more than three yards wide, was estimated in one case at 80 acres”
(p. 89). Since that time the commonable and common lands have undergone
constant and rapid diminution, first by private Acts of Parliament, and
at a still more accelerated pace since 1836, by inclosure,
agglomeration, and exchange, under the Common Fields Edition: current;
Page: [221] Inclosure Act of that year,5 and under the general powers of
the Inclosure Commissioners;6 “but both common fields and common meadows
are still plentiful on all sides of us. Speaking for myself personally,”
says Mr. Maine, “I have been greatly surprised at the number of
instances of abnormal proprietary rights, necessarily implying the
former existence of collective ownership and joint cultivation, which
comparatively brief inquiry has brought to my notice.” (Pp. 87-8.)

It was not Mr. Maine’s business, in a purely historical and
jurisprudential work, to deduce practical inferences from these facts;
nor have we any knowledgec whether he would coincide in the inferences
which we ourselves draw from them. But there are certain truths, of a
very important character, which the facts we have abridged from Mr.
Maine’s work seem to us to support and illustrate very impressively.

They show, first, that even in our own history property in land has not
been, and is not, one simple idea, one conception of rights always the
same; but that different systems of property in land have existed, and
even coexisted, both in this and in other countries; and that, by an
operation not sudden, but extending over our entire history since the
Norman Conquest, we have been gradually transforming one of these
systems into another:

That the system under which nearly the whole soil of Great Britain has
come to be appropriated by about thirty thousand dfamilies—the far
greater part of it by a few thousands of these—d is neither the only nor
the oldest form of landed property, and that there is no natural
necessity for its being preferred to all other forms:

That if the nation were to decide, after deliberation, that this
transmutation of collective landed ownership into individual shall
proceed no further, and that the various rights of the public or of
particular neighbourhoods which in many cases still limit the absolute
and exclusive control of the land by the proprietor—rights generally of
older date than his—shall no longer be allowed to be extinguished, to
the detriment of posterity; the nation, in so deciding, would not
overpass the limits of its moral right. Nay, further, that if the nation
thought proper to reverse the process, and move in the direction of
reconverting individual property into some new and better form of
collective, as it has so long been converting collective property into
individual, it would be making a legitimate use of an unquestionable
moral right; subject to the moral obligation which arises whenever
rights sanctioned by established law are annulled by an act of
authority, of satisfying all just claims to compensation:

That, having thus a full right to retrace the steps which it has taken
under the Edition: current; Page: [222] predominant influence of the
class of large landed proprietors, the nation ought to take into serious
consideration which among the many footings on which the right of landed
ownership might be placed, is the one most beneficial to the whole
community, with a view to adopting, with the precautions justly demanded
by vested interests, that most beneficial system. And, in the meantime,
it should absolutely suspend all further proceedings in the old
direction—all further conversion into the absolute property of
individuals, of land which is now only their limited or qualified
property, or which is not the private property of individuals at all. In
particular, the inclosure of commons should be absolutely discontinued,
until the principles on which it can rightly take place have been
deliberately reconsidered, the classes who have been the chief sufferers
by what has hitherto been done being included in the deliberation.e

This is the moral which we deduce from that part of Mr. Maine’s
researches which relates to the ancient landed institutions of England.
The part which relates to India gives a practical warning of an even
more urgent nature; since it shows that we have done, and are still
doing, irreparable mischief, by blindly introducing the English idea of
absolute property in land into a country where it did not exist and
never had existed, and into which its introduction could only be
effected by trampling upon the rights of all except some one of the
classes which, by the customs of the country, shared among them the
right of using and disposing of the soil. This injustice has been done
by the English rulers of India, for the most part innocently, from sheer
inability to understand institutions and customs almost identical with
those which prevailed in their own country a few centuries ago.

In the purely native governments of India, property in land has never
emerged from that primitive state in which absolute and unconditional
ownership by individuals had no existence. Various beneficial interests
existed in the soil. There was, first, the interest of the sovereign,
who had at least one attribute of an universal proprietor; he was an
universal receiver of rent. The share of the produce to which he was
entitled, and which formed the bulk of the public revenue, was nominally
limited by custom, but practically, in most cases, only by the
impossibility of extracting more. Whether we call it rent or land-tax,
it was usually of such an amount as to leave no surplus to constitute
rent in the hands of any private individual, except those to whom, by a
not uncommon act of favour, the sovereign made a grant of the revenues
of a village or district. At the opposite extremity of the social scale
were the actual cultivators. In some cases the whole of these, in others
only certain classes of them, had a right to retain their holdings as
long as they paid the Government demand. Between these co-proprietors
(as they may be called), the sovereign and the cultivator, there were
intermediate classes who had rights, of greater or less extent, and who
were often extremely different in Edition: current; Page: [223]
different places. But there was nobody who could be called a proprietor
in the absolute sense of English law. The English, however, when they
came into possession of the Bengal provinces, assumed, as indisputable,
that there must be an absolute proprietor of all land, the only question
being how to find him; and the indication of ownership by which they
were at first guided was the collection of rent. In the provinces over
which the British dominion was first extended, this attribute was
exercised by officers of Government, each of whom, at the head of an
armed force, collected the rents of a particular district; and who were
mostly hereditary, for all things tend to become hereditary in the East.
In these officers the English rulers thought they had found the
proprietors of the soil. It was not considered, that these collectors of
rent were bound to pay over the whole of their collections to the State,
except a commission of ten per cent deducted as their own remuneration.
In spite of this, they were declared absolute owners of the land, and
received a pledge that the Government demand of revenue from them should
never be increased. The cultivating classes became their tenants. A
reservation was made of the right of the tenants to be protected against
eviction while they paid the customary rents; but the distance and
expensiveness of the only courts of justice which for a long time were
provided, put it out of the power of the cultivators to enforce this
right. In the words used many years later by a British-Indian judge, the
rights of the Bengal ryots (or peasants) passed away sub silentio.7 They
sank generally into the miserable condition of Irish
cottiers—rack-rented tenants-at-will. What little respect was anywhere
paid to their rights or interests resulted solely from the still
partially surviving influence of custom on the minds of persons whom the
law had exempted from any necessity of observing it.

By degrees India began to be better known, and its English
administrators came to be aware of the error which they had at first
committed. They found that, in mistaking the collectors of revenue for
the landed proprietors, they had overlooked the village communities;
which, indeed, in the provinces first acquired, had almost become
extinct, but in many of the more recently acquired British possessions
still retained a substantial existence, and whose rights in the land
could not without great injustice be ignored. The conclusion which was
come to by the administrators of these later acquisitions was that the
village communities were the real proprietors. And it is certain that,
in adopting this opinion, they were nearer to the truth than they would
have been in supposing absolute ownership to reside anywhere else.
Further experience, however, made them aware that village communities
were of very various composition, and that they, no more than any other
persons or bodies, were absolute proprietors. Their rights, like those
of all others in a country in which custom for the most part decides
what is the law, were limited and hemmed in by the equally positive
customary rights of other people. When this truth dawned on the most
eminent Indian administrators, it taught them Edition: current; Page:
[224] at first the proper lesson. They made it their business to
ascertain, by oral and documentary evidence on the spot, not who was
proprietor of the soil—a question idle and unmeaning in the country with
which they had to deal—but who were all those who had any rights over
it, and what those rights were. When they had, with more or less
completeness, ascertained this, they endeavoured to give equal
protection to all these rights. These rational opinions and rational
practices prevailed in the counsels of the Indian Government for about
two generations. But of late official opinion has taken an unfortunate
turn in the opposite direction.

In England, for some time past, the idea of absolute property in land
has been sensibly weakened, and the tendency of the time is
progressively inclining towards the opinion that proprietary rights in
the mere raw material of the globe should not be absolute, but limited.
While, however, English opinion has thus been advancing, official
opinion in India, which had been much ahead of it, has retrograded. The
change may be roughly dated from the time of the Mutiny. The feeling
engendered by that calamitous event, of the unstable foundation on which
our power in India rested, produced a strong impression of the necessity
of conciliating the natives; and, as usual in such cases, “the natives”
were taken to mean those small classes who were most conspicuous, who
had the greatest opportunitites of making themselves heard, and the
greatest power of being troublesome. Before the Mutiny it had been the
policy of our Government, not certainly to ignore or disregard the
rights or vested interests of the so-called higher classes, but to
construe them strictly, when they conflicted with the interests of the
mass of the cultivating population, towards whom, it was rightly
thought, were the first and most binding duties of our Government. Since
the Mutiny a reaction has set in, which cannot be better illustrated
than by the instance of Oude. We had taken this province from its
Mahomedan Government and annexed it to British India,8 in consequence of
the anarchy occasioned by the lawless usurpations and disorderly
excesses of the Talookdars—a class of functionaries of very various
origin, who collected the Government dues from large districts, and
entertained for that purpose bodies of undisciplined mercenaries, which
made them practically uncontrollable by the feeble native government. By
means of these troops the country was kept in a state of bloodshed and
warfare, the most high-handed violence was practised towards the people
of the country, and the landed possessions of the Talookdars were
swelled by the dispossession, and sometimes the extermination, of entire
families of landholders. These Talookdars were naturally exasperated by
the annexation, which deprived them of their misused position; they
joined, and they were the only powerful class or body in all India that
did join, with the mutineers. We subdued them, and what did we then
proceed to do? We admitted these rebellious oppressors to engage with
our Government for Edition: current; Page: [225] the revenue; we
declared them proprietors of the soil, and delivered over the
cultivating classes into their hands: and it is with great difficulty
that, some years after, an Act was got passed, making some small
reparation to a portion of the dispropertied classes, by giving to
tenants who could prove a certain number of years’ possession a
guarantee against eviction.9 In other parts of Upper India, those to
whom the absolute ownership has been conceded are the village
communities; but there has been a growing disposition to restrict,
instead of enlarging, the number of the inhabitants who are considered
entitled to communal privileges. Even at an earlier period, single
families from which by custom the headman of the village had been taken,
had not unfrequently been recognised by our Government as sole owners.
The remainder of the cultivators, including many who at the first
settlement had been admitted, as proprietors, to enter into engagements
for the Government revenue, have been reduced to the condition of
tenants-at-will. There is great danger that if this tendency of opinion
continues, the whole of the northern provinces* will be possessed, for
the first time in India, by a comparatively small body of absolute
owners, many of them peasants, with a vast population under them of
tenants-at-will. And this—one of the greatest social revolutions ever
effected in any country, with the evil peculiarity of being a revolution
not in favour of faf majority of the people, but against them—its
supporters defend in the name of civilisation and gpolitical economy;
though if there is a truth emphatically taught by political economy, and
from which no one who has the smallest tincture of the knowledge of it
withholds his assent, it is that the status of an agricultural
tenant-at-will is intrinsically vicious, and in a really civilised
community ought not to exist.

The exposition given by Mr. Maine of the real nature and history of
agricultural customs in India, read, as it is sure to be, by all
intelligent Indian administrators, and, we trust, by those who are in
training for Indian administration, is well adapted to check this
baneful reaction. We quote, both as a characteristic specimen of this
part of the work, and for the important lessons it affords, his
exposition of Edition: current; Page: [226] the manner in which, even in
the absence of positive intention on our part, the introduction of our
Government conferred upon those whom we recognised as representatives of
the locality, powers and rights which enabled them to override those who
were their co-partners in the land.

Let us suppose a province annexed for the first time to the British
Indian Empire. The first civil act of the new Government is always to
effect a settlement of the land revenue; that is, to determine the
amount of that relatively large share of the produce of the soil, or of
its value, which is demanded by the sovereign in all Oriental states,
and out of which all the main expenses of government are defrayed. Among
the many questions upon which a decision must be had, the one of most
practical importance is, “Who shall be settled with?” With whom shall
the settlement be made? What persons, what bodies, what groups, shall be
held responsible to the British Government for its land revenue? What
practically has to be determined is the unit of society for agrarian
purposes; and you find that, in determining it, you determine
everything, and give its character finally to the entire political and
social constitution of the province. You are at once compelled to confer
on the selected class powers coextensive with its duties to the
sovereign. Not that the assumption is ever made that new proprietary
powers are conferred on it; but what are supposed to be its rights in
relation to all other classes are defined; and in the vague and floating
order of primitive societies, the mere definition of a right immensely
increases its strength. As a matter of fact, it is found that all
agrarian rights, whether superior or subordinate to those of the person
held responsible to Government, have a steady tendency to decay. . . .
Do you, on entering on the settlement of a new province, find that a
peasant proprietary has been displaced by an oligarchy of vigorous
usurpers, and do you think it expedient to take the Government dues from
the once-oppressed yeomen? The result is the immediate decline, and
consequently bitter discontent, of the class above them, who find
themselves sinking to the footing of mere annuitants on the land. Such
was the land-settlement of Oudh, which was shattered to pieces by the
Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, and which greatly affected its course. Do you,
reversing this policy, arrange that the superior holder shall be
answerable to Government? You find that you have created a landed
aristocracy which has no parallel in wealth or power except the
proprietors of English soil. Of this nature is the more modern
settlement of the province of Oudh, only recently consummated; and such
will ultimately be the position of the Talookdars, or Barons, among whom
its soil has been divided. Do you adopt a policy different from either
of those which I have indicated, and make your arrangements with the
representative of the village community? You find that you have arrested
a process of change which was steadily proceeding. You have given to
this peculiar proprietary group a vitality which it was losing, and a
stiffness to the relations of the various classes composing it which
they never had before.

(Pp. 149-51.)

Whether the Indian village communities had wholly lost their capacity
for the absorption of strangers when the British dominion began, is a
point on which I have heard several contradictory opinions; but it is
beyond doubt that the influence of the British Government, which in this
respect is nothing more than the ordinary influence of settled
authority, has tended steadily to turn the communities into close
corporations. The definition of rights which it has effected through its
various judicial agencies—the process of law by which it punishes
violations of right—above all, the money value which it has given to all
rights by the security which it has established from one end of India to
another—have all helped to make the classes in possession of vested
rights cling to them with daily increasing tenacity. To a certain small
extent this indirect and unintended process of shutting the door to the
acquisition of new communal rights has been counteracted by a rough rule
introduced by thee Edition: current; Page: [227] English, and lately
engrafted on the written law, under which the cultivator of the soil who
has been in possession of it for a period of years is, in some parts of
India, protected against a few of the extreme powers which attach to
ownership of the modern English type. But the rule is now in some
discredit, and the sphere of its operation has of late been much
curtailed. And my own opinion is that even if the utmost effect were
given to it, it would not make up for some of the inequalities of
distribution between classes actually included in the village group,
which have made their way into it through the influence of economical
ideas originating in the West. On the whole, the conclusion which I have
arrived at concerning the village communities is, that, during the
primitive struggle for existence, they were expansive and elastic
bodies, and these properties may be perpetuated in them for any time by
bad government. But tolerably good government takes away their
absorptive power by its indirect effects, and can only restore it by
direct interposition.

(Pp. 166-8.)

These passages, greatly as space has made it necessary to curtail them,
will help to show to the intelligent reader (over and above the example
they afford of the singularly artificial and variable nature of the idea
of ownership) what great difficulties the English Government has to
encounter in endeavouring to do justice to each and all in India: and
how great injustice may be, and has been, caused by the fact that its
mere appearance on the scene destroys the balance of existing social
relations; that “when an official appointed by a powerful Government
acts upon the loose constitution of a primitive society, he crushes down
all other classes, and exalts that to which he himself belongs” (p.
151).

Our desire to profit, as much as our space permits, by the practical
lessons derivable from Mr. Maine’s book, has led to our doing but scanty
justice to its remarkable merits, both as a literary work and as a
series of investigations of the ancient history of human society. But we
must at least not omit to call attention to the concluding lecture;10 in
which, from the facts of Indian experience, a flood of light is thrown
upon the ideas of an early state of society respecting commercial
transactions between man and man, and especially respecting prices and
rents; and upon the widespread and long-enduring influence of custom in
the determination of payments, as well as upon the particular points at
which competition, as a rival principle, first comes in. Our space does
not admit of our giving a summary of this lecture, and we can only refer
the reader to the original, confidently promising to any one who studies
it a rich reward.

The same hindrance prevents us from doing more than merely referring to
the very few points on which we find ourselves dissenting in any respect
from Mr. Maine, and which are questions of definition and classification
rather than of fact. Did space permit, we should have something to say
in behalf of Bentham and Austin11 (of whose extraordinary merits as
philosophic jurists Mr. Maine shows a full appreciation) on a point on
which Mr. Maine differs from them (pp. 67-8);12 Edition: current; Page:
[228] and again, in defence of political economists generally, hagainsth
a charge brought against them in the concluding lecture (p. 196), which
we do not think will stand examination.13 But these small differences of
opinion, though worth noting, are not, at least on the present occasion,
worth entering into; and we will conclude by once more congratulating
our readers and ourselves on the appearance of a second highly
instructive work (to be followed, we hope, by many others) from an
author so eminently qualified for the department of philosophical
history which he has made his especial domain.