Edition: current; Page: [503]


1856

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1856

Mercredi

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

255.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

India House
Mercredi

1856

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Je n’ai reçu votre aimable billet que ce matin—Je regrette bien ne pas
pouvoir profiter de votre invitation pour ce soir et je vous prie de
croire que je n’en désire pas moins la réalisation de l’espérance que
vous m’avez donnée de vous voir plus souvent et de comparer mes idées
avec les vôtres sur les grandes questions qui occupent aujourd’hui tous
les esprits élevés. Je vous engage à ne pas vous décourager de venir à
mon bureau par l’idée que vous me dérangerez. La semaine dernière a été
exceptionnelle pour moi. Ordinairement, à l’exception du mercredi, mes
occupations de bureau sont de nature à pouvoir être ajournées au moins
pour une heure ou deux.

votre dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 21. 1856

East India House

Arthur Hardy

Hardy, Arthur

256.


TO ARTHUR HARDY1

East India House

Jan. 21. 1856

My dear Mr Hardy

My wife has told you that we were much interested in the account of the
Institution2 you have founded at Adelaide. Such means for the education
of the young & the useful instruction of the old, are more important, if
that be possible, in a new than even in an old country, as the helps &
instruments to self cultivation are apt to be more scanty, & what is
done or left undone now, will determine in a great measure what part the
future Australian nation will take in the advancement of the world.

Edition: current; Page: [504]
You are aware that Mr Duffy3 has lately emigrated to Australia. His
immediate destination is Melbourne but in case anything should lead him
to Adelaide I have ventured to assure him that you would be glad to see
him or to be useful to him. He is a very valuable acquisition both
privately & publicly to any colony in which he may determine to
establish himself.

My wife’s health has been very precarious since her attack of
hemorrhage4 but this last summer & autumn it has improved, & I have
great hopes that she at last will now recover from that attack. She has
suffered greatly both in feelings & in health from the unprincipled
conduct of Arthur Ley & his wife about the Trusteeship of her marriage
settlement.5 Her wish alone ought to have been sufficient to make him
resign it—but when the immediate ground of our asking it was (tho’ of
course not so said to him) that she knew from Caroline herself that he
was not only in pecuniary difficulties but that there was a deficiency
in his accounts as Treasurer of a Turnpike Trust, a man with the
ordinary amount of honour & honesty would have been anxious to do so.
Herbert’s not joining in the request6 was entirely immaterial as the
settlement gives the power exclusively to her, & his not choosing to ask
it was merely an instance of his usual contradictory disposition. My
wife has sent you a copy of Caroline’s letter, full of vulgar taunts &
malevolent insinuations. You might suppose from this that she had given
some offence to Mrs Ley, or that there had been some previous quarrel,
but there had been nothing of the kind—for some reason of her own, &
very foolishly, Mrs Ley suddenly changed from her usual professions of
great affection & regard, to this insulting letter, & this is the only
answer she has given. My wife’s last letters both to her & Arthur Ley
remain unanswered.

I found that the only legal protection in our power against a fraudulent
trustee is to lay a distringas7 on the stock which prevents the
possibility of its being transferred without notice given. This would
enable us to apply to the Court of Chancery for an injunction. I have
therefore taken this precaution, without which any accident to the other
trustee would leave my wife’s & the children’s property entirely
insecure.

Pray present my compliments to Mrs Hardy & believe me

very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [505]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 1. 1856

Blackheath

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

257.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath

April 1. 1856

Dear Sir

I am sorry to hear that you have got into the difficulty you mention,2
and am willing to assist. But first I must request you tell me exactly
how much of the £130 you see any prospect of raising and whether £130 is
the whole of what you can be called on to pay in consequence of bills
accepted by you for Mr Leblond.

I am

yrs faithfully

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 5, 1856

East India House

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

258.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

East India House

April 5, 1856

Dear Sir

I inclose a cheque for £70, being a loan of £35 each from myself and
another friend of freethinking opinions.2 This sum I think will complete
the amount you require.3

You must excuse me for saying that in making yourself liable for Mr
Leblond’s bill transactions you were throwing money which you could not
spare into the mere gulf of a bankruptcy—injuring yourself and those
dependent Edition: current; Page: [506] on you without doing your friend
any good, and throwing away the possible means of serving him
afterwards. It would have been a totally different thing if by so doing
you could have saved him. I am

yrs faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy Aug. 13. 1856

Lac de Joux

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

259.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Le Pont
 on the
Lac de Joux

Wedy evg
 [
Aug. 13. 1856

]

I have done pretty well, dearest one, to get here in one day from
Besançon—to do which I had to take a char at Orbe but I walked most part
of the way, which was very agreeable after going to Pontarlier by the
malle poste on a most uncomfortable outside seat, & stewing inside the
diligence from Pontarlier to Orbe, seeing little or nothing. But I am
well recompensed darling by this place. How very much I wish my own only
one could see it. It is the very picture of peace. From my window I look
quite up the lake & to the end of its valley which is called even on
fingerposts Lavallée (par excellence). It is five or six leagues in
length but you see entirely down or rather up the vista as it is quite
straight, & the lake, though small compared with those we have lately
seen, yet long enough & broad enough for beauty, lies between its bright
green slopes which though very high for the Jura, do not shew their
height from the great elevation of this valley but are covered with the
richest & finest Jura pastures & Jura woods. The villages, this &
another smaller one, do not in the least detract from the air of
quiet—they are all large well looking houses, evidently inhabited only
by their inhabitants, & looking straight upon the lake. The water itself
is as peaceful as it is bright & clear. It has no apparent outlet, being
entirely imbedded in hills—a bend (the only one) in the valley just at
this place separates the Lac de Joux from a very beautiful smaller lake
below it, quite shut in by mountains, but the water all seems to
Edition: current; Page: [507] come out under ground into the Valorbe,
another valley at a great depth below this, & so cut off from it that
the road to this does not even lie through that: I enjoy the place much
& you may suppose I am very well when I say that after climbing the Mont
Tendre, a most beautiful mountain, one of the highest of the Jura, which
with a rest on the grass at the top & the return took six hours, I only
staid half an hour to eat a crust of bread & drink a whole jug of milk,
& set off again to climb another mountain & make a round which took
another five hours—& I am not now more tired than is agreeable. The
views of the Alps here are splendid, especially that from the Mont
Tendre—in spite of a great deal of haze towards Berne & Savoy. I saw the
snowy range for a great distance, Mont Blanc tolerably & the Dent du
Midi, the nearer Valais mountains & the whole lake of Geneva from end to
end well, also the lake of Neuchâtel, the whole Jura, & France I should
think nearly to Dijon. The evening walk was still finer: the bit of
Valorbe which I descended to get to the source of the Orbe (the place
where the water of the two lakes is supposed to come out) equals
anything I ever saw—a narrow gorge between precipices but itself full of
the richest Jura verdure of pasture & wood so high as almost to hide the
precipices: & the source with its exquisite clearness & great mass of
water coming out from under an amphitheatre of precipice in the heart of
a wood far surpasses Vaucluse. I also went over in the rocks above a
really immense cave but without any stalactites. If my beloved one was
with me I could stay here with pleasure the whole week—the inn would
do—a little below the mark of St. Martin but larger rooms. As it is I
shall leave tomorrow: for quiet enjoyment one requires to be two—by
oneself there is nothing but activity. I have been much tempted to go to
Annecy—being so near & finding that those who left Besançon with me were
to get to Geneva the same evening by aid of railway & steamboat. But I
have resisted the temptation & shall go to Yverdon tomorrow—if the rest
of the Jura were to be like this I should lose nothing. I shall put in
this letter probably at Yverdon & I hope to be in time for the steamer &
to land not at Neuchâtel but at St Aubin on the west bank from which
Murray says it is but four miles to the Creux du Vent. What I shall do
afterwards I do not know except that I shall return to Besançon from la
Chaux de Fonds & shall try first to see Weissenstein & the Val Moutiers.
This place has rather spoilt me for other places & this lake for other
lakes. How very different a surroundment my darling’s has been these two
days. No doubt she is now in Paris & I so hope in a not unpleasant
lodging. Though I am very glad to have been here I am not half
reconciled to the separation from my dear one—& the more I like the
place the more I long for her presence. But I will try to make the time
as useful as possible for my health & you see I have begun well today.
Adieu my dearest wife with a thousand loves & kisses—your own

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [508]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sunday Aug. 17. [1856]

La Chaux de Fonds

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

260.


TO HARRIET MILL1

La Chaux de Fonds

Sunday evg
Aug. 17. [1856]

My dearest love, I wrote twice to Paris, once on Wednesday & once on
Friday,2 which I hope came safely to her dear hands. The last brought me
to that pretty little place Sonceboz, which lies at the junction of a
valley & two gorges, one going downward & the other upward, both most
beautiful: the valley is that of St Imier & is a good deal like the Val
Travers. It is a very small neat village & would be very quiet, but as
it is on the principal road into Switzerland by way of Bâle, & the
diligences & voitures all stop here, there is generally some bustle
going on. The inn is decidedly good, as well as decidedly cheap: I was
charged 1½ franc a day for a good bedroom & bed, & the same for my usual
breakfast: ½ franc a day for service. I got out at ½ past 8 yesterday &
explored the whole of the Val Moutiers: going through the upper of the
two gorges & through the Pierre Pertuis, which is not a tunnel being not
longer than a mere gateway, the gorge being singularly closed by a mere
wall of rock. This led into the Val Moutiers at Tavannes, for many miles
beyond which it was an open valley in the full glare of the sun: the
beauty consists in two narrow defiles, one above the other below
Moutiers. I dined at a one o’clock table d’hôte at Moutiers & then
walked on to the last turn in the further of the two defiles, from which
the end of it is seen at a short distance. They are fine, but to us who
have seen so much, not extraordinary: you have only to imagine a cleft
winding through precipitous fir clad rocks of great height, in general
just large enough for the road & the little river. The oddity is that
the flat thick tables of which this rock is composed, instead of lying
horizontal one on another, have been thrown up on end & stand
vertically—& as many of them have mouldered or been washed out, those
which remain are in some places like buttresses or gigantic bits of wall
at right angles to the road. From Moutiers I took a car part of the way
back (to Tavannes) & arrived a little before 8. This morning I started
at ½ past 5 in the coupé of the malle poste along the Val St Imier
(green & full of villages) then over a dividing ridge to this
place—which is not at all like what I expected. Murray’s description of
a great straggling village, composed of cottages each standing in its
bit of ground, is as opposite to the truth as can be conceived—it would
be thought in England a compact town, & there is not a cottage in it—all
large Edition: current; Page: [509] houses & large blocks of houses,
abutting at once on green fields at the outskirts, in a way which
reminded me of Brighton—there are about half a dozen houses which have
bits of garden in front like our suburbs & about half a dozen square
patches of garden ground within the limits of the town: it has nothing
whatever of a village except that it is macadamized instead of paved.
Murray’s description must be copied from some old one: it looks an
upstart place, having no promenades or planted trees like Neuchâtel
though it has more inhabitants. Murray is equally out as to the country,
which he calls bleak, desolate & bare of wood. It is one of the open
valleys with sloping sides & those have fewer trees than the narrow
ones, but this has many & is most cheerful & inspiriting. I have had a
beautiful walk: first to a pass called the Col des Loges, about half way
to Neuchâtel which is noted for the view of the Alps, & though it was
very hazy, I saw a part of them very well: then a round over the summits
climbing another noted mountain called Tête du Rond3 (or something
sounding like it) from which the view of the Alps, Jura &c is still
finer, then back through woods, over mountains & across the loveliest
green valleys. The mountains though high are not a great height above
this valley which is itself extremely high. I do not like the town; it
is the only blemish in the [paper torn] Tomorrow I go to Locle & the
Saut du Doubs, & that will be the finale. I have taken my place for
Tuesday for Besançon when I shall have the happiness of finding a letter
from her & in two days after I shall see her again. It seems already an
enormous time since I parted from her. Time never seems long when I am
with her, whether it is at home or travelling. I believe this journey
has set me up as to health—I am afraid it has done very little for
[paper torn] to the heat [paper torn]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 21. 1856

Blackheath

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

261.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath

Sept. 21. 1856

Dear Sir—

On returning a few days ago from the Continent I found your note
inclosing the reprint of my wife’s article in the W.R.2 on the
enfranchisement of women. I think you were not justified in reprinting
it without asking Edition: current; Page: [510] the permission of the
author which you could easily have done through me, still less with many
errors in the reprint. I have marked the principal of them in the margin
of the copy you sent. One particularly offensive is the excessive
vulgarity of substituting “woman” for “Women”; this occurs in several
places and in the first paragraph. One of the purposes of writing the
article was to warn the American women to disunite their cause from the
feeble sentimentality which exposes it to contempt & of which the stuff
continually talked & written about “woman” may be taken as a symbol &
test,—& it is therefore very disagreeable to the writer to see this
piece of vulgarity prominent on the face of the article itself.

We are glad to hear that there was one lady at the Convention3 who
objected to the nonsense attacked in the concluding paragraph.4

I am yrs vy truly

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 29. 1856

Blackheath

Arthur Hardy

Hardy, Arthur

262.


TO ARTHUR HARDY1

Blackheath

Sept. 29. 1856

.

My dear Hardy—

I did not receive your letter until more than a fortnight after its
arrival, as we had not yet returned from our summer excursion, which
this year was to Switzerland—& since we have been at home I have had so
many things to write & to do that I have been unable to answer it until
now. What you say concerning your Institution for working people appears
to me encouraging: the success of the library seems to be everything
that you could have hoped for, & that, besides being the thing of most
importance, will probably in the end lead to the success of the other
part of your plan: it is very satisfactory too that the example has been
so speedily followed in other quarters.

The trust is in exactly the same state as when I last wrote to you.2 We
sent your letter to Mrs Ley, but with no result. Any one who would write
such a Edition: current; Page: [511] letter as she wrote to my wife
without any other provocation than being asked to act honorably in the
matter, has evidently no wish to do so. You are no doubt the only person
whose opinion would have weight enough to induce her to do anything she
does not like, and we therefore have still some hope that the thing will
be done. It will depend on whether or not she thinks the doing it
necessary to your satisfaction. I think it most unjust that my wife shd
be [hampered?] by feeling that her affairs are partly in the hands of
persons in all ways so untrustworthy & so ill affected towards her.

We read every book we can get about the Australian colonies always with
fresh interest. They seem to be most prosperous & rapidly progressive
communities; & that this is not wholly owing to the gold, is proved by
the state of your colony where there are no diggings. I certainly think
the Wakefield system, unpopular as it now is in Australia, & badly as it
has been administered in some of the colonies, has been one of the chief
causes of their unexampled growth. Wakefield3 you know has been for
several years in New Zealand. If he should ever visit the colony which
he planned & founded, & the only one in which his system has been
faithfully executed, you will find him well worth knowing: he is not a
mere man of one idea, but has great general power of mind & energy of
character. My name would be a sufficient introduction to him.

I suppose Macaulay’s 3d & 4th volumes4 are as popular at Adelaide as in
London. They are as you say, “pleasant reading but not exactly history.”
His object is to strike, & he attains it, but it is by scene painting—he
aims at stronger effects than truth warrants, & so caricatures many of
his personages as to leave it unaccountable how they can have done what
they did. If Sarah duchess of Marlborough5 had been nothing but a
thoroughly unprincipled shrew without talent or any one valuable or
amiable quality (as he makes her) could she have been, by mere personal
influence, for many years the most powerful person in England? This
disregard of consistency & probability spoils the book even as a work of
art. What a difference between it & Grote’s Hist. of Greece,6 which is
less brilliant, but far more interesting in its simple veracity &
because, instead of striving to astonish he strives to comprehend &
explain.

Edition: current; Page: [512]
It is of no use writing to you about politics, as nowadays in the
colonies you are as well up in all political news as we are.

Pray present my compliments to Mrs Hardy & believe me

yrs very truly

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November 1856

India House

263.


TO THE SECRETARY TO THE SUNDAY LEAGUE1

[
November 1856

]

Sir—

I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 3d instant asking my objections
to the address of the National Sunday League.2

The passage to which I principally object & which has hitherto made it
impossible for me, consistently with my own convictions, to subscribe to
the League, is the following: “They themselves would be the first to
oppose the opening of any frivolous & vicious places of amusement.”

That the Committee should limit their own endeavours to the opening of
Institutions of a more or less scientific or literary character on
Sundays may possibly be judicious; but it is not necessary for this
purpose that they should join in stigmatizing the broader principle, the
recognition of which I think should be their ultimate aim. With regard
to “vicious places of amusement,” if there be any such, I would not
desire that they should be open on any day of the week. Any place unfit
to be open on Sunday is unfit to be open at all. But with regard to
“frivolous” amusements I no more think myself justified in limiting the
people to intellectual than to religious occupations on that day, & the
Committee cannot but feel that if their disclaimer does them any service
with those whom it is intended to conciliate, it will be by being
understood as a protest against permitting, for example, music, dancing,
& the theatre, all of which I should wish to be as free on the seventh
(or rather the first) as on any other day of the week.

I am also unable to give my adhesion to various expressions in the
Declaration which partake of the nature of a compliance with cant; such
as the “desecration” Edition: current; Page: [513] of the Sunday, & the
preservation of “its original purpose of a day of devotion.” The
devotion which is not felt equally at all times does not deserve the
name; and it is one thing to regard the observance of a holiday from
ordinary work on one day in the week as a highly beneficial institution,
& another to ascribe any sacredness to the day, a notion so forcibly
repudiated in the quotations from great religious authorities on your
fourth page & which I hold to be as mere a superstition as any of the
analogous prejudices which existed in times antecedent to Christianity.

I am Sir
 yrs very faithfully

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 14. 1856

East India House

Herbert Fry

Fry, Herbert

263A.


TO HERBERT FRY1

East India House

Nov. 14. 1856

Sir

I beg to acknowledge your letter dated the 10th November, expressing a
wish to include my portrait in a proposed publication of a series of
Photographic Portraits, and in reply I beg to say that I have no desire
to figure in a collection as I do not think that my personal appearance
can be a matter of any interest to the general public.

I am Sir
 yr obt servt

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 22 novembre [?1856]

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

264.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

le 22 novembre [?1856]

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

J’aurai grand plaisir à discuter avec vous les questions dont vous
parlez dans votre lettre et de profiter de vos observations. Justement
je suis pour le moment très occupé à mon bureau. Si vous voulez bien
venir diner, absolument Edition: current; Page: [514] sans façon, avec
nous, vous ferez grand plaisir à ma femme et à moi. Comme nous seront
tout seuls, nous pourrons causer d’économie politique et d’autres
choses. Mardi nous sommes occupés, et mercredi il y a séance du conseil
de la Compagnie, qui me fait ordinairement rester plus tard que les
autres jours. Nous sommes libres jeudi ou vendredi, et je vous engage à
venir me prendre à mon bureau à quatre heures.

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 24. 1856

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

265.


TO THE AUTHOR OF “CURRENCY SELF REGULATING & ELASTIC”1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Nov. 24. 1856

Sir—

I have to apologize for the delay in replying to your letter of the 7th
Novr requesting my opinion on your plan for the regulation of the
Currency.2 I have received so many similar requests on this & other
economical or philosophical subjects that my whole time would scarcely
suffice for complying with them. I think I might fairly claim to be
excused from examining any more plans for an inconvertible currency,3 &
if I had not seen, on the first inspection of your book, that it
contained more knowledge of the subject & more ability than I have
usually observed in such projects, I certainly should not have spared
time to read it to the end.

But though I recognize the great distinction between you & the
Birmingham school,4 or the writers who are now enlightening the world by
their letters in the Morning Post,5 I do not think your scheme more
defensible than theirs. To a writer who founds his practical suggestions
on theoretic principles (as, in spite of your sarcasms on political
economy, you do) it will probably be Edition: current; Page: [515]
sufficient to say, that I dispute the basis of your theory, viz. the
proposition that in a community which makes large use of credit, an
increase of currency does not (unless by promoting speculation)
influence prices. I grant that any increase of paper currency which can
take place under a convertible system, usually passes off without having
influenced any other prices than those of securities: but only because
the revulsion comes before the increased supply of money has reached the
markets for commodities. Monied capital is not for ever handed to & fro
among money dealers; its ultimate destination is to be lent to
producers, & when the increase reached them it would raise wages & money
incomes, & must consequently raise the prices of all articles of
consumption, in the same manner as you allow it would do if it were
issued by Govt in payment of the public expenses. If you were right, the
supplies of gold from California & Australia, to however many thousands
of millions they might extend, could not raise general prices, except
indeed during the continuance of any speculative mania to which they
might give rise; a proposition in which you will find few to agree with
you, & which I can scarcely think that you will yourself, on
consideration, maintain.

If it were true that no increase of the quantity of money when taking
place through the medium of bankers, could lower its value, the
principal objection not only to your, but to every other system of
inconvertible currency, would be annihilated. But, not admitting this, I
need not further explain why I am not of opinion that your plan, which
enjoins an issue of paper up to the whole amount of the national debt
(or of some definite portion of that debt) on condition that the holder
is willing to pay the current rate of interest for it, would offer any
security against the kind of depreciation which you, as well as myself,
regard as an evil. The provision which you make for a reflux (& which
may possibly be, as you suppose it to be, new) depends for its efficacy
entirely on the truth of your theory of the non effect of currency on
prices; for if prices rise, the increased amount of currency being
permanently wanted in the markets will be “absorbed in the circulation”
& will not flow back.

I must add that I agree with most of your comments on the Act of 18446 &
should think them calculated to be very useful if they were dissevered
from so much that I conceive to be erroneous.

Edition: current; Page: [516]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 25 novembre [?1856]

East India House

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

266.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

East India House

le 25 novembre [?1856]

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Veuillez m’écrire un mot par le porteur pour me dire quel jour vous
viendrez. Si vous m’avez écrit, votre réponse n’est pas arrivée.

Si le messager ne vous trouve pas chez vous, je vous prie d’adresser
votre réponse Blackheath Park, Kent.

tout à vous,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 13, 1856

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Costantino Baer

Baer, Costantino

267.


TO COSTANTINO BAER1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Dec. 13, 1856

Monsieur—

Votre lettre du 12 mai ainsi que les articles et brochures2 que vous
avez bien voulu m’envoyer ne me sont parvenus qu’en Septembre, à mon
retour d’un voyage. Depuis lors, des occupations multipliées m’ont
longtemps empêché, même de lire ces intéressants écrits et ensuite de
vous en offrir mes remerciments. Je suis heureux de voir non seulement
par vos écrits, mais aussi par le receuil où quelques uns entre ceux ont
paru, que l’Italie, et surtout sa partie méridionale, qui au dernier
siècle s’est placée si haut dans les études économiques et législatives,
maintient encore sa position honorable dans cet ordre de recherches.
Votre brochure sur la question de l’or me paraît conforme aux plus sains
principes et je compte profiter de celle sur le métayage dans une
nouvelle édition de mon livre.3 Quant à votre appréciation de ce livre,
quoique trop flatteuse, elle est d’un grand prix, attendu que, parmi les
notices auxquelles mon ouvrage a donné lieu, je n’en connais presque
aucune qui porte autant l’empreinte d’une grande connaissance du sujet,
et qui soit, scientifiquement parlant, aussi satisfaisante. Il me semble
surtout que vos remarques Edition: current; Page: [517] sur la nature du
rapport entre ce qu’on appelle une science abstraite, et la science
correspondante d’application, ne sauraient être ni mieux pensées ni
mieux exprimées. Quoique partageant, à tout égard, vos idées à ce sujet,
je ne m’étais pas étendu là dessus dans mon ouvrage systématique, les
ayant exposées dans un petit volume d’Essais,4 cité dans les “Principes”
et dont je vous prie d’agréer un exemplaire que j’aurai l’honneur de
vous envoyer par la première occasion.

Pour ce qui regarde les applications de l’éc. politique, je vois que,
ainsi que la plupart des économistes, vous condamnez le socialisme d’une
manière absolue. Vous avez vu par mon livre que je ne suis pas, à cet
égard, de votre avis. Le socialisme selon la conception des socialistes
les plus éclairés, me paraît inattaquable en principe, et mon
dissentiment d’avec eux ne porte que sur la possibilité d’exécution dans
l’état présent de la culture intellectuelle et morale de l’humanité. Je
ne pense pas que la propriété privée, telle qu’on l’entend aujourd’hui,
soit le dernier mot de la société, ni que la nature humaine soit
incapable de travailler pour un but plus généreux que celui de l’intérêt
individuel et exclusif. Je crois pourtant que les habitudes d’égoïsme
sont tellement enracinées dans la grande majorité des peuples mêmes les
plus civilisés, qu’elles ne céderont que lentement à des influences
meilleures, et qu’aucun socialisme n’est aujourd’hui praticable comme
fait général, mais seulement dans la forme d’associations d’ouvriers
d’élite.5

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Le 15 décembre, 1856

East India House, London

Alexis de Tocqueville

Tocqueville, Alexis de

268.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

East India House, London

Le 15 décembre, 1856

.

J’ai bien tardé, mon cher Monsieur de Tocqueville, à répondre à votre
lettre du 22 juin. Elle m’est parvenue la veille même de notre départ
pour un voyage en Suisse, et je n’ai reçu qu’à mon retour l’exemplaire
de votre ouvrage2 que vous avez bien voulu me destiner. Je l’ai ensuite
lu sans aucun délai; mais il contient trop de choses pour qu’on puisse
se les approprier Edition: current; Page: [518] toutes à la première
lecture; et j’ai voulu attendre une seconde avant de vous faire part de
mes impressions. Bien que des occupations multipliées aient ajourné trop
longtemps cette seconde lecture, je me suis bien trouvé de l’avoir
attendue puisque ce laps de temps me permet aujourd’hui d’exprimer avec
délibération et sans aucun entraînement, l’opinion pleinement favorable
qui, exprimée tout de suite, eût pu paraître hasardée. Il était certes
difficile qu’après votre premier ouvrage,3 un autre quelconque ne parût
pas relativement inférieur. Il est arrivé à peu de monde de frapper deux
fois un aussi grand coup. Celui-ci pourtant se soutient parfaitement,
même à côté de son prédécesseur. Envisagé seulement comme un chapitre
d’histoire universelle, il me paraît un des plus beaux qu’on ait jamais
fait; et si l’on peut regarder comme le but principal de votre vie
philosophique, celui de caractériser la nature et les tendances de
l’époque actuelle, pour mieux diriger ces tendances dans ce qu’elles ont
de bon et les corriger autant que possible dans ce qu’elles ont de
mauvais, je trouve que vous avez fait un pas important dans
l’explication de cet état de choses actuel, en montrant ses racines dans
le passé. Pour faire cela, comme vous l’avez fait, il a fallu une
patience immense, et une capacité rare de combiner les faits et d’en
présenter en peu de mots les traits les plus caractéristiques. Si
ensuite cet ouvrage n’ajoute pas d’autres grandes vues générales à
celles qui brillent dans votre Démocratie en Amérique, il fait peut-être
mieux, il en reproduit les mêmes avec un grand surcroît de lumière, et
avec de nouvelles applications. Quant à la critique, je n’en trouve,
pour ainsi dire, aucune à faire. Il y a bien quelques différences
générales, et même très importantes, entre votre manière de voir et la
mienne, en tant que vous tenez beaucoup plus que moi au passé, surtout
par son côté religieux. Mais si peu de traces de cette différence
d’opinion se rencontrent dans cet ouvrage, que, même de mon point de
vue, je n’y trouve presque rien à relever. J’aurais seulement insisté
plus sur le bon côté de la philosophie du dixhuitième siècle, que vous
ne laissez pas de reconnaître et de faire voir, tout en appuyant
davantage sur ce qu’elle avait de défectueux. Je ne puis trop exprimer
ma profonde sympathie pour le noble amour de la liberté qui règne dans
votre ouvrage et qui en fait une protestation continue contre le triste
régime que votre grande patrie, l’œil droit du monde, est réduite à
subir dans ce moment.

Acceptez, avec mes remerciements, l’assurance de mes sentiments d’estime
et d’admiration.

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [519]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 16.[1856?]

India House

John William Parker

Parker, John William

269.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

India House

Dec. 16.[1856?]

Dear Sir

I should feel very little doubt of the success of Sir W. Hamilton’s
Lectures.2 His reputation for learning (with everybody) and for
profundity (with one of the two great divisions of the philosophical
world) stands higher than that of any other Englishman of this century;
and even those who do not agree in his opinions (of whom I am one)
regard his as the most powerful intellect on his own side of the
question, and think it important to be well acquainted with all his
speculations. Every student of logic and metaphysics will look forward
with great interest to the publication as a whole, of a system only
fragments of which have yet been printed. The sole obstacle to its
pecuniary success is the abstruseness of some of the speculations, and
in some degree, of the author’s mode of exposition; though his stile, in
a merely literary point of view, is good and clear. Against this may be
set the almost certainty that the book will be much read and used at the
Universities; and their demand for it is likely I think to last a long
while. So that I should suppose it has as good a chance of selling
several editions as any book on its kind of subject.

I shall be happy to revise the Pol. Ec. for another edition3 on the
terms you propose. Will you be good enough to send me the sheets—and
tell me about what time you think you shall require them for the
printer? I am engaged about a new book4 (in one smaller volume) which I
think I could finish in time for publication in May, and I am not so
certain of being able to do so if I put it aside to revise the Pol.
Economy. I am

Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [520]


1857

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

January 19, 1857

Blackheath Park, Kent

Asa Gray

Gray, Asa

270.


TO ASA GRAY1

Blackheath Park, Kent

January 19, 1857

Dear Sir

I have received your letter dated the 22nd of December, informing me
that I have been elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences:2 and I beg that you will express to the
Academy my high sense of the honour conferred on me, which is enhanced
by their having selected me as the fittest person to fill the place left
vacant by Sir William Hamilton.3

The writings which the Academy has thought worthy of this distinction
have been nowhere more intelligently read, or more conscientiously
examined, than in America; judging from the reviews which I have seen,
some of them by writers who differ widely from me in opinion. And all
means of information lead me to believe that there is in America a
public for such speculations, at least as thoughtful and more earnest
than that of England. It is gratifying to me to have my name associated
with so important a portion of that public as the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences. I have the honour to be, Sir

Your very obedient Servant

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [521]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 3 février 1857

Blackheath Park, Kent

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

271.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

Blackheath Park, Kent

,

le 3 février 1857

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

Je prends la liberté de recommander à votre obligeance mon beau-fils M.
Algernon Taylor, qui voyage en Italie pour se distraire d’une maladie
chronique dont il souffre depuis longtemps, et qui compte voir en
passant, avant la fin du printemps la belle ville que vous habitez.

Je me rappelle toujours avec plaisir la soirée si agréable que j’ai
passée avec vous,2 et le projet dont vous me fîtes part alors de venir
en Angleterre dans le courant de cette année. Si ce projet se réalise,
comme je l’espère, ma femme et moi comptons que vous viendrez nous voir,
et que nous reprendrons alors à trois notre bonne causerie.

Votre Dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Feb. 14, 1857

York

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

272.


TO HARRIET MILL1

York

Saturday evg
 [
Feb. 14, 1857

]

My dearest love, if I do not write tonight you will not hear from me
till Tuesday, so I write though it is but to say that I have got here
comfortably. I had a pleasant hour & a half’s ramble in that beautiful
town, & the journey was very pleasant as long as there was light, though
I could not succeed in getting a foot warmer till Newcastle. There was a
stoppage of twenty minutes at Berwick which I availed myself of for a
sort of dinner which disagreed with me. However I have done very well,
and have just time to write this scrawl before it will be too late for
the post. I enjoy excessively the feeling Edition: current; Page: [522]
of those three days and shall enjoy the remembrance of them & be very
happy till you come & a great deal happier afterwards, so be cheerful
darling & keep loving me as you so sweetly do. Bless you my own only
darling love.

I am at the George, alone in the coffee room by a flaming fire.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Feb. 16. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

273.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Monday
 [
Feb. 16. 1857

]

Darling of mine, I write directly to say that I have arrived here all
right. It was not without some drawbacks. I could not get inside York
Cathedral. Any day but Sunday it is open at nine, (& till five) but on
Sunday not till ten. I was there at ¼ to 8, & went to the only verger
that lives near, & his people told me that no one has the key but the
verger whose turn it is, & that he was sure to be there about nine—but
he had not arrived at ¼ to ten when I had to leave. I saw a very
beautiful ruin (St Mary’s Abbey) & a nice public garden & the outside of
the Minster quite equalled my expectation. But the journey; never travel
by a Sunday train when you can help it, for it stops at every station.
It took longer getting to Peterborough than we took the whole way, add
to which that it was an east wind & very cold, & they had no footwarmer
ready, nor could I get one the whole journey. I therefore arrived cold &
with a head ache, but (a sign it had done me no harm) I instantly
scampered off to the cathedral, heard part of the service & saw the
building which is one of the finest I know (in England). The inn was an
old-fashioned red brick place with very moderate charges, & there were
two really gentlemanly & well informed & decidedly liberal men in the
coffee-room all the evening with whom I had a good deal of pleasant
talk. This morning it was cold & foggy but became fine afterwards &
there was a foot warmer. The cold made me go in the first class both
days & I got here very prosperously, by the ten oclock train, (having to
wait to get a rent in my great coat mended). So here is my history. I
long to hear from my beloved one & to know both how she is & how she
manages at that place. I have hardly known which way to turn since I
arrived here between one & two, & therefore must content myself with
this bare recital of particulars—but she will be glad to have it because
it says that all is right. I hope she got mine from York. With the
utmost love

your own

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [523]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb. 17. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

274.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Tuesday
 [
Feb. 17. 1857

]

My dearest love, what a pleasure it was to see her precious writing, but
it was vexatious that she had such a bother the first day, how tired she
must have been, no wonder her fingers were stiff. It is a good thing on
every account that L[ily] is pleased & in good spirits. I am glad she
will not be so busy after today & will be able to be with you, though it
is provoking to think that you might so easily have been with her in
some more agreeable place than that one seems to be.

I do not find my eyes any better for the trip—but I suppose they will
come right by degrees, as they did seven years ago. I have seldom any
defect of sight, but occasional aching, which however I think is nervous
only. Sykes,2 though I did not see him till today, seemed almost
surprised to see me so soon—I might have taken two days more, you see.
He said they had had a “fright” because Mrs Sykes thought she saw your
death in the papers, it was the wife of a Mr Mills of the India House.3
I found two letters from Haji which I send in another cover together
with a bill of Bagnall. Lapworth’s which has also come I need not send.
It comes to £57. 6. not more I should think than we expected. It was the
strangest feeling yesterday & this morning to be there & at the same
time fresh from all those places. I have hardly anything running in my
mind’s eye but innumerable large railway stations. On Saturday night at
York I slept little & dreamt much—among the rest a long dream of some
speculation on animal nature, ending with my either reading or writing,
just before I awoke, this Richterish4 sentence: “With what prospect
then, until a cow is fed on broth, we can expect the truth, the whole
truth & nothing but the truth to be unfolded concerning this part of
nature, I leave to” &c &c. I had a still droller dream the same night. I
was seated at a table like a table d’hôte, with a woman at my left hand
& a young man opposite—the young man said, quoting somebody for the
saying, “there are two excellent & rare things to find in a woman, a
sincere friend & a sincere Magdalen.” I answered “the best would be to
find both in one”—on which the woman said “no, that would be too
vain”—whereupon I Edition: current; Page: [524] broke out “do you
suppose when one speaks of what is good in itself, one must be thinking
of one’s own paltry self interest? no, I spoke of what is abstractedly
good & admirable.” How queer to dream stupid mock mots, & of a kind
totally unlike one’s own ways or character. According to the usual
oddity of dreams—when the man made the quotation I recognised it &
thought he had quoted it wrong & the right words were “an innocent
magdalen” not perceiving the contradiction. I wonder if reading that
Frenchman’s book5 suggested the dream. These are ridiculous things to
put in a letter, but perhaps they may amuse my darling. I intend to come
here early & go away late during her absence in order more quickly to
get through my heap of work. I should have liked to go to Paddington to
vote against the directors of the G. Western,6 but I could not. The
opponents cannot expect to succeed when they do not ask for proxies. The
directors asked me for one which I refused. I think them more & more
wrong the more I look into the management, & they must be made to give
way sooner or later. I wrote to my darling from York & again yesterday.
I sent the paper yesterday & shall send today’s as those of the three
days of absence are enough at home for the present. The Govt is bringing
in a bill to make the savings banks a Govt responsibility.7 Adieu
darling. your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy Feb. 18. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

275.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Wedy
 [
Feb. 18. 1857

]

I do, dear, wonder very much that she should have urged you to come to
such a place as it seems to be, & herself so occupied that she could not
be with you.2 It has turned out better than there was reason to expect
in her Edition: current; Page: [525] having a respite from all that
bustle & occupation, & being able to be more with you. She is very
fortunate in having come to this man—she will evidently have the best
chances with him that the case admits of—so it is well for her, &
everything shews more & more that it is best for us also. I hope my
precious that I shall hear tomorrow that a lodging has been found fit
for you to be in & that she being more with you it is more endurable. I
will not forget the Bidd letter3 darling. That will be for Friday—&
tomorrow is the voting for Martin which is at Lewisham.4 I have done
exactly what she says darling about dinner, that is I have only spoken
to Henry & to Mary. The only difficulty I shall have in ordering relates
to the servant’s dinners, as I do not know the quantities to order: but
I must do the best I can. I get on quickly with the Pol Econ.5 as there
is but little to add or alter. Adieu my darling

your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Feb. 19. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

276.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Thursday
 [
Feb. 19. 1857

]

My most precious one, I do not get on well with the idea of your time
being passed in a dirty gloomy inn in that detestable place—& so much of
it, as it seems, still alone. Surely that decousu irregular character of
the planche life is not inseparable from it, but pretty nearly so in
practice I suppose as these comparatively regular people have so much of
it. I detest equally your returning all that way alone—but for that
there does not seem, as things now look, any alternative.

I pass the evening always at the Pol. Economy, with now & then a little
playing to rest my eyes & mind. There will be no great quantity to
alter, but now & then a little thing is of importance. One page I keep
for consideration when I can shew it to you. It is about the qualities
of English workpeople & Edition: current; Page: [526] of the English
generally.2 It is not at all as I would write it now, but I do not, in
reality, know how to write it.

I gave my vote at Lewisham this morning about nine, & found Martin
himself there.3 He reckons himself sure of success, on the number of
positive promises, after taking off the usual percentage (10 per cent)
for failures. I will not forget to post that letter tomorrow. On Saty I
shall take back the books to Rolandi4 & get others. Can I do any other
useful thing?

your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb. 24. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

277.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Tuesday
 [
Feb. 24. 1857

]

It was less of a shock the first moment than I should have thought it
would have been—no doubt because the same letter said you were better &
because the sight of your beloved handwriting gave me confidence—but I
have been growing more anxious every hour since. Thank Heaven however we
know by experience that this is not necessarily dangerous—though a
warning of the danger there always is. It must have been much less bad
than the former time, or you could not have written immediately. But it
would be very imprudent to attempt travelling for I do not know how many
days, & then it can only be by very short journeys. L[ily]’s being ill
at the same time is an additional misfortune. But why should I not come.
I am ready to come any day & stay any time—& I do not see that your
being there is inaverrable—you are really on a visit, & it is nobody’s
concern to whom. You will judge best of everthing & either you or L.
will let me know—but all my wish is to be with you & to be doing my
little little to help. The blessing & comfort it was & is to me to have
been with you on that former occasion no words will ever express.

I will do about the letters as you say & will send today’s paper as
usual—I shall hear again tomorrow—

Edition: current; Page: [527]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday Feb. 25. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

278.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Wednesday
 [
Feb. 25. 1857

]

Do not torment herself dearest dearest love about this having happened
when & how it has. There is nothing, in comparison, worth thinking of,
except to do the best that can be done now & especially not to be too
impatient to come home, at the great risk it would be to travel either
too soon or by too long journeys. It seems to me quite impossible that
you should come in a Saturday & Sunday, or even with a Friday
superadded—& therefore quite necessary that I should come for longer,
though that will make it necessary to say something to Sykes. You will
judge best what I had better say, & will tell me when my coming will be
of most service. One time of the week or another will be indifferent if
I ask for leave—But it is quite impossible you should do these long
journies which we did in going. I should think you ought not to take
less than four days, if you set out anything like as soon as you hope to
do—& in that case I shall require a week. Have you seen any medical man?

Since L[ily] returns with you at any rate, I shall not send any more
newspapers to G[lasgow] but shall keep them here, & send them if you say
so, or if there is any change of plan.

There are many things I wished to say, but I can write about nothing but
the one subject.

your own my precious darling

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Feb. 26. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

279.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Thursday
 [
Feb. 26. 1857

]

Dearest—

I expect to be with you before this note & therefore only write it in
case of any (impossible) stoppage on the way. I shall go by tonight’s
mail & consequently arrive in Edinburgh a little after eleven. adieu

your

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [528]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 13 [1857]

India House

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

280.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

India House

March 13 [1857]

Dear Chadwick

Neither have I made myself conversant with the details.2 What disgusted
me was the stupidity (if it was no worse) of supposing that people here
could judge of the effect that would be produced on the minds of
barbarians who put to death several thousands per year by the more or
less of reparation demanded where some was evidently due; the ridiculous
appeals to humanity and Christianity in favour of ruffians, & to
international law in favour of people who recognize no laws of war at
all (witness the poisonings & stabbings in the back) & the attempt to
make out Bowring a “flagitious” liar because he said the obvious truth
that if the Chinese thought they were insulting a vessel entitled to our
protection, it was immaterial whether it had really ceased to be
entitled or not.

I think you cannot make too much of the poisonings & of Yeh’s cutting
off heads. Coulson3 told me at the club (I do not know if you heard it)
that a friend of his told him that his brother (or some near relation)
at Canton had himself seen 3000 put to death in one day—they were told
off in 30 parties of 100 each. If you like to come & talk over the
points, pray do. I am too busy to write more, having all Thornton’s work
to do in addition to my own.

yrs ever truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [529]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 13. 1857

East India House

Frederick J. Furnivall

Furnivall, Frederick J.

281.


TO FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL1

East India House

March 13. 1857

Dear Sir

I am very much obliged for the trouble you are taking to procure a copy
of the reprint,2 and for your kind offer of information on the present
state of Cooperation in England. The information of that kind which
would be of most use for my present purpose (a new edition of the Pol.
Economy)3 would be some approximate estimate of the number of
establishments now in operation, distinguishing those which are for
production from those which are only stores—and a general notion of
whether they are increasing in number and prosperity, or falling off. I
am Dear Sir

yrs very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 25 1857

India House

Lord Overstone

Overstone, Lord

282.


TO LORD OVERSTONE1

India House

March 25
1857

Dear Lord Overstone

I have just heard from my friend Mr Alexander Bain that he is a
candidate for the Examinership in Logic and Mental Philosophy,2 and that
he thinks an expression of my opinion on his qualifications for the post
may be of service to him. I think him in all probability the fittest
person for it in the three kingdoms, having on the whole a greater
knowledge of the entire subject than any other person I could mention
and having also been a very successful teacher of it for some years at
an University (Marischal College Aberdeen)3 How much mental philosophy
owes to him as an original, profound, and at Edition: current; Page:
[530] the same time sober and judicious thinker, may be seen in his
principal work “The Senses and the Intellect”,4 in my opinion the best
book yet written on the Philosophy of Mind. I cannot imagine that any
other person of this generation has made good equally strong claims to
such a post as he applies for.

I am dear Lord Overstone
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday April 13. 1857

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

283.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Monday
 [
April 13. 1857

]

Darling—

I have got here quite comfortably, & am on the point of setting out for
Bond St. &c. It was worth much more than the extra 2/3 to hear her say
in such a nice strong voice that she was well.

The three days were very pleasant, and in looking back, seem very long.
I can hardly fancy it is so short a time since I was here last. That is
always the case in pleasant absences.

I always now forget something—I either left my India House clothes brush
behind this morning, or it has dropped out of my pocket.

Fare well & be well my own love for the sake of your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 10. 1857

India House

Frederick J. Furnivall

Furnivall, Frederick J.

284.


TO FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL1

India House

June 10. 1857

My dear Sir

I am extremely sorry to hear such bad news of the Central Cooperative
Agency.2 But if the supporters of cooperative establishments will not
have Edition: current; Page: [531] common sense and reasonable
confidence, they never can succeed. The vulgar seem to reserve all their
distrust for those who desire to befriend them.

You may perhaps like to see the inclosed,3 containing information which
reached me too late to be inserted in the text of my new edition.4 Much
of it is very encouraging.

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

I will send another copy to Mr Shorter5 in returning the book he was
kind enough to send me.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 14 [1857]

Blackheath Park

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

285.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath Park

June 14 [1857]

My dear Monsieur Louis Blanc

If you are disengaged next Wednesday (17th) we should be very glad if
you would come and take a quiet dinner with us at half past six—I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 30 juin 1857

East India House, London

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

286.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

East India House, London

le 30 juin 1857

J’ai tardé trop longtemps, mon cher Monsieur Villari, à répondre à votre
lettre du 15 avril. Aujourd’hui j’ai encore des remerciements à vous
faire de l’aimable accueil que vous avez donné à mon beau-fils Algernon
Taylor,2 et du service que vous lui avez rendu en lui donnant une lettre
de recommandation Edition: current; Page: [532] à Monsieur votre père.
Si, comme je le désire, votre projet de visite en Angleterre se
réalise,3 ma femme et moi pourrons vous témoigner personnellement notre
reconnaissance, et nous serions charmés d’avoir avec vous des causeries
pareilles à celle qui a rempli si agréablement pour moi cette longue
soirée à Florence.4 Nous pourrons alors vous donner plus pleinement
l’explication de la conduite louche que le gouvernement anglais a tenue
envers l’Italie,5 et qui vous a justement indigné, mais qui est à mes
yeux très conforme à la nature de ce gouvernement. En général les
étrangers, même les plus éclairés, prêtent au gouvernement anglais une
profondeur de politique et une suite dans les idées et dans les projets
qui ne lui appartiennent nullement. Je ne crois pas que Palmerston ni
aucun ministre anglais ait songé, ni à soulever les patriotes Italiens
ni encore moins à les trahir. Sauf l’infâme conduite de Sir James Graham
dans l’affaire des infortunés Bandiera, dont encore probablement
lui-même n’a pas prévu le résultat tragique,6 je ne pense pas qu’aucun
homme d’état anglais ait commis aucun crime d’intention contre la
liberté Italienne. Mais le gouvernement anglais, comme tous les
gouvernements, craint les révolutions et les soulèvements, et lors même
qu’il désapprouve réellement les oppresseurs des peuples, il ne veut ni
n’ose faire pour les opprimés autre chose que de provoquer bien
timidement quelques concessions très graduelles de la part de leurs
tyrans. Je crois que Palmerston a réellement espéré qu’en mettant pour
ainsi dire le roi de Naples moralement au ban de l’Europe, il le
forcerait à changer un peu de conduite.7 Il ne connaissait pas son
homme: mais, règle générale, les hommes d’état anglais ne connaissent
pas le monde ni la vie. Même nos plus grands roués Edition: current;
Page: [533] politiques sont parfois d’une innocence qu’un étranger a
beaucoup de peine à comprendre et à croire. Quant à la garantie donnée
au statu quo en Italie,8 n’en croyez rien. Nos ministres n’ont fait que
ce qu’ils ont avoué. Malheureusement ils avaient besoin de l’Autriche
contre la Russie. C’était le plus grand mal de la situation. Alors, afin
que l’Autriche fût libre de les aider, les gouvernements de France et
d’Angleterre lui ont dit “Si vous envoyez votre armée en Crimée, nous ne
permettons pas que pendant ce temps seulement on vous attaque par
derrière.” Heureusement l’Autriche n’y a pas mordu, et on n’a pas donné
suite à ce pacte, qui en tout cas eût cessé avec la guerre. Mais tout en
atténuant la culpabilité de notre gouvernement envers la cause de
l’Italie, je ne puis que dire avec douleur: Ne batissez jamais d’espoir
sur ce governement. Il vous donnera des mots et des sentiments, jamais
des actes. Je crois que son appui moral vaut quelque chose,
momentanément au moins, pour la Sardaigne.9 Mais c’était là justement ce
qu’il fallait à l’opinion aristocratique d’ici—une révolution royale. Le
gouvernement anglais n’aidera jamais un peuple à renverser son
gouvernement, quelque odieux qu’il puisse être, même à ses propres yeux.
Vous avez bien vu qu’il ne s’est pas opposé à l’intervention française à
Rome,10 à l’intervention russe en Hongrie.11 Même en temps de guerre
contre la Russie, il n’a pas voulu soulever la Pologne.12 Cela ne dit-il
pas tout?

J’ai appris avec beaucoup d’intérêt ce que vous m’écrivez sur les
oeuvres inédites de Machiavelli et Guicciardini.13 Des publications
aussi importantes Edition: current; Page: [534] sous le rapport
historique ne sauraient manquer de faire sensation en Europe. Je
conviens avec vous qu’une revue qui a la prétention de rendre compte de
tout, ne devrait pas negliger le mouvement intellectuel de l’Italie.
Mais je n’écris pas dans le Westminster Review, et n’y ai pas
d’influence. Quand j’écrivais, il y a vingt ans, j’y ai fait imprimer
quelques bons articles de Mazzini sur les auteurs Italiens.14 Je ne sais
pas qui a pu vous dire que j’ai écrit quelque chose sur le Socialisme.
Je n’ai écrit là dessus que ce qui a paru dans mes Principes d’Écon.
Politique.15 J’ai fait dernièrement un petit livre qui paraîtra l’hiver
prochain et dont je me ferai un plaisir de vous offrir un exemplaire, si
toutefois son titre “De la Liberté” comporte son entrée en Toscane.16 Il
ne s’agit pas cependant de liberté politique dans ce livre, autant que
de liberté sociale, morale, et religieuse.

Vous avez vu par les elections de Paris qu’il y a encore de la vie en
France.17 C’est ce qui est arrivé de mieux en Europe, à mon avis, depuis
1851.

Vous me feriez grand plaisir en m’écrivant quelquefois. Notre entrevue
d’il y a deux ans m’a donné un souvenir si agréable, que je regretterais
beaucoup de laisser tomber ce commencement de relation entre nous.

Tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 26 août 1857

East India House, London

Nicolas Villiaumé

Villiaumé, Nicolas

287.


TO NICOLAS VILLIAUMÉ1

East India House, London

le 26 août 1857

Monsieur

Des occupations multipliées m’ont empêché jusqu’ici de répondre,
autrement que par l’envoi réciproque de ma nouvelle édition,2 au don que
vous Edition: current; Page: [535] avez bien voulu me faire de votre
important Traité d’Economie Politique.3 Je ne connais pas d’autre
écrivain français qui me paraisse avoir aussi bien approfondi les lois
abstraites de l’Economie Politique, et votre livre est d’autant plus
précieux qu’il se recommande par la conformité de principes à ceux qui
professent en France des opinions démocratiques avancées, opinions que
je partage à beaucoup d’égards, mais qui, il faut l’avouer, se sont
rarement trouvées jusqu’ici réunis comme chez vous, à des opinions
économiques éclairées. Vous avez puisé si heureusement dans ce qui
offrent de meilleur les économistes anglais, que je suis tout surpris
d’apprendre que vous ne les lisez que dans les traductions. Je me sens
très honoré en retrouvant tant de fois chez vous mes propres opinions,
et je crois qu’en économie politique nous sommes rarement en désaccord
sérieux. Notre plus grande divergence porte peut-être sur la liberté du
taux de l’intérêt; encore ne suis-je pas éloigné de penser que cette
liberté puisse admettre des modifications là où comme dans les
républiques anciennes, et même en France, la classe de débiteurs se
compose surtout de ceux qui travaillent la terre de leurs mains.

Vous avez probablement deviné que l’impression de ma nouvelle édition se
trouvait trop avancée pour que j’eusse pu la faire profiter de votre
ouvrage autrement qu’en y ajoutant, en forme d’appendice, les
renseignements importants que vous avez donnés sur l’état actuel des
associations ouvrières.4

Je suis, Monsieur, avec les sentiments les plus respectueux

Votre dévoué serviteur

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 13. [1857]

Salutation [Hotel], Ambleside

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

288.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Salutation [Hotel], Ambleside

Sept. 13. [1857]

Dearest—

I have been very fortunate in having had a most beautiful day for
Helvellyn. I ascended it from Patterdale having gone there by an early
coach from here, & I returned here in the same way in the evening,
walking up the pass so you see I was not tired. The view though there
were a few Edition: current; Page: [536] clouds was splendid. It was a
disappointment as to plants, as on those sunny heights everything was
still more gone by than in the valleys—of all the rare plants which grow
there I could only distinguish two, and those were only in leaf. But the
day before I was unexpectedly successful in plants between Windermere &
this place. I made a circuit & saw Mr Crosfield’s cottages2 which I will
describe to you when I have the happiness of being with you again; they
are not what we want; besides other objections they are in a real
village or rather hamlet. I have planned a very nice round for today,
and shall go to Broughton tomorrow down the Duddon, and to Lancaster, &
I hope to Settle on Tuesday. I talked yesterday with people from
Fleetwood & others from Blackpool & I am afraid they are but ugly
places—I so hope to hear that you have not inflicted purgatory on
yourself to give me this walk. I feel however that it will do me great
good. Today the sky is gloomy—but not very threatening. Yesterday
everything looked its very best. I shall write again as soon as I
receive yours. Adieu my own wife from your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy Sept. 16. 1857

Lion Hotel Settle

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

289.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Lion Hotel Settle

Wedy morning
 [
Sept. 16. 1857

]

I got her two darling letters both together this morning—the train I
came by to Lancaster yesterday being an hour behind time I was too late
for the train I ought to have come here by, and I arrived here too late
for letters. So you see my experience of these northern trains is like
yours, & so is my observation of the dirty, mean, horrid looking people
who go by them & frequent the stations. I am not at all surprised my own
dearest one that neither of the two places turned out fit to stay at,
and I shall be quite happy in rejoining her at Leamington instead of
that Manchester: it is much pleasanter thinking of her in a place we
know & which looks & feels clean & civilized, unlike anything in
Lancashire I should think. Edition: current; Page: [537] I have been
lucky in weather & it greatly increased the pleasure that I knew what
pleasure it would give my darling. On Sunday I was about all day & in
the evening had from the mountains overlooking Grasmere on the east, the
most glorious mountain view I have yet had—four fine ranges of dark
mountain one behind another with the sun behind all. On Monday morning
there was a Scotch mist but I made out my walk over Wrynose & down the
Duddon to Broughton & though I could not see much of the mountains in
Little Langdale it was still very fine & I found a rare fern & a rare
mint, peppermint to wit, which I had never found before. The weather
cleared afterwards & I saw the Duddon very well & to increase the luck,
the valley proved to be much finer descending than it would have been
ascending. The absence of a lake made more space for other varieties &
there is about half way a sort of Vallée de Cluses, of a type not met
with elsewhere in the lake district. Yesterday I saw Furness Abbey which
in its way was fine too. But the weather is now both couvert & hazy
though not looking like rainy. This place is a prettier country town
than any in the lakes & the country about looks very pretty though the
mountains have not the fine forms & beautiful arrangement of the Lakes.
Please darling continue to write here, as I find it is the best centre
for all I want to see—within a day’s walk of everything. I have time to
explore Craven between this & Sunday & I shall certainly go to
Manchester on Monday & to darling on Tuesday. I saw the last Times
yesterday at Lancaster. The Indian news seems to me more bad than good,
but not, I think, of any bad omen.2 I saw in a Liverpool paper an
announcement from a French paper of the death of Comte.3 It seems as if
there would be no thinkers left in the world. I shall know by her answer
to this how long a letter takes—I should think it will not be safe for
her to write after Saturday as I suppose letters northward obey the
London post & therefore are not sent on Sunday. I shall enquire at the
post office here on Monday before leaving.

I fancy it much pleasanter for her at Leamington & even prettier than
that Lancashire coast, & now adieu from her own

J.S.M.

I wrote to Fleetwood on Sunday4—I hope they sent it on.

Edition: current; Page: [538]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Sept. 18. 1857

Settle

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

290.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Settle

Friday morng
 [
Sept. 18. 1857

]

Dearest,

I have spent the last two days in walking about this neighbourhood, &
have seen the famous Malham Cove & Gordale Scar. It is much prettier
country than I expected, & bears the same relation to the Lakes that the
Jura does to the Alps, being greener, & with the green not of fern but
of rich & abundant turf, but the mountains not of the fine shape of
those of the Lakes, but round, or with long inclining ridges & immense
bases, now & then however a peaked top jutting out, as it does in the
Jura not much higher than the rest. If it had but the fir woods (but
what an if that is) it would want little of being equal to the Jura; &
Gordale Scar is a minor Creux du Vent. The mountains as in the Jura
continually break into wall-like cliffs—this is characteristic of
limestone to which also these mountains & those of the Jura owe their
fine turf & their comparative absence of bog & likewise their abundance
of plants—I have done very well botanically considering the lateness of
the season. The weather has remained fine, the south west wind spending
itself in bringing something between clouds & haze which entirely
shrouded the higher mountains till towards evening; but today it is
brighter, the wind having changed to north. It shews how cheap the
country must be to live in that at the inn at the station where I staid
the night I arrived (as there were no means of getting my portmanteau a
mile & a half to the town) I had tea with bread, breakfast with eggs &
cold meat, & a bed, for all which including attendance the charge was
two shillings & two pence. I shall probably see Ingleborough & its caves
tomorrow. There are no more letters yet dear at the post office. When
she writes will she tell me by what railway she got to Leamington: is
there a branch direct from Birmingham, & how do the trains suit? but
only write what you happen to know, & I will find out the rest for
myself. It is a real pleasure thinking of her at a pleasant place & one
I know & have seen with her. I am glad too that she will have seen those
pictures.2 I shall see them either on Monday afternoon or Tuesday
morning & will certainly be with my beloved one on Tuesday evening. I do
not generally find that Art & Nature mix well together in my case—but
Furness Abbey while it exemplified this, shewed that I can get into the
Art state quickly & I will if Manchester ugliness will let me. Adieu
darling—your own

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [539]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saty Sept. 19. 1857

Settle

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

291.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Settle

Saty morng
 [
Sept. 19. 1857

]

I have just got your darling letter you angel which would make me set
off directly to rejoin you if I did not know that you would much rather
I did not on account of the good this excursion does me. I too was
feeling very sad all yesterday but for an opposite reason (partly) to
yours, namely perfect beauty. It was the first splendid day since I have
been here, & I was all day wandering over the edge of the hills having
such a sun & sky as made the views both near & distant perfectly
beautiful & I think that always makes one melancholy, at least when one
is alone, which to me means not with you. I am now going to climb
Ingleborough & see the caves, at least the principal of them, for there
are multitudes all about here. I fancied Leamington would be pleasant
because it has a civilized air, though very ugly—the frequented parts of
the N. of E. are generally hideous as to the human part of them, but
this Settle is a nice quiet, really pretty, very little country place,
not tourified, the people of the place are civil & the few strangers one
sees in the coffee room are really gentlemanly. I shall enquire at the
post office Manchester my own love. I will certainly look particularly
at the pictures my darling liked. Adieu till Tuesday evening & blessing
from her own

J.S.M.

I wrote yesterday to Post Off. Leamington. Excuse the Ambleside
envelopes.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 5, 1857

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

292.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Oct. 5, 1857

I have nearly finished an Essay on “Liberty”2 which I hope to publish
next winter. As the Liberty it treats of is moral and intellectual
rather than political, it is not so much needed in Germany as it is
here.

Edition: current; Page: [540]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 12. 1857

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Henry Carleton

Carleton, Henry

293.


TO HENRY CARLETON1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Oct. 12. 1857

.

Dear Sir—

The little volume2 which you did me the honor to send me, arrived
safely, but not until several months after the date of your letter
announcing its despatch. I read it as soon as I received it, which was
about a fortnight ago, & I not only agree with you throughout on the
main question (of Liberty & Necessity) but also have to thank you for a
very useful exposition & illustration, in small compass, of the Law of
Association as applied to the analysis of the principal mental
phenomena. I could mention points on which I differ from you; but on
several of these the difference is possibly more verbal than real. For
instance, when you say on page 130 that truth is to every man what it
appears to him to be, I cannot suppose you to mean that if I think
poison to be wholesome food, it really is so to me, but only that I
cannot help viewing as truth what presents itself to my perceptions or
judgment as such. So when you say that “sin and crime exist of
necessity,” I do not understand you to mean that it is necessary they
should always exist; but only that when they exist, they are the
necessary consequences of the causes which have produced them. I do not
think you successful in the faint attempt you make to reconcile your
doctrine with the received notions of Divine perfection; but your theory
is quite as consistent with those notions as the opposite theory. In
truth nothing can reconcile the order of nature as we know it with
perfect wisdom & goodness, combined with infinite power. To make any
consistent scheme, at least one of the three must be given up.

There is something doing in this country also for the “Ass[ociatio]n
Philosophy.”3 Mr. Bain has published under the name of “The Senses and
the Intellect,”4 the first part of a treatise on the mind, which I think
you would be much pleased with. He has not yet got to your special
subject, but he will soon arrive at it. Mr. Herbert Spencer’s
“Principles of Psychology,”5 though not so sound as a whole, contains
many searching analyses of complex mental phenomena, and happy
applications of the principle of association. He has unfortunately put
at the head of it a dissertation under the title of the “Universal
Postulate,”6 which seems to me not only erroneous, but quite
inconsistent with the philosophy of the work it is prefixed to.

Edition: current; Page: [541]
I hope that like myself you have been successful in warding off your
chest complaint, and that your eyesight, to which your preface alludes,
is at least not getting worse.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 22. 1857

Blackheath

Frederick Sinnett

Sinnett, Frederick

294.


TO FREDERICK SINNETT1

Blackheath

Oct. 22. 1857

.

Dear Sir—

It is now some weeks since I received your letter but I have not until
now had time to answer your question.

In principle I am quite in favour of considering all land as the
property of the State, and its rent as a fund for defraying the public
expenses. But there are two objections to the application of this maxim
to a country in the circumstances of Australia. One of these you have
mentioned, viz. that a large immigration is most effectually attracted
by granting the land in absolute property, at a price to be only once
paid. I agree with you that a time comes when a colony is so far
advanced in population & importance that immigration ceases to be the
first object so far as the colony itself is concerned, & that when this
time comes, the advantage of the colony should take precedence over the
interest which the mother country may have in getting rid of a surplus
population. But I doubt if that time has yet come in the case of
Australia. A great temporary immigration has been brought about by the
gold discoveries,2 but I should think that for retaining the immigrants,
the colony depends very much on the facilities allowed of acquiring
land; & Englishmen do not like to settle where they cannot get land in
fee. In India we have the system you desire, but that is one great
reason why few English settle there; & the English who do go, & the
greater number who would like to go, are always clamouring to have the
system changed to one of grants in fee: & so I should think would a
large part of the resident population of Australia who have not yet got
land.

There is a second objection which weighs with me as much as the first;
the very great difficulty of levying a land tax, or any annual payment,
from settlers scattered widely apart over a great wilderness. It is
difficult enough, Edition: current; Page: [542] as the Americans find,
to prevent squatting even when only one payment is demanded, as a
condition preliminary to occupancy. But if a payment has to be made
annually I cannot but think that to collect & enforce it, if practicable
at all, would require so costly an establishment as would absorb the
chief part of the receipts, & be quite unsuitable to the finances of a
country like Australia. In India the revenue establishments are one of
the heaviest items of the public expenditure, although India in general
is thickly peopled. I believe that attempts have been made formerly to
collect taxes from outlying lands in the older Australian colonies but
that their failure was so complete that they were abandoned.

The newly introduced parliamentary government of the provinces3 seems to
have some difficulty in getting into regular play, but this will be got
over in time. We are glad to hear your favorable account of your own
prospects.4 My wife sends very kind remembrance to you which is joined
by Haji & his sister—the former I think is very unlikely to become
either a Catholic or a monk, although he passed some months in visiting
convents in Italy, among his various peregrinations in search of relief
for his constant bad health. I am yrs truly

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

October 31, 1857

William Henry Smith

Smith, William Henry

295.


TO WILLIAM HENRY SMITH1

[After
October 31, 1857

]2

I had already read the book with great interest. As is the case with
everything of yours that I have read, it seemed to me full of true
thought aptly expressed and, though not resolving many questions, a
valuable contribution to the floating elements out of which the future
moral and intellectual synthesis will have to shape itself. I have been
much pleased, both on your account and that of the book itself, at the
decided success it has met with.

Edition: current; Page: [543]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 11, 1857

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

296.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Dec. 11, 1857

Dear Sir—

I am unable to put my name to the Memorial2 which I have just received
from you, because I am, to say the least, very doubtful as to the
desirableness of the measure proposed in it.

I quite agree in the opinion that educated persons should count in a
greater ratio than that of their mere numbers in the constituency of the
country. But I have not seen any method proposed by which persons of
educated minds can be sifted from the rest of the community. All that
could well be done is to give votes to a limited number of what are
called liberal professions, on the presumption (often a very false one)
that every member of these professions must be an educated person. But
nearly all the recognized professions have as such, interests &
partialities opposed to the public good, & the members of Parliament
whom they would elect if organized apart would, I apprehend, be much
more likely to represent their sentiments & objects as professional,
than as educated men.

The only provisions for increasing the influence of the more educated
class of voters, to which I see my way, are 1st, an educational test for
all electors, such as would exclude the wholly uneducated. The amount of
expurgation of even the present constituencies, which this would effect,
would be found I believe much greater than is supposed. 2dy, I regard it
as an indispensable part of a just representative constitution, that
minorities be not swamped but that every considerable minority be
represented in a fair proportion to its numbers.3 This would be secured
by the simple plan proposed some years ago by Mr. Marshall, of allowing
a voter if he pleases to give all his votes to the same candidate.4
Other modes of effecting the same object have been Edition: current;
Page: [544] proposed, but they would necessarily be unpopular as they
propose to operate by abridging the rights of the individual voter,
while the plan in question would extend them, & it would besides, allow
weight to degree of preference as well as to number, a distinction
highly favorable to the more eminent candidate.

I may add that I should be glad to see a representation given to the
graduates of the Univ. of London,5 such as is already possessed by
Oxford, Cambridge, & Dublin.

Edition: current; Page: [545]


1858

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 11. 1858

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

297.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

Jan. 11. 1858

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Je n’ai aucune raison pour ne pas vouloir être cité comme l’auteur de la
brochure sur la Révolution de Février.2 Au contraire je me réjouirais
d’associer mon nom à cette protestation en faveur de principes qui sont
les miens, et d’hommes que je respecte profondément.

Ma femme me charge de vous offrir l’expression de sa sympathie dans
votre travail justificatif.3

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 19. 1858

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

John Holmes

Holmes, John

298.


TO JOHN HOLMES1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Jan. 19. 1858

.

Dear Sir—

I am very much obliged to you for sending me the paper which you read at
the Birmingham meeting.2 I only knew enough of the Leeds experiment to
be aware that it had been very successful; & of the Rochdale Edition:
current; Page: [546] one, only a little more.3 I now know the
particulars of the success, & some of the details of the plan, & I hope
as occasions arise to make my knowledge useful. The only doubt which
could reasonably be entertained about the success of cooperation in this
country, was grounded on the low moral & intellectual condition of the
masses. Your success & that of the Rochdale Association proves that
there are at least two bodies of workpeople to be found who are
sufficiently free from shortsighted selfishness—for that is really all
that is required—to be capable of succeeding in such an enterprise, and
the results, economically considered, as exhibited in your paper, are so
advantageous that they can hardly fail to call forth imitators. It is
now shewn that with honest & intelligent management, cooperative
establishments can undersell individual dealers. But to do this, the
management must be honest & intelligent. If the experience of
cooperation teaches the working classes the value of honesty &
intelligence to themselves, it will work as great a moral revolution in
society as it will, in that case, a physical. But it will never do the
last without the first, and that you see this so clearly, gives me much
confidence in the value of your influence, & hopes of the permanency of
your success. I am yrs very truly

John Holmes Esq

The People’s Flour Mill

Leeds

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 23. [1858]

East India House

Arthur Mills

Mills, Arthur

299.


TO ARTHUR MILLS1

East India House

Jan. 23. [1858]

Dear Sir

I return your proofs2 with a few pencil marks in the margin.

In the earlier facts as stated by you there are some about which I feel
doubtful. I have no doubt you have always good authority for them, but
they Edition: current; Page: [547] are sometimes apparently deficient in
explanations which would give them a somewhat different colour from that
which they now bear. I have marked all such passages for your judgment.
But generally speaking your statements are strictly accurate.

I am
 Very faithfully yrs

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 17. 1858

Exam. off

Arthur Mills

Mills, Arthur

300.


TO ARTHUR MILLS1

Exam. off

.

Feb. 17. 1858

Dear Sir

I send you as requested a note of the points which have occurred to me
as requiring correction in your book. They are mostly very trifling, but
some few are important.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 20. 1858

Mary Mill Colman

Colman, Mary Mill

301.


TO MARY MILL COLMAN1

Feb. 20. 1858

Mary—

I have received your note of Feb. 15. I do not know why you write to me
after so long an interval if you cannot shew more good sense or good
feeling than are shewn in this note. There is besides, a total want of
modesty in supposing that I am likely to receive instruction from you on
the subject of my strongest convictions2—which also were those of your
father. There is certainly nothing in your note to make me desire that
there should be any more communication between us than there has been
for many years past.

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [548]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 21. 1858

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Giuseppe Mazzini

Mazzini, Giuseppe

302.


TO GIUSEPPE MAZZINI1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 21. 1858

Dear Sir—

It gave me much pleasure to see your handwriting after so many years
interval.2 I did not answer your first note when I received it, because
I hoped in answering it to have said that I had been able to do
something for Dr Laurenza.3 I have been disappointed of this, through
his not obtaining a certificate from Dr Scott,4 the E.I.C’s examining
physician, without which no one is appointed to the medical charge of
troops. I do not understand clearly from Dr L. what are Dr Scott’s
objections. They are very probably quite unreasonable; but I have no
power of overruling them, & unfortunately I have no interest or
influence that can be useful to Dr L. in any other quarter though I
shall lose no opportunity if any should chance to offer, as I regret
much my inability to be of service to an Italian patriot & a friend of
yours.

When I began writing to you I thought that this country was meanly
allowing itself to be made an appendage to Louis Bonaparte’s police for
the purpose of hunting down all foreigners (& indeed English too) who
have virtue enough to be his avowed enemies.5 But it appears we are to
be spared this ignominy; & such is the state of the world ten years
after 1848 that even this must be felt as a great victory.

I sympathize too strongly both with your taste for solitude & with the
devotion of your time & activity to the great object of your life, to
intrude on you with visits or invitations. We, like you, feel that those
who would either make their lives useful to noble ends, or maintain any
elevation of character within themselves, must in these days have little
to do with what is called society. But if it can be any pleasure to you
to exchange ideas with people who have many thoughts & feelings in
common with you, my wife & I reckon you among the few persons to whom we
can sincerely say that they may feel sure of being welcome.

I am Dr Sir yours very truly

Edition: current; Page: [549]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 9. 1858

India House

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

303.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

India House

March 9. 1858

Dear Chadwick

The inclosed Memorandum2 supplies answers to some of the grossest
misstatements in Ashworth’s paper.3

If you look through the last 20 pages of Dr Royle’s pamphlet4 which I
send, you will learn more to your present purpose than I can tell you.

ever yrs
 in haste

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 9 mars 1858

East India House, London

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

304.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

East India House, London

le 9 mars 1858

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

Vos deux lettres, dont la dernière porte la date du 10 janvier,
méritaient bien une réponse plus prompte. Je vous prie de ne pas voir
dans le retard que j’y ai mis, une preuve d’indifférence aux sentiments
d’amitié que vous voulez bien me témoigner. Ce retard vient de la
multiplicité de mes occupations, et surtout de la lutte que la Compagnie
des Indes, dont je suis un des employés, soutient maintenant pour son
existence.2 Le gouvernement Anglais Edition: current; Page: [550] se
propose d’arracher à la Compagnie la part qu’elle conserve encore dans
l’administration de l’Inde. L’ignorance du public ne permet pas d’espoir
que la Compagnie puisse s’en tirer; mais il importe qu’elle succombe
honorablement, et que sa cause soit plaidée d’une manière digne d’un
gouvernement qui a été, j’ose le dire, unique dans le monde par la
pureté de ses intentions et par la bienfaisance de ses actes. Cette
tâche étant devolue surtout à moi, elle a dû être depuis quelque temps
ma principale occupation.

Cependant depuis l’ouverture du parlement, une question d’un intérêt
encore plus vif est venue compliquer la situation. Je veux parler de la
misérable tentative du ministère Palmerston de traîner la nation
anglaise dans la boue, en faisant d’elle une succursale de la police
française.3 Nous sommes sauvés pour le moment de cet avilissement, par
la chute du ministère, qui, tout puissant en apparence un mois
auparavant, a été chassé du pouvoir par la combinaison de ses ennemis
naturels avec ceux qui lui ont retiré leur appui à cause de son indigne
soumission à des exigences déshonorables au pays. Cet événement m’a
comblé de joie; cependant je ne suis pas encore rassuré: les
successeurs4 de Lord Palmerston ne valent pas mieux que lui, et il n’est
rien moins que certain qu’ils ne seront pas, au fond, tout aussi
obséquieux. S’ils ne font pas une nouvelle loi, ce qui est encore
douteux, ils feront certainement tout le mal possible au moyen des lois
existantes, et celles-là sont déjà bien assez odieuses: heureusement il
nous reste le jury, et la presse indépendante exerce sur lui une
certaine influence. Vous voyez par la part qu’il a prise dans cette
affaire que Lord John Russell a du bon,5 quoique vous l’ayez
parfaitement bien jugé être un homme très médiocre. Tel qu’il est, il
vaut encore mieux que la plupart de nos soi-disant hommes d’état, qui,
s’ils savent quelque chose, ne savent que les traditions de la politique
anglaise, soit conservatrice, soit libérale mais qui sont d’une
ignorance profonde sur la politique générale, et sur les idées et
l’histoire des autres pays.

J’espérais vous offrir depuis longtemps mon petit livre sur la liberté,
mais plusieurs raisons m’ont décidé à ne pas le faire imprimer cet
hiver.6 Au reste, il n’a guère de valeur que pour l’Angleterre. Il
traite de la liberté morale et intellectuelle, en quoi les nations du
Continent sont autant au dessus de l’Angleterre qu’elles lui sont
inférieures quant à la liberté politique.

Ma femme me charge de vous faire ses compliments. Elle s’intéresse
autant que moi à la cause de l’Italie et aux patriotes et philosophes
Italiens. Nous espérons bien vous voir avant peu, soit ici, soit
peutêtre à Florence. Algernon Taylor se rappelle à votre souvenir. Sa
santé est toujours très faible. Moi même je me porte assez bien. Je
serai charmé d’avoir de vous la longue Edition: current; Page: [551]
lettre dont vous me parlez, et j’espère y répondre une autre fois moins
tardivement. Votre dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 11, 1858

Ex[aminer’s] Off[ice]

305.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Ex[aminer’s] Off[ice]

March 11, 1858

Dear Mrs [name heavily blacked out]

It seems to me that in a matter so entirely domestic and personal, no
one can interfere but yourself. I imagine that you should see the man,
tell him what your opinion is, and arrange it with him as you find best.
It is the sort of small annoyance to which every body is liable, and
which every body must settle for themselves.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 20, 1858

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

William Newmarch

Newmarch, William

306.


TO WILLIAM NEWMARCH1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

March 20, 1858

Dear Sir—

I have been turning over in my mind the proposal which was the subject
of your note of the 17th, for founding a Professorship at King’s College
in the name of Mr Tooke.2 In so far as its object is to pay honor to Mr
Tooke I entirely sympathise with it. Few persons have rendered greater
services to P. Economy & its applications than Mr Tooke, & the value of
what he has done is likely to be rated more & more highly as the subject
is better understood & as the ephemeral controversies of the present
time die away. But I am not certain that the best mode of demonstrating
respect to Edition: current; Page: [552] his memory is the one
suggested. It does not seem to me that the persons, of more or less
merit, in whose name professorships have been founded at the
Universities, are remembered to any purpose through those endowments. I
for one do not even know when most of them lived or who they were. The
present plan has certainly the recommendation of aiming at public
usefulness. But to endow a permanent Professorship to an amount worth
accepting by any eminent man, with the interest of subscriptions, would
require a much larger sum than I shd think it would be possible to
raise. And would the lecture be attended? There is a Professorship of
Pol. Ec. at Univ. College but I believe there are hardly ever any
pupils. This brings me to what is with me a decisive objection against
the plan as connected with King’s College, namely that it is a
distinctively Church Institution.3 I have been fighting all my life for
the principle of Schools & Colleges for all, not for Churchmen or any
other class of religionists & I believe Mr Tooke’s opinions on the
subject were exactly the same, while K.C. was founded in avowed
opposition to religious equality, as the National Schools were founded
in opposition to the Lancastrian.4 I have always refused to support any
kind of Church schools & for the same reason I could not join in giving
any additional advantages to a Church College over those which are bound
by their constitution to religious neutrality.

I am Dr Sr yrs very truly

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 15. 1858

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

Giuseppe Mazzini

Mazzini, Giuseppe

307.


TO GIUSEPPE MAZZINI1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

April 15. 1858

Dear Sir—

I heartily wish that I knew where to find such a young man as you
describe. He is wanted for many other purposes besides that which you
are aiming at. But I do not know of any such person.

Edition: current; Page: [553]
Your project is a very good one if it could be successful.2 But of this
there seems little chance. Even supposing the indifference of the
English to foreign affairs overcome, you would probably find that you
had only substituted one obstacle in the place of another. The English,
of all ranks and classes, are at bottom, in all their feelings,
aristocrats. They have some conception of liberty, & set some value on
it, but the very idea of equality is strange & offensive to them. They
do not dislike to have many people above them as long as they have some
below them. And therefore they have never sympathized & in their present
state of mind never will sympathize with any really democratic or
republican party in other countries. They keep what sympathy they have
for those whom they look upon as imitators of English
institutions—Continental Whigs who desire to introduce constitutional
forms & some securities against personal oppression—leaving in other
respects the old order of things with all its inequalities & social
injustices and any people who are not willing to content themselves with
this, are thought unfit for liberty. There is here & there an Englishman
who is an exception, but if all the exceptions were to unite I doubt
their making much impression on English policy. Even Louis Napoleon was
never really unpopular here until he was supposed to have insulted &
threatened England.

yrs very truly

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 17. 1858

Blackheath

Patrick O’Callaghan

O’Callaghan, Patrick

308.


TO PATRICK O’CALLAGHAN1

Blackheath

April 17. 1858

Sir

In reply to your letter of the 9th inst. I beg to say that I have not
the honor of being a member of the British Association,2 unless the body
which met at Birmingham3 last year to discuss subjects connected with
Social Science, has Edition: current; Page: [554] merged in the older
Association; but in any case I have no prospect of having to prepare any
paper for the meeting4 in September next, nor of being able to attend
the meeting.

I am Sir

yr obt Servt

J. S. Mill

P. O’Callaghan Esq
 etc. etc.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 22, 1858

John Elliot

Elliot, John

309.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

April 22, 1858

Dear Sir

Since receiving your note, I have read your volume of Lectures2 a second
time through, and I find my original opinion confirmed, that its view of
the logic of Political Economy is thoroughly sound and philosophical,
and expressed in clear and precise language. This is the most cardinal
point of all in an Examiner,3 whose object should be to test the general
direction of the pupil’s faculties, still more than his positive
acquirements. But your book also shews what appears to me a thorough
knowledge of the questions of political economy which it touches on, and
these are some of the most important.

If this expression of opinion can be of any assistance in promoting your
object, you are most welcome to make use of it.

I am Dr Sir
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [555]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 1.1858

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

J. Britten

Britten, J.

310.


TO J. BRITTEN1

E[ast] I[ndia] H[ouse]

July 1.1858

Sir—

I have to acknowledge a letter from you dated June 24.

You are not the first, nor the hundredth person who has thought that he
was able to prove “that a large majority of the principles or dogmas
usually accepted by economists as being the settled principles of the
science are wholly fallacious.” I have read many such attempts: some of
them more or less ingenious, others merely stupid, but all shewing equal
incapacity of seeing through the most obvious paralogisms: and not only
did none of them, in my judgment, effect their object, but I have rarely
found that anything was to be learnt from them, even incidentally.
Having obtained no better fruit from a considerable course of such
reading, I may claim to be excused from giving time which I can ill
spare, to the examination of any new attempts of the kind, unless I have
some special reason to expect that it will differ very much in character
from its predecessors. And I certainly cannot accede to your proposal,
that I should not merely study the book which is to refute me and all
other political economists, but also assist you in writing it. I am Sir
yr obt Sert

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 1 juillet 1858

East India House, London

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

311.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

East India House, London

le 1 juillet 1858

.

Monsieur

Si j’ai un peu tardé à répondre à la lettre que vous m’avez fait
l’honneur de m’adresser il y a plus d’un mois, c’est que je voulais
auparavant avoir le temps de donner à votre important ouvrage,2 la
lecture soigneuse qu’il mérite.

Je vois dans ce livre, l’exposition la plus philosophique qu’on ait
donnée jusqu’ici des principes qu’on peut invoquer en faveur de
l’intervention gouvernementale. Edition: current; Page: [556] Si je
trouve que vous n’avez pas toujours donné un poids suffisant aux raisons
du côté opposé je dois reconnaître que vous en avez au moins rendu
compte avec une sincérité et une impartialité dignes d’un écrivain qui
met la vérité et le bien public au dessus du triomphe de son opinion.

Vous avez vu par le dernier chapitre de mon Traité,3 qu’il y a bien des
points de contact entre votre manière de voir et la mienne. Il n’y a
entre nous d’autres différences que celles qui peuvent exister entre
penseurs. J’adhère à tout ce que j’ai écrit sur la question que vous
avez traitée, et j’accorde qu’il était temps que le gouvernement général
de l’Angleterre se mêlât jusqu’ à un certain point de surveiller des
institutions locales d’ailleurs fort mal organisées, et plus corrompues
encore que l’état. Malgré cela, je trouve très dangereuse la tendance
que vous signalez par l’expression que “l’Angleterre s’administrative”
[sic]4; et cela surtout par la raison qu’une nation qui se repose sur
son gouvernement du soin de penser pour elle dans les affaires pratiques
de la vie sociale, n’est pas et ne peut pas être libre. Je ne connais
rien de plus fatal à la liberté qu’une bureaucratie très capable et très
fortement organisée, à la tête d’un peuple qui ne cultive pas, par une
active gérance de ses intérêts collectifs, le sens pratique des affaires
sociales.

J’ai l’honneur d’être
 Monsieur
 Votre dévoué serviteur

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 8. 1858

Blackheath

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

312.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

Blackheath

July 8. 1858

My dear Carlyle

Mr Russell,2 the young man who wrote to you about the Poona
Professorship,3 called on me the day after I received your note. He
seemed a reasonable Edition: current; Page: [557] and modest person
enough, but with rather vague notions about the nature of the
information he was in quest of. I was able however to give him some
particulars about the prospects of personal advancement, and the general
eligibility of the position of a teacher of Hindoos. I also recommended
to him such books as I thought most worth his reading.

You are well out of dusty London at this season; though we by no means
find it necessary to go so far as Annan4 for the calm and silence you
speak of. We have a quiet corner down here, where we shall be at any
time happy to see you.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 8. 1858

East India House

Henry Samuel Chapman

Chapman, Henry Samuel

313.


TO HENRY SAMUEL CHAPMAN1

East India House

.
July 8. 1858

My dear Chapman

You are a much better correspondent than I am. I really do not know how
many letters I have received from you since I wrote one. I am always
busy, and have been particularly so of late; but your last letter
especially (dated Feb. 14) contains so many points of interest, that I
will not delay any longer replying to it.

The history it contains of the constitutional changes which have
succeeded one another in your colony since what may be called its
enfranchisement, has connected and made intelligible the scattered
information I had picked up from the newspapers. You have certainly now
obtained a very democratic constitution,2 and I am glad to see by the
papers that you have yourself, since you wrote, had the forming of an
administration to work it.3 No constitution, less democratic, would be
either practicable, or probably desirable in the long run, in a society
composed like that of the Australian colonies. The only thing which
seems wanting to make the suffrage really universal, is to get rid of
the Toryism of sex, by admitting women to vote; and it will be a great
test how far the bulk of your population deserve to have the suffrage
themselves, Edition: current; Page: [558] their being willing or not to
extend it to women. I am sorry, by the way, that the vulgar and
insulting expression “manhood suffrage”4 has found its way to Australia.
Whether so intended or not, it asserts the exclusion of women as a
doctrine, which is worse than merely ignoring them as was done by giving
the name universal suffrage to a suffrage limited to men. The adoption
of the ballot in Victoria5 has made some noise here, and has been a good
deal appealed to by its advocates in parliament. You have heard, no
doubt, of the dinner given by Nicholson.6 It will perhaps surprise you
that I am not now a supporter of the ballot, though I am far from
thinking that I was wrong in supporting it formerly. You remember, I
daresay, a passage which always seemed to me highly philosophical, in my
father’s History of India, where he discriminates between the cases in
which the ballot is in his estimation desirable and those in which it is
undesirable:7 now I think that the election of members of parliament has
passed, in the course of the last 25 years, out of the former class into
the latter. In the early part of the century there was more probability
of bad votes from the coercion of others, than from the voter’s own
choice: but I hold that the case is now reversed, and that an elector
gives a rascally vote incalculably oftener from his own personal or
class interest, or some mean feeling of his own, the influence of which
would be greater under secret suffrage than from the prompting of some
other person who has power over him. Coercive influences have vastly
abated, and are abating every day: a landlord cannot now afford to part
with a good tenant because he is not politically subservient: and even
if there were universal suffrage, the idea of a manufacturer forcing his
workpeople to vote against the general feeling of their class, is almost
out of the question: in this as in so many other things, defendit
numerus. If these things are true in England, they must be still more
true in Australia, where I cannot imagine that any artificial security
can be required to ensure freedom of voting. But if there be even a
doubt on the subject, the doubt ought surely to turn the scale in favour
of publicity. Nothing less than the most positive and powerful reasons
of expediency would justify putting in abeyance a principle so important
in forming the moral character either of an individual or of a people,
as the obligation on every one to be ready to Edition: current; Page:
[559] avow and justify whatever he does, affecting the interests of
others. I have long thought that in this lies the main advantage of the
public opinion sanction: not in compelling or inducing people to act as
public opinion dictates, but in making it necessary for them, if they do
not, to have a firm ground in their own conviction to stand on, and to
be capable of maintaining it against attack. I shall probably at some
time write and publish something about the ballot, which will shew the
grounds of my present opinion more fully,8 and perhaps more clearly,
than I have now done. There is another constitutional point which I must
touch upon, because you say you have quoted me on the subject, and my
former opinion is, to say the least, very much shaken, the payment of
members of parliament.9 There is, no doubt, something to be said for it,
especially where, as you remark, there is no unoccupied class; but I am
afraid of its raising up just such a class, of men without any fixed
occupation but that of being in parliament, for the sake of the certain
payment as members and the possible one as placemen. Certainly, by all
accounts, the American legislatures, both state and federal, are very
much composed of a low class of adventurers whose principal object is
money, and some Americans have a decided opinion that the payment of
members is one great cause of this. By the way, as you have quoted
Bailey10 and me on this subject, I wish you would quote us on the
subject of women’s suffrage also.—The representation of minorities seems
to me not only a good but a highly democratic measure. The ideal of a
democracy is not that a mere majority of the people should have all the
representation, but that if possible every portion of the constituency
should possess an influence in the election proportional to its numbers.
This cannot be realized literally, but it seems to me a good arrangement
that any portion of the constituency amounting to a third should be able
to obtain a third of the representation, by concerting to aim at no
more. This should not be done by limiting each voter to fewer votes than
there are members to be elected, which curtailing the power of the
individual voter, must always be unpopular. The plan I like is the
cumulative method,11 which I am glad to see has been carried. This plan
has also the advantage that when a voter can give all his votes to one
person, intensity of preference carries weight as well as the mere fact
of preference: an arrangement very favorable to candidates who stand on
personal merit, as compared with those who are voted for only because
they belong to a party. I see you think that this plan will increase the
influence of Edition: current; Page: [560] the Irish Catholics:
notwithstanding my good opinion of Duffy,12 I should be sorry for this
result, but the objection is only temporary, and the advantage
permanent.—About education and the public lands, you seem to be in the
right track, and with a good prospect of keeping in it.

There is probably little I could tell you about English politics that
you do not already know. The East India Company has fought its last
battle,13 and I have been in the thick of the fight. The Company is to
be abolished, but we have succeeded in getting nearly all the principles
which we contended for, adopted in constituting the new government, and
our original assailants feel themselves much more beaten than we do. The
change though not so bad as at first seemed probable, is still, in my
opinion, much for the worse. The difficulty of governing India in any
tolerable manner, already so much increased by the mutiny and its
consequences,14 will become an impossibility if a body so ignorant and
incompetent on Indian (to say nothing of other) subjects as Parliament,
comes to make a practice of interfering. In other respects, politics are
more satisfactory than usual. The defeat of all the attempts to make
England instrumental to keeping Louis Napoleon where he is,15 and the
conversion of the Tory chiefs into temporary Radicals for the purpose of
remaining in place,16 are the best things that have happened in Europe
for a long time. The complete disconcerting of the old placehunters, and
the failure of all their attempts to form a party17 are very agreeable
and amusing to all but themselves.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 8 juillet 1858

East India House

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

314.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

East India House

le 8 juillet 1858

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

Il y a bientôt trois mois que je dois une réponse à votre dernière
lettre, mais vous savez comme je suis occupé, et j’espère que vous
m’excuserez. Edition: current; Page: [561] Celle de mes occupations qui
est depuis quelque temps la plus pressante, tire maintenant à sa fin: la
Compagnie des Indes, comme gouvernement, va cesser d’exister,2 mais elle
périt avec un certain éclat, et on a suivi la plupart de ses conseils
dans l’organisation du gouvernement qu’on va mettre à sa place. Ce
résultat, contraire à l’attente générale, est dû en grande partie aux
divers écrits que la Compagnie a fait paraître, et auxquels je n’ai pas
été étranger.3 Malgré ce succès, je suis peu disposé à accepter une
place dans la nouvelle administration, et je profiterai probablement de
l’occasion pour obtenir ma retraite.4 Dans ce cas nous ferons usage de
notre liberté pour voyager; mais la nouvelle loi donnant six mois pour
effectuer le changement, je ne serai pas libre avant la fin de l’année,
et dans le cas même où nous irions à Florence ce ne pourrait être qu’à
un temps très éloigné.

Vos observations sur l’Inde sont d’une grande justesse, vû le peu de
documents qui sont à votre portée. Vous avez surtout très justement
apprécié le genre d’hommes qu’on a souvent nommés Gouverneurs de Bombay
et de Madras.5 Les nominations à ces fonctions-là sont faites par le
gouvernement, et non par la Compagnie; et le général Adam,6 dont vous
parlez dans votre lettre, en fut un des plus nuls. Il est vrai aussi que
les Anglais, en général, ne se font pas aimer des races indigènes, ce
qui, au reste, se peut dire également des autres peuples européens qui
gouvernent des pays éloignés, habités par d’autres races. Cependant les
populations de l’Inde reconnaissent généralement que l’administration
anglo indienne est juste. Elle ne les rançonne ni ne les tyrannise comme
leurs propres chefs, et elle tâche de leur donner de bonnes lois et des
tribunaux honnêtes et impartiaux, chose inconnue en Asie avant elle.
Quant aux princes indigènes, et surtout à l’Oude, vous avez été mal
informé, ce qui n’est pas étonnant. On n’a pas violé la foi des traités:
au contraire, les traités exigeaient que les princes de l’Oude fissent
une réforme complète de leur gouvernement atroce, et on les a par une
fausse délicatesse laissé violer cet engagement pendant cinquante ans,
en se contentant de remontrances qui n’étaient jamais suivies d’effet.7
Enfin on s’est lassé Edition: current; Page: [562] de cette indulgence,
et on a dépossédé une famille indigne de régner, qui sans notre appui
eût été chassée depuis longtemps: en lui assurant toutefois une grande
richesse. Cette histoire serait trop longue pour une lettre, mais je
pourrai vous la raconter quelque jour si elle vous intéresse.

votre dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 9 Juillet 1858

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

315.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

le 9 Juillet 1858

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc—

Pardonnez moi de n’avoir pas encore reconnu réception de votre excellent
livre.2 D’abord je voulais le lire avant d’en parler, et plus tard je
fus si occupé que j’ai ajourné toute lettre qui pouvait souffrir un
retard. Je vous aurais assurément témoigné mes remerciments la première
fois que je vous eusse vu.

C’est presqu’une chose heureuse qu’un homme léger et sans autorité comme
Lord Normanby, ait reproduit les calomnies ridicules et atroces de
1848,3 puisque cela vous a donné une occasion de les écraser comme vous
l’avez fait. Lord Normanby, comme l’aristocratie et la bourgeoisie
anglaise en général, a tout simplement cru ce que lui disaient les
contrerévolutionnaires français qu’il voyait, et dont l’opinion anglaise
vulgaire est devenue l’écho. Parmi les membres du gouvernement
provisoire, Lamartine est le seul qu’il voyait aussi, et le seul, par
conséquent qu’il n’a pas injurié. S’il vous eût fréquenté, il aurait
fait, de vous aussi, une exception. Ce n’est pas un malhonnête homme,
mais il a toutes les faiblesses de sa classe, et entr’autres celle
d’adopter sans examen, sur les affaires des autres pays, tout témoignage
et tous les on dit de ceux qu’il regarde comme représentant l’opinion
conforme à celle de son parti en angleterre. Tous ces mensongeslà
étaient oubliés, mais l’impression restait, et il fallait qu’on les
rappelât de l’oubli pour qu’il fût possible, en les réfutant, d’en
atténuer l’effet. Il n’y a pas d’opinion à laquelle on tient aussi
fortement qu’à celle dont on a oublié les fondements. Vous avez bien
profité de l’occasion. Votre ouvrage sera historique, et ceux qui
désirent la vérité pourront désormais en juger par eux-mêmes en
comparant l’accusation et la réponse. Aussi vous avez dû voir Edition:
current; Page: [563] que la réfutation n’a pas été sans effet. Toutes
les notices qu’on a faites sur votre ouvrage,4 au moins toutes celles
que j’ai vues, malgré l’extrême ignorance propre aux écrivains anglais
sur la politique étrangère, laissent voir que si vous n’avez pas
beaucoup ébranlé les préventions contraires aux hommes et aux événements
de 1848, du moins on a ressenti l’effet de la loyauté et de la franchise
de vos explications.

Vous n’êtes pas oublié ici. Ma femme vous cite souvent, et me prie de
vous présenter ses compliments affectueux.

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sunday July 11, 1858

Matlock

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

316.


TO HARRIET MILL1

New Bath Hotel
Matlock

Sunday ¼ past 5
 [
July 11, 1858

]

My dearest will I know want to hear whether I was in time for the train,
and how I prospered, so I write immediately. Happily the N. Kent was
only two or three minutes behind time, so I got to Euston station in
ample time—& on getting to Derby, found I could go on in half an hour by
railway to Ambergate, six miles from here. So all was right, and I have
come from Ambergate here in a phaeton, along a valley a good deal like
the Wye near Tintern—a narrow space of meadow between high & mostly
thickly wooded hills, & even the river at the bottom looking nearly as
large as the Wye though really much smaller as to quantity of water.
This place as far as I could see it in coming & can see it from the
window at which I am writing, seems quite a village, not at all the
dressed up street like watering place I thought it might be—& the high
hills & perpendicular cliffs come quite close to it. The weather has
been all day & is now most beautiful & there has been no rain lately nor
for a long while in Derbyshire & Leicestershire except two or three
thunderstorms. The grass looks much more parched than with us, that is
in the level country, for here they say there have been showers. The
difference of climate is shewn in this that much of the grass is not yet
carried, & some not cut. There seems a prospect of fine weather. Thanks
to my precious darling for encouraging me to come. I am now going out
for a stroll & Edition: current; Page: [564] shall come in to tea,
having had a good dinner of soup & roast lamb at the Railway station at
Derby, strange to relate. It seems fully as pretty as I expected & this
seems a very clean & prettily situated, & not very pretentious inn
though I do not think I shall like the people who keep it. I cannot yet
tell my movements but will write tomorrow. If dear one writes tomorrow
(which I shall not expect) direct Post Office Matlock. Adieu my own
darling love.

Your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday July 12. 1858

Matlock

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

317.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Matlock

Monday 2 o’clock
 [
July 12. 1858

]

My dearest love, I have pretty well exhausted Matlock—yesterday evening
I climbed the highest hill in this part of the country, the one called
Masson, & between that walk & this morning’s I have gone to nearly every
point & caught every view from both sides of this gorge of about a mile
& a half in length. It is exceedingly pretty, some points even striking,
but one sees the best at first: beyond a narrow compass one only passes
or looks into country pretty indeed but in a tamer way. I should like to
pass a day here with you but I question if we should care to stay
longer. So I mean to go on to Chatsworth by a train at ¼ before 4. In
case there is a letter tomorrow morning I shall not lose it, for as the
distance is but ¼ of an hour by railway I shall run down here for it. In
this way I shall make best use of my time. I have done pretty well as to
plants & have had the best of weather—yesterday evening & night were of
the most perfect brightness: today it is cloudy but warm, with
occasional outbreaks of sunshine. It feels quite strange that yesterday
morning we should have been talking of the necessity of my having a
fire: all the care I have needed was to keep my feet cool. The people
here say however that they have had it very cold a week ago—& two rainy
days this last week. If you write tomorrow darling, please direct to
Bakewell which seems the best centre, for Haddon Hall, Monsal &
Millers-dales & even Castleton if I have time to go there. I shall write
again tomorrow & then not on Wednesday or Thursday as she said, but on
Friday. This watering place seems to have but few people as yet, & those
of a rather humble character. There is but the least little bit of town
if one can call it so, & the Edition: current; Page: [565] rest is
houses dotted about a small portion of the side of a very steep slope.
The opposite side of the gorge is steep woody cliff nearly the whole
way, & the part of it called High Tor is a sort of Salève2 on a small
scale. There are plenty of cut walks but no drives except the high road
up the gorge. Adieu my darling from your own

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday July 13. 1858

Chatsworth Hotel Edensor

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

318.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Chatsworth Hotel Edensor

Tuesday 3 o’clock
 [
July 13. 1858

]

I came on, dearest, from Matlock as I said, & when I got to Rowsley left
my portmanteau to go by the omnibus & walked to & across Chatsworth to
this inn which belongs to the Duke2 & is on the outskirts of the park: &
in the evening I walked over all the finest parts of the park. All the
way from Matlock is a broad valley between high, green, often wooded
hills: at Rowsley it forks into two, in the lefthand of which is
Bakewell; the righthand (rather the smaller valley but with the larger
river) is filled up by Chatsworth. It is a very fine park & a great ugly
clumsy house. This morning after going by railway to Matlock & back on
the chance of a letter, I walked round by Haddon Hall, saw it, & made a
circuit hither. Before I leave this evening for Bakewell I shall
endeavour to see the conservatories of Chatsworth: the house I don’t
want to see. Today began very hot, but the wind had changed a little to
the west & the day got overcast & threatened rain; but there has been
none as yet. I shall stay at Bakewell all tomorrow at any rate: whether
I shall excurse from it to Castleton or go at once to Dovedale will
depend upon the facilities I find. I hold to returning on Saturday, but
it may perhaps be on Saturday night, so as to arrive on Sunday morning.
If my precious love writes tomorrow, direct to Bakewell, as I shall not
leave till the post comes in. After that if she goes to Folkestone it
will not be worth while for her to write again, but I shall enquire on
Saturday morning at Tissington near Ashbourne. Edition: current; Page:
[566] I have been most unexpectedly fortunate in weather though there
must have been more rain on the whole season here than further south, to
judge by the extreme greenness of everything. I shall write again on
Friday my darling wife, till then adieu & a thousand blessings such as
you give to your

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday July 15-16. 1858

Bakewell

Harriet Mill

Mill, Harriet

319.


TO HARRIET MILL1

Bakewell

Thursday evg.
 [
July 15-16. 1858

]

My darling! I received her most precious letter yesterday morning and
the pleasure it gave was almost worth the absence. As to prolonging my
stay, what she so kindly & sweetly writes would induce me to do it, if
it were not that this excursion has not quite fulfilled our expectations
or rather hopes in the matter of health. I have found no deficiency of
strength, but have never been without a dry furred tongue, & never many
hours without other decided sensations of indigestion, & this in spite
of the greatest care, & observance of your advice in every particular.
An excursion of this sort is excellent to strengthen me against
indigestion, but it does not perhaps tend so much to cure it when it
exists. Perhaps the regularity of home may do better. I dare say however
I shall be the better for this afterwards as has so often been the case.
As I shall therefore see her on Sunday morning & she will not get this
till Saturday, I will keep all description for a nice talk & will only
say that, contrary to my expectation, the place which seems most
suitable for us to make any stay at is Buxton which I walked to
yesterday, returning on the top of the omnibus. On consideration I
thought that Dovedale had not the étoffe of a place for more than a day,
so I was driven there in a phaeton this morning from here—the place was
not a disappointment but was soon seen & I have just come in from an
eleven miles walk taken since I came back. Tomorrow morning I shall go
to Castleton & shall have the greater part of tomorrow & the greater
part of Saturday to spend there as I shall go from thence to Sheffield,
no great distance, & return by a night train from there, arriving in
town at about five on Sunday morning when I will rest a little &
breakfast & then come home to my darling. The weather has been
excellent—the last two afternoons there has been a little rain, not
enough to do any harm, & tonight there has been a little since dusk,
with some lightning. I found no plants Tuesday or today, but yesterday
was a splendid day for Edition: current; Page: [567] them, as I found
five, of which Jacob’s ladder was one. Adieu with a thousand loves from
your

J.S.M.

Friday morng. I have only now got my darling’s second sweet & lovely
letter—through the stupidity doubtless of the Post Office. One does not
think it necessary in England to ask to look over the letters oneself,
but I shd have done so if there had been none this morning. You see
darling the reasons are strongest for going home. It has rained all
night but seems as if it would clear for today. your own

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 22. 1858

East India House

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

320.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

East India House

July 22. 1858

Dear Chadwick

Do not pay any regard to anything you may have heard or read about seven
vacancies.2 They are the very bad guesses of people entirely uninformed.
No one can have information, as the Directors do not themselves know
whom they will elect,3 and the Government will not determine whom to
nominate until it knows who have been elected. I do not think that any
single vacancy is certain (or even very probable) except Guildford4 and
I do not think it at all probable that Reigate will be vacated—but this
is only my own guess, perhaps no better founded than those of others—and
I beg you will not mention it. I do not think I shall have earlier
information than yourself on the subject.

I find difficulty in getting sanitary information for you here.5 The
best chance will be by your conferring personally with Mr Appleton6 of
the Military Department in this house.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [568]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 31. 1858

India House

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

321.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

India House

July 31. 1858

Dear Chadwick

Your paper2 is very good, and full of useful matter. I do not know if I
can suggest any additions to it but I will go through it a second time
with that view. There are some very bad misprints or lapsus calami in
it, rendering several of the sentences obscure & confused.

If you want the paper returned immediately, drop me a line.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

I agree with you about the representation of minorities but not about
effecting it by single votes, which would make the minority equal to the
majority. I prefer Marshall’s plan of cumulative votes.3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 5. 1858

John William Parker

Parker, John William

322.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Aug. 5. 1858

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge the receipt of the remaining £250 due on account of
the fourth edition of the Political Economy.2

I suppose you are delaying the account of the sale of the Logic3 &
Essays4 last year, until there is a balance of profit.

Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [569]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 23. 1858

Frederick J. Furnivall

Furnivall, Frederick J.

323.


TO FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL1

Aug. 23. 1858

Dear Sir

Pray excuse my not having sent this book sooner.2 It had been mislaid.

The apparently slow progress of Cooperation is not discouraging. It
cannot progress more rapidly than the intelligence and moral feelings of
operatives. The interest of each is indeed best promoted by the good of
the whole, but no selfish person will ever know or believe this. It is
just as well that cooperative experiments should only be attempted by
those who are capable of making them succeed. Those which exist are most
precious instruments of popular education. The Rochdale history is
really glorious.3

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

August 30, 1858

East India House

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

324.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

East India House

,
August 30, 1858

.

I . . . have been interested by the information as to your papers in the
Rhinish Museum.2 I was disappointed however at your not saying anything
of your historical work on Greek philosophy,3 which I expect will be
very valuable not only by throwing new light on historical points, of
which there are always a great number to be cleared up by any competent
inquirer, but also by exhibiting the speculations of the ancients from
the point of view of the experience philosophy, a thing hardly yet
attempted, and least of all in your country.

Edition: current; Page: [570]
I have no objection to your annexing to the Logic any part of the
controversy with Whewell4 which you think likely to be useful. There are
not many defences extant of the ethics of utility, and I have sometimes
thought of reprinting this and other papers I have written on the same
as well as on other subjects.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct.2, 1858

East India House

325.


TO THE MEMBERS OF THE EXAMINER-OFFICE1

East India House

,
Oct.2, 1858

Dear Sirs,—

I thank you heartily for your unsought and only too complimentary
expression of the friendly feelings of which I had already received from
you individually so many proofs. I have not long had the honour of
presiding over you; but during that time, if it had been the sole object
of all of you to make my situation agreeable to me, you could not have
more effectually exerted yourselves for that purpose.

It is no mere reciprocation of politeness when I say that I have been
proud of my associates; and my feelings on my retirement would have been
very different from what they are, were it not for the conviction that I
leave behind me an office surpassed by none and equalled by few in the
high qualities of the chiefs of departments, and the general efficiency
of the establishment.

Believe me to be, gentlemen, with sincere regard, yours faithfully and
obliged,

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [571]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct 21. [1858]

Lyons

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

326.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Lyons

2
Oct 21. [1858]

Dear Lily

Mama is decidedly better today, and has no doubt that she shall be quite
well with two or three days more rest. Her head is a great deal better
than yesterday, but still it aches with the least exertion, and
therefore she asks me to write for her. It has been one of the usual
attacks of fever. She has taken the fever mixture and some pills, and it
is now over. She is very weak, and does not mean to get up till
tomorrow, when she has ordered a warm bath in the bedroom which she says
will quite set her up. This is the exact state of the case, therefore be
sure there is nothing to be uneasy about. As it is doubtful if they
deliver letters on Sunday she will not write again till Saturday. If
this reaches you in time to write a word to Avignon on Saturday, it will
be sure to be in time, we shall go so slowly: or you might even write on
Sunday with scarcely a chance of not being in time: besides that at the
worst it would be sent on. And now, Mama says, adieu dear—as do I. Yours

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 28. 1858

Avignon

Dr. Cecil Gurney

Gurney, Dr. Cecil

327.


TO DR. CECIL GURNEY1

Avignon

Oct. 28. 1858

Dear Dr Gurney,

My wife is lying at the Hotel de l’Europe here, so very ill that neither
she nor I have any hope but in you to save her. It is a quite sudden
attack which Edition: current; Page: [572] came on at Lyons, of
incessant coughing which prevents sleeping, and by the exhaustion it
produces has brought her to death’s door. I implore you to come
immediately. I need hardly say that any expense whatever will not count
for a feather in the balance. I am Dear Dr Gurney

very truly yours

J. S. Mill2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 29 or 30 1858

Avignon

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

328.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

[
Avignon

]

[
Oct. 29 or 30? 1858

]

Dear Lily

Mama has had a tremendous attack of bronchitis with congestion & fever
much worse than at Lyons. We have done everything possible & today for
the first time she is a little better. The cough has been unceasing &
most painful preventing her lying down day or night or getting any sleep
besides that the intense nervous irritation caused by the congestion the
fever & the fatigue made her almost out of her mind. We have had the
best physician here but his prescriptions are too weak. She has taken a
number of her own. On Thursday she did not think she shd recover. She
thought you wd see by her letters from Lyons how ill she was but she did
not like to alarm you. Today she is certainly better. The cough is less
frequent & the head for the first time more calm. We took every
precaution on the road. She was carried by the porters in a chair to the
railway at Lyons & we had a coupé to ourselves from Valence here but she
says the whole [?] incidents of such a journey are totally unfitted for
her. The excessive hardship of every part—the inability to have anything
fit for a delicate stomach to eat, the tremendous noise everywhere, the
coarse manners of the women, the intense fatigue of waiting in the
railway rooms for at least half an hour & then the immense distance to
go both to & from them. This inn is thought one of the best in France &
we appear to have the best rooms yet bedrooms & sitting room are of red
tiles with thin carpet over wch she endeavoured to obviate the first day
by using a footstool but in vain—but still far more than all the evident
fatal Edition: current; Page: [573] effect upon her of the air of the
S[outh] of F[rance]. She dragged herself up to write you a few words on
Wedy that you might not be anxious, hoping it wd prove as she said—but
she felt ill as she wrote & got gradually worse till at night she was
very ill. She does not wish you to come to her because she thinks she
has taken the turn to get better & therefore it wd be a very great pity
to break up your good arrangements wch are a great pleasure to her to
hear of. You shall know continually how she is going on. We have got all
your letters from Montp[ellier] today here & continue to write here for
it will probably be weeks before we leave this place. All notice of your
letters must be at a future time.

She is anxious that you shd not think of coming to her. She wd be
extremely annoyed if you did.

J.S.M.

And now she says adieu dear girl in haste.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 1. 1858

Avignon

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

329.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Hotel de l’Europe
Avignon

Nov. 1. 1858

Cable

By the Electrical and International Telegraph Company.

She is not better or perhaps worse have written to beg Dr G[urney] to
come.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November 3, 1858

330.


TO THE MAYOR OF AVIGNON1

[After
November 3, 1858

]

Monsieur le Maire,

Par vos fonctions officielles, vous avez eu connaissance du malheureux
événement qui a créé pour ma famille avec la ville que vous administrez
un lien indissoluble. Nous croyons ne pouvoir rendre un meilleur hommage
à celle que nous avons perdue qu’en faisant autant que possible les
choses que, vivante, elle eût voulu faire; et comme elle n’aurait pas pu
venir s’établir à Edition: current; Page: [574] Avignon sans que les
malheureux de cette ville en eussent profité, nous souhaitons que, dans
la triste circonstance où nous nous trouvons, ils aient encore à la
remercier de quelque chose. Veuillez donc, monsieur le maire, accepter
au profit de la Caisse des pauvres le don de mille francs, somme
proportionnée à nos facultés plutôt qu’à nos désirs, et que nous vous
prions de vouloir bien inscrire au nom de ma bien-aimée épouse, Mme
Henriette Mill, née Hardy, décédée à Avignon le 3 novembre 1858.

Agréez. . . .

J. Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November 3, 1858

James Bentham Mill

Mill, James Bentham

331.


TO JAMES BENTHAM MILL1

[After
November 3, 1858

]

[Mill, in writing to his brother James after his bereavement, says:—]

When I was happy, I never went after any one; those that wanted me might
come to me.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 9, 1858

Hotel d’Europe, Avignon

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

332.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

Hotel d’Europe, Avignon

Nov. 9, 1858

My dear Thornton—

The hopes with which I commenced this journey have been fatally
frustrated. My wife, the companion of all my feelings, the prompter of
all my best thoughts, the guide of all my actions, is gone! She was
taken ill at this place with a violent attack of bronchitis or pulmonary
congestion—the medical men here could do nothing for her, & before the
physician at Nice2 who saved her life once before could arrive, all was
over.

It is doubtful if I shall ever be fit for anything public or private,
again. The spring of my life is broken. But I shall best fulfil her
wishes by not giving up the attempt to do something useful, and I am not
quite alone. I have with me her daughter, the one person besides myself
who most loved her & whom she most loved, & we help each other to bear
what is inevitable. I am sure of your sympathy, but if you knew what she
was you would feel how little any sympathy can do.3

Edition: current; Page: [575]
We return straight to England but shall be detained here for some days
longer & I beg of you the kind office of inserting the inclosed notice
twice in the Times & once in the Post, Herald & Daily News & in the
principal weekly papers. Believe me my dear Thornton

very sincerely yours

[The Notice]

Died on the 3d November, at Avignon, after a few days illness, to the
inexpressible grief & irreparable loss of those who survive her,
Harriet, the dearly loved wife of John Stuart Mill, late of the East
India House.4

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 24. 1858

Blackheath

Dr. Henry Cecil Gurney

Gurney, Dr. Henry Cecil

333.


TO DR. HENRY CECIL GURNEY1

Blackheath

Nov. 24. 1858

Dear Dr Gurney

The sum which Sir J.O.2 received shall be paid into your banker’s as
soon as the proceeds of the sale of some securities come in which will
be on the 1st of December. It is well earned by the sacrifices you made3
& above all, the risks you incurred to health & practice in the hope of
saving that precious life—& though I am not in circumstances to think
lightly of such a sum, I never less grudged any payment. Would to God it
had been all I have & that we had written to you three days sooner! You
did all that man could, & your presence was an immense good to us even
as it was. We4 have only just arrived here, having remained at Avignon
to see her removed to her (& our) last resting place & to complete the
purchase of a small house & garden near the cemetery5 which we shall now
frequently require. Helen’s health kept up while we remained at Avignon
but broke down as soon as we arrived here: She is however better today &
I hope is doing well. She begs to be Edition: current; Page: [576]
kindly remembered to you. To myself the return to the place which is
full of memories unlike those of that dreadful time is soothing—but no
one except ourselves can know what a blank our life now is.

I am dear Dr Gurney
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 25. 1858

Blackheath

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

334.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath

Nov. 25. 1858

Dear Sir

I trust you will not have supposed that your note would have remained
unanswered from any other cause than my not having received it. It came
into my hands two days ago, on my returning from a journey on the
Continent, which was abruptly closed by the most melancholy event2 which
could possibly have happened to me. I have now next to nothing left to
care for in life, except to use such power as I have of helping forward
my opinions—which it is uncertain if I shall ever again have energy
enough, even if left to myself I had wisdom enough, effectually to serve
by anything I can write. I have only the greater desire to be useful to
fellow labourers in the same field of usefulness, and I have so many
opinions and modes of thinking in common with you that I regard you as
one of the principal of these. You may therefore rely on me in any
quarter in which I have influence—but I have no ground for believing
that Lord Stanley3 is one of these. I have seen him in private just
three times—the first was when he offered me a place in the Council of
India4—the last when I took leave of him on my retirement. We have
conversed exactly once on any topic of public interest. He has on these
different occasions been very polite and flattering, but I have no
reason to think that he retained any interest in me from the time when
he knew that I was not going to serve under him. The mode of transacting
business which Edition: current; Page: [577] he has adopted, almost
exclusively with the Chairmen of Committees of Council, has not brought
him into much contact with the officers of the India House, and I had
therefore no opportunity of acquiring any influence with him. This being
the case it would be an impertinence in me to volunteer any
recommendation to him, especially if it relates to the patronage of
another minister, a case in which, as I know, ministers have generally
the strongest feeling of delicacy about intermeddling even in the
slightest manner. I am therefore unable to help you in the way you
propose; but if you think it can be of any use to you to mention me, in
any terms however strong, either verbally or in writing, to any minister
or other person whatever, as one who would derive the greatest
satisfaction both public and private from your obtaining what you
seek—and who would think it a credit to any minister to obtain the aid
of abilities and principles like yours for the public service, and an
absolute disgrace not to avail himself of them when offered—you have my
fullest authority to do this—and there are some members even of the
present Government, especially Bulwer5 and Disraeli,6 on whom so decided
an opinion from me if known to them might perhaps have some influence.

I am Dear Sir
 Yrs very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28th November 1858

Blackheath

George Grote

Grote, George

335.


TO GEORGE GROTE1

Blackheath

,
28th November 1858

My dear Grote

I knew that you would feel with me and for me. Your letter has done as
much good to me and to my fellow-sufferers as we are now capable of
receiving.

If I were to attempt to express in the most moderate terms what she was,
even you would hardly believe me. Without any personal tie, merely to
have known her as I do would have been enough to make life a blank now
that she has disappeared from it. I seem to have cared for things or
persons, events, opinions on the future of the world, only because she
cared for them: the Edition: current; Page: [578] sole motive that
remains strong enough to give any interest to life is the desire to do
what she would have wished; but will this give the strength or the
energy to do any new thing? Perhaps not. I shall try, however. I can at
least put in order for publication what had been already written in
concert with her, and this is my occupation for the present.

Pray express to Mrs Grote my gratitude for her kind sympathy. I will
write again soon.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 28. 1858

Blackheath Park

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

336.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath Park

Nov. 28. 1858

Dear Sir

The concluding words of my note2 were for yourself only. But you have my
full authority to say, to all and sundry, wherever and whenever it can
be of any use to you, that I take the strongest interest in your
application, that I should derive the greatest satisfaction both on
private and on public grounds from your success, and (in the words I
before used) should think it a credit to any minister to obtain the aid
of abilities and principles like yours for the public service, and an
absolute disgrace not to avail himself of them when offered.

I am Dear Sir
 Yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

Herbert Spencer Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 30. 1858

Blackheath Park

John William Parker

Parker, John William

337.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Blackheath Park

Nov. 30. 1858

Dear Sir

You can have my little book “On Liberty”2 for publication this season.
The manuscript is ready; but you will probably desire to look through
it, or Edition: current; Page: [579] to have it looked through by some
one in whom you confide, as there are some things in it which may give
offence to prejudices.

Should you decide to publish it, I propose that we should make the same
arrangement as we made for the Political Economy, viz. to publish one
edition at half profit, and if another is called for, make a fresh
agreement respecting it.

I have also, prepared for publication, a selection of my articles3
published in periodicals which I should like to bring out somewhat later
in the season. If it would suit you, I propose the same terms. There are
enough to make, I should think, two volumes of the size & type of the
early editions of Carlyle’s Miscellanies:4 but I have not calculated
exactly, and it may extend to three. I send you a list of the subjects.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yrs

J. S. Mill

-   

    1. The Right & Wrong of State Interference with Corporation & Church
    Property.
-   

    2. The Currency Juggle.
-   

    3. A few remarks on The French Revolution.
-   

    4. Thoughts on Poetry & its Varieties.
-   

    5. Professor Sedgwick’s Discourse on the Studies of Cambridge.
-   

    6. Civilization.
-   

    7. Aphorisms.
-   

    8. Armand Carrel.
-   

    9. Writings of Alfred de Vigny.
-   

    10. Bentham.
-   

    11. Coleridge.
-   

    12. Tocqueville on Democracy in America.
-   

    13. Bailey on Berkeley’s Theory of Vision.
-   

    14. Michelet’s History of France.
-   

    15. The Claims of Labour.
-   

    16. Guizot’s Essays & Lectures on History.
-   

    17. Early Grecian History & Legend.
-   

    18. Vindication of the French Revolt of February 1848, in reply to
    Lord Brougham & others.
-   

    19. Enfranchisement of Women.
-   

    20. Whewell on Moral Philosophy.
-   

    21. Grote’s History of Greece.

Edition: current; Page: [580]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November 1858

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

338.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

[
November ? 1858

]

[In reply to my condolence, he said] I have recovered the shock as much
as I ever shall. Henceforth, I shall be only a conduit for ideas.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1 Decembre 1858

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Louis Nicolas Ménard

Ménard, Louis Nicolas

339.


TO LOUIS NICOLAS MÉNARD1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

1 Decembre 1858

.

Mon cher M. Ménard—

Comme vous avez bien voulu témoigner le désir d’avoir de nos nouvelles,
j’écris uniquement pour vous en donner, car je ne me sens pas encore
capable d’écrire une lettre qui puisse vous intéresser à tout autre
égard. Nous sommes arrivés sans accident et la santé de ma chère fille
s’est soutenue jusqu’à la fin du voyage mais pour s’ébranler aussitôt
après. Dès le lendemain elle fut malade mais elle est à présent à peu
près rétablie et j’espère qu’elle s’y maintiendra. Elle et son frère se
recommandent à votre souvenir. Quant à moi j’ai éprouvé un véritable
soulagement en me retrouvant dans le lieu où nous avons vécu heureux
avec celle que nous déplorons, et où son image n’est pas mêlée aux
souvenirs déchirants de sa dernière maladie. Votre ville et tout le pays
du midi me seraient en horreur si son tombeau n’y était pas—ce qui en
fait pour moi un lieu non seulement sacré mais le seul, sauf celui-ci,
qui me soit cher.

J’espère que l’éditeur2 de la traduction française de mon Ec.Pol. vous
en a envoyé de ma part un exemplaire. Vous y trouverez, si je ne me
trompe, autre chose qu’un simple traité scientifique, et j’aime à croire
que ce que vous y verrez de mes opinions et de mes sentiments ne sera
pas de nature à affaiblir la sympathie morale et intellectuelle que vous
avez semblé ressentir envers moi.

Agréez mon cher M Ménard avec l’expression de notre reconnaissance,
celle de mon amitié et de mon dévouement.

J.S.M.

J’espère que Mme M. se porte bien et que la santé de votre petite
demoiselle se rétablit.

Edition: current; Page: [581]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 4, 1858

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

340.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

,
Dec. 4, 1858

Dear Sir—

Your letter found me under the shock of the bitterest calamity which
could possibly have fallen on me. I have lost by a death, which may
almost be called sudden, my perfect friend, companion, guide, teacher,
all in one. The little you saw of her may have been enough to make you
surmise that there was much more to see, but nothing I could say could
give you the smallest idea of what she was or of what her loss is to me.

You will not wonder that I care very little now for speculative
controversies. I am obliged to you however for sending Professor
Apelt’s2 treatise, & the other pamphlet. I have not yet looked into
them, but the passages you cite from Apelt are sufficient to convince me
that I should not in any case have thought of answering him. If you are
yourself inclined to append to the translation any remarks on his
objections, they are sure to be fresher & more vigorous than mine would
be, & are likely to be a valuable addition to the book itself.

I wait with much expectation for your historical essay.3 My small volume
on Liberty4 will be published early this winter. Its subject is moral,
social, & intellectual liberty, asserted against the despotism of
society whether exercised by governments or by public opinion.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 5—1858

Blackheath

Arthur Hardy

Hardy, Arthur

341.


TO ARTHUR HARDY1

Blackheath

Dec. 5—1858

My dear Sir—

Before receiving this you will already have heard the terrible & most
unexpected blow which has fallen upon us. I have not felt equal to
writing to you before & now when I do, language is so utterly incapable
of expressing such a loss, or what that loss is to us, that it is
sickening to attempt it. But you will desire to know some of the sad
details. We left England on Edition: current; Page: [582] the 12th of
October, intending to pass the winter at Hyères, where she had wintered
once before or at some other place in the south of France. For the first
time we were able to do as we pleased as I had just retired from the I.
H. & we were looking forward to a happy half year or year in a mild
climate. She was apparently in her usual health, perhaps even better
than usual, & as fit for travelling as when she set out on other much
longer journeys by which her health had not suffered but benefitted. She
continued pretty well up to Lyons, but when there she had a sharp
feverish attack, which yielded to the usual remedies but left a good
deal of cough behind it. We staid there a week, at the end of which she
felt sufficiently recovered to go slowly onward, but the day after we
arrived at Avignon she was again taken very ill—she was better the next
day, but the improvement was not progressive—and a great shortness of
breathing came on. She had the best medical men the place afforded but
as usual with French physicians their remedies were not sufficiently
powerful & after a few days becoming alarmed though we never suspected
immediate danger, I wrote to Dr Gurney of Nice2 who attended her in a
dangerous illness there in 1853, asking him to come over & see her. He
came instantly but found all at an end! The very day before her last we
thought her illness had taken a favorable turn. From the symptoms Dr
Gurney thinks the cause of death was excessive & violent congestion of
the lungs. She is buried in the cemetery of the town of Avignon & with
her all our earthly happiness; we have henceforth no interest in life
but to fulfil her wishes in all we can, & to return continually to her
grave. We have bought a small house & garden near the cemetery, where we
shall go early in spring & intend to pass much of our time there until
our turn comes for being buried along with her. Algernon would have
written to you if I had not, but I wished to write myself if able. He &
Helen are pretty well, though Helen at one time broke down & had an
attack of illness, but fortunately it proved short. It is useless to
write more. Believe me yrs very truly

Arthur Hardy Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 6. 1858

Blackheath Park

John William Parker

Parker, John William

342.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 6. 1858

.

Dear Sir

I understand that a difficulty has arisen with respect to the
publication of my friend Mr Bain’s second volume (which completes his
work as an Analytical Edition: current; Page: [583] Treatise on the
Mind)2 in consequence of the limited sale of the first volume, which
though not discouraging as to prospects of ultimate success, has not yet
repaid its expenses. Both Mr Grote and myself are very desirous that the
remaining volume should be published, as it is more popular than the
first both in subject and in execution and we think it likely not only
to sell better but to add to the sale of its predecessor. We are
therefore willing, if you will publish the second volume this season, to
guarantee you against loss by it, to the extent of £100 (that is each of
us to the extent of £50). I mean that if at the end of such time as you
would be willing to wait for indemnification (and which should be agreed
on) you are still a loser by vol. 2 we will make up the loss if short of
£100, & pay £100 towards it if greater; the subsequent proceeds being
applied to our indemnification.

I should like to stipulate that if we then pay up the whole of your loss
by both volumes, the entire copyright should belong to us—that is to Mr
Bain himself to whom we should transfer it. I am

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 13. 1858

Kent

Jane Mill Ferraboschi

Ferraboschi, Jane Mill

343.


TO JANE MILL FERRABOSCHI1

Blackheath Park
Kent

Dec. 13. 1858

Dear Jane

Your letter to Avignon was sent to me here. I thank you for your
expressions of sympathy. But you cannot know, nor can anything I could
say enable you to conceive, the immensity of my loss.

I am glad to hear that your health is so much better. When you write to
Mary or Harriet, please to thank them for their letters, and to give my
best remembrances to Mr Ferraboschi.

Yrs affy

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [584]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 21. [1858]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

344.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Dec. 21. [1858]

Dear Chadwick

I am quite disposed to give you such help as I can in fighting the
questions you are at work upon. In happier circumstances I might have
assisted actively by personal exertions. I always meditated joining the
Law Amendment Society2 when we returned from abroad. I can now only work
with my pen. You shall have the letter you mention, if you think it
would be useful to the object, but before writing it I should like to
read your paper3 once more quietly through.

With regard to Parliamry Reform, what you urge me to do is already done.
I have a pamphlet4 by me, written several years ago, which only required
a little adaptation to the present time. This it has received, and I
propose publishing it about the time of the meeting of Parliament. If
the knowledge of this would in any way interest Lord Grey,5 I should be
glad that you should tell him. I cannot hope that he will agree with the
whole of what I have written, but I believe he will with a considerable
part of it. I am

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 22 1858

Mary Mill Colman

Colman, Mary Mill

345.


TO MARY MILL COLMAN1

Dec. 22 1858

Dear Mary—

I received your letter addressed to Avignon & in writing recently to
Jane2 I asked her to thank you for it.

You always write as if you had some great reason to complain of me & as
if some caprice of mine had been the cause of the estrangement as you
call Edition: current; Page: [585] it. I have always told you & now
repeat that your own conduct & manifestations of feeling were the sole
cause of the existence of any estrangement & you have given no sign from
that time to this that your conduct and feelings had been in any way
wrongly interpreted.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 30. 1858

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

346.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Dec. 30. 1858

Dear Chadwick

I am obliged to you for the opportunity of reading Lord Grey’s paper,2
and am glad that he is applying himself to the subject with a view both
to present exigencies and to permanent principles. It is very desirable
that his suggestions should be made as public as possible to invite
discussion and call out other modes of effecting the same object. The
essential is, as you observe, that the object itself should be
recognized as necessary. My own thoughts on the matter have been
travelling in a rather different channel, except as to the
representation of minorities, which I have long held to be of the utmost
importance, and also that the cumulative voting which Lord Grey
advocates3 is the best mode of effecting it. His suggestion of the
choice of a certain number of members by the House itself seems to me
very valuable.4 I have often thought of it as a good mode of
constituting an Upper House in a democratic constitution, but never
before as applicable to any of the members of the Lower House itself.
But I do not think they should, in the latter case, be chosen for life.
There are considerable objections to making a small, and the least
popular section of the House, a kind of privileged order within it, and
still greater objections to their being irremovable. And what weighs
with me quite as much, is the importance, when working against the
current, of retaining whatever advantage is to be found in adhering to
the old constitutional landmarks. It conflicts with everybody’s idea of
a House of Commons that any of its members should hold their seats for
life. Edition: current; Page: [586] The same objection applies still
more strongly to the proposal that the Crown should appoint a certain
number of members by warrant.5 There would not, I think, be a chance
that this could be carried, or that even if carried it would be
permanent, and it seems unnecessary, since election by the House itself
at the commencement of each Parliament would answer the same purpose.
The ministers, being the leaders of the majority, would in fact nominate
two thirds of the number, while the provision for cumulative voting
would give a similar power over the remaining third to the leaders of
the Opposition: and each side would have a strong interest in selecting
to be brought into Parliament in this manner the persons who would most
strengthen the party. In spite of these and all other objections, I
should much prefer Lord Grey’s plan exactly as it is, to a low suffrage
and equal electoral districts without any regulating counterpoise.

Your letter in the D. News is excellent.6 But I am afraid, on that
subject as on so many others, jacta est alea.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [587]


1859

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 2. 1859

Blackheath Park

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

347.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 2. 1859

.

Dear Chadwick

I returned Lord Grey’s paper2 by post yesterday to your address. I now
return Mr Greg’s.3 I agree with him in expecting no substantial
improvement in the representative system at present. But I differ from
him, among many other things, in thinking that some bill will certainly
pass.4 None of the parties will wish the question to lie over and give
rise to a prolonged agitation. There will be a compromise. What is done
may be little in amount, & that little may be more bad than good. All we
can do is to point out what are the evils, and throw out suggestions
which will lead people’s minds in a right direction so far as they can
be got to attend to them. Your letter5 (which I return) is very valuable
in this way. But a letter in a newspaper is too little read—I wish you
could get out your matter in some better form.

I have never been able to agree with you and Mr Greg about voting
papers.6 I do not doubt their benefit in the election of poor law
guardians. But in political elections, a person who does not care to
vote will seldom give a good vote. He will be assailed by canvassers who
will not leave him until they have seen him fill up his voting paper. It
is possible that more conservative votes might be given in that way. So
much the worse. When things get into a state in which any person of my
opinions can wish for the success of the conservative candidate,
conservative voters will have got quite sufficiently frightened to come
up to the poll.

But I expect no good so long as any election expenses whatever, borne by
the candidate himself, are permitted by law.7 Liberalism & Conservatism
Edition: current; Page: [588] ought to unite in putting down that
greatest of existing abuses. As for the measure to be expected from the
present Government—all that anybody can know of it is, that it will be
all trick.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 10. 1859

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

348.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Jan. 10. 1859

.

Dear Chadwick

I return Lord Grey’s two letters.2 Independently of the hopelessness of
carrying a provision for life members in a representative assembly, I
should fear that to assign a superior status to one section of the House
would by exciting antagonism between the elective majority and the
permanent minority, do more harm than good even to the interests which
the life members would represent.

I see no tenable ground for resisting the democracy of mere numbers, but
by directly and openly asserting two broad principles—that every one is
entitled to some voice in the representation, and that every intelligent
person is entitled to a more potential voice.

If it has not occurred to Lord Grey, it would be worth suggesting to him
(as he is not a politician of routine, or afraid to entertain new
proposals) that one of the most conservative as well as most liberal
provisions in a reform bill would be to give the franchise to all women
who fulfil the rating or other conditions required of men. There is
precedent for this in local elections:3 the women enfranchised would be
almost solely those of the higher and middle ranks—& the immediate
effects would undoubtedly be highly favorable to conservatism.

On the question of the dockyard labourers I agree with Mr Greg.4 Unless
all who are in a dependent condition could be disfranchised, I see no
good but harm in excluding a single class. In this country of publicity
the Government influence is the least bad of the bad influences.

yrs faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [589]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 12, 1859

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

349.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

,
Jan. 12, 1859

.

You will not have been surprised at my not answering your letter of Dec.
10.2 I am however sincerely thankful to you for it. No letter that I
have received did me more good, and it is a real pleasure to think that,
so little as you saw of her, should have made so true an impression. If
I understand you rightly in your last letter as offering to translate
the little book on Liberty,3 I could not desire any better fate for it,
supposing that when you have read it, you think it likely to be
successful and useful in Germany. I will take care that you have one of
the earliest copies or the sheets, if you will let me know the safest
mode of sending it, as the title might cause it to be stopped at the
post or further on, under the idea of its being political. . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 13, 1859

B[lackheath]

Mary Mill Colman

Colman, Mary Mill

350.


TO MARY MILL COLMAN1

B[lackheath]

Jan. 13, 1859

Dear Mary—

It is well you have at last perceived that it was not likely I should be
inclined to commence a discussion with you about the past. Such things
are either cleared up at the time or not at all. I have no ill will to
you & am quite willing to put the best interpretation that the case
admits of, upon everything that has happened between us. But I do not
expect that I shall ever again wish to see any person (two or three
excepted) unless on necessary business or for some public purpose. The
melancholy life I have before me would be quite insupportable if I could
not be left alone with those who are fellow sufferers with me & who feel
as I do.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 20. 1859

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

351.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Jan. 20. 1859

.

Dear Chadwick

I write, without waiting to go through your paper, to say that it would
be very repugnant to me at present to make any sort of public
appearance—even Edition: current; Page: [590] that of attending a
meeting. In any case I should not have liked that my first connection
with the Law Amendment Society2 should be by taking the chair—an office,
too, which it requires much more experience than I have had of public
meetings to be qualified for. When I return from abroad I shall probably
ask you or some one else to propose me as a member of the Society. I may
probably then be desirous of moving actively for the promotion of public
objects.

I will write you the letter I promised,3 without delay, and make any
suggestions that occur to me about the paper itself.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 21. 1859

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

352.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Jan. 21. 1859

Dear Chadwick

I inclose a letter2 which I hope will serve your purpose.

I have scratched over the margin of your proof with suggested
alterations, very slight in appearance but which would make a great
difference in the intelligibility of the paper. It is very carelessly
written as to the mere construction of the sentences. Some of the
proposed alterations in page 2 have a further object—attained however by
equally slight changes—that of avoiding a slur upon Malthus, not at all
required for your purpose.

After revisal of the composition, it is a very telling paper.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 21. 1859

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

353.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Jan. 21. 1859

.

Dear Chadwick

I have read carefully twice over your paper on the advantage of enquiry
by Commissions as a preparation for legislation,2 and specially for
Parliamentary Edition: current; Page: [591] Reform; and I not only agree
with you entirely on the general principle, but also in thinking
Parliamentary Reform a very strong case for its application.
Disfranchisement indeed, may be sufficiently judged of from general
principles and notorious facts; but when the question is, how far to
carry enfranchisement, few persons, I should think, are rash enough to
imagine that they have nothing important still to learn respecting the
new classes of voters to be created—their numbers, their local
distribution, their degree of education (even the number of them who can
read and write); their amenability to corruption, the probability of
their exercising the franchise if conferred, and the influences under
which they are likely to exercise it. If the franchise is to stop
anywhere short of universal suffrage, or to arrive even at that by any
succession of steps, the choice of the intermediate measures must
necessarily be more or less a question of statistics; and the statistics
of the whole subject are in their infancy. Even on so narrow a point as
the admission of the £10 householders in the small towns to vote for the
counties,3 all is uncertainty as to the nature of the change it would
make in the composition of the county constituencies.

Your paper cannot be too much read, or too widely circulated.

I am

Dear Chadwick
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edwin Chadwick Esqu.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 26 [1859]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

354.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Jan. 26 [1859]

.

Dear Chadwick

I have gone through your proof,2 which requires as much correction in
the wording as the other did. I do not know if my pencil marks are
legible. Your Edition: current; Page: [592] facts are very striking, and
the view of the subject one which it is of great importance to exhibit.
But I do not well see where your principle is to stop, or at what place
you would draw the line of demarcation between it and conflicting
principles. You had better I think, not trouble yourself with what
socialist writers have said against competition: It is much better that
your results should be seen to come, as they do, from your own thoughts
and observations.

You should not have proposed me as a member of the Law Amendment Society
without asking me first.3 I should have much preferred not joining it
till my return. I expect to be abroad at least a year, and I certainly
shall not go near the Society till afterwards. I shall not leave finally
for the Continent till some two months hence.

Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

February 1859

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

355.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

[
February ? 1859

]

[His pamphlet on Parliamentary Reform, written some years previously,
was revised and sent to press. On this he remarked in a letter:—] Grote,
I am afraid, will not like it, on account of the ballot,2 if not other
points. But I attach importance to it, as a sort of revision of the
theory of representative government.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

February 1859

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

356.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

[
February ? 1859

]

[A few days later he wrote—] Grote knows that I now differ with him on
the ballot,2 and we have discussed it together, with no effect on
either.

Edition: current; Page: [593]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

February, 1859

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

357.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

[
February, 1859

]

[In 1859 J.S. Mill sent Holyoake a copy of his essay On Liberty, asking
him not to review it until the other reviewers had done so.]

It is likely enough to be called an infidel book in any case; but I
would rather that people were not prompted to call it so.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday February, 1859

Blackheath

John William Parker, Jr.

Parker, John William, Jr.

358.


TO [JOHN WILLIAM PARKER, JR.?]1

Blackheath

Tuesday
 [
February, 1859?

]

Dear Sir

I shall be quite unable to write anything during my stay here—and an
article on the French treaty2 should be written immediately. Besides I
never write well unless I feel moved to write on the particular
subject—which on this subject I do not. I hope soon to find something
suitable to Fraser.3

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 7. 1859

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

359.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Feb. 7. 1859

Dear Chadwick

Strange as you seem to think it, I have voted at every election since I
have been qualified, and have attended one electoral meeting in my own
district. Edition: current; Page: [594] That meeting (here at
Blackheath) gave a very favourable reception to language and doctrines
far from demagogic. It is true there was little or no catechizing, and
little indication of the degree of political information of the
electors. I am quite aware from other evidence of the density of
ignorance among the bulk of the English population—of all classes I
might say: certainly of the working and lower middle class. The new
introduction by the Government of a reading and writing qualification2 I
regard as a striking proof of the utter want of principle of their
Conservatism.

Have you seen Hare’s book (the Charity Commissioner) on Representation?3
If not I beg you to read it without delay. It seems to me most masterly
in theory and of the greatest possible practical value.

Voting papers, except in the form in which Hare admits them, I am more
opposed to than ever, for it seems to me that they make bribery and
intimidation both much easier and much more certainly effectual.

I am obliged to you for a sight of Gaultier.4 It is very sound and as
you say, a good logical exercise. Shall I return it to you or to
Gilbart,5 whose name I see is in it?

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

(1) Why say understated? Your opponents charge you with overstatement.
It would be better to deny both. [Scored through.]

(2) That when, of the measures I proposed, any prominent part was
omitted by the legislature, it has invariably happened that on
subsequent experience, impartial persons have independently represented
the necessity of its being restored; & that whenever any of those
measures has been even imperfectly adopted, a more extensive application
of it has been subsequently demanded, & in many instances, made.

(3) restricted by charges, which might be reduced to less than half
their Edition: current; Page: [595] amount not only without loss, but
with positive benefit to the shareholders; who would also be gainers by
reducing the rates for conveyances of goods, to the immense advantage of
the metropolis & the great towns by cheapening &c.

(4) by persons carefully selected for the task, before introducing bills
on important subjects into Parliament

(5) recommended such previous enquiry as a necessary preparation for
measures of Parliamentary Reform.

(6) Until this evil shall be cured discrimination is in my opinion
necessary in extending the elective franchise.

(7) These, however, if I were elected, I should consider it my duty to
examine, whenever my duty to my constituents & to the country required
that I should possess a knowledge of them.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 24 [1859]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

360.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Feb. 24 [1859]

.

Dear Chadwick

I have just returned from Avignon2 and have found your notes waiting for
me. I hasten to return the supplementary matter of your paper—the
detention of which I much regret as this being apparently the original
manuscript, you may have been prevented from sending it to the press.
The matter is all telling and useful. But the short paper 1A3 would I
think require more working out to produce its proper effect. The
objection that will be made to paper B is, that you select the best
cases of the working of nomination and the worst of popular election,
and that nomination very seldom gave the particular good results you
depict—scarcely oftener than a good representative system would. Still,
there is a point to be made though it is not so exactly germane to your
immediate purpose—enquiry by a commission—as paper A is. By the way did
Bristol reject Romilly?4 Are you not thinking of its rejection of
Burke?5

I am glad you coincide with so much of the pamphlet.6

very truly yrs

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [596]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 26 février 1859

Blackheath Park

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

361.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Blackheath Park

Kent

le 26 février 1859

Monsieur

A mon retour d’une absence, j’ai trouvé votre billet du 7 février. Je
suis très flatté que vous ayez eu même la pensée de traduire mon petit
livre.2 Rien ne pourrait lui être plus avantageux que d’être traduit par
une plume comme la vôtre; et rien ne saurait m’agréer davantage, pourvu
toutefois qu’après l’avoir lu tout entier, vous persistiez dans votre
désir. Car il est certain que nous représentons, vous et moi, en quelque
sorte, deux systèmes opposés, et je trouverais très naturel que vous
pussiez regarder mon ouvrage comme à tout prendre, plus nuisible
qu’utile. Il est vrai que comme nous possédons chacun la philosophie de
nos opinions respectives, nous sommes, mieux que beaucoup d’autres
adversaires, faits pour nous entendre.

Je suis, Monsieur, avec la plus haute considération

Votre dévoué serviteur

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 2. 1859

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

362.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

March 2. 1859

Dear Sir

On returning from an absence2 I find your note. It is a great
encouragement to me that you agree so fully with me on the various
points touched on in the pamphlet.3 The idea of combining double voting
(élection à deux degrés) for the less educated with direct voting for
those of higher qualifications is well worth considering as a mode of
making the distinction in a manner probably less obnoxious to the
“opinion démocratique” than the plural voting which I proposed not as an
immediately practical measure but as a standard of theoretic excellence.
I have however had a complete adhesion to it by one Chartist leader of
some weight.4

Edition: current; Page: [597]
Have you happened to see Hare’s book on Representation.5 I have not been
so delighted with any political treatise for many years.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 2, 1859

Blackheath

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

363.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath

March 2, 1859

Dear Sir

There is now no longer any need for reserve respecting the Liberty,2 as
it has received almost all the notices from the newspapers and weekly
periodicals which it is likely to have.3 There has been an amount of
response to it far beyond what I expected.

I was very much pleased with your oration on Owen.4

I wish that in quoting from some paper a recommendation for taking all
taxes off “industry” and laying them all on “realized property” you had
taken occasion to protest against the iniquity of the proposal—which I
have shewn very fully in my Pol. Economy.5 Why should those who save,
pay all the taxes for those who have spent all they got? A necessary
consequence too would be that those who will not consent to pay any part
of the taxes must be willing to renounce all control by their votes over
the levying and expending of them, otherwise it would be exactly as if
the poor rates were voted and expended by the paupers. There would be no
limit to the taxes they would exact from other people for their own
emolument or pleasure. A heavy tax on inherited property I do not object
to.

I am glad you agree with me about plural voting.6

Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [598]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 2. 1859

Blackheath

Arnold Ruge

Ruge, Arnold

364.


TO ARNOLD RUGE1

Blackheath

March 2. 1859

Dear Dr Ruge

On returning from Avignon2 I find your note. I am grateful for the
sympathy it expresses and only wish that you had known her who is gone
sufficiently to know what a feeble and inadequate expression that
dedication3 gives of what she was. While she lived, she never sought to
be known beyond her small circle of intimates—but now it seems perfectly
shocking that the world should be utterly unaware of the treasure it has
lost.

I am glad that you are so usefully and interestingly occupied in writing
for your country and I shall be much pleased to read the article you
mention.4 I am aware that my little book5 is, generally speaking, as
little needed in Germany as it is much here. Citizenship and political
activity are what Germany most wants, and I trust is again in the road
towards acquiring. I am

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 3, 1859

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

365.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

March 3, 1859

.

Dear Sir

Having been absent from home2 it is only within the last few days that I
have had an opportunity of reading and studying your book3—which I have
done with no ordinary feelings. You appear to me to have exactly, and
for the first time, solved the difficulty of popular representation; and
by doing so, to Edition: current; Page: [599] have raised up the cloud
of gloom and uncertainty which hung over the futurity of representative
government and therefore of civilization. That you are right in theory I
never could have doubted, and as to practice, having begun with a great
natural distrust of what seemed a very complicated set of arrangements,
I ended by being convinced that the plan is workable, and effectually
guarded or guardable against fraud. In the details I have as yet found
only one point which, it seems to me, might be improved, and that is so
minor a one as hardly to be worth mentioning. You propose that (assuming
the quota to be 2000) the first 2000 votes a candidate obtains at the
place for which he stands, should be counted for his return, and his
name struck out of all subsequent voting papers. Should it not be the
last 2000 rather than the first? Otherwise there is a premium on hanging
back from the poll; the later votes having more power than the earlier
ones, inasmuch as after the attainment of their first object, their
second votes also are counted.

Excuse my offering this very small criticism on a scheme for which I
shall henceforth be a zealous apostle.4 I am as sanguine as you are
yourself respecting the moral and political effects of it, which would
far transcend anything that is apparent at first sight. A thing so
complete will not however be attained at one step, and it is therefore
mortifying that the principle of representation of minorities is not in
some way recognized (however imperfectly it might be realized) by the
ministerial Reform Bill.

Allow me to add that while I so entirely concur both in the principles
of your book and in its practical proposals, I have also the good
fortune to agree with most even of your incidental remarks on things in
general. I am

yours with great respect

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 3. 1859

Blackheath Park

James Lorimer

Lorimer, James

366.


TO JAMES LORIMER1

Blackheath Park

Kent

March 3. 1859

.

Dear Sir

Allow me to thank you for your very interesting treatise2 which, having
been absent, I have only just had an opportunity of reading. We agree to
a Edition: current; Page: [600] considerable extent in our practical
views, particularly in the important point (almost new I think in the
theory of representation) that the proper safeguard against the undue
preponderance of a class more numerous than all others taken together,
is not the exclusion of anybody, but the graduation of influence
proportionally to just claims. Between some influence and more
influence, the ratio is finite and appreciable, but between some and
none at all it is mathematically infinite. No one could without
voluntary degradation admit that he ought to be counted for nothing,
though every reasonable person is eager to admit that there are persons
entitled to be counted for more than himself.

But while we agree thus far we differ very much on other points. I would
not give any one a plurality of votes in consequence of any merely
social superiority, and your general principle of making the
representative assembly an exact reflection of existing inequalities of
weight and position seems to me liable to very strong objections, with
which as I shall probably write something on the matter, I will not
trouble you here.

I would also include women in the ultimate universal suffrage that you
contemplate—which as far as I can collect from a note in your book, you
would not do. I think your principles break down altogether if you allow
of any exception among persons sui juris. I am

very faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4. 1859

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

367.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

March 4. 1859

.

My dear Monsieur Louis Blanc

Having been absent2 I only received your kind and sympathizing note a
few days ago, and have not until now had time or heart to write to you
in acknowledgment of it. I feel a tie between myself and every one who
knowing Edition: current; Page: [601] even a little of her, valued and
appreciated her to the extent of their opportunities. I do not speak
from feeling but from long standing and sober conviction in saying that
when she died this country lost the greatest mind it contained. You
cannot know what she was privately, but you, more than most men can
sympathize in the nobleness of her public objects, which never stopped
short of perfect distributive justice as the final aim, implying
therefore a state of society entirely communist in practice and spirit,
whether also in institutions or not. This entire faith in the ultimate
possibilities of human nature was drawn from her own glorious character,
while her keen perception of present difficulties and obstacles was
derived from her wonderful practical discernment, and comprehension of
life. I am

yrs most sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4, 1859

Blackheath

Horace Grant

Grant, Horace

368.


TO HORACE GRANT1

Blackheath

March 4, 1859

Dear Grant

Since my return from Avignon a week ago, I have had so many things to
attend to that I have not, till now, had time to express to you how
deeply interested I feel in your account of your health. I suppose the
medicine they gave you to stop hemorrhage was sugar of lead, the most
effectual of styptics but which always disorders the stomach dreadfully.
That effect however will go off, if only the bleeding does not return.
It is consolatory that the pulmonary disease did not appear on
examination to have advanced. When organic disease exists, hemorrhage
may at any time shew itself without marking any fresh advance of the
malady.

I recognized your accustomed kind attention in sending the Daily News
and the Athenaeum. The D. N. had on last Monday week an attack on the
pamphlet,2 not at all in harmony with the previous article.3

Edition: current; Page: [602]
I have not yet been able to look at the little book of your Quaker
friend.4

Hickson has probably told you that I hope to be able to walk across to
Fairseat before I leave England.

Yrs ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4, 1859

Blackheath

William E. Hickson

Hickson, William E.

369.


TO WILLIAM E. HICKSON1

Blackheath

March 4, 1859

.

Dear Hickson

I inclose directions for taking the Bromide of Potassium. I should think
the two cases somewhat similar, as the temporary paralysis was caused in
my wife’s case by an injury to the spine, suffered in a carriage.2 It is
right to say that she took iodine at the same time, according to the
prescription I send. But the iodine did not apparently do any good until
she added the bromine to it.

Thanks for your musical present. It is a great advantage to you as it is
to me, and very useful under depression, to be interested in a great
variety of things. I will refer again to “Time and Faith”3 on the
subject of M. Aurelius,4 and should be very happy if so great a
character could be exculpated. But, being the inferior of the two, I
fear he must be held responsible even for Verus.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [603]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4. 1859

Blackheath

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

370.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath

March 4. 1859

Dear Sir

I fully expected, both that you would go heartily with me in the main
object of the little book on Liberty, and also that you would think it
does not go far enough. Any difference that there can be between us in
the matter can only, however, be on points of detail, not of principle.
There are none of your writings which I admire more than your
“Over-Legislation”.2

I see I omitted to send you a pamphlet I have published on Parliamentary
Reform.3 I send it by this post. But I recommend to you, as much better
than it (if not already known to you) the book by Hare the Charity
Commissioner on “the election of representatives”.4 I am much mistaken
if you will not recognize in it a combination of theoretic wisdom and
practical sagacity very rarely found in any writings on such subjects.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yrs.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 6 mars 1859

Blackheath Park, Kent

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

371.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 6 mars 1859

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

A mon retour d’une absence j’ai trouvé votre bonne et affectueuse
lettre. J’y reconnais une sincérité de sympathie qui toujours soulage un
peu le malheur dont elle ne console point. Je voudrais pouvoir de
quelque façon que se soit, vous rendre ce bien. Si j’avais pu vous faire
connaître celle qui n’est plus, il me semble que je vous aurais plus que
payé de tout bienfait et de toute amitié qu’il eût été possible de
recevoir. Elle était, non seulement le coeur le Edition: current; Page:
[604] plus aimant et l’âme la plus élevée, mais aussi l’esprit le plus
profond et le jugement le plus infaillible qu’il m’a été donné de
connaître. Tout ce qu’on trouve de meilleur dans mes écrits n’est que la
plus pâle réflexion de ses lumières et de sa grande âme—et l’on s’en
apercevra bien, je le crains, dans ce qui me reste à faire, malgré tous
mes efforts pour me diriger toujours par son souvenir.

Vous me demandez comment cette catastrophe est arrivée. Nous étions en
route pour le midi. Nous voulions passer l’hiver à Hyères et le
printemps en Italie, peutêtre à Florence. Quoique délicate, elle se
portait bien lors de notre départ, mais la fatigue du voyage ou quelque
cause inconnue a déterminé à Avignon une attaque de poitrine qui quoique
sérieuse, ne sembla dangereuse que le jour même qui fut le dernier de sa
vie. Ainsi l’affranchissement que j’avais désiré, et dont je me
promettais tant de bien pour nous deux, est devenu le malheur de ma
vie—et c’est peu de chose encore, car Dieu sait que j’aurais racheté de
tout mon bonheur sa simple existence même éloignée de moi. Il me semble
que j’aurais pu tout supporter excepté qu’elle cessât d’être.

J’ai acheté une petite maison près de son tombeau, et je vous engage
lorsque vous m’écrirez d’ici à une année, d’adresser vos lettres à
Saint-Véran près Avignon, Vaucluse. Si je n’y suis pas, vos lettres
m’arriveront plus vite que si vous les adressiez ici.

Votre dévoué

J. S. Mill

Algernon Taylor vous remercie de votre souvenir et vous présente ses
respects.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 10 [1859]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

372.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 10 [1859]

Dear Chadwick

The reason why I think that voting papers would facilitate bribery and
intimidation is, that the person who can influence a voter could
actually stand by him and see him sign the paper.2 In regard to bribery,
a great additional motive would be created by the fact that the briber
need no longer trust the bribee. He could have ocular demonstration that
the voter fulfilled his bargain. Edition: current; Page: [605] In these
respects the experience of the Poor Law elections is not much to the
point, as there is comparatively little inducement either to bribe or
intimidate at those elections.

Craik3 is entirely wrong in his arithmetic. If anything is as plain as
that 2 + 2 = 4, it is that with three persons to be elected, and
cumulative voting, it would require a third plus one of the electors to
be sure of returning one member. Craik’s error is in supposing that
while the one third concentrate all their votes on one candidate the two
thirds will split theirs among three. Of course they would know better
than to do that. They would only divide theirs between two, which would
give them exactly the same power of carrying two candidates as the one
third would have of carrying one. If either the two thirds or the one
third aimed at more than they could do, while the other party did not,
they would fail of doing the whole of what they could do. But this
liability would be common to both sides, & to both in the same degree.

I am not disposed to republish Gaultier’s book4 myself, but I should be
very ready to give anybody a recommendation who would do it.

I very much hope you will read Hare5 and help to make the book known.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 12. 1859

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

373.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

March 12. 1859

.

Dear Sir

Your note partakes of the comprehensive and thoughtful character of your
book. I may well be pleased when, besides approving my suggestion,2 you
furnish me with arguments for it which I had not myself thought of. Your
own third course, however, is the real thing; and though I agree with
you that in the present stage your main idea should not be encumbered
with minutiae which would make it less easily intelligible, this and all
similar detailed improvements should be kept in reserve, to be brought
out when the time actually comes for legislating on your principles. For
the quality in your plan which will contribute most to make it take a
strong hold of every Edition: current; Page: [606] competent mind which
can be got to look into it, is precisely the finished perfection of
adaptation of which it is susceptible. It is the only representative
mechanism which is capable of fulfilling all the demands of principle.
Every other is a mere rough piece of botching compared with it; and this
character of the plan stands out so prominently when once it is
understood, that it has a fair chance, if sufficiently promulgated, of
being widely and enthusiastically taken up by the élite of the nation.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 17. 1859

B[lackheath]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

374.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

B[lackheath]

March 17. 1859

.

Dear Bain,—

I am glad that you like the Liberty so much & agree with so many of the
heresies of the Reform pamphlet. With regard to the plural voting, one
must not withhold one’s opinion as to what is right in principle because
one does not see one’s way to getting it fully acted on. The right
principle, put into a legislator’s head, may decide his judgment on some
important practical question involving the same principle. It is a great
point also to meet the claims of mere numbers with something which
appeals to the reason & sense of justice of the numbers themselves,
which no other mode of inequality of political rights does. One must
never suppose what is good in itself to be visionary because it may be
far off. That this is not really visionary is illustrated by the fact
that Holyoake2 has already taken it up warmly & in the most unqualified
form. We must remember too that the numerical majority are not the
politically strongest force yet. The point to be decided is, how much
power is to be yielded to them; & justice always affords the best basis
for a compromise, which even if only temporary may be eminently useful.

Pray read Hare.3 His plan supersedes all that I or anyone else has said
about grouping of boroughs representation of minorities &c by realizing
all these ends through a self acting machinery in a degree of perfection
almost ideal.

I am going to write to Reeve,4 & will inform you immediately of his
answer.

Yrs very truly

Edition: current; Page: [607]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 20. 1859

Blackheath

M. E. Grant Duff

Duff, M. E. Grant

375.


TO M. E. GRANT DUFF1

Blackheath

March 20. 1859

Dear Sir

I am obliged to Mr Herzen2 for his writings, and shall have pleasure in
reading them. But I have not yet seen any one, except from necessity;
and as I am going abroad very shortly, for an absence of some duration,
there would be little use in commencing an acquaintance which I should
not be able, for the present, to prosecute. After my return, I shall be
happy to see Mr Herzen, if he should then wish it, and still more (I
hope I need not say) yourself.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 20. 1859

Blackheath Park

George Cornewall Lewis

Lewis, George Cornewall

376.


TO GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS1

Blackheath Park

March 20. 1859

My dear Lewis

I agree with you that now is the first time (perhaps also the last) when
a parliamentary reform might have a chance of being decided by reason,
and not by the tug of hostile parties, each holding fast not by what it
ought, but by what it can. It is important therefore that the
opportunity should not be lost.

Respecting the ballot2—it is quite possible to make the secrecy of the
act of voting quite independent of the voter’s will; so that he shall be
unable to make known his vote, in any other way than by pledging his
veracity to it. If, however, the operation of the ballot were such as
you consider probable, there would still be the great evil done of a
recognition by the State that electors may vote as they please, and are
not accountable for their vote as a moral act. This would not be the
intention; but that it would be the popular Edition: current; Page:
[608] interpretation of the ballot I feel sure. You must have observed
that of late the most popular advocates of the ballot have actually
rested its justification on the avowed doctrine that the suffrage is a
right and not a trust; a doctrine which, even if there were no
non-electors, would be enough to corrupt and destroy the purest
democracy conceivable. There will never be honest or self-restraining
government unless each individual participant feels himself a trustee
for all his fellow citizens and for posterity. Certainly no Athenian
voter thought otherwise.

Have you seen Hare’s book on Representation?3 If not, let me beg you to
read it. I think it both a monument of intellect, and of inestimable
practical importance at the present moment. His suggestions appear to me
the real basis of a reconciliation between Radicalism and Conservatism.
Had I seen his book before writing my pamphlet I should have made it
very different.

I am
 Very truly yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 27. 1859

Blackheath

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

377.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath

March 27. 1859

Dear Sir

I am truly sorry that you have been so unwell, and that there is less
chance than there seemed to be of your obtaining a position compatible
with your pursuits.2 I cannot but think, however, that there must be
some posts (though fewer than formerly) which would suit your purpose.
The difficulty is to know which they are, and to catch them before they
are promised.

I did not propose to give votes at present to all who can pass my
elementary test—unless plural votes were given to the higher grades of
education in all classes. Neither do I propose an educational test as in
itself perfect, but as being better than a property test. If education
is not a complete guarantee against being swayed by class interests,
often ill understood, property is still less so. What you say of the
shoemakers3 only shews, at worst, that they are Edition: current; Page:
[609] no better than the shipowners—and probably in this instance less
ignorant; for the shoemakers, most likely, suffer more real
inconvenience from the sewing machines, than the shipowners from foreign
competition.

I think your principle of attaching direct taxation to representation,4
a very important one. If the taxes were to be spent under the control of
those who fancy they do not pay them, they would think they could never
lay on too much, or spend it too lavishly. I am afraid however I should
come under the same ban with them in the two instances you give of
improper expenditure—for I cannot help thinking that public gardens
should be the property of the town, in order that they may be free to
all without payment: and though I do not think so of public baths, yet
in order to foster the taste for them, and render them ultimately a
profitable private speculation, I should not object to their being
experimentally provided by public authority. These cases exemplify the
difference there is between us in degree, though I think not in
principle, respecting the limits of government interference.

I am
 Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 28. 1859

Blackheath Park

John Plummer

Plummer, John

378.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath Park

Kent

March 28. 1859

Dear Sir

I have read your two pamphlets,2 and I like much both their spirit and
most of the things you say. I should have been glad however to have had
your opinion, grounded on observation, as to whether the introduction of
new machinery does not often temporarily, and even for some considerable
time, diminish the employment for labour. If so, the operatives have
reason to complain, not of machinery, but of the State, for not doing
something to help them. I fear also that so much cannot be done for the
condition of the Edition: current; Page: [610] poorer classes by
reduction of taxation as you seem to think there is room for—especially
when there is a treacherous despot just across the Channel watching his
opportunity.

I have desired my publisher to send you a copy of a book of mine,3 of
which I request your acceptance. In it you will find my opinions on both
the subjects referred to in your note. I am

yrs very sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 28 mars 1859

Blackheath Park

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

379.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

Blackheath Park

le 28 mars 1859

.

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

Votre belle et touchante lettre m’a fait du bien. Je vous honore d’avoir
su voir, au moins en partie, dans mes écrits, ce que je dois à un
enseignement et à une collaboration dont le bonheur n’existe plus
maintenant qu’en souvenir.2 Cependant vous risquez toujours de lui
attribuer trop peu de tout ce que vous louez en moi. Nous n’étions pas,
comme on pourrait le croire, deux esprits différents mais égaux, dont
l’un aurait apporté autant que l’autre au fonds commun—comme par exemple
l’élévation des idées serait dûe surtout à l’un, la justesse des
appréciations pratiques à l’autre. Il n’en était point ainsi. Elle me
dépassait également aux deux égards. Sa hauteur atteignait le ciel, tout
en restant ferme sur la terre. Elle était complète sans moi, tandis que
moi je suis très incomplet sans elle. Ce qui m’appartenait dans l’oeuvre
commune n’était guère qu’un certain talent de rédaction et
d’interprétation, qui encore ne vaut quelque chose que pour les lettrés
et pour les savants, car elle trouvait toujours beaucoup mieux que moi
le chemin de l’esprit et du coeur de la simple humanité.

Passons maintenant aux affaires de l’Italie. Je ne m’étonne point de
l’illusion où semble être pour le moment chez vous l’esprit national. Je
crains pourtant qu’elle ne puisse devenir très fatale. Soyez bien
persuadé que le plus dangereux ennemi qu’ait en ce moment l’avenir de
l’humanité c’est celui dont vous invoquez l’appui.3 Je comprendrais qu’à
tel époque donné, on mît Edition: current; Page: [611] la nationalité
avant la liberté, je pourrais même le pardonner, parceque la liberté a
souvent besoin de la nationalité pour exister. Mais comment peut-on
croire que la nationalité Italienne puisse exister avec cet homme?4
A-t-elle existé sous son oncle?5 Pense-t-on que ce soit par un sentiment
généreux qu’il veut faire la guerre à l’Autriche sous prétexte de
l’Italie?6 Est-ce une nationalité que d’être dans la dépendance servile
d’un despote étranger? Sait-il même ce que c’est que la foi, que
l’honneur, que le respect de la parole donnée? La France, même libre,
veut beaucoup trop imposer son joug aux autres peuples; et son maître
actuel, en flattant ce défaut national, désire faire usage des Français
pour asservir les Italiens afin de les tenir tous deux subjugués les uns
par les autres, tout comme en use l’Autriche à l’égard des divers
peuples qu’elle domine. C’est navrant pour un ami de la liberté d’être
forcé de souhaiter le succès même de l’Autriche contre une puissance
plus retrograde encore et plus malfaisante qu’elle. Je ne voudrais
pourtant pas que l’Angleterre prêtât main-forte à l’Autriche attaquée, à
moins d’une renonciation préalable à l’Italie. Je ne voudrais jusque-là
qu’une médiation, et une neutralité armée. Mais si la guerre a lieu, je
ne pense pas que l’Angleterre s’arrête longtemps à ce point.7 Un peuple
n’a jamais qu’une idée à la fois, et le nôtre, je le crains, cesserait
bientôt de sympathiser avec le patriotisme Italien s’il se présentait
comme l’appui du tyran perfide de la France. Ce que veut cet homme est
par là même mauvais, car il ne veut que l’accroissement et
l’affermissement de son pouvoir, et il n’y a pas de plus grand mal sur
la terre.

Je serai charmé de voir votre ouvrage sur Savonarola8 et je le serais
encore plus de vous voir. Quoique probablement nous ne retournerons pas
en Angleterre sans passer par Florence, je ne crois pas que ce soit
avant le printemps de l’année prochaine. Mais pendant une partie de ce
temps nous ne serons pas plus loin qu’Avignon: nous y serons même à
quelques jours d’ici, pour y séjourner quelque temps, et nous y serons
aussi dans l’automne. Je ne pourrai Edition: current; Page: [612] pas
vous y offrir l’hospitalité, car la maisonette suffit à peine pour nous
loger: mais à cela près, si vous pouviez venir passer quelque temps avec
nous en famille avant l’hiver, nous pourrions causer sur bien des
choses, et parcourir ensemble ce pays classique pour tout Italien.

Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 29. 1859

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

380.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

March 29. 1859

Dear Sir

I have long ceased to regard speeches in Parliament2 as meaning anything
except that the speaker has not made up his mind to vote next day for
the thing he attacks. The position of a Member of Parliament must be
very corrupting, for it seems to divest people of all concern for the
day after tomorrow. People are not afraid to flétrir by a passing word,
something that they have never once thought about—provided there does
not seem to be at the time any strong party for it among their own
friends. This is what is called being practical.

Your plan, if kept before the public, will be adopted as soon as any
really large concession of the suffrage has to be made to the working
classes—but all parties at present think they can get off, this time,
without that; so they do not like to delay and incumber their measure
with provisions which are not understood.3

Does Gladstone4 know of your book? I should think him, of all prominent
public men, the likeliest to appreciate it.

I have been working at propagandism since I last wrote to you, and have
called the attention of various people to your plan who are sure to talk
about Edition: current; Page: [613] it when they understand it.5 I have
also an article in the forthcoming Fraser,6 great part of which is on
your book. A copy shall be sent to you. You will see that I have
ventured to differ from you about educational suffrage, which I prefer
to any property test, and which indeed I think the necessary
accompaniment and supplement of your plan.

Further consideration of the point I wrote to you about before,7 has
made me think your last solution of it a very important element in the
plan. In the case of those popular favorites who would receive many
thousand votes, a considerable number would probably be given for them
and them only. Now every one of these which is not counted for the
candidate’s return, corresponds to one elector unrepresented. The same
result will often, though not so often,8 happen in the case of those who
put only one or two additional names on their list. So that if a voter
with a long list is counted in preference to one with a short list,
there is a double evil: one is perhaps disfranchised while the country
loses the benefit of the other’s more careful consideration.

As you do not mind the trouble of writing to me, and as I should not
like to lose any letter from you, let me mention that after ten days or
so my address will be Saint-Véran, près Avignon, Vaucluse, France.9 I
hope to hear from you, especially if there is anything to be done which
I can do. I shall take your book with me, and as far as writing is
concerned, can do as much anywhere else as here.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 31, 1859

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

381.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

,
March 31, 1859

.

. . . . The book2 has had much more success, and has made a greater
impression, than I had the smallest expectation of.—We shall be at
Avignon for some time. . . . I hope to hear from you sometimes at that
place, as I am very desirous to know, how your various literary projects
go on. . . .

Edition: current; Page: [614]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 31, 1859

Blackheath

William E. Hickson

Hickson, William E.

382.


TO WILLIAM E. HICKSON1

Blackheath

March 31, 1859

.

Dear Hickson

Since your first note I have been in daily expectation of hearing that
all was over.

He2 was, I think, without exception the most unselfish person, of the
male sex, whom I have ever known intimately enough to be able to judge.
The only thing which can at all alleviate our regret is that his health
had long been too much broken to make life any enjoyment to him.

I would attend the funeral, at whatever inconvenience, if any mark were
necessary of my respect and affection for his memory. But I am in the
midst of printing against time (a selection from my review articles)3
and am hurrying the printer in order not to delay my departure from
England. I hope to start within ten days, and I fear therefore I shall
be unable to make out my projected visit to Fairseat.

My address will for some time be Saint-Véran, près Avignon, Vaucluse,
France, where I shall be glad to hear from you, and shall be much
interested in knowing whether the bromine experiment succeeds.4

I am,
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 31 [1859]

Blackheath

383.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath

March 31 [1859]

Dear Sir

I wrote today to Mr. W. Hickson explaining to him my reasons for
preferring not to attend the funeral;2 but as you may perhaps desire to
hear from me before you leave town, I write again merely to say that
much as I should Edition: current; Page: [615] wish in any way to shew
the great regard I felt for my friend, yet in the present circumstances
I would rather not attend.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 4. 1859

Blackheath

Frederick J. Furnivall

Furnivall, Frederick J.

384.


TO FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL1

Blackheath

April 4. 1859

Dear Sir

Your approbation of the ‘Liberty’gives me much pleasure, and the last
sentence of your letter has caused me a still deeper feeling. I did not
for a moment think of doing any good by those few words of preface, but
only of expressing some insignificant fraction of what I feel to the
noblest and wisest being I have known. But I could do nothing more
useful with the rest of my life than devote it to making the world know
and understand what she was, if it were possible to do it.

With regard to your impediments at the College:2 Mr Davies3 I know
nothing of. Maurice I do know, and respect highly.4 I should have sent
him a copy of the book, if I had not thought that my doing so might
appear a sort of bravado: for though I was persuaded that he would see
some good in it, and though I know that he has the kindest feelings
towards me personally, I was quite prepared to find that it contained
much which he would think it his duty to discourage.

I had already read Mr Huber’s papers in the Reasoner with great
satisfaction.5

I am Dear Sir
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [616]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 4, 1859

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

385.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

April 4, 1859

.

Dear Sir

I have read your letter with much pleasure, and entirely agree with it.
I shall be very glad to receive your observations on any part of my
Political Economy2 and there will be time enough for you to prepare them
at leisure, as I am going abroad immediately probably for a year or
more; and as you might lose all your trouble by the miscarriage of a
letter, I would suggest your withholding your remarks until my return.

I am
 yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 7. 1859

Blackheath

James Lorimer

Lorimer, James

386.


TO JAMES LORIMER1

Blackheath

April 7. 1859

.

Dear Sir

Many thanks for your letter. I should think the difficulty you had in
obtaining a publisher was owing to the same cause which you refer to in
the case of Mr Hare, the scientific apparatus of your treatise. Probably
something of the same kind has stood in your way with Reeve.2 The
English public do not like to see even their own conclusions rested upon
arguments which they are conscious that they themselves could never have
used. You do not at all exaggerate the English dislike of theory, and of
any political suggestion which is at all out of the common way. But this
dislike is always greatest at first, and though a Minister may be
obliged to bow to it, it is a great mistake in any one else to humour
it. Every repetition and inculcation of a really good doctrine or
proposal, does a little towards raising it from the class of
impracticable into that of practicable things. The errors of the public
owe half their mischievous power to people who do not participate in the
errors, but who think it practical to summarily reject everything that
is opposed to them. Therefore, when, as in the case of Hare’s plan,
there is really no obstacle to Edition: current; Page: [617] its
adoption but the novelty of the idea, we should always, I think, talk
and write about it as if that were no obstacle at all.

I hope you may yet find some channel for saying all you would wish to
say in reply to me.3 If you do, you could not oblige me more than by
telling me where it is to be found. I shall be out of England for some
time, but a letter addressed Saint-Véran près Avignon, Vaucluse France,
will find me either immediately or in no very long time.

I am
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 10. 1859

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

387.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

April 10. 1859

.

Dear Sir

My address for some time will be, Saint-Véran près Avignon, Vaucluse,
France, where I shall be happy to hear from you any time when you are
disposed to write.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 11, 1859

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

388.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

April 11, 1859

Dear Sir

I have sent your letter to Mr Hare.2 It will please and encourage him,
as it well may.

His plan would be the most effectual of all antidotes to the fatal habit
of Edition: current; Page: [618] mind which as you say, is creeping over
the non-democratic portion of all the large constituencies.3

I dare say the first attempt to introduce representation of minorities
will be made in some such manner as you suggest.4 But this will only be
owing to the timidity of our statesmen—for the whole, in this case, is
so much more defensible than any part, that it would probably be quite
as easy to get it adopted in totality as partially.

I am just leaving England for the Continent.

Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 4. 1859

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

389.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

May 4. 1859

.

Dear Sir

Many thanks for your letter. You have made a good move in endeavouring
to get the subject brought before the Social Science Association.2 The
meetings of that body are of considerable use in getting an audience for
new views of things practical. If Lord Brougham3 would take up your plan
he would do a great service. Lord Lyndhurst’s4 approbation is valuable.
Parker5 has sent me an article cut from an Edinburgh paper (the Evening
Courant)6 containing Edition: current; Page: [619] an intelligent
appreciation of the plan, though the writer knew it only from the
article in Fraser.7

I do not see how we can now avoid the terrible calamity of war.8 If we
allow Austria to be crushed between Russia and France, which left to
herself she certainly will be, the fate of England is sealed, for the
two together will be a match for her at sea, and vastly superior on
land. It is quite possible that Europe may be divided between two great
military despotisms, and freedom driven to take refuge in America and
Australia. I am

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 14, 1859

Saint-Véran près Avignon

Arthur Hardy

Hardy, Arthur

390.


TO ARTHUR HARDY1

Saint-Véran près Avignon

Vaucluse France

May 14, 1859

My dear Hardy

I received your letter2 when on the point of leaving England, and I put
off answering it till our arrival here. I have been further delayed by
the troubles and interruptions incident to getting into a new place, but
still more by the painfulness of writing on the only subject on which I
should care to write, or doubtless you to hear.

Though she could not be to anyone else, even if not separated by half
the circumference of the globe, all that she was to us, her immediate
family, it must make a blank in any life to lose one whose equal we may
be perfectly sure that we shall not live long enough ever to see again.

To us who have known what it is to be with her and to belong to her,
this silly phantasmagoria of human life devoid of her, would be utterly
meaningless and unendurably wearisome, were there not still some things
to do in it which she wished done, and some public and other objects
which she cared for, and in which therefore it is still possible to keep
up some degree of interest. I have been publishing some of her opinions,
and I hope to employ what remains to me of life (if I am able to retain
my health) in continuing to work for them, and to spread them, though
with sadly diminished powers Edition: current; Page: [620] now that I no
longer have her to prompt and guide me. I thank you for your wish that
we should sometimes correspond. I should be glad to do so, as I feel a
tie between myself and everyone who had any sincere feeling of regard
for her. Up to next spring it will be best to address any letter to this
place, as though we shall not be always here, we do not intend to be in
England before that time at soonest. I believe I told you that we have
bought a small house and a little bit of ground here, near the place
where she lies.

I am my dear Hardy
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Arthur Hardy Esq.

Mount Lofty

near Adelaide

[
South Australia

]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 15. 1859

Saint Véran

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

391.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran

May 15. 1859

.

Dear Sir

It gave me pleasure to hear from you again, and still more to learn that
you propose writing something in further development and defence of the
plan. The assertion that you propose to abolish the representation of
localities might well astonish any one who had not noticed the
extraordinary mistakes made by people who write critical notices of a
book after one hasty reading. If they have taken in the main idea, it is
as much as they have done even in very favorable cases; and if the main
idea is new to them, it is all that their mind will hold, and they
generally assume that it is advanced without any qualifications and
restrictions, though the book may be full of them. This seems to be one
of the conditions of daily writing. It is a fact that your book lays so
great a stress upon the representation of localities, that I was struck
and almost surprised by the great pains you took not only to prevent any
of the advantages of local representation from being lost, but to give
them an unexampled extension, since you allow any locality or corporate
body which has a definable existence to have a member of its own, if it
chooses to elect one by its local majority.

The number and population of the unrepresented towns, as stated in your
letter, surprised me.

I inclose a letter2 I have received on the subject of your plan, which
as you Edition: current; Page: [621] think of writing further on it, you
may like to see. The only difficulty stated by the writer is easily met.
I am

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 16, 1859

Saint-Véran, près Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

392.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint-Véran, près Avignon

,

May 16, 1859

.

. . . . I am rather anxious to hear from you, not knowing whether you
have received the sheets of the little book,2 and, in case you have,
whether you still have any idea of translating it. I should much prefer
you to any other translator who is likely to offer, but I have always
thought it probable that you might have good reasons against undertaking
it, and that some other part of Germany might be more suitable for
bringing the book before the German public. In addition to an offer made
through Messrs. Parker3 I have lately received one under the signature
of Eduard John,4 Justizrath at Marienwerder . . . who has sent me a
portion of a translation actually executed; but as it is in the German
manuscript character, which I do not read fluently, I am not at present
able to judge of its merits. . . . I could write much about politics,
but think it more prudent to wait for some better opportunity; though I
certainly do not side with France in this miserable war,5 which I
condemn as strongly as any Austrian can. . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 26. [1859]

Hotel Nevet, Montpellier

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

393.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Hotel Nevet, Montpellier

May 26. [1859]

Dearest Lily—

I got here quite prosperously, except that by a blunder not common with
me, I first got to Arles instead, & had to wait some time for a train to
get back, during which I botanized & did not get here till 7. I however
strolled about a good deal both before & after tea & cutlets. Today I
Edition: current; Page: [622] began my walk at half past eight & was
fairly driven in at ¼ past 2 by the load of plants. It has taken me till
now (½ past 4) to determine them, so I shall hardly have time for
another walk before the table d’hôte which is unluckily at 6. I am in a
very pleasant groundfloor room opening on a shady court yard with large
trees, or garden as they call it, thanks to which I here also hear the
nightingale in bed. I am very well and not at all tired. This place much
exceeds my recollections & expectations, & I now think you would like to
see it. To me it is very strange, having seen it twice before2 and been
familiar with it in winter, to see it now in the full blaze of summer,
with a richness and verdure I did not think it capable of—but
cultivation has gained immensely on the garrigues since my time. I think
it a delightful place, and should have felt it delightful once. Now, the
contrast with the change in my own life the reverse way, deepens the
melancholy which is the groundplan of life and is always in the depths
whatever else may be on the surface. But I would not wish it otherwise
and would rather seek than avoid any place or circumstance that makes it
more so.—My plans remain the same, except that as the weather seems
unsettled and may be rainy in the mountains I may possibly stay a day
longer here than I intended; but I do not think I shall do so. The
weather today is exquisite—the most perfect English summer day, with
delicious flying clouds & breeze—but there are storms in the air—it has
evidently rained much here & I think you had a storm of rain yesterday
afternoon. Tomorrow I shall go down to the sea & next day climb St Loup.
If I stay longer I will write again from here. Do not, dear, write here
more than once. I will now go & put this in the post, & then see if the
best chemist here has got me the citrate he said he would if he could
find it in Montpellier.

Your ever affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sunday May 29, 1859

Hotel Nevet

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

394.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Hotel Nevet

Sunday morning
 [
May 29, 1859

]

Dearest Lily

I have only just got your letter as yesterday morning they denied having
one and I was so late returning from my walk (after 7) that the office
was Edition: current; Page: [623] shut. Thanks for it dear, it was a
great pleasure. If I have had a fair specimen of Montpellier in the last
week in May, the climate must be exquisite—to be out all day for several
days in that season & never have to think, even, of heat. On Friday I
was out from ½ to 9 till between 5 & 6, by the sea, in the most
delightful weather, with now & then a few drops of rain towards
afternoon—& as for plants, the load of the day before was a joke to
them. Yesterday I had marked out for climbing the Pic St Loup, and was
out soon after ½ past 8, but after a delightful walk of about twelve
miles to the foot of the mountain a succession of thunderstorms came on
& though I found shelter, first at a very pretty convent called Notre
Dame des Champs, afterwards among sheep & shepherds in a hut, it put a
stop to my projects & I had to walk back, mostly through rain, seeing by
the way two fine rainbows, one of them when the sun did not shine. So I
have the Pic still to climb, which is a reason for staying here today:
but a stronger reason is that unless this storm inaugurates a change,
the weather must be rainy in the mountains. Not to repeat the walk over
the same ground I have engaged a carriage to take me to the
neighbourhood of the mountain & bring me back when I am tired. It is a
beautiful morning, & if it looks fine towards Le Vigan I shall go there
tomorrow, for I hunger & thirst for mountains. Yesterday I was less
encumbered with plants but they were all choice ones. I have got the
citrate, which the chemist made on purpose for me. This mode of life is
doing me a world of good—more than I could possibly hope for in the
time, so I would not willingly be forced to give up the mountains for
the present. We seem to have had the rare fortune of falling on a wet
summer in the driest region of Europe.

ever affectionately

J. S. Mill

I expected that the weather would be bad for Montpellier, from heat, &
good for the mountains. I have found it the reverse. It has never been
so hot as in any day at Avignon.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday May 30 [1859]

Hotel Nevet

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

395.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Hotel Nevet

Monday May 30 [1859]

Dearest Lily

Still here! When I got up it rained violently, continued raining all the
morning & is only now (1 o’clock) for the first time clearing. There is
not time now to go to Le Vigan today, even if it were advisable to go to
mountains in such weather. I have been all the morning drying my papers
by a fire—the Edition: current; Page: [624] first I have had, but the
papers I spread out last night were almost as wet this morning as they
were at first. I got to the top of the Pic St Loup, or as they call it
here (the country people I mean) the Pied de St Loup, so I got to the
head of the saint’s foot. The view was very fine, the walk & plants very
good. I am now going to see what sort of walk I can get. Tomorrow I will
certainly either go to Le Vigan or return home.

Thanks again for your nice letter dear. I was extremely interested by
everything in it & only hope M. Pascal’s2 news will not prove again a
mere put off of the marbrier. Your affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 31 [1859]

Le Vigan

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

396.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Le Vigan

May 31 [1859]

Dearest Lily

I write a line to save the post and let you know a day sooner that I
have arrived here. It is 40 miles from Montpellier & as the only
diligence was a night one, I preferred taking a carriage from the hotel.
It has been a tolerable day & gives tolerable hopes: though only hopes
for the future. The number of days I stay here will depend on the
weather & on anything I hear from you. I should think you must have
heard from Gurney2 by this time. This seems a beautiful place though a
most primitive French town & inn. I enquired for your letter & received
it immediately on arriving.

Your ever affectionate

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday [June 2, 1859]

Le Vigan

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

397.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Le Vigan

Thursday evg [June 2, 1859]

Dearest Lily—

only one word to say that I have taken a place by the diligence to Nîmes
for Saturday morning & as I shall arrive there somewhere Edition:
current; Page: [625] about 3 or 4 in the afternoon, am sure of a train
to take me home tolerably early in the evening. It will be time enough
for Benoît to go to the station for my things after I arrive. I shall
want nothing but tea, with eggs or not according as I have or have not
dined.

As I shall so soon be able to tell you all about this place I will only
say that I have climbed today the highest mountain within reach & have
been out from ½ past 8 to past 7. I had a fine day & saw everything to
perfection.

I received your second letter to this place—third altogether—yesterday
morning. Thanks dear for all of them.

Your affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 11, 1859

Saint-Véran, near Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

398.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint-Véran, near Avignon

June 11, 1859

I sincerely condole with you on the unhappy events2 which have caused
you so much pain and disturbance of mind. The delay in answering my
letter has occasioned no inconvenience, and since you are willing to
translate the little book,3 or rather have by this time actually done
so, I desire nothing better than to leave it in your hands and certainly
should not think of giving the preference to any other translator.4 I
have no objection to the omission of any part or the whole of the note
to which you refer, nor of the sentence on page 9,5 though in the latter
case I have not been able to discover what there is which renders it
more unsuitable for publication than all the rest of the chapter.
Perhaps some words in it may be understood as a declaration against
kingly government, but nothing of the sort was intended, nor did it
occur to me that anyone could think so. The only opinion expressed or
implied is in favour of free political institutions, and even that is
but incidental. But I do not think the retention of the sentence of any
importance. . . .

Edition: current; Page: [626]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 17. 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

399.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

June 17. 1859

Dear Sir

I was very glad to hear from you again, and particularly so to hear that
you are going to have the opportunity of a public discussion at the
Social Science meeting.2 What is wanted is to get the subject much
written about and talked of; previously to which the theory that two and
two make four was no doubt regarded as a paradox, and such people as
Disraeli3 got up in public places and attacked their political opponents
for maintaining it. How I should have liked to have been there to answer
him on the spot. But there was nobody to do it. I like your idea of
writing a paper and sending it to the members of the Association, but I
am rather doubtful about attaching signatures to it. That foolish
Memorial to Lord Palmerston4 has thrown a wet blanket on the idea. I
suppose you will give brief and pungent answers to the popular
objections against the plan, which are only expressions, in varied
phrase, of the popular inability to understand it. Where there is
anything definite in the objections, the truth is generally the reverse
of what is asserted. For instance, it is supposed that the plan would
enable minorities to govern; whereas the fact is that now a minority
very often governs (by being the majority of a majority) while under
your plan a minority never could by possibility do so. It is the only
plan which ensures government by the majority.

I see no prospect of anything but mischief from the change of ministry.5
Its effect on foreign affairs will be bad, and dangerously so, while
reform will not be benefitted.6 The new cabinet will never be able to
agree on anything Edition: current; Page: [627] but the well worn
useless shibboleths of Whig mitigated democracy, and besides they will
be unwilling to propose anything new from the certainty that the Tories
would oppose it, would by misrepresentation rouse vulgar prejudices
against it, and finally throw it out in the Lords. The Liberals, by
refusing to take the bill of the late government as the foundation for
theirs, have given redoubled force to the mischievous custom almost
universal in Parliament, that whatever one party brings forward, the
other is sure to oppose7—whereby the enemies of change, even if very far
from being a majority, are able to combine with the opponents and defeat
the proposals of either. All parties seem to have joined in working the
vices and weak points of popular representation for their miserably low
selfish ends, instead of uniting to free representative institutions
from the mischief and discredit of them.

I intend to pass the greater part of the summer among the Pyrenees,
during which time I shall have no settled address but my publisher Mr
Parker will be able to tell you where to direct to me for the time
being. I am Dear Sir

Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 22 juin 1859

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

400.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

le 22 juin 1859

.

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

Je ne vais pas renouveler notre discussion sur les affaires politiques.
S’il dépendait de moi, je ne voudrais pas maintenant vous décourager. Le
sort est jeté, et je souhaite ardemment que l’événement réponde à vos
désirs. Seulement tâchez de ne pas mal penser de l’Angleterre à cette
occasion,2 et surtout gardez-vous de croire qu’elle ne sympathise pas
avec l’Italie. Cette sympathie est tellement forte qu’en ce moment elle
suffit pour balancer non seulement la méfiance et la haine que doit
inspirer une ambition criminelle, mais encore les motifs les plus graves
de sûreté nationale. Songez que l’Autriche est la seule alliée sur
laquelle nous aurions pu compter3 (car il n’y a Edition: current; Page:
[628] pas de fonds à faire sur la Prusse et l’Allemagne sans l’Autriche)
dans le cas très probable et peutêtre prochain où nous aurions à lutter
pour notre existence nationale contre la France et la Russie réunies.
Dans cette lutte nous n’aurons plus l’Autriche avec nous, d’abord
parcequ’elle sera probablement trop affaiblie, ensuite parcequ’elle sera
trop offensée de notre neutralité actuelle. Nous aurons, hélas, l’Italie
contre nous, car vous serez forcés à suivre dans toutes ses guerres
votre prétendu libérateur.4 Ainsi l’ombre d’indépendance dont on vous
flatte aura pour résultat que vous aiderez à abattre la seule liberté
bien affermie qui existe dans l’ancien Continent.5 Vous nous
pardonnerez, j’espère, de n’être pas très enthousiasmés de cette
perspective. Si vous pensez sérieusement là dessus, vous verrez que ce
danger doit être désormais la principale préoccupation de nos hommes
d’état. Assurément tout le parti libéral aurait demandé la guerre contre
la France, pendant que nous avons encore des alliés, si était la
répugnance que lui inspire l’idée d’appuyer la domination de l’Autriche
sur l’Italie.

Je vais maintenant quitter Avignon pour les Pyrénées, où je me propose
de passer la saison des grandes chaleurs. Mais je compte revenir à la
fin de Septembre, et vous me feriez un plaisir véritable (à moins que
les affaires de votre pays n’exigent votre présence) si vous vouliez
venir passer ici quelque temps avec nous. Comme je vous l’ai déjà
indiqué, la petitesse de notre demeure m’empêche de vous y offrir un
logement, mais il y aura un couvert pour vous, et je serai à votre
disposition pendant la journée. Si cette lettre vous parvient, veuillez
me dire si nous pouvons avoir cette espérance. Ecrivezmoi toujours à
Avignon, on saura où envoyer vos lettres.

Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July, 1859

Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell

Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn

401.


TO ELIZABETH CLEGHORN GASKELL1

[
July, 1859

]

[Where I think you do me an injustice is in saying that] in publishing
letters not written for publication you disregarded the obligation which
custom founded on reason has imposed, of omitting what would be
offensive Edition: current; Page: [629] to the feelings and perhaps
injurious to the moral reputation of individuals . . . and the notion
you seem to entertain that everything said or written by any one, which
could possibly throw light on the character of the sayer or writer, may,
justifiably, be published by a biographer, is one which the world, and
those who are higher and better than the world, would, I believe,
perfectly unite in condemning.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July, 1859

Elizabeth Cleghorn Gaskell

Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn

402.


TO ELIZABETH CLEGHORN GASKELL1

[
July, 1859

]

You entirely mistake the motives which actuated the letter to which you
refer2—It was not hurt feeling on a sensitive point but a sense of truth
& Justice which I flatter myself wd have been the same in any other
case.

Even now I shd feel that I was acting contraryly [sic] to her wishes &
character by any partiality or unreasonable sensitiveness, much more
therefore at a time when I could afford to regard these things with
indifference.

The case being simply that in the exercise of the discretion of an
Editor you neglected the usual and indispensable duties which custom
(founded on reason) has imposed of omiting [sic] all that might be
offensive to the feelings Edition: current; Page: [630] of individuals.
Had what was said referred only to myself the publication of it would
have been equally unjustifiable. Miss Bronté [sic] was entitled to
express any foolish impression that might occur to her in a private
letter—It is the Editor who publishes what may give just offence who is
alone to blame.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 18, 1859

Luz

John William Parker

Parker, John William

403.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Luz

2

July 18, 1859

Dear Sir

Since writing my note3 this morning, I have received a message from
Avignon which makes it necessary for me to return there4 before going to
Bagnères de Luchon. Therefore please direct to Avignon instead of Luchon
for the present.

I have also received your letter inclosing the accounts, and the very
interesting letters from Mr Hare5 and Mr Kingsley,6 to both of whom I
will write. I am sorry to say I never received Mr Gladstone’s letter,7
to my great regret, but I have written to Bagnères to enquire about it.
I should like his second note to be forwarded to Avignon (Saint Véran).

The sale of so large an edition of the Liberty8 in so few months is very
satisfactory. You have not told me the number you think it advisable to
print of the second edition. If so many as 2000, I think I may fairly
ask £200 for the edition.

I do not propose to make any additions or alterations. I am

Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 6. 1859

St. Véran

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

404.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

St. Véran

,
Aug. 6. 1859

Dear Bain—

Your letter of July 11 reached me in the Pyrenees & I was pleased with
all the news it contained, except what related to the weakness in
Edition: current; Page: [631] your foot.2 I hope however that your
Scotch excursion will cure what remains of that & if not you have the
resource of hydropathy the benefits of which have been so strikingly
exemplified in your case.

The “Liberty” has produced an effect on you which it was never intended
to produce if it has made you think that we ought not to attempt to
convert the world. I meant nothing of the kind, & hold that we ought to
convert all we can. We must be satisfied with keeping alive the sacred
fire in a few minds when we are unable to do more—but the notion of an
intellectual aristocracy of lumières while the rest of the world remains
in darkness fulfils none of my aspirations—& the effect I aim at by the
book is, on the contrary, to make the many more accessible to all truth
by making them more open minded. But perhaps you were only thinking of
the question of religion. On that, certainly I am not anxious to bring
over any but really superior intellects & characters to the whole of my
own opinions—in the case of all others I would much rather, as things
now are, try to improve their religion than to destroy it. My review of
you has been in Reeve’s hands for several weeks, but I have yet heard
nothing from him concerning it.3 I am expecting the proof shortly. The
testimonies & notices you tell me of seem to be of the right kind & of
good promise for future ones. I hope that the National will follow up
its apparent intention of reviewing you.4 Its review of me I saw before
I left England.5 I thought the writer’s drift was plain enough, but he
wrote from an erroneous point of thought. I have seen as yet no review
of the “Dissertations” but that in the Saturday Review6 which is so
complimentary on the whole, & so very weak where it differs from me that
I think it is likely to do more good than harm to the opinions it
attacks. I am sorry your former reviewer in the Saturday7 has left off
reviewing. The Principal of the Owens College8 feels as many sincere
Christians now do, & I hope the “Liberty” will make many more such. It
is curious that the most enthusiastic adhesion I have received is from
Kingsley who seems to have been very strongly impressed by the book.
When he had only seen it at Parker’s he sent a message Edition: current;
Page: [632] thanking me for the pages on Xtian morality & he has since
written to me saying that it made him “a clearer headed & braver minded
man upon the spot.”9

I suppose this letter will be forwarded to you. I do not know at present
where I shall be for a month to come, so please address as at [post?]10
S. V. &c.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 6. 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

William E. Gladstone

Gladstone, William E.

405.


TO WILLIAM E. GLADSTONE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Aug. 6. 1859

Dear Sir

I regret that a note which I am informed by Mr Parker that you did me
the favour of writing and which was forwarded by him, has never reached
me.2

In acknowledging the kind expressions in your second, allow me to say
that in venturing to send you my last publication,3 I intended a mark of
respect to one of the very few political men whose public conduct
appears to me to be invariably conscientious, and in whom desire of the
public good is an active principle, instead of at most, a passive
restraint. I am

yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 6. 1859

Saint Véran, near Avignon

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

406.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran, near Avignon

Aug. 6. 1859

Dear Sir

Your note of July 142 reached me in the Pyrenees, where I was seeking
for health, not unsuccessfully. I think you have judged rightly in the
subject of your paper for the Social Science Association,3 which will, I
expect, be very valuable, and I shall be much interested in knowing the
impression it makes. The best use that can be made of the Association is
to make it a means Edition: current; Page: [633] of gaining adhesions to
important practical suggestions fitted for immediate adoption.

I was much gratified by your approbation of the Dissertations. You give
them the sort of praise which one thinker most desires to receive from
another: and that you should find so much usefulness in them is of
itself sufficient to justify my having republished them.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 6, 1859

Saint Véran, near Avignon

Charles Kingsley

Kingsley, Charles

407.


TO CHARLES KINGSLEY1

Saint Véran, near Avignon

,
Aug. 6, 1859

Your letter of July 52 reached me long after its date, while wandering
in search of health in the Pyrenees. Allow me, while expressing the
great pleasure it gave me, to say that its humility, as it respects
yourself, seems to me as much beyond the mark as the deference expressed
towards me exceeds anything I have the smallest title to.

Laudari a laudato, or by any other viro,3 has never been very much of an
object with me. But to be told by a man who is himself one of the good
influences of the age, and whose sincerity I cannot doubt, that anything
I have written makes him feel able to be a still better influence, is
both an encouragement and a reward—the greatest I can look for, now that
a still greater has been taken from me by death.

Far from having read none of your books, I have read them nearly all,
and hope to read all of them. I have found in them an earnest endeavour
towards many of the objects I myself have at heart; and even when I
differed from you it has never been without great interest and sympathy.
There are few men between whom and myself any nearer approximation in
opinion could be more agreeable to me, and that you should look forward
to it gives me a pleasure I could not forbear to express.

Edition: current; Page: [634]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 6 août 1859

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

408.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

le 6 août 1859

Mon cher Monsieur Villari

Votre lettre du 23 juin m’est parvenue, mais un peu tardivement, et je
ne vous ai pas alors fait de réponse, parceque peu après l’avoir écrite,
vous avez dû recevoir ma lettre du 22,2 si toutefois l’administration
des postes l’a laissé passer. Elle peut dorénavant laisser tout passer,
car je n’ai plus besoin de faire aucune observation sur les affaires
politiques. Ce serait inutile car aujourd’hui tout le monde en Italie,
sauf peutêtre les Lombards,3 doit être du même avis que moi. Moi-même je
n’aurais jamais pensé qu’on vous eût sitôt revendus à l’Autriche pour
avoir sa neutralité ou peutêtre son alliance contre la Prusse et
l’Angleterre: Au moins, si vous lisez nos débats parlementaires, vous
savez à présent de quel côté se trouve la véritable sympathie envers
l’Italie.

Si vous n’avez pas reçu ma lettre, il est probable que vous ne recevrez
pas davantage celle-ci. Cependant je ne m’abstiendrai pas de renouveler
l’expression de mon désir que ce soit à votre convenance de venir passer
quelque temps ici au mois d’Octobre, en partageant notre vie modeste et
tranquille, sauf le logement que je ne puis pas vous offrir, à cause de
la petitesse du pied à terre que nous possédons.

Si cette lettre vous parvient, veuillez en accuser réception, afin que
je sache à quoi m’en tenir.

votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 24. 1859

Paris

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

409.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Paris

Aug. 24. 1859

.

Dear Sir

I thank you for your paper,2 which I have read with great pleasure. The
expressions which your modesty almost apologizes for, seem to me quite
Edition: current; Page: [635] indispensable. I should rather have liked
them stronger than at all weaker. Unless the pretensions of the plan are
stated highly—as they well may be—sufficient attention will not be
attracted to it. I only wish you had had other names to refer to in the
second paragraph than merely mine, or that the reference in the note to
p. 13 had been brought in simultaneously.

Your paper is excellent. If I had a criticism to make, it would be that
you suppose the persons to whom it is addressed less ignorant than, I am
afraid, they are. You address them as if they were well acquainted with
the subject of discussion, but were under the influence of some of the
futile objections which have been brought against you. No doubt this is
the case with some, but for the greater number I fear that a brief
popular explanation of the plan itself and of its purposes is still
required. The conclusion of the paper in some measure supplies this, but
a good deal is, I think, lost by not beginning with it. However “I speak
as to wise men—judge ye what I say.”3

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 5. 1859

Avignon

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

410.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

Avignon

Sept. 5. 1859

Messieurs.

Votre lettre du 3 sept. ne m’est parvenue qu’aujourd’hui. Pour parler
d’abord de ce qui regarde le grand morceau. L’étude des proportions fait
voir que les dimensions que vous indiquez seraient tout à fait
insuffisantes. Elles ne dépassent que très peu celles du morceau destiné
à être superposé. Je suis donc forcé à abandonner l’idée de prendre tous
les morceaux dans le même bloc, et à me contenter par le grand morceau
du marbre blanc clair dont nous possédons déjà un bloc à Marseilles.

Mais il reste la question du temps, qui est pour moi de la plus grande
importance. J’ai été au désespoir du délai de huit jours qui s’est déjà
écoulé. Edition: current; Page: [636] S’il fallait y ajouter encore six
semaines, ne seulement tous nos plans pour l’hiver et l’été prochain
seraient entièrement bouleversés, mais, ce qui nous affligerait bien
davantage, nous serons forcés d’ajourner presqu’à l’année prochaine
l’érection du monument. Je vous prie, Messieurs, avec la plus grande
instance de tout faire pour abréger le délai autant que possible. Puis
qu’il ne s’agit que de trois morceaux au lieu de quatre j’espère qu’ils
pourront été rendus à Avignon avant la fin du mois actuel. Cela même ne
nous donnerait que tout juste le temps nécessaire.

Après avoir consulté le sculpteur, je vous donne, Messieurs, les
dimensions exactes des divers morceaux. La différence de ces
dimensions-celles que je vous avais indiquées, est peu de chose, mais
elle suffit pour avoir un effet très appréciable sur les proportions.

Vous voudrez bien adresser les marbres à M. Dupré, marbrier à Avignon.

Je vous engage Messieurs à me donner une réponse immédiate, et à mettre
dans les travaux toute l’urgence possible.

Agréez Messieurs

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7 Sept. 1859

St. Véran

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

411.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

St. Véran

7 Sept. 1859

Messieurs—

Je viens de recevoir votre lettre du 6 septembre. Je vous remercie de
vos assurances que vous mettrez toute la promptitude possible à préparer
et à envoyer les trois morceaux de marbre mais j’espérais que votre
lettre m’aurait indiqué de combien le délai dont il était avoir été
question dans votre lettre du 3 serait susceptible d’être raccourci. Je
vous prie de vouloir bien vous expliquer à ce sujet avec M. Pascal,
l’architecte de la ville d’Avignon qui s’est chargé de diriger les
travaux du monument et qui connaît exactement mes intentions. Il est
d’autant plus nécessaire que M. Pascal soit au rapport avec vous, car
nous-mêmes ne serons pas à Avignon pendant la moitié du mois.

Nous nous entendons parfaitement sur le prix, qui selon vos2 lettres du
25 août et du 3 sept est, pour les trois morceaux livrés à Avignon: 6000
fr plus les frais du transport. Mais quant à la proposition que vous me
faites d’en payer la moitié ou le tiers d’avance, je ne comprends pas
par quel motif vous avez pu faire une proposition tellement inusitée, et
je ne peus pas y consentir. Le prix sera payé lorsque les trois marbres
se trouveront rendus à Avignon dans les conditions convenues. Si vous
désirez des renseignements je vous pourrais les obtenir de mes
banquiers, la maison Prescott Grote et Cie de Edition: current; Page:
[637] Londres, à qui je pourrais ajouter beaucoup d’autres personnes si
vous le désiriez.

S’il vous arrive d’avoir des questions ou des observations à faire,
veuillez les adresser à M. Pascal, à l’Hôtel de Ville d’Avignon.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 16 sept. 1859

Briançon

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

412.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

Briançon

le 16 sept. 1859

Messieurs—

J’ai reçu aujourdhui de M. Pascal communication de vos deux lettres du
10 et 11 sept.

Ce que nous avons à discuter ne regarde pas les possibilités de veines
ou de taches dans les morceaux. Depuis que j’ai vu le bloc il n’y a plus
eu de doute sur cette partie du sujet.

Je consens à prendre sur moi tous les risques qui ne regardent que la
qualité du marbre. Mais il n’en est pas de même quant aux chances de
dommage dans le transport. Dans tout ce qui s’est passé entre nous et
expressément dans ma lettre du 7, il a été stipulé que les marbres
seraient livrés à Avignon moyennant un surcroît de prix convenable. Il
est évident pour moi, qui ne sais pas du métier et qui n’ai aucune
expérience en pareilles matières, je ne pourrais me charger des
précautions nécessaires pour assurer le transport d’un objet de cette
nature et il ne me conviendrait nullement qu’après avoir payé les
marbres 6000 francs un ou plusieurs d’autre cas arriveraient fêlés au
milieu gâtés par des écornures.

Je vous prie donc de vouloir bien me dire pour quelle indemnité vous
consentiriez à vous charger des risques du transport. Si ces risques
sont petits vous n’auriez pas de motif suffisant pour vous y refuser;
tandis qu’ils sont grands vous ne pourriez vous étonner que je ne
veuille pas m’y exposer. Selon toute probabilité ils seraient petits
pour vous, et très grands pour moi. Ceci est donc une condition sine qua
non du marché. Pour la question de fournir le marbre en trois morceaux
ou en deux je n’y tiens pas, et je me remets là dessus à votre jugement.

Veuillez donc, Messieurs, m’informer par le premier courrier quel
surcroît de prix que vous demandez en considération des frais et risques
du transport. Vous voudrez bien mettre votre lettre dans une enveloppe
adressée à M. Pascal qui me l’enverra après en avoir pris connaissance

Agréez Messieurs &cs

J. S. Mill

Si la Compagnie du chemin de fer garantit la sûreté de pareilles
marchandises moyennant une prime d’assurance, cela offrirait une
solution facile de la difficulté.

Edition: current; Page: [638]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 24. 1859

Sisteron

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

413.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

Sisteron

Sept. 24. 1859

Je viens de recevoir votre lettre du 20 sept.

Puisque vous acceptez les conditions posées dans ma lettre du 16 sept et
que vous consentez à prendre sur vous les risques du transport moyennant
un surcroît de prix de 800 frcs, je consens au surcroît, et je m’engage
à payer le prix de fr 6800 à la livraison sur wagon en gare d’Avignon
des deux blocs, en bonne condition, avec les dimensions exactes
indiquées dans la lettre qui vous a été adressée par M. Pascal.

Je vous engage à presser le travail autant que possible, en tout cas, à
ne pas dépasser le terme de 20 jours mentionné dans votre lettre à M.
Pascal du 10 sept. Vous voudrez bien avertir M. Pascal du jour où les
marbres arriveront à Avignon.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 5, 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

John William Parker

Parker, John William

414.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 5, 1859

Dear Sir

Thanks for the prompt payment of the £2002 and likewise for Fraser.3 I
shall be happy to send you another paper4 when I feel prompted to write
anything which will suit the Magazine. If any subject should occur to
you on which I can write at a distance from books, I should be glad if
you would mention it.

The articles you sent from the two reviews, and three newspaper
articles,5 have reached me since I last wrote. Of these the only one of
much importance is that in the National, which I conjecture to be by
Martineau.6 It is quite as favorable as it could be, consistently with
the writer’s opinions, and will I Edition: current; Page: [639] think be
useful. The others are poor stuff, except the article in the Guardian,7
which interested me somewhat. By the by there was on the other side of
the page, part of an article, evidently favorable on Mr Bain’s book.8 I
wish you had sent that likewise.

I have received and answered Messrs Rankin’s letter.9

If it is not a secret, who is G.D.H., the writer of the article on
Bacon?10

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 15. 1859

S. Véran

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

415.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

S. Véran

.
Oct. 15. 1859

Dear Bain—

I have received an application from Lorimer, saying that he is a
candidate for the office of Principal of the Univ. of St. Andrews,2
vacant by Sir D. Brewster’s removal to Edinburgh3 & asking me to write
in his favour to Sir G. Lewis.4 Before I give him any answer I am
desirous to know whether you are likely to be a candidate, as if you
have any idea of being so I should not think of giving a recommendation
to any one else. Therefore please write directly that I may be able to
answer Lorimer as soon as possible.

I am your debtor for an interesting letter dated as long ago as Sept. 8.
I am afraid I shall not be able to repay you in kind. You have probably
seen before this time what I have written about your book.5 I am glad to
see by the advertt that Reeve has put it at the head of the number. What
you say of the notices in the Athenaeum6 & Press7 gave me pleasure. I
saw accidentally part of another, apparently favourable & likely to be
useful, in the Guardian.8 The single paragraph in the Westminster9 was
shabby but I hope Grote persists in his intention of reviewing you
there10 when he has finished with Plato—who Edition: current; Page:
[640] seems to take him a length of time only to be warranted by using
the opportunity to speak out very plainly on the great subjects—a thing
I rather wish than expect he will be found to have done; though the
perfect impunity of the bold things in the Liberty ought to give him
courage of one qui bene est ausus vana contemnere.11 Have you seen any
of the recent reviews of the Liberty? That in the Dublin Univ Mag,12 for
instance, & the series of letters in the Engl. Churchman?13 People are
beginning to find out that the doctrines of the book are more opposed to
their old opinions & feelings than they at first saw, & are taking the
alarm accordingly & rallying for a fight. But they have in general dealt
candidly with me, & not too violently. As was to be expected they claim
for Xtian morality all the things which I say are not in it, which is
just what I wanted to provoke them to do. The article in the National
Rev. on my writings generally is worth reading.14 It seems to be by
Martineau & I am obliged to him for it, since it is favourable to the
utmost extent consistent with the writer’s opinions & decidedly tends to
increase rather than diminish the influence which he says is already so
great. I really had no idea of being so influential a person as my
critics tell me I am. But being thought to have influence is the surest
way of obtaining it really. The arguments of the reviewer on the
controverted points you will I think agree with me in considering to be
very easily answerable.

I hope to hear that your peccant limb is quite restored.15 It has been a
very tedious business for you. As for myself I am in very fair health
though I do not find it so easy a matter to keep my digestion right as
it used to be a year or two ago. We shall be here, I expect, for at
least two months from this time, & it is at present uncertain where we
shall be able to go afterwards. I am employing myself in working up some
papers which have been lying by me, with additional matter into a little
treatise on Utilitarianism.16 I only hope you will like it as well as I
expect to like your discussion of Phrenology.17 That, both on its own
account & from the nature of the topics which Edition: current; Page:
[641] it raises, is one of the most important things you could do. In
what shape do you intend to publish it?

I was very sorry to see the death of Nichol.18 He had a geniality of
character which was very pleasing & interesting: his influence which his
activity & enthusiasm made considerable was almost always given to right
opinions & his conversation was that of a thinking, instructed, & right
feeling man on many more subjects than those which he mostly wrote upon.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 22. 1859

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

416.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

Oct. 22. 1859

Messieurs—

Le délai de 20 jours que vous avez demandé pour l’expédition des blocs
de marbre s’est terminé le 15. Comme vous n’aviez donné de réponse ni à
la lettre que je vous écrivis de Sisteron, ni à celle écrite d’ici par
M. Pascal, celui-ci vous envoya une dépêche télégraphique, à laquelle
vous répondez le 18me [que] l’un des blocs serait expédié de Paris en
trois jours, mais que l’autre ne serait pas prêt, et sans la moindre
indication du jour où il le serait. Après le temps précieux perdu en
correspondances, j’avais le droit de compter que vous vous tiendriez au
temps fixé par vous mêmes. Je ne veux pas que l’un bloc soit envoyé sans
l’autre, parceque si après que je l’eusse accepté, l’autre se trouvait
écorné et gâté dans le transport le premier me serait inutile et j’en
serais pour mon temps et pour mon argent. Vous m’avez manqué de parole,
et probablement fait échouer tous [les] projets pour cet hiver. J’ajoute
seulement que si les blocs n’arrivent pas avant la fin du mois je me
croirai libéré de tout engagement envers vous.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 29 octobre 1859

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

417.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

le 29 octobre 1859

.

Monsieur,

Vous avez exprimé, il y a quelque temps, quelque velléité de traduire le
petit livre sur la Liberté.2 Quelque prix que je mise à ce qu’il fût
traduit par Edition: current; Page: [642] une plume comme la vôtre, je
craignes dès lors que la divergence d’opinion ne fût trop considérable
pour que vous donnassiez suite à ce projet, et je vous en dis quelques
mots à cet effet. N’ayant plus eu de vos nouvelles j’ai peur que mon
présentiment ne soit vérifié. Depuis ce temps-là, j’ai reçu plus d’une
proposition au même sujet, mais aucune que me parût acceptable.
Aujourd’hui il m’est arrivé une proposition de faire une traduction qui
paraîtrait sous les auspices d’Emile de Girardin,3 avec des notes et une
préface de lui. Ce projet réunirait évidemment des conditions
excellentes pour la bonne exécution et pour le succès: mais il me
répugne d’être associé, de quelque manière que ce soit, avec l’homme qui
a tué Carrel.4 Dans ces circonstances il me serait très désirable de
savoir si vous avez positivement renoncé au projet que vous aviez
d’abord conçu. S’il n’en était point ainsi, j’aurais, avec le grand
avantage d’être traduit par vous, celui d’avoir une réponse toute prête
à l’offre qu’on vient de me faire. Je prends donc la liberté de vous
demander un mot là-dessus, et ce serait pour moi un grand plaisir si ce
mot était plus favorable que je n’ose l’espérer.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’expression de ma considération très particulière.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 30. 1859

Saint Véran

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

418.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran

Oct. 30. 1859

Dear Sir

I was much pleased by receiving from you so satisfactory an account of
your proceedings at Bradford,2 and of the prospects of the cause; and
the more so as the omission by the newspapers of all mention of your
paper had made me fear that some unforeseen obstacle had prevented your
reading it. I was very much interested by your account of Mr Fawcett.3
So active an interest in progress in a man early afflicted with such a
misfortune as blindness, Edition: current; Page: [643] is very rare and
meritorious. Is the recovery of his sight quite hopeless?4 It is very
desirable that the friends of real representation should be in
communication, in order to combine their efforts in forcing the idea on
the attention of careless people, since want of familiarity with it is
the chief obstacle it has to encounter. Mr Fawcett’s idea therefore of
bringing a few together at Cambridge5 is very good, and I hope you will
go.

I have not much opportunity of helping you at this distance, but I
endeavour to do so. I lately offered to the editor of the Edinburgh
Review6 to write an article on your book, not much expecting that he
would consent, but unwilling to lose a chance. He answered “I am afraid
it will not be compatible with the other arrangements of the Review for
me to accept the article you suggest, at least at present. The whole
question of Parliamentary Reform has been so bedevilled by bungling
operators and repeated failures, that I find it very unsafe to continue
the discussion of it until we have some clear prospect of a definite
result. I agree with you however in thinking that the plans advocated by
Mr Hare and Mr Lorimer (of Edinburgh) are not devoid of merit and of
interest.” So he keeps the door open, and is willing to advocate the
plan—when he thinks it will succeed.

You are safe in directing to me here for some weeks.

Every yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 5. 1859

Saint Véran, near Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

419.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, near Avignon

Nov. 5. 1859

.

Dear Sir

I have received your letter of Nov. 2, and the prospectus contained in
it. I need not say that I wish success to the scheme,2 but I have not
much confidence Edition: current; Page: [644] in the management by a
company or board, of a business in which, in addition to the ordinary
considerations of profit, questions of speculative opinion necessarily
play so large a part. A Catholic society for the purpose may succeed,
because its creed is definite, and every person concerned knows what it
is: and because it has an assured market for its publications, most of
which besides are reprints of prayer books and generally accepted works.
But freethinkers and extreme liberals do not form a body at all; they
differ as much from one another as they do from the orthodox, and have
often as bad an opinion of the tendency of each other’s writings as the
orthodox have. In any case it would not be convenient for me at present
to embark any money in the scheme.

With regard to the Westminster: I have never ceased to consider myself
as a potential contributor, and I shall be very well disposed to give it
an occasional article; but so long as it cannot pay its expenses without
gratuitous assistance, I should not think of accepting payment for any
contributions I might furnish.

I am aware of the interest Lord Stanley takes in the Westminster,3 and I
was equally surprised and pleased to hear of it. I am

yrs very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 5 novembre 1859

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

420.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

le 5 novembre 1859

.

Monsieur

C’est avec un grand plaisir que j’ai reçu votre lettre. La traduction du
petit livre ne saurait être dans des mains plus capables.2 Je suis
heureux de trouver en vous un ami de Carrel. Je me réjouirai toujours de
l’avoir, moi aussi, personnellement connu, et je conserve de lui un
souvenir des plus vifs. Pensant qu’un petit opuscule que j’ai consacré à
sa mémoire pourrait peut-être vous intéresser, je vais écrire à mon
éditeur de vous expédier un exemplaire d’un recueil de mes petits
écrits, dans lequel vous trouverez cette notice.3 Je vous Edition:
current; Page: [645] prie de l’accepter comme témoignage des sentiments
avec lesquels je suis, Monsieur

votre dévoué serviteur

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov.14.1859

S. Véran

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

421.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

St. Véran

Nov.14.1859

.

Dear Bain—

I am glad that you & Grote liked the article in the Edinburgh.2 It is a
considerable thing to have got the Ed. to say that the experience
philosophy & the association psychology are getting up again, & to
praise & recommend a book on that side of the question. I shall look
with interest for Grote’s article when he is able to write it.3 With
regard to his Plato, one would be reconciled to the long time he spends
over it if he were going to speak out his whole mind at last. But his
timidity on the population subject is of bad augury. It would be easy
enough to keep from any close contact with the physical part of the
subject & yet convey clearly enough all he means, or needs to say. But
he seems to be incurable. I have no doubt however that there will be
much useful & improving matter in his book, & the longer he is in
finishing it, the more thought there is likely to be in it when it is
done. And with this we shall have to be contented, in default of better.

It is very pleasant to hear that you will be ready with the discussion
of Phrenology & the science of character by next spring.4 It is an
excellent plan to publish it in the first instance in Fraser if Parker
will take it. Besides being much earlier and more widely read, it will
be an advertisement of the other volumes. I expect to learn a good deal
from it & to be helped by it in anything I may hereafter write on
Ethology5—a subject I have long wished to take up, at least in the form
of Essays, but have never yet felt myself sufficiently prepared. I do
not think of publishing my Utilitarianism6 till next winter at the
earliest, though it is now finished, subject to any correction or
enlargement which may suggest itself in the interval. It will be but a
small book, about a fifth less than the Liberty, if I make no addition
to it. But small books are so much more read than large ones that it is
an advantage when one’s matter will go into a small space. I have not
written it in any hostile spirit towards Edition: current; Page: [646]
Xtianity, though undoubtedly both good ethics & good metaphysics will
sap Xtianity if it persists in allying itself with bad. The best thing
to do in the present state of the human mind is to go on establishing
positive truths (principles & rules of evidence of course included) &
leave Xtianity to reconcile itself with them the best way it can. By
that course, in so far as we have any success, we are at least sure of
doing something to improve Christianity.

I have just sent to Parker for next month’s Fraser a paper on
Non-Intervention,7 in which there are some severe things said of Lord
Palmerston’s conduct in opposing the Suez Canal.8 That affair is
damaging the character of England on the Continent more than most people
are aware of; it is so direct a confirmation of the old & false ideas
respecting the selfish foreign policy of England.

It is amusing to have drawn out Candlish.9 I expect a series of attacks
now from the bigotted portion of all religious sects.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22 novembre 1859

S. Véran

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

422.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

St. Véran

22 novembre 1859

Messieurs—

Je vous prie de vouloir bien m’informer par le premier courrier, s’il y
a moyen de prendre sur ce qui reste du grand bloc, un morceau ayant les
dimensions suivantes, savoir—longueur 1.90 mètres largeur 75
centimètres, hauteur 40 centimètres: et en cas de réponse affirmative,
quel en serait le prix (frais de transport compris) et en combien de
jours vous pourriez l’expédier.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov.28.1859

St. Véran

William George Ward

Ward, William George

423.


TO WILLIAM GEORGE WARD1

St. Véran

Nov.28.1859

Dear Sir—

It gave me real pleasure to hear from you again after so long an
interval, & I am much indebted to you for the opportunity of reading
your Edition: current; Page: [647] first volume while still
unpublished.2 I have read it all with great interest, much of it with
sincere admiration & sympathy: & (what you probably care more about)
with no little admiration also for the eminent Catholic writers whom you
quote.3 Many of them I was already disposed to think highly of, but my
knowledge of them was chiefly at second hand. The questions you put to
me I will with pleasure attempt to answer. A candid adversary has as
great a claim as a supporter, to one’s best endeavours for making one’s
meaning clear to him, even if no change of opinion is likely to result.
I never feel so sure of doing good as when I find that my writings have
given matter for thought to those who differ from me; a service which
your treatise is well calculated to render, if I may judge from its
effect on myself.

With regard to the passages in which I am mentioned4 (with the same good
feeling which you have always shewn towards me) my answer is that both
Mr Herbert Spencer & you have misunderstood me. When I spoke of
inferences as necessarily following from premisses,5 I was not using the
word necessary in its metaphysical but in its popular sense. I meant
neither more nor less than that the reasoning process is, to us,
conclusive evidence of what it proves: take the testimony of our senses,
which neither you nor I nor any one considers to be necessary in the
philosophical sense. As soon as I read Mr Spencer’s criticism6 I saw
that I had given ground for it, by an incautious use of the word
necessary, which I endeavoured to correct in revising the book for
another edition. My mistake was not so much in using the term in a
double sense, as in not giving proper notice that I did so. For at that
time I thought the word necessary a word worth retaining in philosophy;
& I therefore, in conformity to my own rule (so to define words that
their application may cover the same ground, & if possible even the same
extent of ground, as before) used it as a designation for those
properties of things which are deducible from the properties implied in
their names. All mathematical Edition: current; Page: [648] truths, &
truths analogous to mathematical, are in this sense necessary. As
therefore I wished to keep the word necessary specifically for truths
which are the results of reasoning, I was not unnaturally led into
applying the term to the reasoning process itself. But (as I said
before) I meant nothing in this case by necessity, but conclusiveness.

I dare say you are not aware that in the last ed. of the Logic I added a
chapter in reply to Mr. Spencer,7 in which may be seen what I have to
say against his own doctrine, but if I remember right, I scarcely if at
all, touched upon his remarks on myself.

While I am on this part of the subject, I hope you will allow me to say,
that I do not think there is any ground for the distinction you draw
between the evidence of present & that of past sensations, classing the
one as experience & the other as intuition.8 If remembering were one act
of the mind, trusting to memory another act, & judging that memory is to
be trusted a third, your doctrine might be admissible. But they seem to
me to be all three the same act, just as when I press my hand against an
object—feeling resistance, trusting the feeling, & judging that it is to
be trusted are all one. We cannot remember that which did not happen; no
more than we can see or feel what does not happen. When I feel so & so,
I cannot doubt that I do feel so & so; & when I remember to have felt so
& so I cannot doubt that I did feel so & so. Memory I take to be the
present consciousness of a past sensation. It is strange that such
consciousness can exist; but the facts denoted by was, is, & is to come,
are perhaps the most mysterious part of our mysterious existence, as is
strikingly expressed in the well known saying of St Augustine.9 If I
have made sufficiently clear what I mean, I think you will see that it
leaves in my apprehensions nothing to be done by the intuitive act which
your doctrine interposes. There indeed remains the act of generalization
which we perform when from remembering particular facts we ascend to the
general proposition that Memory may be trusted, in other words that we
have a faculty of Memory; but this generalization & classification of
acts of our own mind, has nothing in it contradictory to the Experience
doctrine, which always admits facts of internal consciousness as well as
of external sensation, & considers the same logical processes as
applicable to both.

Edition: current; Page: [649]
Now as to the still more important subject of the meaning of ought. I
will endeavour to explain the sense I attach to it, though this cannot
be done in very few words. I believe that the word has in some respects
a different meaning to different people. We must first distinguish
between those who have themselves a moral feeling—a feeling of approving
& condemning conscience, & those who have not, or in whom what they may
have is dormant. I believe that those who have no feeling of right &
wrong cannot possibly intue10 the rightness or wrongness of anything.
They may assent to the proposition that a certain rule of conduct is
right; but they really mean nothing except that such is the conduct
which other people expect & require at their hands; with perhaps the
addition that they have a strong motive for themselves requiring the
same from other people. This you will probably agree with, & I will
therefore pass to the case of those who have a true moral feeling, that
is, a feeling of pain in the fact of violating a certain rule, quite
independently of any expected consequences to themselves. It appears to
me that to them the word ought means, that if they act otherwise, they
shall be punished by this internal, & perfectly disinterested feeling.
Unless they would be so punished, or unless they think they would, any
assertion they make to themselves that they ought so to act seems to me
to lose its proper meaning, & to refer only to the sentiments of others,
or of themselves at some other time or in some other case.

If I am asked, what is the nature of this feeling, & whence it comes, I
do not think that it is exactly of the same nature, or has exactly the
same origin, in all who have it. My father’s theory of it,11 which you
quote, seems to me a sufficient account of it as it exists in many
minds. I certainly do not accept that theory as an exhaustive analysis
of the phenomenon: yet I do not think your refutation, even of that
theory, a sufficient one; inasmuch as the generation of a complex
feeling from simpler ones being a sort of chemical union, not a
mechanical juxtaposition, it is quite to be expected that the compound
will be to appearances unlike the elements it is formed from. The pains
of conscience are certainly very different from those of dread of
disapprobation; yet it might well be, that the innumerable associations
of pain with doing wrong which have been rivetted by a long succession
of pains undergone, or pains feared or imagined as the consequence of
wrong things done, or of wrong things which we have been tempted to do
(especially in early life), may produce a general & intense feeling of
recoil from wrongdoing in which no conscious influence of other people’s
disapprobation may be perceptible.

However, I do not hold this to be the normal form of moral feeling. I
conceive that feeling to be a natural outgrowth from the social nature
of man: a Edition: current; Page: [650] state of society is so eminently
natural to human beings that anything which is an obviously
indispensable condition of social life, easily comes to act upon their
minds almost like a physical necessity. Now it is an indispensable
condition of all society, except between master & slave, that each shall
pay regard to the other’s happiness. On this basis, combined with a
human creature’s capacity of fellow-feeling, the feelings of morality
properly so called seem to me to be grounded, & their main constituent
to be the idea of punishment. I feel conscious that if I violate certain
laws, other people must necessarily or naturally desire that I shd be
punished for the violation. I also feel that I shd desire them to be
punished if they violated the same laws towards me. From these feelings
& from my sociality of nature I place myself in their situation, &
sympathize in their desire that I shd be punished; & (even apart from
benevolence) the painfulness of not being in union with them makes me
shrink from pursuing a line of conduct which would make my ends, wishes,
& purposes habitually conflict with theirs. To this fellow feeling with
man may of course be added (if I may so express myself) fellow feeling
with God, & recoil from the idea of not being in union with Him. May I
add, that even to an unbeliever there may be a feeling similar in nature
towards an ideal God? as there may be towards an ideally perfect man, or
towards our friends who are no more, even if we do not feel assured of
their immortality. All these feelings are immensely increased in
strength by a reflected influence from other persons who feel the same.

This is the nearest approach I am able to make to a theory of our moral
feelings. I have written it out, much more fully, in a little manuscript
treatise12 which I propose to publish when I have kept it by me for the
length of time I think desirable & given it such further improvement as
I am capable of. Perhaps the short statement I have now made will convey
some notion of what my opinion is though a very imperfect one of the
manner in which I should support it.—I am very sincerely yours,

J.S.M.

P.S. I had not heard of the article in the Rambler but have now sent for
it.13

Edition: current; Page: [651]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 29. novembre 1859

S. Véran

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

424.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

S. Véran

le 29. novembre 1859

Messieurs—

Je viens de recevoir votre lettre du 27. Je vous prie maintenant de
préparer le nouveau bloc dans les conditions de votre lettre du 24,
c.à.d. au prix de 3000 frs rendu sur wagon en gare à Avignon, et dans
l’intervalle de 15 jours.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 29. 1859

S. Véran

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

425.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

S. Véran

.
Nov. 29. 1859

.

Mon cher Monsieur Villari—

Je vous remercie beaucoup de votre lettre et de l’envoi de la Revue où
se trouve votre article.2 Je l’ai lu avec très grand plaisir.
Abstraction faite des louanges dont vous me comblez, et dans lesquelles
je vois un nouvel indice de l’amitié et de la sympathie que vous
ressentez pour moi, je puis dire en toute sincérité que vous avez donné
une excellente analyse de l’ouvrage. Vous en avez mis en relief les
idées dominantes, vous avez assez appuyé sur chacune pour la faire bien
saisir, et cela de la manière non d’un copiste, mais d’un penseur dont
les idées ne sont pas tirées de l’auteur dont il parle mais se sont
rencontrées avec lui. Grâce à vous, les lecteurs de la Revue doivent
avoir aujourd’hui du livre et de moi une idée très avantageuse, ce qui,
je l’avoue, me fait plaisir, car la vive sympathie que j’éprouve pour
l’Italie fait que je me plais à l’idée d’être en rapport intellectuel
avec les bons esprits du pays.

Comme vous je crains que la position actuelle des affaires, empirée
comme elle est par la démission de Garibaldi,3 n’ait des suites
fâcheuses. Qu’il en résulte la dissolution des volontaires, ou des excès
populaires dans la Romagne, l’un ou l’autre résultat serait également
nuisible à la cause de l’Italie. C’est sans doute ce que désire celui
qui4 a mis les choses en cet état, et qui ne veut pas que les Italiens
soient soustraits à leurs tyrans actuels par une autre Edition: current;
Page: [652] main que par celle d’un nouveau maître. Ce n’est qu’en se
tenant sous les armes, et en montrant la ferme volonté de se battre pour
la liberté envers et contre tous, que l’Italie pourra obtenir du Congrès
des conditions supportables. Je suis persuadé que l’Angleterre fera dans
le Congrès,5 si elle y prend part, tout son possible pour vous. Mais
comme tout le monde sait qu’elle n’en fera pas un cas de guerre son
influence sera peu de chose. Les trois despotes6 sont probablement déjà
d’accord pour lui ménager un affront.

Je félicite le gouvernement toscan de votre nomination à la chaire
d’histoire à Pise.7 Je sens toutefois combien il vous sera difficile
d’appliquer à ces paisibles travaux les forces de votre esprit, tant que
les destinées de l’Italie restent suspendues sur le fil d’un rasoir.

Votre tout dévoué

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 8, 1859

Saint Véran

John William Parker

Parker, John William

426.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Saint Véran

Dec. 8, 1859

.

Dear Sir

Fraser for December2 has arrived this morning—nine days after it was
posted. Napoleon the Third has taken that time to make up his mind
whether to let it pass.

Possibly therefore the two French reviews3 may now have received their
copies; and therefore if you have not sent the article, in an envelope,
to them, it is unnecessary to do so for the present.

The same post brought the Daily News,4 and also the Economist:5 your
people having cut out the article which you doubtless intended to send
and having sent the paper without the article, instead of the article
without the paper.

A Mr Durand6 of New York who conducts a periodical called the Crayon
Edition: current; Page: [653] (of which he says he has sent a copy
through you) requests permission to reprint one or more of the
Dissertations in his magazine. I cannot give him permission without your
consent; but as the sale would rather be promoted than injured by his
doing so, it would perhaps be desirable. I should like the number which
he has sent, to be forwarded by post.

Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 19. 1859

Saint Véran

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

427.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran

Dec. 19. 1859

.

Dear Sir

I duly received the Bradford paper2 you were so good as to send, and I
quite agree with you as to the excellence of the account it gives, in so
short a compass, of your plan. I also received the Law Magazine, and
read Mr Mayo’s paper3 with much interest. It shews a real understanding
of the subject, and a decided capacity for such studies. I was more
prompt in answering his letter than I have been in acknowledging yours.

It gave me great pleasure to hear of the article you were writing for
Fraser.4 The line you intended to take (I speak in the past tense, for
it is probably by this time completed) seems to me very useful, and one
which you are well entitled to take. The more I think of your plan, the
more it appears to me to be the great discovery in representative
government. As you have read the two volumes of Dissertations, you have
seen how during a great part of my life I have been troubled by the
difficulty of reconciling democratic institutions with the maintenance
of a great social support for dissentient opinions. Now, your plan
distinctly solves this difficulty. The portion of the House of Commons
returned by an union of minorities would be this social support, in its
most Edition: current; Page: [654] effective form; since its members
would meet in the same arena with the organs of the majority; would
command public attention, which under any other organisation of
minorities might be refused to them; and would have the opportunity of
obtruding upon the public daily proofs of the superiority of individual
value which they would generally have over their antagonists. In no
other way, that I can conceive, would it be possible to maintain a real
superiority of power in the majority, along with a full & fair hearing
for minorities, and an organization of them which would be all the more
effective from being natural and spontaneous. If the Americans would but
adopt your plan (which I fear they never will) the bad side of their
government and institutions, namely the practical exclusion of all the
best minds from political influence, would soon cease. Let us hope that
in the old country (thanks to you) democracy will come in this better
form.

I am Dr Sir
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 20. 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

428.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 20. 1859

.

Dear Chadwick

I quite agree with you in expecting no benefit whatever from any reform
bill likely to be brought forward by the present government.2 Neither
they nor the Tories wish to make elections unexpensive; they will not,
therefore, take the only effective measure against bribery, by
prohibiting and making penal all expenses whatever (the small amount of
necessary expense being defrayed by the locality). That is mauvaise
volonté on their part: but this is chiefly stupidity: neither of them
will adopt Hare’s plan,3 whereby any person of reputation for talent
would be sure of being brought in by some set of electors or other if he
chose, without needing any local influence. If Hare’s plan were acted
on, you would be in Parliament directly;4 and anybody else whose
adherents or admirers are scattered over the country generally. As this
plan would be essentially, and in the best sense of the word,
Conservative, as well as, also in the best sense, liberal and
democratic, it ought to unite both parties in supporting it: only such
people as Bright,5 the mere demagogue Edition: current; Page: [655] and
courtier of the majority, are its natural opponents. Notwithstanding
this, we shall not have it, until some government finds itself obliged
to give a largely extended suffrage, and has sense to see that this plan
would diminish the danger of the concession, under cover of which they
could contrive to pass it. I am strongly of opinion however that the way
by which most good can be done on the Reform question, is by agitating
on this point.

I am glad you like the paper in Fraser.6 It has certainly been very
successful, and coming out just at the time it did, may have some
practical effect. It has been sent, not to Galignani (who certainly
would not reprint it in his paper) but to several of the principal
French reviews7 and public writers. What you say about the real nature
of the liberality of English public men is very true. But I had nothing
to do with that. I was only concerned with their acts, and the doctrines
they profess. The opposition to the Suez Canal8 adds greatly to the
difficulty of their doing the kind of things mentioned in your
letter—for every project for international communication patronized by
England, is sure henceforth to be opposed by other countries.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 20 Déc. 1859

S. Véran

Dervillé et Cie

Cie, Dervillé et

429.


TO DERVILLÉ ET CIE.1

S. Véran

le 20 Déc. 1859

Messieurs—

Quelques jours s’étant écoulés depuis la terminaison des quinze jours
que vous avez fixés dans votre lettre du 1er décembre pour l’expédition
du morceau supplémentaire de marbre statuaire, je vous prie de vouloir
bien m’informer si ce morceau est prêt, ou sinon, quel jour vous croyez
pouvoir l’envoyer à la gare.

Agréez de

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 21 Décembre 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

430.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 21 Décembre 1859

Monsieur

J’ai appris avec plaisir par votre lettre du 7 que vous aviez presque
terminé un nouveau livre, sur la Centralisation.2 Je ne doute pas que la
lecture ne Edition: current; Page: [656] m’en soit aussi utile
qu’agréable. Je vous applaudis de vous être beaucoup occupé, en cette
matière, des lois et des usages anglais. Je ne me rappelle pas d’avoir
remarqué dans votre ouvrage “L’Individu et l’Etat” des erreurs
importantes sur l’Angleterre. Sans doute il serait à peine croyable
qu’il ne s’en rencontrassent pas quelques-unes, vu la très grande
difficulté qu’éprouve toujours un étranger à bien connaître un pays
quelconque: difficulté peutêtre encore plus grande pour l’Angleterre que
pour les autres pays, tant la pratique des institutions anglaises
s’écarte parfois de leur théorie. Je n’ai pas l’ouvrage avec moi ici,
sans cela je le relirais pour tâcher de vous donner les indications que
vous désirez.

Pour passer à un autre sujet, il y a une idée nouvellement éclose en
Angleterre, qui n’a pas encore, que je sache, passé le détroit, et qui
pourra être intéressante à un penseur qui s’occupe comme vous du
mécanisme des institutions politiques, et qui est capable d’apprécier
les idées grandes et fécondes. Celle-ci se rapporte au système
représentatif, dont en France comme en Angleterre il est important de
perfectionner la théorie, en attendant qu’on puisse de nouveau le
posséder de fait. Tous les systèmes existants ont le grand défaut que la
majorité est seule representée; tandisque dans les principes même du
suffrage égal et universel, une minorité quelconque d’électeurs a le
droit d’être representée par une minorité correspondante de l’assemblée.
Or, un penseur anglais, Mr. Hare, a proposé une organisation au moyen de
laquelle, en supposant par exemple un député par dix mille électeurs,
tout candidat qui réunirait dix mille voix dans tout le pays serait
nommé. J’ai rendu compte de son système dans le supplément de la seconde
édition d’une brochure que j’ai publiée sur la réforme parlementaire,3
ne l’ayant pas connu à temps pour en parler dans la première édition. Je
vous ferai envoyer cette brochure par mon éditeur, et si, après avoir lu
l’analyse que j’ai donnée du livre de Mr. Hare,4 vous désirez en savoir
davantage, je vous enverrai ensuite le livre même.

Je suis charmé que l’opinion favorable que vous avez bien voulu exprimer
du livre de la Liberté se soutienne à un examen plus approfondi, et que
vous soyez content aussi de ce que vous aviez lu des Dissertations. Je
me suis tant occupé, dans ce recueil, de la France et de choses
françaises, que je ne puis manquer d’être tombé dans beaucoup d’erreurs.
Je vous aurais une véritable obligation de toutes celles que vous
voudriez bien me mettre à même de rectifier.

J’adresse ma lettre à Paris, croyant que le froid de la saison vous y
aura probablement ramené.

Edition: current; Page: [657]
Agréez, Monsieur, l’expression sincère de mes sentimens respectueux et
amicaux.

J. S. Mill

P.S. Je rouvre ma lettre pour répondre à la vôtre du 18. La loi de
réforme de nos corporations municipales est de 1835.5 Sans pouvoir
l’assurer je crois que le renseignement qu’on vous a donné doit être
inexact, et que si les Communes ont besoin d’un assentiment quelconque
pour s’imposer ou pour emprunter, c’est de celui du Parlement.

Je vous remercie de l’indication sur la Revue des Deux Mondes.6 Je puis
la voir au Musée d’ici.

Puis que vous êtes toujours à Fontainebleau je vous y adresse la lettre.

J.S.M.

le 22 Décembre

Edition: current; Page: [658]


1860

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1860

Janet Duff-Gordon

Duff-Gordon, Janet

431.


TO JANET DUFF-GORDON1

[Early
1860

]

Dear Madam,

I have only just received your note informing me of the death of one of
the men whom I most valued,2 and to whom I have been morally and
intellectually most indebted. I had learned the sad news some weeks ago
from the Athenaeum,3 and it was a greater shock to me as the
characteristic vigour of his assumption of authorship last winter4 had
made me hope that his health had undergone a decided improvement and
that the termination of his career was still far distant.

I believe that few persons, so little known to the common world, have
left so high a reputation with the instructed few; and though
superficially he may seem to have accomplished little in comparison with
his powers, few have contributed more by their individual influence and
their conversation to the formation and the growth of a number of the
most active minds of this generation.

For myself I have always regarded my early knowledge of him as one of
the fortunate circumstances of my life.5 I am

Yours very faithfully,

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [659]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan.25 [1860]

Hotel Bedfort

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

432.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Hotel Bedfort

[
Paris

]

Jan.25 [1860]

Dearest Lily—

I got here prosperously and without once feeling cold, and have done all
my business here—witness the paper I am writing on, & witness also the
two numbers of the Revue des 2 mondes which they promise to send by the
same post. I luckily found at the gare About’s book “La Grèce
Contemporaine”2 which I read in the train during the heavy shower and
when the country was not interesting—but generally I did not want to
read, as I never saw the mountains look finer. All on the right, (& on
the left too as we approached Lyons) were covered with snow so nearly to
the very plain, that I feared I should find snow on the ground here—but
I only found the most enormous mud & wet. About’s book will interest you
if we go to Greece, and what he says mostly agrees so well with all I
know, that I incline to trust him in what I do not know. I have bought
the Flore de Dauphiné,3 a quite new one. I went into Notre Dame in
passing; they have erected a flêche on the roof, in imitation of that of
the Sainte Chapelle: it is not so ugly as it might have been, but they
have covered the interior with their polychromatism which to my eye is
by no means an improvement. The hinder half of the building is shut up,
as the workmen are still on it both within & without. I am going via
Calais, as the Boulogne hours do not suit; so I shall arrive early
tomorrow. I am now going out to put this in the post and to have dinner.
I will write again as soon as I arrive. Good bye dear. I do not half
like this going away from you.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 26.[1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

433.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Jan. 26.[1860]

Dear Lily—

I arrived here about nine this morning not at all tired, but having been
ill (though not very) during the passage. It was a rough sea, and
Edition: current; Page: [660] the short pitching of the steamer was
trying. There had been five or six weeks of rain at Paris and it rained
here up to yesterday but I found a hard white frost. As you will know by
this time, Parliament met on Tuesday instead of today,2 as we thought. I
was luckily able to get yesterday’s paper at the London Bridge station &
so read the debate—which was as satisfactory as any debate ever is in
that stupid house. I found Hadji looking pale but, I thought, with a
more animated (or rather less dead) expression of countenance than
usual. He seems disposed to be amiable. Puss (who seems to have entirely
forgotten me) quite startled me by her size—rather bulk than stature. It
may be an illusion, from having been used to a little puss & little
doggy (to whom remember me) especially as the teapot also looked as if
it had grown. Elizabeth3 asks to be allowed to have a woman to help her
one day in the week. I assented (thinking the request moderate) and she
is going to try to get Mrs Goodenough. I write this in some haste
previous to going out to the ironmonger’s at Greenwich. So goodbye dear.
I shall not always give you these small sheets. Ever affectionately

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Jan.28 1860

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

434.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Saturday
Jan.28 1860

Dearest Lily—

I have not lost any time since I arrived here. I saw Coulson yesterday
morning, and he advised me to see him again in a fortnight, after taking
four of the pills, which he thinks will very likely be sufficient, & I
should not wonder if they were, as I seem better even without taking
them, and yesterday was the first evening for more than three months
when I have had no signs of indigestion without having taken either
magnesia or anything else. I took the first pill last night. Yesterday I
saw Parker, Prescott, and Thornton. I was very glad to find that
Thornton has again hopes for his poor boy—who appears to have gone
through a crisis, evacuated the contents of an abscess or an ulcer in
the lungs, and to be now better. India affairs, or at least India House
affairs, seem even worse than appeared from his letter. He told Edition:
current; Page: [661] me some instances of the ignorance & presumption of
Wood2 which startled even me. From Parker I heard as usual some gossip
about publications, and (of course) outpourings against the new shilling
magazines, Thackeray’s3 & McMillan’s,4 which he describes as mere Barnum
affairs,5 paying any fabulous sums to get names, while the bulk is
written by the mere riff raff of the press. In proof of the first he
affirmed what seems quite incredible, that they give Tennyson a guinea a
line for poems i.e. for the first publication, for they do not even get
the copyright. He says that T. has given one to McMillan, one to
Thackeray, one to Once a Week,6 & that Mrs Tennyson proposed to him
(Parker) that he should give one to Fraser, but P. refused, saying that
it would not pay to give such a high price & that he should not like to
give him less than others gave. As for McMillan we shall judge for
ourselves what it is worth, as I have bought the three numbers and will
send them to you as soon as I have looked through them (if I have time
to do so). He says Kingsley has refused to write for McMillan or for any
magazine but Fraser. He says however that K. is done up in point of
health & means to rest for years to come except as regards his parish.
He told me various things of the Queen’s & Prince’s civilities to K.7
and that he was given to understand he might be a Dean or something
more, but that he kept to what he had said years ago, that he would take
no preferment that would remove him from Eversley. I tell you any gossip
I hear that may either interest or amuse you. In my “main objects in
coming here” as the footman who climbed Mont Blanc said (meaning to
throw a summerset on the top) I have not got on fast. With all diligence
I have only read four Saturdays, and have only got through the merely
provisional sorting of one of the two packets of plants. This part of
the job takes much longer than I ever knew it to do before. In the
Saturday I am stuck (after the intermission) by its general dénigrement
of all public men & notorieties, the extreme exaggeration of its
hostility to democratic changes, & by a very uniform & monotonous line
of subdued jocularity in its criticisms on minor victims.8 Still it is
as interesting as ever to read, malgré the oldness of the topics. I
inclose a Mem. of your account at Prescott’s, extracted from your book.
You will see that the balance is ample. Now touching the house—there
Edition: current; Page: [662] are no visible cracks outside, all having
been filled up during the summer but what has struck Ross9 is a very
marked bulging of the east half of the brickwork above the darling’s
window beyond the west half, which is very apparent even from the road &
must be disagreeable to Ross’s feelings as a house proprietor. In your
room there is a second large crack inside near the one which Suter10 saw
& pronounced harmless—but this one is larger (it is just on the right
side of the top of the window) & shews the west end of the house to be
breaking away from the east end. Hadji thinks it may not be new since
Suter saw the other but may then have been hid by the paper. The kitchen
side of the house seems safe enough at present, but the cracks must have
been prodigious: they have not reopened, and the wall is [shored?] up by
shores near the kitchen window. I think I must have Suter to see the
crack in your room. H. says that Girling10 (who professes to understand
such things) declares that the brickwork of the lamed arch need not be
taken down, but that an iron bar, applied I do not yet understand how,
will make all perfectly safe. If what he says when I see him appears
plausible, it may be well to try, and so postpone the decision on
anything further till you are here. I find to my surprise that Haji is
still taking music lessons. This agrees with the other signs that he is
not really studying economy. Hann11 has undertaken to give black edges
to the cards. I find I cannot get a Times to read, as Wray12 has none
disposable except at 12 when I shall always be out: & the reading room I
frequented in Gracechurch St. is given up. I must be content with the
Telegraph.

[PS.] I shall soon hear from you now dear & I begin to be impatient for
news of you. I have left out many things which I will put into my next.
Ever affy

J.S.M.

[Enclosed memorandum of Helen Taylor’s account]

  --------------------------- -----------
  Balance end of March —      £ 15.11.8
  July div. on consols —      34.16.1
  Brighton div. —             19. 5 —
  S. Western d^o^ —           10. 4.6
  N. Western d^o^ —           10. 4.6
  Cash, (Nov.25) —            205.18.5
  January div. on consols —   36.11 —
                              332.11.2
  --------------------------- -----------

Edition: current; Page: [663]
13Probably Peppercorne and Price, stock and share brokers, 2 Royal
Exchange Buildings.
14Probably a contribution to the Society for Promoting the Employment of
Women, founded in 1859 by Jessie Boucherette and Adelaide Proctor.
Expended
Cheque to Hajji —
40.— —
d^o^ to [Peppercorne?]13
199.7.6
d^o^ Empl. of Women14
5 — —
244.7.6
244. 7.6
88. 3.10
Deduct cheque to J.S.M.
30 — —
Balance in hand
58. 3.10

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Jan. 31 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

435.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Tuesday Jan. 31 [1860]

Your second letter has just come, dear, your first having arrived
yesterday. I need not say how glad I was to receive them. All they tell
is satisfactory except the delay in the sawing, which is shameful, as
the man got on considerably faster with the former one, in spite of the
fêtes, and himself spontaneously told me the day before I left, that it
would be done on Thursday. I do not suppose the words Concession
Perpétuelle need necessarily be on the monument,2 but I do not know, and
I suppose we need not decide till we can ask Pascal or somebody who does
know. I was very much interested by the rose plantations and the
jonquils. Here there are no signs of spring except a little green on the
honeysuckle in a hedge near Plaistow. The weather is excessively wet:
yesterday it rained so incessantly till late in the afternoon that I
only got out late to Deptford to order potatoes. Saturday was the only
really fine day and that was beautiful. I think the scenery here & that
at Avignon are exactly suited to make each other more thoroughly
appreciated. Here the green, the majestic trees, and the beautiful
irregular shining & gleaming outline of the masses of wood, seem all the
more beautiful for being so unlike Edition: current; Page: [664] the
beauties of atmosphere and form at our other home. I have not been in
town again since I wrote, though I should have gone yesterday but for
the rain, & I shall go today chiefly to see various people at the
I[ndia] House beginning with Willoughby.3 I told you I had seen Coulson.
I have not yet taken my second pill, but shall take it tonight. I have
hardly had a vestige of indigestion all the time till yesterday evening,
when I had a good deal: the direct effect of the pill I suppose had worn
itself out, & it had not yet sufficiently acted as an alterative. I
could not expect that it should. The experience thus far is very
satisfactory. I omitted to tell you that I was weighed the day after my
arrival, & had gained some pounds since we left England. As for the
plants—the mere preliminary sorting, which every former year has been
done in one evening, took four of above six hours each, & the best part
of yesterday forenoon: but yesterday evening I got down the first parcel
of the herbarium & got on pretty well, having got half through it. I
find it extremely interesting but rather bodily fatiguing, as it is any
thing but sedentary work. In the “Saturday” I have just got through
June. There are many things in it which I should not have liked to miss
seeing, though very few that tend to raise the writers in my estimation.
I have read nothing else except glancing through one number of
Macmillan—which seems to me not at all worth taking. It seems both poor
& dull except a tolerable political article by Masson,4 & there is an
elaborate review of Tennyson’s last publication by Ludlow,5 (the
sometime Christian Socialist, & writer of a bad book about India)6
making out to the writer’s entire satisfaction that the four Idyls are
the most splendidly moral & impressing work of the age, chiefly on the
point of conjugal infidelity. It is hardly worth sending, at most worth
bringing, but Fraser has just come in & shall be sent as soon as read,
for it contains Hare’s paper (under a better title).7 I shall be glad to
subscribe for Spencer’s large programme of intended works,8 though I
think it rather too ambitious a one. I have had a note from Bain saying
that he is to be at home till the 6th & will put off going if I cannot
come before, but I must try to do so though I grudge all time taken from
the reading & the plants at present. I get on well with Edition:
current; Page: [665] Hadji, who is less silent than usual though he
never speaks about his own concerns. I suppose Ellen9 has given him some
taste for neatness, for one day when I left the room untidy I found on
coming in that he had arranged everything with quite studious tidiness.
He has got on a little with music & his practicing is now quite
tolerable. Tell me dear directly you get tired & wish me back. I do not
say ennuyé for I know you never can be that. Ever affectionately

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 2. [1860]

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

436.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

Feb. 2. [1860]

Dear Sir

Your bulletin of progress has followed me here, where however I am only
for a short time. It is, I think, very satisfactory, and I have no fear
that the plan2 will fail to make progress if a quiet agitation is kept
up on the subject. I hope your paper in Fraser3 will be soon followed up
by another4 of a more distinctly practical character. The effect of the
present one is I think a little damaged by the introduction of so much
of other people’s generalities which (especially those of Carlyle)5 are
associated in most minds with anything rather than a plan admitting of
actual legislative realization. The same generalities shaped in your own
mind and clothed in your own language (which would not have precluded
using the authority of the men as far as available) would have had the
practical remedial principles much more distinctly imbedded in them and
would therefore have made more of the impression which is desirable. I
am feeling strongly on this point through the evidence which is always
coming before us of the obtuseness of the English practical intellect
when any new details are concerned, and the utter absence of
Conservative principles among the professed Conservatives. Witness the
reform article in the last Quarterly,6 which will not condescend even to
discuss the representation of minorities. The suggestion about forming a
Edition: current; Page: [666] Committee may prove useful when we have a
sufficient number of the right names to put on it—which I hope we shall
have by & by.

Yours ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 2. 1860

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

437.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Feb. 2. 1860

Dearest Lily—

Your nice letter came by the second post yesterday, just as I was on the
point of going out: three letters in three successive days. How does it
happen that you get my letters regularly on the second day instead of
the third? you answered my Thursday’s on Saty & my Saturday’s on Monday.
Do the letters no longer remain a day at Paris? or does the favour of
the Director abridge the delay at Avignon? Now for business. I find
that, probably by my own fault, I misunderstood the point on which
Girling had given an opinion, opposed to Suter’s. It was, the stability
of the kitchen wall as now shored up, which G. from his experience
guarantees, while S. according to Hadji wants to have a job there. The
suggestion of the iron bar to support the arch above the darling’s
window came from Suter, & it can, as I & also Hadji conceive it, only be
put up from inside. That being the case, what had better be done? Had it
better wait altogether till you are here also? Say what you think and
feel as best. If needful I will have a fire in the room and remain in it
all the time; which would I hope prevent mischief though not obviate the
desecration about which I also feel very strongly. Doubtless the job
Ross proposes can be done wholly from without, and to this we shall
probably come ultimately (viz. next summer) if not to worse, for the
house seems at least to be in a more precarious state than it has ever
yet been. I will do, in regard to it, exactly what you think best. I do
not expect any danger before, at soonest the end of another dry
summer.—Mrs Goodenough is to come on Saturday. Eliz. says if she could
not have had her, she, knowing your unwillingness to have a stranger,
would have gone on as well as she could without. But it seems fair that
she should have help once a week in the cleaning.—I have been in town
once since I last wrote, doing one or two little jobs, & seeing India
House people, which has brought on me the (agreeable) task of reading
several very good papers of Willoughby’s. He & all I have seen are in a
high state of dissatisfaction, & every fresh thing I hear of Wood shews
more Edition: current; Page: [667] & more how much ground there is for
it. I would rather have to do with any public affairs now than with
India. There is nothing new to say about my health. I have taken the
second pill & shall take the third tomorrow. I am in the middle of my
second packet and of the Caryophylleae. You can trace my progress in
Babington,2 the order of the families being the same. The Cruciferae
alone took more than a whole evening, but they contained one or two
difficult genera, having got through which, & also the troublesome
Helianthemums, amounts to a considerable progress. In the Saturdays I
have just finished July 16. The best service they have rendered is by
being always strenuous for arming, & against Louis Napoleon, but in
doing so they have become anti-French to a degree I do not like—though
some of them write candidly enough too on the French people. While I am
writing a Times has come from Wray with a message that I can now have
one. Thanks dear for your kind feeling about it. The fact is I have been
so immersed in last year’s S. Review politics that a glance at the
Telegraph has generally been enough for me hitherto. Hare’s paper in
Fraser3 rather disappoints me. There is nothing in it that lowers my
opinion of his mind, but it is ineffective. On a subject which ought to
be studiously presented in the most eminently practical light, his paper
is overlaid with quotations of rhapsody from Carlyle & generalities from
Maurice & Ruskin, as applicable to any other subject as to this. I have
not yet read any more of Fraser, but will lose no time in doing so. I
have desired Wray to post the February number of the Englishwoman’s
Journal to you: I have read no more of McMillan yet. I found the
Westminster at Galignani’s, so perhaps it would not have been stopt if
it had been sent to Avignon. I do not know if I mentioned that I glanced
(at Galignani’s) at the article in the Quarterly on reform.4 They made a
good deal of use & mention of the pamphlet (last spring)5 though they
adopted nothing of what it proposed—but they made no use of the ballot
part, for though they liked the conclusion, the premises I presume were
too un-Tory for them. I was struck with the de haut en bas manner in
which they set aside as not worth even consideration any plan for
representing minorities. What an illustration such things give of the
low state of the general intellect. Is it not surprising that
Conservatives have no sense or appreciation of Conservative principles?
Conservatism with us means a blind opposition to change. I know no
Conservatives who are really so but the Saturday reviewers whose
adherence is to principles of stability & principles of unjust
domination so far as now practically maintainable, but who have no mere
instinctive attachment to details Edition: current; Page: [668] as they
are. N. B. To shew our preference for openness I shew Haji your letters.
This put me into a dilemma with the last, but on reflection I thought
you would not dislike his seeing the few words about him. If I was
wrong, say so. I shall see if he shews me your letters to him: if not, I
shall shew no more of mine. He did not shew me M. L.’s6 letter, though
he told me she had asked him to lend money.—February opened with a
beautiful day of hard frost, & there has been a little snow today.
Sundridge Park was lovely & Camden too in spite of the new villas. ever
affectionately J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 4. 1860

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

438.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

Feb. 4. 1860

Dear Sir

I received your note, and by the same post your letter from Avignon with
its inclosure. I need hardly say I should be happy to hear from Mr
Fawcett, and as to my occupations here I can have none more important
than to aid you and him in any mode in my power. I am doubtful about the
move you now propose. It seems to me of the utmost importance not to
begin with the Lords or in any quarter under suspicion of Toryism. Those
who wish not for the equal rights of all but for the despotism of the
numerical majority will be only too ready to run down the plan as a
fetch of Tory Anti Reform. It is not at all Tory, though, in the best
sense, Conservative, and having also the advantage of being a strict
logical corollary from the broadest principles of Democracy it ought not
to throw away that advantage. If we only are unguarded enough to give
any handle for representing it as anti-democratic we shall throw away
all our best chances. I think we should rather strive to bring the plan
and its recommendations forcibly before individuals of position and
influence, & among these Lords Lyndhurst & Brougham2 hold a high rank.
With respect to Lord Grey,3 if the question were, who is likeliest in
the H. of Lords to see the merits of the plan, and seeing them to do his
duty towards it, I should name him without hesitation, but it would be
most undesirable that he should identify himself with it early, as he
has got so confirmed a character for being crotchetty and unpractical,
i.e. (being interpreted) for having no following, that people think they
may dismiss anything at once of which he is the most prominent
supporter. Any public move should, I am convinced, go to the Commons
first, and should turn the Liberal side of the Edition: current; Page:
[669] scheme outwards, shewing the other side afterwards.—I have
received this morning a note from Mr A. F. Mayo. He says “I am happy to
find that Mr Hare’s plan is becoming more talked about. Mr Dilwyn,4 M.
P. for Swansea, whom I have been endeavouring to stimulate for months,
has at length made a speech in public at Swansea on the subject. It is a
pity that Mr Hare did not state his Act synthetically and in order at
the beginning of his work.” I give this last opinion for quantum valeat.
Pray consider me always at your call while I remain here. I am often in
town between 12 and 4 and could call on you in York Street to talk over
matters if you are there and at liberty. It is certainly very desirable
to make use of the present reform discussions for agitating on so great
a principle of reform. The best mode of doing it would depend on the
strength we can count on. I will suggest to Mayo to communicate with
you. I am not at present in the way of sounding many people. We can
count on Bain, and, I should think, Helps.5 While I am writing a note
has come in from Mr Fawcett. I am glad he is going to see Lord Stanley.
Out of office6 Lord S. will not feel tongue tied, and his advocacy would
give both Radical and Conservative support. I am also very glad to find
both that Lord Grey approves and that he declines to initiate.

ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 4. 1860

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

439.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Feb. 4. 1860

I found your letter yesterday, dear, when I came in at five o’clock, &
by the same post a note from Hare, who had just heard from Parker of my
arrival. I agree entirely in every word you say on that subject & shall
write to him accordingly. Most of all do I agree that on no account
ought the plan to be propounded under Tory auspices. This morning a note
has come in from Mayo (who sent us the Law Magazine). Among other things
he says “I am happy to find that Mr Hare’s plan is becoming more talked
about. Mr Dilwyn, Edition: current; Page: [670] M. P. for Swansea, whom
I have been endeavouring to stimulate for months, has at length made a
speech in public at Swansea on the subject.” This is encouragement to go
on propagandizing. Mayo also says that before I mentioned Bain’s book2
he had read it with very great approval & had been propagandizing at the
Athenaeum for that too. A man with so much zeal should be kept up with.
I went yesterday to Richmond to see Bain. The place is getting overrun
with building, especially the high ground where the Rose hotel stands, &
the whole neighbourhood of the Sheen road (I mean the one which goes
down hill from opposite the Star). The space between that road & the
park wall is almost entirely filled up, & Bain’s is one of the tiny
houses in that slip of ground close to the park wall. He still requires
crutches3 (for his stick is almost a crutch) & though he walks with it
as fast as I do, he cannot keep up very long, so we had only about an
hour’s walk, but the walk to & from Greenwich & between London bridge &
Waterloo make up a decent day’s exercise. He is in good spirits on
things in general. His first volume has sold 640 in all, & the deficit
is now made up. The sale made a start on the publication of the second
vol. & another start when the article in the Edin. came out. The second
has only yet sold 320, but it is sure to equal the first. He has
finished & is sending to Parker the first of his papers on Phrenology
which are to appear in Fraser in alternate months.4 He has been staying
with Grote & has seen some of his writing on Plato which from the
account he gives of it must be very good, & considerably outspoken. He
also says that Grote has benefitted much in health by his Surrey house &
is getting, for the first time, fond of the country. Their lease in
Savile Row is expiring & they do not mean to have any permanent house in
town now. All this is good, as it will both prolong his life & increase
the amount of work he will do. Of the six people who have the
appointment of the St Andrews professor, the two clever men, Ferrier &
Tulloch,5 are decidedly for Bain, which is creditable to both & quite
remarkably so to Tulloch. Of the four mediocrities, two are against him,
the other two doubtful, and likely I should think to vote against him.
But he has a chance of a professorship at Aberdeen,6 a more important
university: for when the arrangements for the union of the two Colleges
there take effect,7 there will be (if all goes as is projected) a
separation of the Logic from the Moral Philosophy Chair, & the former
will be in the gift of the government, in which case if Lewis8 is still
in office Bain considers himself almost sure of the appointment.—I send
you two letters relating to Mr Austin. Edition: current; Page: [671] The
first, from Miss Duff Gordon9 (whom I never saw, unless perhaps when a
child) had been left for me at Prescott’s. I was glad it was from her
rather than from her mother or grandmother, & answered it by another
about the same length, expressing regret & respect for him & mentioning
nobody else. Yesterday evening came one from Mrs Austin which seems to
involve the unpleasant necessity of writing to her.10 My principal
anxiety is to do as exactly as I am able what would have been done if I
had still my darling to guide me, not only for the reasons which exist
in all cases, but for the special one that all relations with persons
should shew her to be as much present as before. I inclose for your
remarks & suggestions what I think of saying.—Archdeacon Allen11 having
heard that I am here, has written another letter very like the first,
wishes I would visit him next summer, is thinking of going again to
London on Feb. 13 for convocation & asks to be allowed to call on me to
which I must of course assent. I have a letter from Hardy12 who appears
to be making a search himself for M. de Gaillard,13 but as yet without
success: I suppose I must write to M. de Gaillard to report progress. So
much for general news. For myself, my improvement in digestion has by no
means kept up to the degree it attained at first. Last night I took the
third pill & will report further in next letter. I have finished
Fraser—it is a goodish number & I will send it at latest on Monday: In
the Saturdays I have got to August 6, & in the plants to the end of
Thalamiflorae & am going to begin my great heap of Leguminosae, which I
shall get quickly through as I do not think any of them will require any
redetermining.—About the gilding we need not, as you say, decide yet.14
My feeling is strongly against it, as being less grave, & more gaudy &
ostentatious, besides being considerably less legible. But we must
consider the pros & cons. I am glad the dames were less tiresome than we
feared, though their quality of mind was well illustrated by your
anecdote. Even provincial women of their station in England would
perhaps have been a little better. I am sorry for the man’s accident
with the thorn. I hope it can be poulticed out. your ever affectionate

J.S.M.

P.S. A note has just come in from that fine fellow Fawcett, & one from
Lady Duff Gordon.15 The last would make the letter too heavy & contains
nothing that need affect the present question. I will write again
immediately.

Edition: current; Page: [672]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 5. 1860

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

440.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Feb. 5. 1860

Dear Sir

It gave me great pleasure to hear from you. One who, suffering under
such a calamity as yours,2 has the heart and energy to commence a career
of vigorous exertion for great public objects, must be a man of the
right mould, and I am proud of being thought to have been of any use to
such a man.

You have selected well the object of your present efforts. We can never
do enough in pressing forward Mr. Hare’s plan, which, in my deliberate
belief, contains the true solution of the political difficulties of the
future. It is an uphill race, and a race against time, for if the
American form of democracy overtakes us first, the majority will no more
relax their despotism than a single despot would. But our only chance is
to come forward as Liberals, carrying out the Democratic idea, not as
Conservatives, resisting it. To become identified with Toryism would be
fatal to the plan, for the Conservative is not only the least powerful,
but the silliest party. It has been left behind by all its able men, and
the others are daily shewing that of all politicians the Conservatives
are the least alive to any real principles of conservation. It is
they—it is Disraeli, the Quarterly Review, &c, who go out of their way
to insult the idea of representation of minorities. It will be, as it
has been through all my lifetime, that in every real pinch, Radicals
have had to do duty as Conservatives, often in opposition to those they
were attempting to save.

As you so clearly see, Mr. Hare, like many discoverers, has much to
learn in the art of presenting his discoveries with a view to popular
effect; but he seems truly anxious for advice and help, and we who did
not make the discoveries must aid them in that way. I need hardly say
that I shall be glad to read the paper you propose sending,3 and to give
my opinion on it. I beg that I may be counted on for cooperation
whenever wanted, though I am glad that the very useful task of visiting
public men, for which I have decidedly no vocation, is undertaken by
yourself.

To say the truth, I am rather glad than otherwise that Lord Grey,4
though approving the plan, is unwilling to move actively at present in
its favour. It is important at starting to keep clear of those who have
the unenviable reputatation of being crotchetty. The case is different
with Lord Stanley,4 who would be the most valuable single accession we
could obtain. He is reserved, and will not shew the extent of the
impression which may be made, but he will take the book and study it,
and some day you will see the result.

Edition: current; Page: [673]
As I am often in town, and you probably are never at Blackheath, I
should be happy to call on you as often as wanted instead of giving you
the trouble of coming on purpose.

I am yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb. 7 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

441.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Tuesday Feb. 7 [1860]

Dearest Lily—

I received your Thursday evening letter yesterday & was made very glad
by hearing that you are in good spirits & that the work is proceeding
satisfactorily. I will make a translation carefully & send it.2 I was in
hopes that by this time you would have told me what you think had better
be done about the repairs here. Yesterday while I was out a man (a
builder) came on the part of Ross, without any definite message, & after
looking at the outside, told Haji there was no danger: but I think Suter
must look at the great crack near the window of your room. I have been
waiting till I hear from you. I write but a short letter this time
because I wish to inclose two notes from Fawcett which I think will
interest you. I shall meet him & Hare tomorrow & as I shall also see
Coulson, there will be much to write to you next morning. I have been
doing better again as to health, though I have still occasionally a
little acidity even while taking the mercury. I do not think I shall
recover a perfectly healthy digestion quickly. My chronic ailments
however slight are always a long while in going away. I took the fourth
pill last night, so it is time to see Coulson. I am getting on pretty
well with the plants. I have finished Leguminosae, Rosaceae & others, &
of the fourth packet there remain only the stonecrops & saxifrages, both
of which are rather numerous. You should see how plethoric the packets
have grown, & what difficulty I now have in making their girdles meet.
After next spring’s acquisitions I shall have to build my barns bigger.
Of the Saturdays I have just finished Sept. 10. They are wonderfully
steady in their quality in all respects. They are certainly however a
proof of the influence of my writings, for besides that they are
continually referring to me by name, I continually detect the influence
of some idea they have lately got from the Dissertations. They must also
get me plenty of readers, for they are always treating me & my influence
as something Edition: current; Page: [674] of very great importance. Did
you notice the death of Dr Todd?3 another great loss. I hope the Evening
Mail will give a letter in the Times today from the editor of the
Gazette de Nice4 who says the French papers misrepresent & suppress
everything & that the anti-annexation party there & in Savoy must look
to the English papers only to make the truth known. I send, by this
post, Fraser, which I am ashamed to say I forgot yesterday. I saw two
days ago the first flowers, being a primrose & some winter aconite: not
here, but in the Christmas rose garden in the Park. The laurustinus
everywhere is quite as backward as it was this day fortnight at Avignon,
& there is not a crocus or a snowdrop visible. your ever affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 10. 1860

Blackheath

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

442.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

Blackheath

Feb. 10. 1860

Dear Mrs Austin

From my remembrance of the Lectures2 I should say, without hesitation—If
a bookseller will undertake them, publish them all, with only such
revision as may remove needless repetitions & so far reduce the bulk.
They are much more calculated for popularity than they would have been
if he had, by rewriting, made them (as he would have done) more
elaborate, & more difficult reading. I am persuaded that his reputation
with all students of his subject would sell the book (if not too
voluminous) & I am sure the book would greatly extend his reputation.
But you cannot have better advisers than Sir J.R. and Sir G.L.3 I am
sorry to say I have sought in vain for my copy of the Tables.4

I am yrs faithfully

Edition: current; Page: [675]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday, Feb 11. [1860]

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

443.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Saturday, Feb 11. [1860]

Dearest Lily—

I received your letters yesterday & today. I am very glad that you
thought I hit the right mark in my answer2 to that letter. I sent it
yesterday, except that for the sentence about the Tables, I had to
substitute “I am sorry to say that I have sought in vain for my copy of
the Tables.” It must be in some recess of the boxroom, not to be found
without a general clearance. She will be able to get one from somebody
else. You have very truly characterized her letter; which is like all
her letters & if you saw her daughter’s you would say she has an apt
pupil. Only the daughter has the grace to mention my loss though in a
very inadequate manner. As it requires no answer I will not send it but
bring it. I cannot translate the inscription at all satisfactorily,3 but
for the mere formal purpose a general indication of the sense, even
though in bad French, is sufficient. There is no reason at all against
putting up the two lower blocks as soon as they are ready. I shall most
likely have finished everything else by the end of my second fortnight
with Coulson. I am deep in the Compositae, and though I have not yet got
through half the number of packets, I am more than half through the
work, as after Labiatae the new acquisitions (except the Grasses) are
much more thinly scattered. In the Saturdays I am at October 29. But
neither of these would keep me here, as you know. Suter has been here;
the iron bar is to be outside, & he not only thinks that there is no
necessity to put it up at once, but thinks it better not. The great
crack in your bedroom he will send a man on Monday to stop. About seeing
Hare, Fawcett, &c. you will have seen that I took your advice before I
received it. The truth is that though I detest society for society’s
sake yet when I can do anything for the public objects I care about by
seeing & talking with people I do not dislike it. At the moment of going
to do it, I feel it a bore, just as I do taking a walk or anything else
that I must & ought to do when not wishing to do it. But I believe the
little additional activity & change of excitement does me good, & that
it is better for me to try to serve my opinions in other ways as well as
with a pen in my hand. With such people as Hare & Fawcett it is a
pleasure, & ranks with going to the Pol. Econ. Club (for which by the
by, Fawcett asked me to propose him as a member, or rather expressed a
wish to be a member & I offered to propose him, which I have done).4
Archd. Allen’s visit would be a bore, but he has written to say he is
not coming to town at present. He renews his invitation very warmly.
This morning the papers have Gladstone’s budget.5 It is a great success.
He turns Edition: current; Page: [676] the edge of the argument about
relieving the rich instead of the poor, by raising the income tax to
tenpence, & he takes off the paper duty,6 & all the remaining protecting
duties, making a clean sweep of all duties on manufactures, on butter,
cheese, eggs &c. & leaves a number of other duties, giving for the first
time a really good fiscal system. He says wine will still be more
heavily taxed than beer, therefore there need be no reduction of the
malt tax. The French concessions are larger & better than anybody knew
of. His speech was one of principle, good throughout, & pointing out
many bad effects to which I had not adverted as produced by the taxes
which the French treaty takes off.7 All other wines are to have the same
benefit as French. Except a little complaint from the representatives of
the silk interest, nobody but the wise Mr Bentinck ventured to
complain.8 They only asked for time to consider, & I have no doubt that
the intending opponents find their hopes dashed. It will be supported I
think zealously by all liberals. Very judiciously they mean to finish
this before bringing in the Reform Bill,9 lest the enemy should defeat
this by forcing them to dissolve on that.—I hope the really touching
appeal to the English public from a number of Savoyards, in yesterday’s
Times,10 is in the Evening Mail. There was also a good leading article
on that topic.11 Mayo has written again & has sent a paper of notes &
criticisms on Bain’s book of which as I told you he is a great
admirer.12 I bought at the railway station to read in my journeys to &
fro, a shilling copy of Emerson’s Representative Men.13 It seems to me
very empty mouthing, with only a foundation of a few vague & general
ideas which are right or wrong according as they are taken. Is it a pair
of revolvers you want? I ask, because one hears of a pair of pistols (or
as the old phrase is, a brace) but revolvers I only remember hearing of
in the singular number, & I should think one of their advantages must be
that there is no need for people to burthen themselves with two. We have
bitter cold weather again here: it was hard frost all day yesterday, to
the benefit however of my walk. I have kept my word with you in letter &
spirit: according to weather I walk (at five miles an hour) for two
hours or for between three & four: the only exception (not counting the
days of going to town, when I have plenty of exercise) was the rainy day
I told you of, when I went only to Deptford. There are now a few nice
snowdrops Edition: current; Page: [677] out near the door but no
crocuses. I think the Vichy water is doing me good. It is only like very
pure water with a slightly pungent taste.

Your ever affectionate

J.S.M.

[P.S.]

With all help from Boyer’s dictionary14 I cannot find an equivalent for
“earnest” for “instructor in wisdom” or for what we mean by “goodness.”
If you can amend any part of it, do.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb. 14 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

444.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Tuesday Feb. 14 [1860]

Dearest Lily—

Your nice letter of Saturday came yesterday, but not till after I had
gone out, though I staid till I thought the time for the second post had
passed. I quite understand the way you are affected by spending hours in
the company of such people. You do not mean to keep up both the
Demoiselles & the Dames? It is a great happiness to me to be a support
to you under depression, but it would be very painful to me to think
that I should always continue to be the only one, as I must necessarily
fail you some day & I can never be at ease unless, either by means of
persons or of pursuits you have some other resource besides me, and I am
sure my own darling would feel as I do. But to speak of things more
germane to the present moment. Suter came yesterday & the crack in your
room was filled up. Everything has thus been done which seems necessary
or desirable for the moment. His man, who seems intelligent, thinks that
the sinking is caused by the foundation not going down below the sand,
which being washed away more & more by the landsprings, the wall goes on
sinking. In what I said about the shrubs I did not mean to suggest doing
anything now. I am even disposed not to have any of them propped up (for
they are not actually levelled) & as for cutting them, nothing would
induce me to have the dearest one’s shrubs touched without the presence
of some one who understands the subject & knows what she would have
liked: It is easy however if you think it desirable, to have a few
stakes put in the most important places. But it cannot well be done yet
for it is hard frost, with cold wind, & snow on the ground. I was caught
yesterday Edition: current; Page: [678] in two snow showers. It will be
a late spring in both countries evidently. The birds who had begun
singing have left off, though there are great numbers of them. The other
day looking out of my bedroom window I perceived five bulfinches perched
on the thorn near the dining room window.—There have been two notes from
Gregson. He seems to take matters very slackly: The first said that he &
Cooper thought it was best to sell the securities.2 The second, in
answer to an enquiry by Haji, said that he had not seen the will, but
only extracts furnished by Cooper & that these satisfied him that the
third share is divisible now. I tried to see him to get some explanation
of this vagueness, but as he was not at home, I wrote a note to him to
say that I think it important that he should see, not extracts, but the
will itself, as the difference of opinion between Cooper & his principal
makes it necessary to have the best evidence. Meanwhile Haji is under an
impression that the consols are already divided, as he says there are
£200 more to his account than would be the case otherwise. This ought
not to have been done with Gregson’s consent, unless after further
communication with you.—Fawcett has sent his MS. pamphlet this morning.3
It is very well done, but I can suggest some additions & a few omissions
of things which would be better away, & I am writing to him to say that
I will call tomorrow to talk about it. He will probably send over to
Hare who is close by. I am glad you thought my advice & notions on the
former occasion correct. I had not shewn Fawcett’s letters to Haji but I
have shewn him this one. I have not sent Lady D[uff] G[ordon]’s letter
as it is heavy, but I shall know by your next whether you would like it
sent. I have got through the Compositae & am in Campanulaceae. In the
Saturdays I have got into the middle of December. Although not so quick
in perceiving such things as dear one was I cannot help seeing continual
marks that some of the writers have taken their cue from the Liberty &
the Dissertations. A very favorable notice of the Diss. in a Bradford
paper has been sent,4 & there is one of the Liberty in a large quarterly
review called the London Review5 which I found here, & which had got to
a 25th number without my even knowing of its existence. As to health I
think I am going on very well. I seldom have any acidity now, but I do
not yet feel confidence that after eight pills I shall be able to get on
without medicine. I shall see what Coulson says. I do not think of
seeing either Clark or Ramadge this time. The success of the Edition:
current; Page: [679] Budget seems as far as I can judge to be complete.6
There is something going on about Savoy & Nice, which has induced our
Government to ask Kinglake7 to put off his motion for the present. There
is another notability dead, Sir W. Napier, aged 74.8 How is poor little
Bruno? Another pet, little Goldie, keeps singing very loud in the
kitchen. Tell me anything you would like me to bring when I come. You
spoke of bulbs, & roots from Halley. It will soon be time to get them.
Shall I bring Macmillan? It is hardly worthwhile if we have but a few
days to stay at the little place before going our journey. I will bring
the Westr in any case. Your ever affectionate

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday, Feb. 17 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

445.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Friday, Feb. 17 [1860]

As there is no letter this morning, dear, I will write without waiting
for one. Gregson writes that he has seen the will2 at Doctor’s Commons &
examined it and that it bears out Cooper’s extracts, which however he is
not allowed to compare verbatim. The extracts he has sent. They prove
that Arthur’s3 impression is wrong, & that the time for making the
division does not in any way depend on Mrs Hardy’s life or death. They
do not however clear up all doubt. By the words used, the trustees,
after the death of any one of the three legatees, become trustees for
that one’s sons till of age, & daughters till of age or married: so that
in your case & Haji’s the trust has expired. But this does not shew that
it could not be kept alive by consent, unless there be something in the
law which makes this impossible. I shall try to see Gregson to ask this
question. But on the whole I am now rather for letting the division take
effect. Now that the Birkenhead shares are commuted Edition: current;
Page: [680] to Liverpool corporation bonds, I do not know that they are
likely to rise by keeping. The following words are from Gregson’s note
“By it (the will) it is perfectly clear that the children of Mrs Mill
became entitled to the principal of one third of the residue immediately
on her death. They will also become entitled to a further share on the
death of either Mrs Ley or Mr Alfred Hardy without children. The will
expressly required that the number of three trustees should always be
kept up, which I apprehend has not been done, as I observe that the will
was only proved by Mr Harman & Mr Arthur Hardy & not by Mr Booth4 the
third executor. It would be proper to see that this is done in order to
protect the contingent rights of Mrs Mill’s children in the remaining
two thirds of the funds” or rather I should say (if at all) their right
to a third of those now appropriated to Mrs Hardy.

I had a long talk on Wedy with Fawcett. Hare was not there, but a young
Cambridge friend of F. named Wilson5 was there who seems to be
intelligent & a warm supporter of the plan. As we had to go over the
pamphlet & discuss all points of it, there was little general
conversation. I once tried to lead the talk to the subject of women, but
nothing came of it. I shall however have plenty of opportunities. This
morning F. has sent the MS.6 revised & I shall call on Monday to talk
about it further. I have impressed on him that in the present stage the
only thing that can usefully be aimed at is to get access to individual
minds likely to be influential. I have discouraged sending the pamphlet
to any members of parliament but select ones. I have on the other hand
suggested sending it with a few words of remark to all who signed the
Memorial to Lord Palmerston for an educational suffrage.7 Though that
scheme was not a good one, those who signed it were mostly persons of
talent or instruction, & they have all given evidence that they want
something out of the common line of parliamentary reform & are alive to
one of the strong recommendations of Hare’s plan. Most, no doubt, will
disregard it, but if we can recruit only a few of them, it will be a
great gain. F. says that Cairnes (whom he knows) is with us. Mayo has
sent his remarks on Bain: they are all on one detached point, & without
being striking or very good, they are worth shewing to Bain which I
shall do, having Mayo’s permission. I have now read up the Saturdays
within two numbers. I think they grow worse rather than better, though
there are often good things of a kind one finds nowhere else. I am on
the point of beginning Labiatae, & I see my way to leaving about Monday
week. Haji intends going to Norwich first,8 & following in the middle or
at the end of the same week. What is your opinion now about going to
Greece? Do you think it would do to cross Italy? I am Edition: current;
Page: [681] frightened at the thought of going round by Malta,
especially at a stormy season, & I doubt too if there are any regular
steamers from Malta to Corfu or Athens. The French steamers to Athens
touch I think at Messina but not at Malta. I can perhaps learn this
before I go. The frost here may be said to have gone though it still
sometimes freezes in the night & is still very cold all day, with
continual snow showers (which do not lie) & a great deal of wind. Your
ever affectionate J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Feb 18 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

446.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Saturday Feb 18 [1860]

Dearest Lily—

I have just received your Tuesday evening’s letter. We have had nothing
here comparable to the weather you describe. There has been no snow that
has lain, or none of any depth, & skaiting [sic] had only just begun
when the thaw came. It was a slow, cold thaw, but the weather is getting
daily milder, & yesterday was beautiful. I saw yesterday in Morden road
the first crocus. I wrote to you fully yesterday, & I write again today
chiefly to say that Ross has been here, with his man, the same whom Haji
saw. They both say that the sinking & cracks can only be finally stopped
by underpinning the house at the corners. Tudor House, Ross said, was as
bad, but it was underpinned & it never sank afterwards. On the other
hand, Suter’s man told Haji that Powell’s2 house had been underpinned
long ago & that it did not stop the mischief, which as Powell told Haji
has gone so far that he means to leave the house which otherwise he
would not. The man said, what I can hardly believe, that it can be done
without destroying or much injuring the shrubs: only the rose on the
wall nearest the corner must go: I believe there are other stems and
roots of roses along the wall though the shrubs hide them. I have asked
the man to send a rough estimate of the cost of doing this. The kitchen
wall, in the part which has bulged out & is propped up, he says cannot
be mended, but only pulled down & rebuilt. Ross, for his part, does not
care whether the underpinning is done or no (he avers that there is no
danger, as the wall sinks upright) but he cares very much for our having
the brickwork of the arch in front taken down & replaced (though it
would be evidently absurd to do this with any prospect of more sinking)
& he does not seek to disguise that the reason of his caring for this is
because Powell’s lease expires at Midsummer & people who see the state
of our house may be deterred from taking that. So he evidently hopes to
get us to do this immediately, in which he will be disappointed.—I have
finished the Labiatae & Edition: current; Page: [682] shall certainly be
ready to come by the time I mentioned. I am sorry to perceive by your
note to Haji that you do not think they will have finished the work
before the end of March or beginning of April. This settles the question
against Greece, & therefore in favour of Catalonia & the Eastern
Pyrenees. In the Saturdays I have overtaken Haji, having only one to
read besides the one which came today. On further consideration I
inclose Lady D[uff] G[ordon]’s letter. Ever affectionately J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb.21 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

447.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Tuesday Feb.21 [1860]

Dearest Lily—

Your letter of Friday morning arrived yesterday. Let me first say that
there is no shop of Colt’s2 from one end to the other of Regent Street.
I must therefore go again to town tomorrow & get at the Post Office
Directory to trace where it is. I shall then go to the London Library &
see if I can find any books worth bringing, though if it is for myself
only, I do not think it much worth while. I went over yesterday with
Fawcett his pamphlet3 as revised by him, and the alterations which I
suggested on his revision. We seemed to agree perfectly, but Hare it
seems has not yet seen it. He sent to tell Hare, who came. I like Hare
more & more. I like very much the expression of his face. I inclose a
note I had just before had from him. The pamphlet is to be sent about
privately first & afterwards published. Hare said that Hickson has
written to him saying that Rowland Hill some years ago proposed for
South Australia the very principle of Hare’s plan4 & that Hickson
himself had afterwards proposed it to the Commissioners on the
Corporation of London, for adoption in the municipal elections there.5
This has suggested to Hare to make a push for trying the plan in that
way & he Edition: current; Page: [683] is going to press it upon
Ayrton.6 We had a good deal of talk on the women question. They seemed
to go so thoroughly with me in feeling, that there was little or no
actual discussion which would have shewn whether they enter into every
corner of the subject, but it seemed to me that they will go the whole
way with us. They warmly assented to my statement that all employments &
positions should be open to women & that then each would fall naturally
into what it turned out they were fittest for individually. It appears
that Fawcett presses the subject on his friends as he does all things
which he cares about, & as he noticed the way in which they seem to be
afraid of doing anything in the matter for fear of ridicule, Hare said
if he were in Parlt he would bring it forward (the question of the
suffrage for women, as I understood). Since I finished the Saturday I
have been looking through the Reasoner, & nothing in it has struck me so
much as the progress making on that question. Continually some new
advocate for it is starting up. A Colonel Clinton,7 a great radical who
writes letters to the Reasoner & is for plural voting, is strongly for
women’s suffrage, & there is a curious document called the Belfast
Resolutions, professing to have been agreed to at a public meeting at
Belfast8 & signed by a Mr Scott as Chairman, in which a whole radical
system of government & political economy is elaborately set forth & near
the beginning is a demand that all women as well as all men shall not
only be electors but eligible to Parliament. Fawcett thinks it a great
thing to have had a woman (Miss Craig)9 appointed Secretary to the
Social Science Association, & so indeed it is. He says it was done by a
most strenuous personal canvass by Miss Parkes10 & others & that now
everybody is glad of it, as the duties are done most admirably. So also
at some place in the North, I forgot which of the large towns, he says
that a woman was with great difficulty got chosen Librarian & that the
admirable way in which the office is filled is having the most
beneficial effects. Various things he says incline me to attach more
importance than I did to what Miss Parkes & her set are doing. He says
the E[nglish] W[oman]’s Journal increases in sale & has got into places
where it was scouted at first. By the bye he said that Miss Craig got
her living at Edinburgh as a needlewoman till Miss Parkes found her out,
brought her to Edition: current; Page: [684] London & kept her there
till she succeeded in getting this Secretaryship for her.—Politics are
satisfactory. The first move against the Commercial Treaty & Budget,
headed by Disraeli, was defeated last night by an unexpectedly large
majority (between 60 & 70)11 though the Metropolitan members whose
election depends on the publicans, are up in arms against opening of the
wine licenses & Ayrton, as well as Horsman12 (now grown completely
factious) spoke on the Tory side. There is to be another attempt made
tonight, on the motion of Du Cane,13 member for Essex, which I hope will
fail as ignominiously. The general feeling of the country as far as I
can judge, seems right, & I think that a great many Tories must have
abstained from voting not to drive the ministry to a dissolution. I saw
Coulson yesterday. He recommends to me to take no more mercury, but
quinine daily for a week & then to leave off medicine. I am very
doubtful whether the mercury has done me any permanent good. Yesterday I
had more acidity than I have had for some time. I shall probably have to
reconcile myself to having a weak stomach & merely take care not to
overload it. Perhaps the excursion may do good. But I hardly like going
to Spain after what I read in the papers about the bitter feeling
against England there. Still I do not suppose it will affect our comfort
in a short tour. I am now here alone, Haji having just left for
Norwich,14 not to be back while I remain if I go next Monday. I inclose
a note from him. There will be nothing to keep me here. I have got into
Monocotyledoneae & into the last but two of the fourteen packets. I do
not think I shall bring a hat as I intended. In Spain & the Pyrenees a
wideawake15 will do better. Even if we go to Greece I can get a hat at
Avignon or Marseilles. I shall be glad to bring MacMillan. It improves a
little as it goes on, & there is an article by Maurice on Macaulay,16
this month, which I like. The Social Science Association has sent a
thick volume of its Transactions17 from which I find that my name is on
the Council. I think I ought to write to have it taken off, especially
after what I wrote to the Secretary of this very Association about the
other subject.18 It is still cold here. Yesterday the frost & snow
seemed to have come back. But there is nothing like what you tell me
there still is at Avignon. The prospect of a very late spring makes me
care much less about the retardation of a mere short excursion, our
principal object Edition: current; Page: [685] having been frustrated.
An Avignon winter judging from our experience is anything but what one
means by a Southern one. What Gregson said about filling up the trustees
turns out to be bosh, as the stock certificates he himself gave me are
signed by Harman in person & by Cooper in behalf of Booth. Ever your
affectionate

J.S.M.

[P.S.]

I will bring 2 doz. sherry from Paris. We shall not, I suppose, want any
tea. I have answered Guillaumin’s19 letter.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Feb. 23 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

448.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Thursday Feb. 23 [1860]

Dearest Lily—

Your Sunday evening’s letter arrived yesterday. Your report about the
progress of the work seems favorable but if we do not leave before
April, it would entirely negative going to Greece as far as I alone am
concerned. I should arrive rather later than I did before;2 I wish to
see both the places I did not then see, & those I did: we should
inevitably do it more slowly; & it is impossible to stay a day later
than I did, on account of the heat. Still, if you decidedly preferred
that journey to any other, I should do so too, for I have no very strong
attraction towards the alternatives, which are Catalonia & the Pyrenees,
or some part of Italy or Sicily. If you would rather travel in Greece
before trying tent life in the East, we might, next winter, go to Egypt
first, & then to Greece, postponing Palestine & Syria. By that however
we should lose the approach by Corfu & the Corinthian Gulf which I very
much tiens to shewing you first. The same objection applies to going by
Malta, for, judging by the long & detailed list of steamers in
Bradshaw’s Continental, there is no steamer from Malta or Marseilles to
Corfu but only to Syra & Athens. Everybody who sees Greece first by the
south coast of the Morea, & Athens, is disappointed. If we go this year
it will be best to start from Ancona, stay a week at Corfu, go from
there to Athens, then see Attica & the Morea only, which we might do
thoroughly, & then return by Italy or by Constantinople as the season,
the convenience, or our inclination might determine.—I have bought your
revolver. With the case, caps &c. complete it cost £5, & 50 cartridges
in addition make three shillings Edition: current; Page: [686] more. It
was not too heavy for me to carry home. I hope they won’t stop it at the
Custom House. I believe importation of arms is prohibited, not to
mention that they may think I intend to fire at the Emperor. I made up a
list of books for the London Library, but it was not a very attractive
one. If they send half a dozen volumes however that will probably be
reading enough for the time we want it, especially as I hope to resume
writing. It is again hard frost here: should it be so on Monday I shall
perhaps be afraid to come. I have been, however, a good deal better
these two days. In the plants I have only now the Grasses to go through,
as I have not acquired this time any ferns or other cryptogams. I shall
like very much to hear an account of your domiciliary visits with the
ladies of the Bienfaisance. I have just been reading a manuscript essay
on Strikes,3 by Fawcett: it is the best thing I ever read on the
subject, with some new lights even to me, & I hope it will be published.
I think we may look to him with great hopes (notwithstanding his
misfortune) as one of the successors. A propos, the misfortune,
according to what Hare tells me, seems to have happened under most
painful circumstances. It was the effect of two stray shots from his
father’s gun: only two, but one went into each eye, breaking the
spectacles & no doubt forcing in the broken glass. What a sad
concurrence of circumstances was necessary to make one poor man (or
rather two) afflicted for life! If the coincidence had been the contrary
way, would it not have been thought manifestly providential?—Everything
looks well for the Budget,4 for though the Tories are making a distinct
party opposition to it, they evidently cannot muster their full
strength. But I am sadly afraid the Government may be forced to give up
the best provision of all, that which destroys the brewers’ public house
monopoly; for not only the publican interest is the most powerful, next
to the attornies, in all the larger constituencies, but the Teetotallers
have with their usual narrow-mindedness come up in great force & are
pouring in petitions against what they call a great extension of the
trade in intoxicating liquors. By the bye I believe I am very unpopular
at present with the teetotallers.5 A correspondent of Holyoake complains
that they misunderstand me & think me “opposed to Temperance.” I
perceive Francis Newman is a leading Maine Edition: current; Page: [687]
law man, & writes papers with his name in the Reasoner, in one of which
he obliquely glances at me.6 I think, he, like the Saturday reviewers,
is among the greatest enemies to our principles that there now are; such
will mostly be found among those who agree with us on many details.
After your letter I think I may authorize Gregson to consent to Cooper’s
proposed sale & division. Ever your affte

J.S.M.

[P.S.]

Your Brighton dividend, received at Prescott’s, this time is £26.19.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saty Feb.25 [1860]

Blackheath

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

449.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Blackheath

Saty Feb.25 [1860]

I write but a few words, dear, as I shall see you so soon. I shall
certainly go on Monday evg & consequently arrive on Wednesday by the
express at midday. I have finished the plants, & done everything that
requires doing, & though it freezes every night rather hard it does not
freeze in the day. I am not taking any medicine, & have had very little
indigestion since I wrote last. I have certainly gained a good deal by
the course of medicine, & perhaps now the excursion will set me up. Your
Wednesday’s letter came yesterday. I have not heard anything further of
or from Ross or his man. If I had seen either of them I should have
again repeated that I would do nothing till we return, there being in
their opinion & in that of every one else who has been spoken to, no
immediate or rather no present danger. If it is desirable to write to
Ross, this can as well be done from St Véran. I do not know what you
mean by Suter’s “job” as the putting up of the iron bar which was what
he recommended need not in his opinion be done at present & I do not see
why it should not wait till we can decide on everything at once.
Gladstone has defeated the second motion of the Tories against the
budget by the quite unexpected majority of 116.2 But he has been obliged
to limit his measure about licensing to the sale of wine, leaving the
beer question as he says to be considered hereafter as a separate
subject. I cannot blame him though I am Edition: current; Page: [688]
sorry.—Do not feel any anxiety about my passage for there is no wind, to
speak of, here. So now dear I leave off, & shall not need to write again
before the pleasant moment of seeing you.

Your ever affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 26. 1860

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

450.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Feb. 26. 1860

Dear Mr Fawcett

It would never for a moment occur to me, seeing what you are in other
respects, to regard your loss of sight as excluding you from political
life. It could only do so if it had, as in most men it would have done,
thrown a damp on your wishes and aspirations. You have only to take
every fair opportunity of making yourself known as a public speaker and
lecturer. When you have thus proved that you are under no real
disqualification, your misfortune will, I am satisfied, be very much in
your favour, not only by exciting interest, and neutralizing envy and
jealousy, but because it will cause you to be much more and sooner
talked about. You will then, I think, have quite as good a chance of
being elected to Parliament, as any other man of independent opinions.

I return the pamphlet2 by post. I like the original title best, but
either is good. The addition on the back of the title page is very
desirable, but instead of “interest in the improvement of the
Representation” I would say “interest in improving the quality of the
Representation” or, more generally, “in correcting the deficiencies of”
&c. or some other and better phrase to distinguish those you address
from mere Parliamentary Reformers of the old school.

Parker writes “I am just going to Cambridge, and will see Mr Fawcett and
discuss with him further the ‘Strikes’paper.”3 By this I conclude he
thinks you are at Cambridge.4 He does not say when he will be back, but
I suppose very soon.

I have marked in pencil on the margin of the proof, a few misprints, and
two or three slight alterations or additions which occur to me.

ever yours sincerely

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [689]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 7 mars 1860

Saint Véran

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

451.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran

le 7 mars 1860

Monsieur

C’est avec grand plaisir que j’ai reçu votre lettre du 8 février. Elle
m’a suivi en Angleterre, où j’étais allé pour affaires, et si j’avais eu
le temps de m’arrêter à Paris en retournant ici, j’aurais répondu à
votre lettre personnellement plutôt que par écrit. Je me promets de
profiter à une meilleure occasion de votre invitation aimable et
amicale.

Je suis charmé que votre nouveau livre2 soit à la veille de paraître. Je
le suis aussi d’apprendre que la traduction aura, à votre airs,
l’avantage de l’à propos, et que l’opinion commence à pencher du côté
contraire à la centralisation. Je puis le dire sans blesser vos
convictions, car vous conviendrez, je pense, qu’en France l’engoûement
pour la centralisation a été excessif, comme j’accorde que de notre côté
de la Manche on a dormé un peu dans le fanatisme contraire. Du reste, ni
votre point de vue ni le mien n’est exclusif, en notre divergence,
quoique considérable, repose sur une différence de nuance plutôt que de
principe.

M. Guillaumin3 me fit, il y a quelque semaines, la proposition de faire
traduire le petit livre par M. Paillottet.4 Je lui fis savoir sans délai
que vous aviez bien voulu charger de cette tâche. Je me suis aperçu
seulement hier, par le Journal des Economistes, que M. Guillaumin avait
eu l’imprudence d’annoncer sa traduction avant de me faire part de son
projet. Si vous avez vu l’annonce, vous avez sans doute compris comme la
chose s’est passée.

Agréez, mon cher Monsieur, l’expression de ma haute considération et de
mes sentiments d’amitié.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 25. 1860

Saint Véran

Lord Overstone

Overstone, Lord

452.


TO LORD OVERSTONE1

Saint Véran

near Avignon

March 25. 1860

.

Dear Lord Overstone

I have just heard that Mr Hare, the Charity Commissioner, and author of
the remarkable Treatise on Representation, is to be proposed to the
Committee Edition: current; Page: [690] of the Athenaeum on the 27th,
for selection without ballot.2 If I could be sure that you had read Mr
Hare’s book it would be quite needless, indeed I should hardly feel at
liberty, to express to you any opinion of mine on the subject; but in
case you have not, I venture to say that there are few books you would
find better worth reading, or which are likely to give you a higher
opinion of the author. My own conviction is, that Mr Hare has
discovered, what the best political thinkers have rather lamented the
want of, than hoped to find—an effectual and practicable mode of
preventing numbers, in a popular constitution, from swamping and
extinguishing the influence of education and knowledge. Whatever your
opinion may be on this point, I feel sure that as a mere specimen of
intellectual power applied to the great political question of the modern
world, the book would amply repay in pleasure, the time spent in reading
it.

Believe me
 Dear Lord Overstone
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 6 avril 1860

St. Véran

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

453.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

St. Véran

le 6 avril 1860

Mon cher Monsieur—

Je vous remercie beaucoup de l’envoi de votre nouveau livre.2 C’est un
ouvrage très remarquable et qui me paraît même supérieur à celui auquel
il fait suite.3 Je pense qu’il fera époque dans la grande discussion de
la Centralisation. Vous ne vous attendrez pas, à coup sûr, qu’il n’y ait
pas une divergence considérable entre nos opinions. Cependant (comme
vous avez dit à propos du livre de la Liberté) je suis plus frappé des
coincidences d’opinion que des différences: et je crois que vous eussiez
dit cela avec encore plus de raison si vous aviez connu un certain
manuscrit inédit que j’ai dans mon portefeuille.4 J’attends avec un vif
intérêt l’introduction5 promise dans l’annonce de la Liberté. Je suis
plus que curieux de voir de quelle manière vous concevrez la différence
entre nos deux manières de penser. Il est au reste très convenable que
le plus modéré et le moins fanatique Edition: current; Page: [691] des
localistes soit présenté et commenté par le plus philosophe des
centralistes.

Je n’entre pas ici dans les questions qui nous séparent et que j’espère
discuter avec vous de vive voix. Vous êtes un de ceux avec qui on ne
peut que gagner à comparer ses idées. Je donnerai seulement un mot
d’éclaircissement sur deux points.

L’un des deux me regarde personnellement. Je n’ai jamais entendu nier
l’influence des races. Vous pouvez voir dans mon article sur Michelet6
que j’admets pleinement cette influence. Dans la phrase que vous avez
citée, je voulais seulement blâmer une tendance qui existe dans tous les
temps mais plus particulièrement dans celui-ci (par suite de la réaction
du 19me siècle contre le 18me), c’est celle d’attribuer toutes les
variétés dans le caractère des peuples et des individus à des
différences indélébiles de nature, sans se demander si les influences de
l’éducation et du milieu social et politique n’en donnent pas une
explication suffisante. Je ne puis comparer cette tendance qu’à
l’habitude qu’avaient les peuples primitifs d’attribuer tout ce qu’on
faisait, sans pouvoir dire de qui et comment on avait appris à le faire,
à l’inspiration directe d’un dieu. Dans le cas dont il s’agit, savoir
celui des différences de caractère entre les peuples celtiques et les
peuples anglo-saxons, je crois avec vous que la race y entre pour
beaucoup; mais quant à leur goût pour ou contre la centralisation, je
vous demanderai si la diversité dans le développement historique de la
France et de l’Angleterre dont vous avez fait une esquisse si vraie et
si instructive, ne suffisait pas à elle seule comme explication.

L’autre point sur lequel je veux dire un mot, c’est celui-ci. Je
reconnais pleinement la tendance que vous signalez dans la législation
anglaise vers une centralisation plus grande. Non seulement je reconnais
cette tendance, mais encore j’y applaudis même. Mais notez bien que ce
mouvement centralisateur est plus utile que nuisible chez nous,
justement parce qu’il est en opposition tranchée avec l’esprit du pays.
De là il arrive que ces changements si grands en apparence, se réduisent
dans la pratique à des proportions presque exiguës. Vous croyez
peut-être que l’administration de la charité publique est réellement
centralisée chez nous depuis la loi de 1834.7 Eh bien, il n’en est rien.
L’immense abus qu’on avait fait du pouvoir local avait tellement
effarouché le public qu’il est devenu possible de faire cette loi; mais
il n’est pas été possible de l’exécuter: le pouvoir local a fini par
regagner sa prédominance sur le pouvoir central; et celui-ci n’a pu
conserver ses attributions qu’en les exerçant avec une réserve si
excessive qu’elles sont restées plutôt une ressource pour des cas
extrêmes qu’un ressort régulier d’administration. Il en sera ainsi
Edition: current; Page: [692] pour longtemps de tout ce qu’on tentera
chez nous dans le sens de la centralisation. On admettra bien
l’intervention du pouvoir central comme remède héroique et passager: on
ne l’admettra pas comme régime. Maintenant c’est à réfléchir si ces
dictatures momentanées du pouvoir central ne remplissent pas
suffisamment les conditions de votre système.—Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 6. 1860

Saint Véran

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

454.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran

April 6. 1860

Dear Mr Fawcett

I was very glad to hear from you, and was much pleased that you are
going to lecture on Strikes. Your being urged to do so by Sir J.
Shuttleworth,2 and his presence as Chairman,3 take away all appearance
of the proceeding’s being uncalled for; and anything which tends to make
you known as a public speaker without looking like a desire on your part
to push yourself into notice, is useful for your ulterior views.

With regard to being examined before the Committee on Strikes,4 I should
not have anticipated a much more favorable answer than you received,
though I should have expected a civil one. It is contrary to the theory
of a Parliamentary Committee to examine witnesses on anything but
matters of fact; and it is only because members of parliament are not
what they are censés to be, that such a practice could ever have crept
in. As it is, I have always felt that there was a sort of impropriety in
it, and have avoided rather than sought to be examined on questions of
argument and theory, though I have once or twice consented5 when
particularly asked to do so by Edition: current; Page: [693] the
Chairman of the Committee. In the case of the Corrupt Practices
Committee,6 the same reasons do not apply, as inventors may always with
propriety offer themselves to explain their plan.

Mr Hare’s letter in the Times7 seemed to me a very good move, and I am
glad to hear from him that it has met with some response from the press.
Mr Martineau’s8 is an important adhesion. If he has made up his mind to
do all that he can, it will probably be found to be not a little. In
your remarks on the impossibility of making any impression in the House
of Commons, you must, I think, have overlooked Sir J. Pakington’s
speech.9 He seemed to me to have sought an occasion for separating
himself from Disraeli on the question, and to be quite ready to consider
any feasible plan for the representation of minorities. I hope he has
your pamphlet,10 but I would not counsel any more direct application to
him. There is a great deal in leaving an idea time to crystallize.

I expect to leave Avignon in about a week, after which I must refer you
to Parker for my address.

Ever yours sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 6, 1860

Saint Véran

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

455.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran

April 6, 1860

Dear Sir

Your letter of the 29th gave me great pleasure. It is very satisfactory
that your proposals in the Times2 were so decidedly supported by the
Economist,3 Edition: current; Page: [694] and received so much attention
from the papers. Several passages in the leading articles of the Times
have since pointed, by slight indications, in the direction we wish
for.4 Notwithstanding the inaccessibility of members of Parliament to
any idea which will not serve for the hustings, the situation seems to
me favourable for gaining the attention of leading politicians to such a
plan as yours. Did you notice Pakington’s speech?5 He ostentatiously
separated himself from Disraeli, complimenting Lord J. Russell on the
provision in his former bill for representation of minorities (which
Disraeli had reproached him for as unconstitutional) and altogether
seemed on the lookout for some unobjectionable mode of doing what your
plan does in the best of all modes. The foundation is evidently laid for
making an impression on his mind. But I would not recommend (unless some
special opportunity offers) entering into any communication with him,
beyond sending him Mr Fawcett’s pamphlet.6 We must be on our guard
against the danger of making people feel bored by the subject before
they understand it.

What Sir E. Lytton says is true, but not much to the purpose; as he was
not asked anything but what was perfectly consistent with his remarks.
He was not applied to as a minister, but as one of the leaders of
opinion. An important member of parliament has it in his power to help
forward materially by incidental notice, ideas with which it may not be
yet time for him to identify himself as a practical statesman. And from
the tone of Sir E. L’s letter7 I should not despair of his doing so in
this case, though he will not commit himself beforehand.

I do not like to discourage any move in favour of the plan, but I
confess I should not expect that much good could be done at present by
any appeals to the inadequately represented places. Any feeling that
might be excited, would be sure, I think, to turn itself into a movement
for the more practical object of merely obtaining more members: while
the plan would be made chiefly known by its least beneficial feature,
the increased representation it would give to the large towns. I say
this in ignorance of all that may have occurred to you on the other
side.

I was glad to hear from Mr Fawcett that Mr Martineau promises to do his
utmost in the National.8 That Review is, I believe, a good deal read by
a rather advanced order of liberals; and independently of Mr Martineau’s
own abilities as a reasoner and writer, he is attended by a cortège of
younger men who can also use their pens efficiently. His adhesion is
very valuable, and Edition: current; Page: [695] tends to hasten the
time when you will be able to cite an imposing number of thinkers,
differing in other respects, but agreeing in their support of your plan.

I have not yet seen the new Fraser,9 but hope to see it in a day or two.
Perhaps if a good article were offered to the Westminster, it would be
accepted, but it should be by a new person, if possible. If I were in
England, I would try to move Herbert Spencer, but I do not know how he
is affected by the plan. Have you any means of knowing?

I expect to leave Avignon about this time next week, but I shall keep
Parker informed of my address.

Yours ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 11. 1860

S[aint] V[éran]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

456.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

S[aint] V[éran]

April 11. 1860

Dear Bain—

I propose leaving Avignon in a day or two to pass a few weeks or months
in the Pyrenees & in Spain—during which time as my address will be
frequently changing I had better refer you to Parker for it.

I mentioned in my last letter that I had completed the first draft of
the new book.2 I have read since my return here, several things which
have interested me, above all Darwin’s book.3 It far surpasses my
expectation. Though he cannot be said to have proved the truth of his
doctrine, he does seem to have proved that it may be true which I take
to be as great a triumph as knowledge & ingenuity could possibly achieve
on such a question. Certainly nothing can be at first sight more
entirely unplausible than his theory & yet after beginning by thinking
it impossible, one arrives at something like an actual belief in it, &
one certainly does not relapse into complete disbelief.

Another book I have been reading is Baden Powell’s last,4 which though
much inferior to Darwin is a wonderful book for a clergyman & an Oxford
professor5 to write, & remarkable as an exemplification of one form of
modern Edition: current; Page: [696] theism. It is curious to see
natural theology reverting to the form in which it was conceived by
Aristotle6—that it is not what cannot be predicted, but what can, that
proves an intelligent agency. There is in Powell’s otherwise very
consistent system an awkward gap at the point where this doctrine comes
face to face with historical Xtianity. What can he mean by holding that
miracles are impossible, & yet that those of the new testament may be
received as matters of faith, though not of science?7 Is this last a
mere saving clause, as when Voltaire said nearly the same thing?8 If so,
he must intend it to be seen through, as Voltaire did. But the general
tone of his mind, so unlike Voltaire’s, makes this improbable.

When you next write I hope to hear that you have quite got rid of your
lameness.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 4th [Sept., 1860]

William Ellis

Ellis, William

457.


TO WILLIAM ELLIS

[The Letter to William Ellis originally numbered in the sequence here as
from Avignon on May 1, 1860, has been transferred to the following year
as Letter 488A.]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 9. 1860

Barcelona

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

458.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Barcelona

May 9. 1860

Dear Sir

On returning here after a tour of more than a fortnight I found your
letter—and I inclose a few sentences by way of reply to your circular.2
I hope they may suffice, though they are not so good as I could wish,
having been written when I was tired and somewhat pressed for time. I am
very glad Edition: current; Page: [697] that Lord Grey has got his
Committee.3 It enables you, with a favorable Chairman, to bring forward
the whole subject with advantages which you might have waited long for.

The mention of your plan in the H. of Commons both by Bulwer4 and by
Walter5 will also do good, notwithstanding the disparaging remarks of
the latter. As you observe, he rather misses the matter in saying that I
think a proposition has only to be logically proved in order to be
universally agreed to. What I do think is that when a thing is
“logically proved,” it is the duty of whoever sees that it is so, to
stand up for it, whether it is likely to be agreed to or not. This,
however, is a view of obligation which M.P.’s and journalists, being “of
the day daily” cannot be expected to understand.

I shall be anxious to hear from you. Please direct Poste Restante
Perpignan, Pyrénées Orientales, till further notice.

Ever yrs truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 9. 1860

Barcelona

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

459.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Barcelona

May 9. 1860

.

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge your letter requesting that I will state my
impression respecting the causes of the much greater proportion of
parliamentary electors who abstain from exercising the franchise in the
large than in the small constituencies.

I am unable to answer this question from experience of my own individual
feelings and conduct; since, however imperfectly any of the candidates
who offered themselves may have represented my political opinions
considered generally, I have not felt myself released from the
obligation of voting for that one of them who had most in common with
me. But so far as I can form Edition: current; Page: [698] any judgment
from the probabilities of the case, and from such opportunities of
observation as I have had, I should say that the causes which induce a
very great proportion of voters in the numerous constituencies to
neglect the exercise of the franchise, are principally two, viz.

1. In the case of the uneducated a habitual indifference to politics,
unless in times of great popular excitement, or when some question
affecting their class interests or feelings is at stake, or unless they
expect to be, in some shape or other, paid for their votes, which they
often can be in the smallest, but seldom in the larger constituencies.

2. In the case of the educated, a conviction that any candidate who, in
any sufficient degree, represented their sentiments, would not have the
smallest chance of being elected. And this state of things is likely, I
apprehend, to be permanent, in all constituencies of which the majority
are uneducated and give their votes freely; so long as, by an omission
in our Constitution as iniquitous as it is impolitic, minorities are
denied the right to which they are equally entitled with majorities, of
being represented in proportion to their numbers.

I am
 Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Thomas Hare Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 12. 1860

Barcelona

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

460.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Barcelona

May 12. 1860

Dear Mr Fawcett

I have not yet acknowledged two interesting letters from you, dated the
10th and 17th of April. The last I only received a day or two ago, on
returning here from making the circuit of Valencia, Madrid, and
Saragossa. It gave me much pleasure to hear that your lecture2 was so
successful. It is a great encouragement. Respecting Mr Hare’s plan,
although Massey’s3 move has come to nothing, and I suppose Capt. Gordon4
has abandoned his projected motion, there have been several incidents
that are very favourable. The mention Edition: current; Page: [699] by
Bulwer and even that by Walter in the H. of Commons5 will be extremely
useful, and Lord Grey’s Committee with the prospect of Mr Hare’s being
examined,6 is one of the most fortunate things which could have
happened. I received the pamphlet7 but I am sorry to say the Globe8
miscarried. From what you say of it however, there seems to be good
fortune in that quarter too. Any newspaper of good circulation which
takes up the plan, stamps it in the opinion of commonplace people as at
any rate not Utopian, quoiqu’en dise Mr Walter. I still think the two
parties will patch up something this year!9 The Lords will alter the
bill, and the Commons will accept it altered. Your list of provisions
for a temporary Reform Bill is very good, but who will support it?
unless Lord Stanley or Pakington take it into their heads that it would
be a good compromise, and I fear even they could not carry their party
with them. Jones10 I believe to be quite incapable of having a
fundamentally new, and at the same time true, idea in Political Economy.
His merit was that he called attention to the great variety in the
tenures of land as affecting the laws of distribution.

Please direct for the present to Perpignan (Pyrénées Orientales) Poste
Restante.

yrs vry truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 19, 1860

Amélie les Bains

John Nichol

Nichol, John

461.


TO JOHN NICHOL1

Amélie les Bains

Pyrénées Orientales

May 19, 1860

Dear Sir

Your letter of April 12 has only just reached me here, and the volume2
you mention has not been forwarded. As I expect to be in England in July
I Edition: current; Page: [700] will not expose your book to the risk of
loss at the little post office of this remote corner of France. When I
return, I will lose no time in reading it. I regret that my absence
prevented my seeing you when you were in London, but I hope that I may
have at no distant time another opportunity. If, in the meantime, there
is anything I can do that would serve you, my publisher Mr Parker (445
West Strand) will forward any letter. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 10 juin 1860

Ax (Ariège)

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

462.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Ax (Ariège)

le 10 juin 1860

Mon cher Monsieur—

Votre bonne et intéressante lettre m’a suivi jusqu’à cet endroit
charmant, digne d’une plus grande célébrité qu’il n’a encore acquise.

Il est vrai, comme vous dites, que l’Angleterre n’a plus à lutter contre
la tyrannie ou la compression officielle, et en cela elle est sans doute
plus avancée que la France—mais de même que beaucoup d’autres progrès,
celui-ci promet plus qu’il ne tient. L’opinion a hérité de toutes les
autres tyrannies. Son joug paraît léger, parce qu’on ne songe pas
ordinairement à lutter contre lui. Il est entré dans les âmes. Tout se
fait chez nous par contrainte morale. On trouve tant de petits obstacles
à sortir de la voie commune en quoi que ce soit, que peu de monde le
fait même en théorie, et il est presque impossible de le faire en
pratique. Les classes supérieures, soit par leur position, soit par leur
intelligence, n’y songent pas plus que les autres, et c’est ce qui fait
que je ne fonde pas sur ces classes autant d’espérance que vous semblez
le faire. Toutefois il y a en Angleterre beaucoup de choses qui semblent
mortes, mais qui ne font que dormir, et qui sont capables de s’éveiller;
témoin la renaissance de l’esprit militaire,2 qui peut-être ne
contribuera pas peu à fausser les calculs de l’homme qui gouverne
actuellement la France.

Edition: current; Page: [701]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 18. 1860

Bagnères de Luchon

George W. Hastings

Hastings, George W.

463.


TO GEORGE W. HASTINGS1

Bagnères de Luchon

June 18. 1860

Sir

Allow me, through you, to offer my grateful acknowledgments to the
Council of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science,
for the honour they have done me in nominating me to the distinguished
office of President of the Social Economy Department for the next annual
meeting of the Association.2 I am, however, under the necessity of
declining that honour, as I have occupations in hand which will require
all my time and attention during the ensuing autumn; and I feel assured
that the Association will have no difficulty in finding some one much
better qualified to preside over its deliberations than a person of my
little experience in such matters. I am Sir

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

G. W. Hastings Esq.
 &c &c &c

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 14. [1860]

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

464.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

July 14. [1860]

Dear Sir

I am glad of the prospect you hold out of my seeing you next week in
London. I shall be happy to meet you any day and hour that you may do me
the favour to appoint.

Your pamphlet2 (which I liked very much) was so far from having
miscarried, that the one you send is the third copy I have received. I
am

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [702]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 18. [1860]

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

465.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

July 18. [1860]

Dear Sir

As I wish in any case to go to town one day this week to see Mr Hare I
will if it suits you call on you in Norfolk Street about twelve on
Friday. If I do not hear from you, I shall conclude that this
arrangement will suit you.

I look forward with much pleasure to seeing you again.

Very truly yrs

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 18 [1860]

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

466.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

July 18 [1860]

Dear Sir

I have been waiting to fix a time for calling on you until I heard on
what days Mr Fawcett will be in town. I have just heard from him and
have fixed to call on him in Norfolk Street on Friday about twelve. When
I have [seen?] him I will call at your office, but if anything should
make it inconvenient to you to see me then and there, have no scruple
about it, as I can without inconvenience come to town any other day.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 18 1860

B[lackheath] P[ark]

T. E. Cliffe Leslie

Leslie, T. E. Cliffe

467.


TO T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Aug. 18 1860

.

Dear Sir—

Your article2 has interested me very much & its main position is
unshakeable, but I suspect we shd differ greatly on a subject into which
you Edition: current; Page: [703] do not enter, that of the limitations.
Though you do not say so, the whole of your reasoning seems to converge
to the conclusion that all Europe (if not the whole human race) will
some time or other be brought under one government. That there may one
day be a kind of loose federation among the countries of Europe, & a
common tribunal to decide their differences, is likely enough. But as
for actual incorporation, when there is not identity of language,
literature, & historical antecedents, I see no spontaneous tendency to
it, nor any likelihood of its being brought about but by that which has
produced it heretofore, viz. conquest, which of all tendencies we ought
most to execrate.

As you asked me to do so I have made two or three brief notes on
particular passages

(a) I would omit the reference to [Roussillon?].3 Réunion does not in
French necessarily mean reuniting but simply uniting [. . . ?]

(b) Would it not be better to omit Nice & Savoy, or at least to refer to
them in a manner which would not recognize their union with France as an
accomplished & irrevocable fact?4

(c) These rivers & mountains do not form any conceivable system of
natural boundaries5

(d) Kilometre stones are not milestones & I doubt if St Denis is so much
as four miles from Paris.6

(e) The bracketed passage is only true in a very strained sense.

The generalities of Buckle’s7 theory are very vulnerable, & I hardly
think he could have held by them if any competent person had criticized
them before publication. He could have afforded to part with most of
them, for the Edition: current; Page: [704] premisses are much broader
than was required to support his conclusions, & it is exactly in this
unnecessary margin & overplus of premisses that, as it seems to me, the
error lies.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 17, 1863

Blackheath Park

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

468.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK

[Originally an excerpt from E. T. Cook, The Life of Florence Nightingale
(2 vols., London, 1914), was to appear at this point. In the course of
printing, however, the full MS has been located. The complete text,
correctly dated, is to be found as letter 440A in Appendix II.]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 4th [Sept., 1860]

Sandwich

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

469.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Sandwich

Tuesday evg 4th [Sept., 1860]

Dearest Lily—

We have got here from Canterbury today, having spent eight hours on
foot, walking and botanizing, besides seeing Canterbury Cathedral &
Richborough by the way. Though these two days journeys were by far the
least promising botanically speaking, of our whole route, we have found
a great many plants, and though there is not yet much that is quite new
to me, I have filled up an immense number of the gaps in my Kent Flora.
But the greatest treat was Canterbury Cathedral. I had not the remotest
idea that it was so magnificent. We must go and see it together. It is
nearly as fine as the fine foreign cathedrals. The time has passed very
pleasantly. Mr Irvine2 is a very agreeable companion and seems to me
very sensible and right thinking and feeling on things in general; and
with the novelty to me of botanizing with a good botanist & the quantity
of botany I learn, no excursion that we do not make together could pass
more pleasantly. Tomorrow we shall have a botanical exploration of this
very rich neighbourhood, and I expect to get many novelties. We shall I
suppose be at Deal tomorrow night and at Dover the next. I shall write
to you either tomorrow or next day, probably the latter, as there is a
great deal to be done tomorrow & I may be too tired. I am writing this
previously to having a ‘meat tea’which is going to be an ordinary
regimen. Edition: current; Page: [705] N. B. We were out at six this
morning, for two hours before breakfast, and shall do the same tomorrow.
ever dearest Lily your affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday [Sept. 6, 1860]

Royal George Folkestone

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

470.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Royal George Folkestone

Thursday evening [Sept. 6, 1860]

Dearest Lily—

We arrived here at ¼ to 9 tonight, having been on our legs since ¼ past
9 in the morning, besides a short walk before breakfast. So you see we
do not lose time. Yesterday and today have been splendid days of walking
& botanizing; yesterday was equal in number of new plants to almost any
day I ever had even on the Continent & today not very much inferior. I
had no idea that Kent was so rich or that there could be such botanizing
in it. What contributes as much to make it pleasant is the very great
pleasure Mr Irvine takes in it. The country is all new to him and he
says he never had so pleasant & altogether so successful an excursion.
We expect two more equally good days at Sandgate, Hithe, &c. and in
Romney Marsh. I suppose we shall stop tomorrow night at Hithe & have a
walk next day before returning to town, but I will write again to tell
you for certain at what hour on Saturday I shall arrive. Though the
journey is so pleasant I look forward with the greatest pleasure to
returning to you and resuming our home life, first at Blackheath,
afterwards and better at St Véran. I do not half like amusing myself
while you are not even quiet, but fatigued and bored—but I shall soon be
back dear. I will not write any more now I have written this to be sure
of being in time for tonight’s post, as soon as we arrived, or rather as
soon as the bag arrived, which this time was later than we were, though
we were so late.

ever your affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 9. 1860

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

471.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Sept. 9. 1860

Dear Sir

I was very glad to hear from you, and to read your MS.2 Not having seen
the paper by Dr Whewell to which it replies I cannot judge how far it is
a Edition: current; Page: [706] sufficient answer to the particular mode
in which he puts the argument. But at all events it contains a great
deal of the matter out of which the answer must be made, and I am glad
that Macmillan desires a paper of the kind. I have put down a few notes
which occurred to me in reading it, but there are none of them to which
I attach importance except the one marked (h.)

I return the MS. by this post.

I hope you may not be disappointed in your anticipations of getting some
notice taken at Glasgow3 of Mr Hare’s plan.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 10, 1860

Blackheath

Florence Nightingale

Nightingale, Florence

472.


TO FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE1

Blackheath

Sept. 10, 1860

Dear Madam—

Your note should have been answered sooner, but I was from home when it
arrived.

I should most willingly do my best to be of use to you in the matter
which you speak of, if you think that I am a suitable person to be
consulted about a work of the kind. In one respect indeed I am very well
fitted to test the efficacy of your treatise,2 since I probably stand as
much in need of conversion Edition: current; Page: [707] as those to
whom it is addressed. If in spite of this (or perhaps all the more on
that account) you would like me to read and give my opinion on it, I
will do so with much pleasure.

I am very happy to hear from yourself that you did not mean to convey
impressions which I still think the words of the concluding passage of
your Notes are calculated to give.3 I did not myself think you could
possibly mean it, since in the same passage you also seem to imply that
women should not be excluded by law or usage from the liberty of trying
any mode of existence open to men, at their own risk in case of failure.
But as the advocates of the “rights of women” contend for no more; and
are even, in general, ready to make what appear to me far too great
concessions as to the comparative unfitness of women for some
occupations, I do not think they can justly be accused of jargon, nor of
contending that women ought to do certain things merely because men do
them.

Believe me
 Dear Madam
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 19, 1860

Blackheath

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

473.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

[After
Sept. 19, 1860

]

Your letter of September 19 gave me much pleasure, because it contained
better and more encouraging accounts of your health, and also because it
Edition: current; Page: [708] said that things were likely to be made
pleasanter to you at the India House by changes in the mode of
transacting business.2 I shall be greatly interested by hearing more of
these changes, since, as you are aware, I think that the practical
goodness of a government depends, much more than is generally supposed,
on the forms of business. It is a comfort to hear of any changes for the
better. Unfortunately, the deteriorations in the structure of the
instrument of Government in detail, which I always feared would follow
from the substitution of the traditions of the Government Offices for
those of the India House,3 seem to be taking place still more rapidly
than I looked for. If the Council at Calcutta is to be abolished, and a
Cabinet of Secretaries put in its place, as the newspapers say, and as
is too probable, the change will be almost fatal: for the Members of
Council are the only high administrative Officers not dependent on the
will of the Governor-General, and their Minutes are the only Channel
through which an independent and ungarbled opinion necessarily reaches
the home authorities. The difficulties of governing India have so much
increased, while there is less and less wisdom employed in doing it,
that I begin to despair of the whole subject, and almost believe that we
are at the beginning of the end.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 23. 1860

Blackheath

Florence Nightingale

Nightingale, Florence

474.


TO FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE1

Blackheath

Sept. 23. 1860

Dear Madam—

I have read your Treatise,2 or rather the portion of it which you did me
the honour of sending to me. If any part of your object in sending it
was to know my opinion as to the desirableness of its being published, I
have no difficulty in giving it strongly in the affirmative. There is
much in the work which is calculated to do good to many persons besides
the artisans to whom it is more especially addressed.3 In point of
arrangement indeed, of condensation, and of giving as it were, a keen
edge to the argument, it would have been much benefitted by the
recasting which you have been prevented from giving to it by a cause4 on
all other accounts so much to be lamented. Edition: current; Page: [709]
This, however, applies more to the general mode of laying out the
argument, than to the details.

With regard to the substance of the book, it is scarcely necessary to
say that there is very much of it with which I am in entire agreement
and strong sympathy, and when I am not, I neither have any desire to
shake your own conviction, if I could suppose myself capable of doing
so, nor should I regret the adoption of the same creed by any one to
whose intellect and feelings it may be able to recommend itself. It
would be a great moral improvement to most persons, be they Christians,
Deists, or Atheists, if they firmly believed the world to be under the
government of a Being who, willing only good, leaves evil in the world
solely in order to stimulate the human faculties by an unremitting
struggle against every form of it. In regard however to the effect on my
own mind, will you forgive me for saying, that your mode of reconciling
the world as we see it with the government of a Perfect Being, though
less sophistical than the common modes, and not having as they have the
immoral effect of consecrating any forms of avoidable evil as purposes
of God, does not, to my apprehension, at all help to remove the
difficulty? I tried what I could do with that hypothesis many years ago;
that a Perfect Being could do everything except make another perfect
being—that the next thing to it was to make a perfectible one—and that
perfection could only be achieved by a struggle against evil. But then,
a Perfect Being—limited only by this condition, might be expected so to
form the world that the struggle against evil should be the greatest
possible in extent & intensity; and unhappily our world conforms as
little to this character, as to that of a world without evil. If the
Divine intention in making man was Effort towards Perfection, the divine
purpose is as much frustrated as if its sole aim were human happiness.
There is a little of both, but the absence of both is the marked
characteristic.

I confess that no religious theory seems to me consistent with the facts
of the universe, except (in some form or other) the old one of the two
principles. There are many signs, in the structure of the universe, of
an intelligent Power wishing well to man and other sentient creatures. I
could however shew, not so many perhaps, but quite as decided
indications of an intelligent Power or Powers with the contrary
propensity. But (not to insist on this) the will of the benevolent Power
must find, either in its own incompleteness or in some external
circumstances, very serious obstacles to the entire fulfilment of the
benevolent purpose. It may be, that the world is a battlefield between a
good and a bad power or powers, and that mankind may be capable by
sufficiently strenuous cooperation with the good power, of deciding, or
at least accelerating, its final victory. I know one man, of great
intelligence & high moral principle, who finds satisfaction to his
devotional feelings, and support under the evils of life, in the belief
of this creed.

Edition: current; Page: [710]
Another point on which I cannot agree with you is the opinion that Law,
in the sense in which we predicate it of the arrangements of Nature, can
only emanate from a Will. This doctrine seems to me to rest solely on
the double meaning of the word Law, though that double meaning cannot be
more completely and clearly stated than you have done. It is much more
natural to the human mind to see a divine will in those events in which
it has not yet recognized inflexible constancy of sequence, than in
those in which it has. No doubt, this instinctive notion is erroneous;
and Will is in its own nature as regular a phenomenon, as much a subject
of law, as anything else; but it does seem rather odd that
unchangeableness should be the one thing which, to account for its
existence, must be referred to a will; Will being, within the limits of
our experience, the thing of all others most liable to change. Indeed it
cannot be unchangeable unless combined with omnipotence, or at all
events with omniscience.

With all that you say in affirmation of the universality of Law, and in
refutation of the objections on the subject of Free Will and Necessity,
I need hardly say how heartily I agree.

I have made a few cursory remarks in the margin of your book, but what I
have now said is the chief part of what I had to say. I do not yet
return the volume because, unless what I have said of it takes away your
desire to shew me any more of the book, I hope to see the remainder. If
so however it should be soon, as I shall leave England for the Continent
in about a week.

I have not time or space left to say much on the other subject of our
correspondence.5 My opinion of the medical profession is not, I dare
say, higher than yours. But it would be dealing very rigorously with the
M.D.’s of whom you have so low an opinion, to expect that they should
already have made any improvement in medical practice. Neither, when we
consider how rare first-rate minds are, was it to be expected, on the
doctrine of chances, that the first two or three women who take up
medicine should be more than what you say they are, third rate. It is to
be expected that they will be pupils at first, & not masters. But the
medical profession like others must be reformed Edition: current; Page:
[711] from within, under whatever stimulus from without; & it surely has
more chance of being so, the more the entrance to it is widened. Neither
does the moral right of women to admission into the profession, at all
depend on the likelihood of their being the first to reform it. On this
point, however, we are agreed.

I am Dear Madam
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 4 1860

Blackheath Park

Florence Nightingale

Nightingale, Florence

475.


TO FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE1

Blackheath Park

Oct. 4 1860

Dear Madam—

I should have been very sorry to miss reading the sequel of your book.2
If when I had only read the first volume I was very desirous that it
should be published, I am much more so after reading the second, as the
exhibition it contains of what life is in this country among the classes
in easy circumstances, being so earnestly and feelingly, and many parts
of it so forcibly done, and so evidently the result of personal
observation is at once a testimony that ought not to be lost, & an
appeal of an unusually telling kind on a subject which it is very
difficult to induce people to open their eyes to. And though the things
into which are put the best of one’s heart & mind never do all the good
which, to one’s own feelings, seems to lie in them, few books have a
better chance than this of doing some good, and that too in a variety of
ways. I should not feel any doubt about it if the book were published
with your name. Indeed, the mere fact that these are the opinions of
such a woman as all the world knows you to be, is a fact which it would
be of as much use to the world to know, as almost anything which could
at this time be told to it.

I have seldom felt less inclined to criticize than in reading this book;
and moreover I have said in my former letter the substance of nearly all
the criticism I should have to make. There is however a new point of
difference between us, sufficiently a matter of principle to be worth
mentioning to you. In one, and only one of your inferences from the
doctrine (improperly called) of necessity, I do not agree; it is when
you say that there ought to be no punishment (only reformatory
discipline) and even no blame. It seems to me that on the principles of
your Treatise, retaliation from others for injuries consciously and
intentionally done them, is one of these natural consequences Edition:
current; Page: [712] of ill doing, which you yourself hold to be the
proper discipline both of the individual and of the race. With many
minds, punishment is the only one of the natural consequences of guilt,
which is capable of making any impression on them. In such cases,
punishment is the sole means available for beginning the reformation of
the criminal; and the fear of similar punishment is the only inducement
which deters many really no better than himself from doing acts to
others which would not only deprive them of their own happiness, but
thwart all their attempts to do good to themselves & others. With regard
to the legitimacy of resentment: a thoroughly evil will, though I well
know that it does not come into existence without a cause, seems to me
not the less on that account an object of aversion; and a strong
indignation against wrong is so inseparable from any strong personal
feeling on the subject of wrong and right, that it does not seem to me
possible, even if desirable, to get rid of the one, without, to a great
degree, losing the other. I write these things for your consideration,
and not as pretending to lay down the law on the subject to any one,
much less to you.

My address while abroad will be Saint-Véran, près Avignon, Vaucluse,
France, and I am very far from wishing that you should do as Frederic’s
General said he would.3

I have returned your Treatise today by the Book Post. I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6 Nov. 1860

S. Véran

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

476.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

S. Véran

6 Nov. 1860

Mon cher M. Villari—

Voici bien longtemps que je n’ai pas reçu de vos nouvelles quoique ce
soit moi qui ai écrit la dernière lettre. Ce m’est toujours un grand
plaisir d’avoir une lettre de vous et je le désire d’autant plus car
dans un temps comme celui-ci,2 on ne sait jamais à quel endroit un
patriote Edition: current; Page: [713] Italien peut s’être porté ni dans
quelle situation il est. Je voudrais aussi m’entretenir avec vous sur
les grands événements de cette année. Vous aviez bien prédit l’année
passée que les Italiens feraient aujourd’hui de plus grandes choses
qu’en 1848, bien que celles-là suffisent assurément pour la gloire
éternelle de ceux qui y ont pris part. Vous avez le droit d’être fier de
votre pays: aussi est-il, comme vous voyez admiré par l’Europe et les
Anglais même qui sont difficiles en cette matière le reconnaissent comme
digne d’être libre. Il est vrai que ceux, qui ont tout préparé pendant
dix ans, qui ont entretenu le feu sacré par les seuls moyens alors
practicables, Mazzini et ses amis, n’éprouvent pas encore la justice
qu’ils méritent.3 Cela était inévitable, et ils ont, je crois, assez de
grandeur d’âme pour s’y résigner. Je sais par ma propre expérience,
ayant toujours avoué sur bien des sujets des opinions qu’on appelle
extrêmes, que ce sont ceux-là qui font accepter par les gens de la foule
les opinions avancées immédiatement praticables, en leur donnant la
satisfaction de se croire dans le juste milieu, et d’avoir d’autres sur
qui se décharger du reproche d’être des exaltés ou des exagérés.
Maintenant l’avenir est à vous, pourvu toutefois que vous ne provoquiez
pas un conflit prématuré avec l’Autriche,4 dans des conditions où vous
ne pourriez vaincre que par l’appui d’une puissance étrangère. Peutêtre
le prix que cette puissance a exigé de son intervention en 18595 a été
presque vrai bonheur pour l’Italie, en la dégageant de tout lien de
reconnaissance et en ôtant à un monarque absolu l’influence que, plus
désintéressé en apparence, il eût obtenue sur l’esprit public de votre
pays. C’est à l’œuvre d’organisation que je vous attends maintenant. Il
y aura de grandes difficultés à la fusion de tant de peuples, tous
Italiens, mais différents par leurs antécédents et par leurs mœurs; et
de plus grandes encore à la profonde rénovation morale dont la
population de la moitié méridionale de l’Italie a besoin. Mais vous avez
aussi de grandes ressources dans l’enthousiasme général, dans le
prestige d’un grand homme,6 dans celui d’un roi fidèle à la liberté,7 et
surtout dans le génie Italien qui à aucune époque n’a manqué quelque
déplorable que fût d’ailleurs la situation. L’année prochaine sera pour
ceux qui pensent, un chapitre de l’histoire tout aussi intéressant que
celle qui vient de s’écouler. J’ai grande confiance dans le bon sens
dont la partie avancée de l’Italie a fait preuve dans les circonstances
présentes, et dans la haute capacité gouvernementale qui a toujours été
moins rare en Italie qu’ailleurs.

Si cette lettre vous parvient, donnez moi je vous prie, de vos nouvelles
et croyez toujours à mon dévouement et à ma véritable sympathie.

Edition: current; Page: [714]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 10. 1860

Saint Véran

Frederick J. Furnivall

Furnivall, Frederick J.

477.


TO FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL1

Saint Véran

near Avignon

Dec. 10. 1860

.

Dear Sir

I would with great pleasure accede to your proposal with respect to a
reprint of the chapter on the Futurity of the Labouring Classes for
separate sale,2 if it rested with me to do so. The current edition
however of the Pol. Economy is the property of the publisher Mr Parker,
and he alone has the power of authorizing what you propose. Your
application therefore should be to him, unless you prefer waiting till
the present edition is out of print, which it is likely to be, I
believe, in a few months. I propose making some additions to the chapter
for another edition,3 so as to bring up the facts of Cooperation to the
latest date, and if I have anything to say worth saying in the way of
advice to Cooperators, that will be, I think, the most suitable
occasion.

I am very glad to hear such good news of the progress of Cooperation.
The publicity given to the brilliant results of the Rochdale and Leeds
experiments, by Mr Holyoake’s book,4 Mr Bright’s speech,5 and otherwise,
was likely to encourage others to do the same. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 24 Décembre 1860

Saint Véran, Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

478.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 24 Décembre 1860

Mon cher Monsieur

Votre lettre m’est parvenue en même temps que la traduction,2 et si j’ai
un peu tardé à y répondre, je vous prie de n’en accuser que mes
occupations, car je ne cesse pas de travailler à de nouveaux écrits.

Edition: current; Page: [715]
Je ne connais pas de traduction où l’on se soit plus consciencieusement
occupé de rendre le sens de l’auteur, non seulement dans toute son
exactitude mais dans toute sa force. Cela vaut infiniment mieux qu’une
paraphrase fidèle et élégante mais plate, et je vous en sais on ne peut
pas plus de gré. Il y a tout au plus cinq ou six endroits où il y a eu
de légers malentendus sur le sens de telle ou telle phrase, que je dois
attribuer à un défaut de clarté dans l’expression, et qui, du reste,
sont très peu importants. Il n’y a que la division en alinéas qui laisse
à désirer, et je devine que je dois m’en prendre là dessus à
l’imprimeur.

Quant à la préface, j’avais senti qu’elle devait être surtout une
critique. Est-il besoin de dire que non seulement je ne m’en plains
pas—mais que je l’eûsse au besoin provoquée? Les termes flatteurs dont
vous vous servez à mon égard suffiraient pour contenter un amour-propre
beaucoup plus exigeant que le mien, et le fait même qu’avec les
divergences que vous indiquez, vous avez assez bonne opinion de
l’ouvrage pour prendre la peine de le traduire, est lui-même un
compliment qui en vaut bien d’autres. Je trouve, au reste, que les
grandes reserves que j’ai faites pour les cas où l’on se sert de sa
liberté d’une manière nuisible aux autres, répondent suffisamment à une
grande partie de vos observations. Je me sens un peu tenté de prendre ma
revanche en rendant compte dans quelque revue anglaise de vos deux
ouvrages.3 Les questions qui ne peuvent se vuider que par de grandes
concessions de part et d’autre, sont celles qui gagnent le plus à une
discussion assez prolongée pour devenir serrée.

J’espère, mon cher Monsieur, que nous pourrons causer sur ces matières
et sur d’autres en peu de temps, car je me rends en Angleterre au mois
prochain. Ce ne sera pas avant le jour que vous désignez pour votre
départ de Fontainebleau, mais selon toute probabilité ce sera bientôt
après. En attendant donc de vous retrouver à Paris, croyez bien à la
sincérité de mon estime et de mon dévouement.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 24. 1860

Saint Véran

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

479.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran

Dec. 24. 1860

Dear Mr Fawcett

I was unwilling to write to you while all your time and thoughts were
required for the contest in Southwark,2 and I have not had time to write
any Edition: current; Page: [716] letters since the election until
today. I shall be most desirous to hear from you vivâ voce when I come
to England, all that there must be to tell. At present I only know what
I have read in the Times,3 or rather in the Evening Mail.4 From that,
although evidently not favourable to you, I can see that a great point
has been gained, that you have made a very favourable impression
generally, and that people are familiarized with the idea of you as a
candidate. The compliments paid you, and the great support you received,
will tell much more for you at any future election, than the preference
given by the majority to a more known man5 will tell against you. He
little deserves the preference, for his public conduct has always seemed
to me anything but honorable to him. Still it is some credit to the
Southwark people to have preferred a celebrity, though a second or third
rate one, to a local or pothouse candidate, and to have elected him free
of expense. You must have done considerable good by standing on the
footing of no expenses,6 and going about speaking to them in the way you
did. I was all the while wishing greatly that I could have helped you,
but I have no power of helping anybody with electors. You will be your
own best helper if you go on making yourself known by well-considered
writings. I shall like much to see the articles you mention in your last
letter.7 I left England at the very beginning of October without having
seen Macmillan for that month, but when I return I will make a point of
seeing all the numbers which contain anything of yours.

I have not been idle since I came here. I have two things finished,8 one
of them a considerable volume and have made good progress with a third.9
I wish, when I leave this world, to carry as few of my thoughts away
with me as I can; therefore I go on writing even what I do not mean to
publish at present. I expect to be in England soon after the middle of
January, when I shall hope for an early opportunity of seeing you.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [717]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 24. 1860

Saint Véran

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

480.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran

Dec. 24. 1860

.

Dear Sir

I am surprised to find on referring to your letter, how long I have
suffered it to remain unanswered. I received your paper in the
Statistical Society’s Journal,2 and was very much pleased with it. On
the point raised by Mr Hickson I do not exactly recollect all the
reasons he gave. I think the chief of them was, that if a voter was
allowed to put down an indefinite number of names, he would generally
put the latter part of his list at random, or insert the name desired by
anybody who asked him. I do not think this argument valid against such
strong reasons as those which tell the other way; but it seems worth
considering, not with a view of limiting the contingent votes to a small
number, but perhaps of limiting them to tens instead of hundreds. All
that occurs to anybody on the details of the subject is worth bringing
before you as a suggestion for your judgment. It is necessary to look
forward to many unfavorable contingencies, for the purpose of contriving
the best means of obviating them. For all means will be used to thwart
the benefits of the plan. Political parties, as they now have their
candidates, will then have their lists of candidates, to catch the
contingent votes. These they will make as long as the law allows,
putting the names in the order of their importance to the party: and it
is a question whether the unlimited number of votes does not give an
advantage to the mere party voters who will vote for the whole list of
the party, over the independent thinkers who, besides that they will be
divided among themselves, will only find a limited number for whom they
can vote with thought and conscience. Does not this seem worth thinking
of? I have little doubt that whatever your ultimate judgment may be on
the matter, you will have sufficient reason for it. I am

very truly yours,

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [718]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1860

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

481.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

[
1860

]

[Here is an interesting remark in a letter to Thornton, in 1860.
Thornton had been to see Oxford, and Mill recalls his own visit twenty
years before, and says—]

In that same holiday2 I completed the first draft of my Logic, and had,
for the first time, the feeling that I had now actually accomplished
something—that one certain portion of my life’s work was done.

Edition: current; Page: [719]


1861

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan.15.1861

S[aint] V[éran]

Gustave De Beaumont

Beaumont, Gustave De

482.


TO GUSTAVE DE BEAUMONT1

S[aint] V[éran]

Jan.15.1861

Mon cher Beaumont—

Je viens d’achever la lecture de la correspondance et des opuscules et
fragments inédits de Tocqueville.2 J’y ai trouvé à chaque pas de
nouvelles preuves de sa haute valeur comme homme et comme esprit, et de
la perte irréparable que l’humanité a faite par sa mort prématurée.3 Si
même il nous eût été épargné jusqu’à la complétion de son deuxième grand
ouvrage!4 A ce propos vous me pardonnerez j’espère, si j’exprime un
regret qui, à ce que je crois, sera général, de ce que vous avez poussé
un scrupule, d’ailleurs très louable, jusqu’à ne vouloir rien imprimer
qui n’eût absolument reçu la dernière touche de l’auteur. Je sais bien
la conscience que mettait notre ami à ne donner au public l’expression
de sa pensée qu’après qu’il l’eût amenée à la dernière perfection qu’il
se sentait capable d’y donner; mais autre chose est de reserver un écrit
pour le rendre plus parfait, et autre de vouloir qu’il soit supprimé
lorsque le sort a ordonné que le perfectionnement ne puisse plus avoir
lieu. Les brouillons même d’un penseur et d’un observateur comme
Tocqueville seraient d’un prix inappréciable pour les penseurs à venir,
et à moins qu’il ne s’y soit opposé de son vivant, il me semble qu’il
n’y aurait pas d’inconvénient à publier ses manuscrits imparfaits en ne
les donnant que pour ce qu’ils sont et en conservant scrupuleusement
toutes les indications d’une intention de revenir sur un morceau
quelconque et d’en soumettre les idées à une vérification ultérieure.

Quant à la correspondance je me réjouis d’apprendre que la partie sans
doute très considérable, qui ne pourrait être imprimée quant à présent,
est Edition: current; Page: [720] toute prête à l’être en temps
convenable.5 Ce que vous en avez pu donner est d’une grande valeur par
lui-même, et encore plus en faisant connaître ce qu’a été l’homme.
Quelle idée ne se fait-on pas de la face d’intelligence et de la haute
vertu de celui qui a su se maintenir comme penseur et comme écrivain
dans une élévation si sereine et si impartiale audessus de toutes les
misères de notre temps, quand on vient à apprendre que cet esprit si
calme n’était rien moins que calme par nature et par tempérament, qu’il
était d’un type tout opposé et que cela même faisait la plus grande
souffrance de sa vie. C’est une consolation pour ceux à qui sa mémoire
est chère, qu’il fut heureux dans sa famille, qu’il eut des amis vrais,
et qu’il fut apprécié de son vivant autant que cela puisse jamais
arriver à un homme très audessus du vulgaire par l’esprit et par les
sentiments.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 1, 1861

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

483.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 1, 1861

Dear Chadwick

It is long since I have read anything on the subject of Education which
impressed me so much as the facts and ideas contained in your letter to
Senior,2 and I wish they were in the hands of every reading and thinking
person in the country. Among several points of great practical
importance which you have made out by an irresistible weight of
evidence, two appear to me to stand in the very highest rank: the
equality, if not superiority, in attainments & intelligence, of the
short time pupils over the others; and the immense advantage, both in
efficiency & economy of large over small school districts. These results
of experience, the first of which was so unexpected as to amount to a
discovery, afford the means of overcoming the two principal obstacles to
the efforts of the Government and of individuals for the improvement of
popular education, namely, the early withdrawal of the children from
school owing to the demand of parents for their labour, and the
impossibility of obtaining, or, if obtained, of keeping, schoolmasters
of a high average of excellence. You have put it in the power of any
Education Minister who avails himself of the results of your inquiries,
to elevate the general standard of popular improvement to a height &
with a rapidity which have hitherto Edition: current; Page: [721] seemed
quite hopeless. Too much cannot be done to give publicity to matter so
valuable. I am

Dear Chadwick
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 4 mars 1861

Blackheath Park

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

484.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Blackheath Park

,

Kent

le 4 mars 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

J’ai reçue l’Illustration2 et la Presse,3 qui sont très satisfaisantes,
et dont j’ai trop tardé à vous remercier. Quant à l’article de la Revue
des Deux Mondes,4 ne vous donnez pas la peine de l’envoyer. Je suis
abonné à la Revue. Il est vrai que je ne la reçois qu’à Avignon, mais
j’ai le moyen de la voir ici.

Je suis très sensible à l’intérêt amical que vous témoignez pour tout ce
qui peut me faire plaisir.

Je songe toujours à faire un article sur vos deux ouvrages.5 A présent
j’ai sous presse un volume sur le Gouvernement Réprésentatif, où je
m’occupe entr’autres choses de la Centralisation au point de vue du
dernier chapitre de mes Principes d’Economie Politique, auquel vous avez
bien voulu donner votre approbation.

Ma fille et moi vous prions de nous rappeler au souvenir bienveillant de
Madame Dupont-White et de Mesdemoiselles vos filles.

Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 15 mars 1861

Blackheath Park

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

485.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Blackheath Park

le 15 mars 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

L’article de la Revue Nationale2 est très satisfaisant en ce qui me
regarde, Edition: current; Page: [722] mais il vous traite avec
injustice, surtout quand il trouve que vous ne m’êtes pas assez
favorable. Vous m’avez traité le mieux possible, et je préfère être
présenté aux lecteurs français par un traducteur qui n’est pas un simple
partisan. En cela, je suis conséquent avec ce qui est dit dans le livre
même, sur l’avantage de mettre les opinions divergentes en face l’une de
l’autre.

L’article de M. Taine3 est un chef d’œuvre en fait de compte rendu. On
n’a jamais présenté les doctrines de mon Système de Logique avec une
intelligence aussi approfondie et un aussi parfait ensemble.

Ce que vous me dites sur l’état des esprits en France, m’intéresse
extrèmement. Malgré tous les obstacles, il me semble que les choses
prennent déjà en France un meilleur aspect. Il y a, du moins pour le
moment, une liberté de discussion véritable, et cela ne peut manquer
d’ébranler la torpeur générale qui était le plus grand fléau du régime
actuel. Si l’empereur ne se dégoûte pas de l’expérience qu’il tente en
ce moment, c’est qu’il aura pris son parti d’essayer de se réconcilier
un peu avec les amis les moins exigeants de la liberté.

Je ne me suis pas occupé du budget des cultes4 dans mon nouveau livre,
le regardant comme n’étant pas précisément une question de gouvernement
représentatif. Du reste, j’aurais de la peine à me prononcer là dessus
en thèse générale. C’est, il me semble, surtout une question de temps et
de lieu.

Veuillez offrir à Madame Dupont White et à vos demoiselles mes hommages
respectueux. Ma fille vous prie de la rappeler à leur souvenir amical.

Votre bien dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 15 mars 1861

Blackheath Park, Kent

Hippolyte Taine

Taine, Hippolyte

486.


TO HIPPOLYTE TAINE1

Blackheath Park, Kent

,

le 15 mars 1861

.

Monsieur,

Quoique je n’aie jusqu’à présent l’honneur de vous connaître que par vos
écrits, vous ne trouverez, j’espère, pas déplacé que je vous exprime la
très grande satisfaction personnelle, aussi bien qu’admiration
désintéressée, que m’a fait éprouver le compte que vous avez bien voulu
rendre de mon système de logique dans la Revue des Deux Mondes.2 On ne
saurait donner, en peu de Edition: current; Page: [723] pages, une idée
plus exacte et plus complète du contenu de ce livre, comme corps de
doctrine philosophique. J’ajoute qu’il était impossible de présenter aux
lecteurs français cet ensemble d’opinions, de manière à lui attirer
davantage leur attention, et c’est ce qui importe le plus à un penseur.

Quant à la critique que vous avez faite du point de vue psychologique
qui caractérise l’ouvrage, il ne m’appartient point de la juger.
Seulement je crois que vous vous trompez en regardant ce point de vue
comme particulièrement anglais. Il le fut dans la première moitié du
XVIIIe siècle, à partir de Locke, et jusqu’à la réaction contre Hume.
Cette réaction, commencée en Écosse, a revêtu depuis longtemps la forme
germanique, et a fini par tout envahir. Quand j’ai écrit mon livre,
j’étais à peu près seul de mon opinion; et bien que ma manière de voir
ait trouvé un degré de sympathie auquel je ne m’attendais nullement, on
compte encore en Angleterre vingt philosophes a priori et spiritualistes
contre chaque partisan de la doctrine de l’expérience. Pendant toute la
durée de notre réaction de soixante-dix ans, on a regardé ici la
philosophie de l’expérience comme française, de même que vous la
qualifiez d’anglaise. A mon avis, on s’est trompé de part et d’autre.
Les deux systèmes se suivent par la loi des réactions dans toutes les
parties du monde. En effet, l’Allemagne se tourne aujourd’hui vers la
doctrine a posteriori. Seulement les différents pays ne coïncident
exactement ni dans les révolutions ni dans les contre-révolutions.

Veuillez agréer, monsieur, l’expression de mon véritable respect et de
ma considération la plus distinguée.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 28 mars 1861

Blackheath Park

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

487.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Blackheath Park

le 28 mars 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

Rien ne me saurait être plus agréable que de vous avoir pour traducteur
de mon nouveau livre.2 Vous n’aurez qu’à vous entendre là dessus avec M.
Guillaumin, qui vient de demander et d’obtenir mon autorisation pour en
publier une traduction.

Nous sommes tous deux très sensibles aux souvenirs amicaux de votre
famille, et aux amitiés dont elle ne cesse pas de nous combler. Nous
comptons sur une prochaine visite à Fontainebleau; seulement nous
n’aurons pas le temps de nous arrêter cette fois-ci en route, ne faisant
qu’un très court séjour en France.

Edition: current; Page: [724]
Agréez, avec mes salutations amicales, l’expression de mon sincère
dévoûement.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 1 mai 1861

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

488.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

le 1 mai 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

Je vous remercie de l’envoi du Journal des Débats.2 L’article de M.
Baudrillart3 fait beaucoup d’honneur au livre, et doit servir
notablement le succès de la traduction.

Je suis charmé que vous donniez une si pleine adhésion à mon autre
livre,4 et que vous vouliez bien le traduire. Quant à la préface, je
suis sûr qu’elle n’eût pas manqué de m’être agréable, quel que fût le
nombre “de si et de mais” qu’elle pût contenir. Et quand je prendrai la
revanche dont vous parlez, j’espère bien avoir auprès de vous un succès
pareil. J’ai écrit au directeur de la Revue d’Edinbourg pour lui
proposer un article sur vos deux ouvrages.5 S’il accepte, je m’en
occuperai dès mon retour en Angleterre. Je lirais volontiers le livre de
M. Odilon-Barrot6 en vue de cet article, mais il ne me sera utile que
lorsque je commence à travailler sur la question et il vaudra mieux que
je le prenne à Londres, ou en passant par Paris.

Ma fille se rappelle au bon souvenir de Madame Dupont-White et de vos
demoiselles, et je vous prie de leur offrir mes hommages respectueux, et
de croire à mes sentiments amicaux et à mon dévouement.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 1, 186[1]

Avignon

William Ellis

Ellis, William

488A.


TO WILLIAM ELLIS1

Avignon

,
May 1, 186[1]

.

Dear Ellis,—

Your letter, which has followed me here, reminds me that I Edition:
current; Page: [725] have not yet thanked you for your last
publication.2 I have read it, as I had done all your others, with great
interest. The line of usefulness you have chosen for yourself is as
difficult and quite as important as any other, and you have given it the
dignity of an apostolate. With respect to the criticisms and suggestions
you invite, I have so little of the appropriate experience compared with
yourself, that what I can offer does not amount to much. Besides, you
are daily bringing all that you do to the best and only effectual test,
actual practice. The only criticism which occurs to me in reference to
this little book is, that the answers and remarks which you assign to
the boys might perhaps with advantage be put into more eloquent
language, knowing as I do the efficacy which your teaching possesses for
extracting from the minds of pupils thoughts which hardly anyone would
suppose them capable of. I have full faith in all that you say in the
Preface, but the scientific and somewhat recondite language in which
your boys express themselves, gives an air of improbability to the
conversations which they need not necessarily have. With regard to the
rest of your letter, I need hardly say that your approval of what I
write gives me much pleasure. I have always looked upon you as one of my
public, both for old friendship’s sake, and because you are a student of
the same subjects as myself. There are enough of people now who praise
my writings with exaggeration, without being at all competent to judge
of them. But though these are the persons I write to benefit, they are
not (it is unnecessary to say) those whose praise, unless as a means to
that object, gives me any satisfaction.

I am, dear Ellis,
 Very truly yours,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 1, 1861

S[aint] V[éran]

Henry Reeve

Reeve, Henry

489.


TO HENRY REEVE1

S[aint] V[éran]

May 1, 1861

Dear Sir—

M. Dupont White, whom you probably know, at least by reputation, has
lately published two books (or written one book in two parts) entitled
L’Individu et l’État & La Centralisation.2 These from their merit & the
sort of theoretic & scientific character which he has endeavoured to
give them Edition: current; Page: [726] afford a good occasion for
bringing the whole question of the limits of governmental action under
discussion. M. D. W. takes decidedly the governmental side, a thing now
rather uncommon among thinking men, even in France: & as the things he
says in favour of centralization are about the best that can be said for
it, there would be some use in a review3 which should concede the
portion of truth contained in them & at the same time bring forward the
still more important truths which as stated by him they contradict.

If you would like such an article from me I would try to write it, &
would send it to you some time in the course of this summer or autumn. I
could include M. Odilon Barrot’s new book on Centralisation4 if after
reading it I should find that it affords good additional material for an
article.

There are two other purposes for which I have been wishing to write to
you—one is to recommend a contributor, the other a book. The contributor
is Professor Cliffe Leslie of Belfast. He is probably already known to
you as a man of an extensive range of thought & acquirements & a clear
effective & popular writer—but he is modest & thinks he requires a
recommendation & though the offer to give him one came from myself it
was warmly accepted by him. The book which I wish to mention to you is a
new life of Savonarola by Pasquale Villari,5 professor of history at
Pisa, a valued friend of mine. Besides being a very interesting chapter
of history which contains much new information interestingly told, the
book places the character of Savonarola in a new light, shews him to
have been the most enlightened lover of liberty & one of the wisest
practical politicians of his time. A person sufficiently acquainted with
the religious & political history of Italy at that period could write a
review of it which I shd think would be very interesting to many readers
of the Edinburgh. Not having that necessary qualification I do not offer
to do it myself.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 13 1861

Address undecipherable

Jane Mill Ferraboschi

Ferraboschi, Jane Mill

490.


TO JANE MILL FERRABOSCHI1

[
Address undecipherable

]

May 13 1861

Dear Jane,

You cannot do better than place your papers in Mr Crompton’s2 hands as
he is your trustee, and you have more confidence in him than in Mr
Gregson.3 I know of no reason to distrust Mr Gregson and he still has
charge of my legal documents, but this is no reason whatever for not
putting yours in Mr Crompton’s care. You had better obtain the other
Trustee’s control and send Edition: current; Page: [727] a letter from
him requesting Mr Gregson to deliver your papers to Mr Crompton.

I was aware that you had lost your first child but I did not know that
you had now only one. I am sorry that your health is still delicate.
From

Yrs Affy,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 18. 1861

St Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

491.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

St Véran, Avignon

May 18. 1861

.

Dear Sir

I am glad that you and Mr Leslie are likely to get on well together,2
and also that you are so well pleased with my book.3 With regard to
writing an article for you, I am looking out for a subject that will
suit the Review and myself; but on Foreign Policy, I could add little,
of a general kind, to what was said in a paper I published a short time
ago in Fraser.4 The principles concerned are so mixed up with the
specialities of the cases to which they are to be applied, that they can
hardly be discussed with fruit unless à propos of some particular
application; and at the present moment the only case which offers
itself, on which people are not already agreed, is that of Turkey,5 on
which I am not master of the details, and in which (as I know by my
experience of Oriental nations) details are all-important.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yrs

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 19. 1861

St Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

492.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

St Véran, Avignon

May 19. 1861

Dear Sir

I ought to have acknowledged the receipt of Mr Nisbet’s [sic] article.2
But it came in my absence. I had not time to read it immediately on my
return, Edition: current; Page: [728] and when I did, I thought it
likely that I might see you, or have occasion to write to you on some
other matter. I was greatly interested by the article, and thought it a
very complete and satisfactory vindication of one of the greatest
benefits ever conferred upon Ireland. To me, no vindication was
necessary, but I was much gratified by the additional knowledge I
obtained of the subject.

No expression of opinion which I have received respecting my book,3 has
given me so much pleasure as yours; your adhesion being so much more
complete than any knowledge I had of you entitled me to hope for, while
that knowledge was quite sufficient to make me feel that there are few
persons whose adhesion is more complimentary or more valuable. Such a
testimony strengthens my hope that the opinions which I have expressed
are not only true, but may, within some assignable length of time,
become practical.

What you say of the Irish system of education as a striking example of
the right combination of central and local agency, is important, and I
should much like to see the illustration fully developed.

I am Dear Sir
 with sincere respect
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 26 mai 1861

Saint Véran

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

493.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran

le 26 mai 1861

Mon cher Monsieur

Je vous remercie beaucoup de l’envoi de l’article de Monsieur
Baudrillart.2 Je l’avais déjà lu grâce au hasard qui m’a fait connaître
un négociant d’ici,3 économiste et publiciste, dont les lumières et les
opinions dépassent de beaucoup ce que je croyais pouvoir trouver dans
l’ancienne ville des papes, et qui est abonné à la Revue Nationale. Je
suis de votre avis sur l’article. Personnellement Edition: current;
Page: [729] j’ai tout lieu d’en être content; mais M. Baudrillart, ainsi
que je le savais déjà, porte l’opinion anti-centralisatrice jusqu’au
fanatisme. Lorsque j’ai vu qu’il croyait que la liberté locale eût mieux
valu sous le règne d’Acbar4 ou de Charlemagne, je me suis dit—Il n’y a
que les Français pour avoir des idées absolues. Cependant je trouve
qu’ils sont en train de se corriger de ce défaut, comme les Anglais du
défaut contraire.

J’écrivis au directeur de la Revue d’Edinbourg, pour lui proposer un
article sur vos deux ouvrages;5 mais il se trouve que le directeur lui
même se propose de traiter la Centralisation à propos de l’éducation
publique dans son numéro de juillet,6 et à ce que je crains, dans un
esprit assez différent du mien. J’attends donc pour voir comment il s’en
tirera, et s’il y aura place pour moi après lui. Je n’ai pas encore vu
la deuxième édition de votre Centralisation.7 Y avezvous mis du nouveau?
Je lirai votre ouvrage de 18468 avec d’autant plus de plaisir, que vous
y aurez moins épargné la société actuelle, que je passe pour ne pas
estimer beaucoup.

Ma fille est très sensible au bon souvenir de Madame Dupont-White et de
vos demoiselles. Je vous prie de me recommander à leur bienveillance, et
de croire toujours aux sentiments d’estime et d’amitié de

votre bien dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 9. 1861

Blackheath Park, Kent

George W. Childs

Childs, George W.

494.


TO GEORGE W. CHILDS1

Blackheath Park, Kent

June 9. 1861

Dear Sir

On returning from the Continent, I have only now found your letter.

It must be flattering to any author, and is most agreeable to myself,
that my writings should obtain the favourable opinion of competent
judges in the Edition: current; Page: [730] United States, and that I
should have been thought of as a fit person to write a treatise on
Representative Government specially for that country. I have, however,
so many demands upon my time and exertions, that it will not be in my
power to undertake what you propose; an inability which I the less
regret, as what I could write would be little more than a rather flat
repetition of a volume I have very recently published.2

I have the honor to be

yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 5 [1861]

Blackheath

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

495.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath

July 5 [1861]

Dear Sir

My daughter and I thank you very much for your kind invitation, but I am
so very busy just now, and have so much occupation awaiting me for some
time to come, that I do not like to make any engagement that can
possibly be postponed. There is no visit I should like better than the
one you kindly propose and a little later in the summer if it should
happen to suit you I hope I may have more time at my disposal.

I have written a few additional pages for the new edition,2 to keep up
the fight against the objections to the plan. I am continually meeting
with proofs of the increased attention—of which these very criticisms
are one. The first time I am in the neighbourhood of St. James’s Square
I will return your interesting Sydney correspondence,3 and bring you a
German newspaper containing some things which I think will amuse you.

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [731]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 5th, 1861

Blackheath Park, Kent

Henry Taylor

Taylor, Henry

496.


TO HENRY TAYLOR1

Blackheath Park, Kent

July 5th, 1861

My Dear Taylor,

Your letter of May 28th came while I was abroad, and I have not hitherto
had time to make the acknowledgment which is due to the feelings you
express and to the considerate and sympathizing view which you take of
what I have been endeavouring to do. I am very glad that my treatment of
the subject,2 as a general thesis, has obtained so much of your
approbation. With regard to its applicability to this country3 and
immediately, I am quite alive to the force of many of the considerations
which you bring forward. You only state them as misgivings, and as
misgivings I share most of them, though probably in a considerably less
degree than yourself. On one thing we are almost sure to be agreed: that
whenever the movement for organic change recovers strength, which may
happen at any time, and is sure to happen at some time, it will make a
great practical difference what general theories of constitutional
government are then in possession of the minds of cultivated persons. It
is as a preparation for that time that my speculations, if they have as
much truth in them as you seem to think they have, may be valuable. In
the meantime, while they keep up the faith in possibilities of
improvement, they tend rather to moderate than to encourage eagerness
for immediate and premature changes of a fundamental character. If the
opinions make any way, they will influence, more or less, what is done
from time to time in the way of partial improvement; and while changes
in right directions will be facilitated, the barriers will, I hope, be
strengthened against those of a bad tendency. It is not to you that
anything need be said on the necessity of keeping a true ideal before
one, however widely the state of facts may differ from it, and the
extreme peril, both of having a false ideal, and of having no ideal at
all, between which states (with a tendency at present towards the
latter) politicians both speculative and practical seem to be divided.

I am very sorry to hear that your health imposes on you so much
confinement.4 I hope that is the worst of the inconveniences it causes
you. I, too, am not likely to forget the old days you remind me of,5 nor
any of those with Edition: current; Page: [732] whom I used to discuss
and compare notes, so agreeably and usefully to myself. If I have ceased
to frequent them, it is not from estrangement, but because society, even
of a good kind, does less and less for me; and I have so much to do in
the few years of life and health I can look forward to (though my health
is now on the whole good), that I really have no time to spare for
anything but what is at once absolutely necessary to me, and the only
thing besides reading which is a real relaxation, active out-door
exercise. I do not however give up hope of again seeing you & to do so
will always be a pleasure.

I am dear Taylor
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 12. 1861

Blackheath

John Chapman

Chapman, John

497.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Blackheath

July 12. 1861

Dear Sir

I have my hands so full just now that I shall not for some months be
able to undertake any review article, least of all one which would
require much reading, and a great deal of careful thinking on a
practical subject not familiar to me. Neither do I feel disposed to
attempt writing anything comprehensive on the question of national
education in the present stage of the discussion. Whether I may be
differently inclined some time hence I cannot at present say. But in any
case I should not venture to engage myself beforehand. I have however
more than one subject in view, which I will mention when I see my way
more clearly.

I have read the paper on the ape controversy2 with much interest. I like
several of the papers in this number very much; especially the one on
Buckle.3 It is the only thing yet written about him which seems to me
exactly in the right tone. The article on my own book,4 I can sincerely
say, gave me less pleasure by its praises than by its intelligent
adhesion to some of the opinions I attach most importance to. I should
like much to know, if it be not a secret, the authorship both of that
and of the article on Buckle.

Edition: current; Page: [733]
I have had some conversation with Mr Cliffe Leslie5 on his proposed
article on Income Tax Reform. I think it will be a good one. He will
probably set about it as soon as the Report and Evidence are
accessible;6 but he does not like the idea of its not appearing till
April, and I should certainly think January would be a better time, as
giving it a chance of helping to shape the speeches in Parliament or at
public meetings, and the newspaper articles, by which alone any
impression can be made upon unwilling Finance Ministers.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 30. 1861

B[lackheath]

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

498.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

B[lackheath]

July 30. 1861

.

Dear Sir

I was very sorry to hear that the state of your health2 had compelled
you to suspend the issue of your “First Principles”.3 I sincerely hope
that the cause of the interruption has ceased, or will soon do so.

Allow me to thank you for your volume on Education,4 which I have only
within the last few days had time to read. It is full of things well
worth saying, & contains hardly anything with which I disagree, though I
shd sometimes suggest other things as requiring to be taken into
consideration along with those on which you lay stress.

As connected with your last chapter,5 some very important & conclusive
evidence has been collected by Mr. Chadwick6 (& is now printing by order
of Edition: current; Page: [734] the H. of C[ommons]) shewing that the
half-time scholars, those who attend school only three hours a day, are
not only equal but superior in their attainments to those who attend six
hours. I believe we shd hear little of injury to health from over
application if people were not kept at one kind of mental work for a
longer time than it is possible for them to apply their minds
strenuously to it.

I have been in the habit of attributing the diminished strength of
constitution of the middle & higher classes (which I believe to be a
fact) to a physiological cause not mentioned by you, being the same
which explains the strong constitutions of many savage tribes. Formerly
all the weakly children died, & the race was kept up solely by means of
vigorous specimens. Now, however, vaccinations, & improved bringing up
of children, by their very success keep alive to maturity, & enable to
become parents, a vast number of persons with naturally weak
constitutions. This influence, diffused by intermarriage through the
succeeding generations, must necessarily, unless counteracted by
powerful causes of an opposite tendency, diminish the average vigour of
constitution of the classes in which it occurs.

I am Dear Sir
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 3. 1861

Blackheath

Harriet Grote

Grote, Harriet

499.


TO HARRIET GROTE1

Blackheath

Aug. 3. 1861

Dear Mrs Grote

I am very happy to hear that Mr Grote is getting rapidly well.2

We will come to you on the 21st with pleasure,3 and as I suppose Bain
also will go by way of Caterham, I will leave it to him to fix which of
the trains you mention will suit him best—both being equally convenient
to us. I am

dear Mrs Grote
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [735]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 4. 1861

Blackheath

John Chapman

Chapman, John

500.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Blackheath

Aug. 4. 1861

.

Dear Sir

I have read Mr Harrison’s letter in the Daily News.2 But I do not agree
with him to the extent or in the manner which he seems to suppose. I
believe that I agree entirely with the view taken in Mr Fawcett’s
article.3 But I do so, specifically on the ground stated, I believe, for
the first time by him viz. that the power of striking tends to bring
about something approximating to what I consider the only right
organization of labour, the association of the workpeople with the
employers by a participation of profits. I regard the payment of a fixed
sum per day as essentially demoralizing, and I disapprove of what the
men are doing,4 precisely because as Mr Harrison says they are on the
conservative side, standing up for the existing practice, a practice
which is making workmen more and more fraudulent in the quality of their
labour just as dealers are in that of their goods. I see no hope of
improvement but by altering this; and payment by the hour appears to be
a step, though but a small one, towards making the pay proportional to
the work done. At the same time, I think that the men would be right in
standing out for the recognition of a certain length of working day,
beyond which the payment per hour should be higher; & that in this way
it should be made the interest of the masters, not to overwork the men.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Chapman Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [736]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 8. 1861

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

501.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Aug. 8. 1861

.

Dear Chadwick

I have had a visit from a Walachian, Mr Alexandre Pétreskou,2 who has
been sent to France and England by his Government to qualify himself for
being a Professor of Political Economy. I have advised him to go to the
Social Science Meeting3 where he will be able to see and hear much that
may be useful to him. Do you intend to be there? If yes, I will ask you
to give him a little help which will be the more necessary as, though he
speaks French excellently, he is probably no great hand at speaking
English. If you are not going, it would oblige me much if you would send
any introductions that would be useful to him at Dublin. He is evidently
a well informed and very intelligent man, and worth our taking a little
trouble for him.

Do you wish your two agricultural papers4 sent to M. de Lavergne,5 or
will it be time enough when I pass through in September?

Yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Will you kindly direct the inclosed letter6 to Fawcett and send it, as I
have mislaid his Wiltshire address.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 8 août 1861

Blackheath

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

502.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Blackheath

le 8 août 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

Je commencerai par répondre à vos questions.2

Shibboleth,3 page 136, peut se traduire par un quelconque des équivalens
que vous proposez. C’est un mot tiré d’une anecdote d’histoire juive,
pareille à celle qu’on raconte à l’occasion des Vêpres Siciliennes.4 Les
meurtriers palermitains ont (dit-on) reconnu leurs victimes à leur
incapacité d’articuler Edition: current; Page: [737] certain mot
italien, difficile aux organes français. La Bible dit que le mot
Shibboleth a une fois servi aux juifs pour un but social d’une nature
semblable. Par suite on a donné ce nom chez nous à tout signe vocal
qu’une classe ou un parti exige pour se reconnaître.

Section, mot assez en usage chez les américains, veut dire dans leur
langue politique non seulement un parti, mais une subdivision quelconque
de la nation. Tout ce qui a un intérêt ou une opinion communs avec
lesquels il faut compter, s’appelle une section.

On pourrait traduire stupidest5 (p. 138) par le plus borné. En me
servant de ce mot je n’étais pas sans une certaine envie de faire
enrager le parti conservateur.

Hobson’s choice6 est une expression proverbiale, dont l’origine m’est
inconnue. L’alternative indiquée est “that or none”: “ce que je vous
offre, ou bien rien du tout.”

J’aurai, en quelques jours, à vous expédier la seconde édition. Vous
n’aurez pas à vous occuper des changemens purement verbaux; et il n’y en
a pas d’autres, si ce n’est une courte note au 14me chapitre, et
quelques pages ajustées au septième.

Je ne crois pas plus que vous à des projets positifs sur la Sardaigne,7
et je pense même qu’un tel projet ne deviendrait positif que lorsque la
réalisation en serait assurée. Je crois seulement qu’il y a quelqu’un
qui a les yeux sur tout, et que les agneaux sont tenus à des précautions
continues lorsqu’ils ont pour voisin un loup.

Veuillez nous rappeler au bon souvenir de Madame Dupont-White et de vos
demoiselles, et agréez mes salutations amicales.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 8. 1861

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

503.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Aug. 8. 1861

Dear Mr Fawcett

I have had a very interesting conversation with a young Walachian, M.
Alexandre Pétreskou, who has been sent to Paris and London by his
Government Edition: current; Page: [738] to qualify himself for being a
Professor of Political Economy. He knows some of the best Frenchmen, but
nobody at all in England. I have advised him to attend the Social
Science meeting, and as I suppose you will be there, I hope you will
allow me to give him an introduction to you, and recommend him to your
good offices. I do not believe he speaks much English, but his French is
excellent. He seems both intelligent and well informed, and eager to
inform himself still more; and anything we can do for him will be done
for the benefit of his countrymen, who have almost everything to learn,
but are very desirous to learn it.

I am very busy revising the Logic for a new edition.2

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 18. 1861

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

504.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

Aug. 18. 1861

Dear Sir

I have not waited all this time to read your MS,2 though press of
occupations has delayed my writing to you about it. I think it may be
worked up into a most valuable paper and one particularly wanted at the
present time. I have been very much struck with the ignorance which, in
nearly all the writing which has appeared in England about the American
disruption, has been shewn respecting the necessary conditions of
American slavery and the transcendant importance of the stake at issue
in the present contest. The English organs of opinion cry out for a
recognition of the secession, and for letting slavery alone; but slavery
will not let freedom alone. As you have shewn, more powerfully than had
been done before, American slavery depends upon a perpetual extension of
its field; it must go on barbarizing the world more and more, and the
Southern states will never consent to a peace without half the
unoccupied country, and the power which it would give of unlimited
conquest towards the south. Instead of calling on the North to subscribe
to this, it would be a case for a crusade of all civilized humanity to
prevent it. I think it very important therefore, that in recasting your
lectures Edition: current; Page: [739] in the form of an article, you
should connect them expressly and openly with the present crisis, and
make them, in effect, a pamphlet on that; though without entering into
the mere details or personalities of the quarrel. I am convinced that
you could make it most telling; and the only thing I should like better
is that it should appear with your name, and be written about in many
reviews, instead of being contributed to one.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug.21.1861

B[lackheath Park]

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

505.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

B[lackheath Park]

.
Aug.21.1861

Dear Sir—

It gave me much pleasure to hear from you again after so long an
interval & to receive from you so many expressions of kind and friendly
feeling. But I greatly regret that you are suffering so much in health,2
& the more so as the morbid affection which you mention is of a kind to
necessitate much temporary forbearance as to mental application, which
from the opinion I have of your capacity I consider as a misfortune.

I am sorry you should feel any doubt respecting the interest I must
necessarily take in what is occurring in the Austrian Empire. Even in
this extraordinary time in which there is scarcely a spot on the globe
where some great historical change does not seem to be either dawning or
approaching its crisis, I do not know anything more important or more
intensely interesting than the progress & chances of the political
transformation of Austria. I have read with the greatest pleasure your
letters to the Neueste Nachrichten3 & I need say nothing more than that
I agree, from beginning to end, in the view you take of the Hungarian
question.

I am glad you are not discouraged from prosecuting your translation of
the Edition: current; Page: [740] Liberty by the fact of there being
another translation in the field.4 You have a full right to state that
yours is the translation undertaken with the concurrence & approbation
of the author at a time when no other had been announced.

It is a sign of the times that there is a Russian translation of the
Liberty published at Leipzig.5 The French translation has been very
successful.6

Pray let me hear from you now & then. I shall be here for another month
& afterwards at Avignon where I spend fully half the year. Thanks for
your kind enquiries about my health. It is now, & generally, very
satisfactory.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 14 Sept. 1861

Blackheath

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

506.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Blackheath

le 14 Sept. 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

Je répondrai à vos questions en suivant l’ordre que vous avez suivi.

1°. Je ne sais pas au juste le nombre des électeurs.2 Il n’est pas bien
constaté, et d’ailleurs il varie tous les ans. On croit cependant qu’ils
sont au nombre d’un million à peu près.

2°. Il n’y avait primitivement dans l’Inde3 la propriété foncière
proprement dite que celle des associations ou communautés villageoises.
Là où ces communautés existent encore, on leur a conservé leurs droits.
Dans une grande partie de l’Inde ces communautés ont disparu. Depuis
lors, en certaines provinces il n’existe pas de propriété foncière
complète, mais seulement un droit d’occupation permanente, moyennant un
paiement annuel au gouvernement, dont le taux est fixé par des baux à
long terme; le plus souvent au terme de trente ans. A la fin du bail,
l’ancien cultivateur a droit de priorité pour le renouveler. Dans ces
provinces, comme dans les provinces à communauté, il y a, comme vous
voyez, impossibilité de fait à ce que des Anglais puissent devenir
propriétaires fonciers.

Mais il y a une troisième partie du territoire qui comprend le Bengale,
le Behar, et en général les plus anciennes possessions de l’Angleterre
dans l’Inde: dans celles-là on a reconstitué la propriété, et même la
grande propriété Edition: current; Page: [741] à condition seulement
d’un paiement annuel à l’Etat, qu’on peut comparer à l’impôt foncier en
France, excepté qu’il est ordinairement beaucoup plus considérable. Dans
ces provinces-là un Anglais peut devenir propriétaire par contrat à
l’amiable en désintéressant les propriétaires actuels. S’il achète une
terre, il est tenu, comme de raison, à payer l’impôt. Depuis quelque
temps, les acquireurs britanniques demandent qu’il leur soit permis de
racheter cet impôt: et c’est là ce qu’ils entendent en disant qu’ils
veulent devenir propriétaires.

3°. Vous avez parfaitement bien compris ce que sont les “assessed
taxes”.4 On pourrait peutêtre les appeler des impôts de consommation. On
ne pourrait pas les traduire par taxes établiés.

4°. Les repudiating states5 sont ceux qui ont refusé de reconnaître
leurs dettes. Le mot repudiate est leur propre mot. Ils les ont
désavouées.

5°. Les élections anglaises ne se faisant pas par la voie du scrutin,
les électeurs se présentent à un lieu donné qu’on appelle polling
place:6 ils déclarent leur nom et leur vote, qui sont écrits par des
poll clerks,7 ceux ci s’assurant en même temps que le nom du votant est
dans la liste de ceux qui ont droit de voter au même polling place.
L’élection commence et finit par un meeting. Au premier de ces deux
meetings on propose les candidats; à celui qui suit l’élection, on en
déclare le résultat. Comme ces meetings ont lieu en plein air, on a
besoin d’une estrade en bois qu’on appelle hustings.7 L’autorité locale,
les candidats, les électeurs qui les proposent, et généralement tous
ceux qui ont l’intention de parler, montent sur le hustings pour se
faire voir et entendre.

6. Un deadlock8 a lieu lorsque les rouages d’une machine ou les roues de
deux voitures s’embrouillent de manière à ne pouvoir se dégager à moins
d’être démontées. Impasse est une métaphore différente, mais à peu près
équivalente.

Je vous félicite d’être si près de la fin de votre travail. Je lirai
votre préface avec le plus grand intérêt.

Pour en venir à la dernière question: nous nous proposons, s’il n’arrive
rien d’inattendu, de partir d’ici pour Avignon le soir du 23 et ce
serait avec beaucoup de plaisir que nous nous arrêterions pour un jour à
Fontainebleau. Nous comptons donc pouvoir arriver à Fontainebleau par
quelque train de l’après midi du 24.

Nous nous recommandons tous deux très cordialement aux bons souvenirs de
toute votre famille.

Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [742]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 19. 1861

Blackheath

Leonard H. Courtney

Courtney, Leonard H.

507.


TO LEONARD H. COURTNEY1

Blackheath

Sept. 19. 1861

Dear Sir

I am glad to have had the opportunity of reading your objections to my
arguments on the Income Tax;2 and I am always glad to receive and
consider intelligent objections from all quarters to any of my opinions.
I have often profited very much by such criticisms; but their authors
cannot expect that I should have time to answer them; and I hope,
therefore, that you will excuse me if I do not discuss your arguments,
or point out why they do not, in the smallest degree, alter or shake my
opinion. It so happened that none of my cross-examiners in the
Committee3 took the same view of the subject which you, and the
actuaries, take; and their questions, therefore, drew out very little of
what I could have said in opposition to that view. I will merely place
before you one form of the argument, which appears to me very simple and
conclusive. The actuaries argue that income of equal capitalized value
should pay equal amounts to the tax. Granted: that is, equal total
amounts. But if these equal total amounts are to be made up by equal
annual payments, it is implied that the payments are of equal duration,
and the owner of the terminable income would be required to go on paying
his quota to the tax after his income had ceased.

If you will only consider what would be the payments required from the
two supposed taxpayers if each of them was required or empowered to
redeem the tax by paying down a gross sum once for all, you would, I
think, see that the opinion of the actuaries has no ground whatever to
stand on.

I am Sir
 yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [743]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 20.1861

Blackheath

James A. Froude

Froude, James A.

508.


TO [JAMES A. FROUDE?1]

Blackheath

Sept. 20.1861

Dear Sir

Many thanks for the proof of the second part,2 which I return corrected.
I leave England for Avignon on Monday next, when my address will be
Saint Véran, Avignon, Vaucluse, France.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 22. 1861

Blackheath Park

Henry Parkes

Parkes, Henry

509.


TO HENRY PARKES1

Blackheath Park

Sept. 22. 1861

Dear Sir

I am sorry that I missed you on both the occasions on which I called at
your lodgings, and the more so as I am leaving England tomorrow for the
winter, and shall therefore have no opportunity of seeing you until my
return, if you are still in England at that time. Allow me to thank you
for the valuable documents which you did me the favour to send. The
reports—I have not yet had time to read the evidence—disclose a state of
things among the poorer population, in some respects worse than I should
have expected; but it is very satisfactory to find that attention has
been so strongly called to the existing evils.2

My address for the present will be, Saint Véran, Avignon, Vaucluse,
Edition: current; Page: [744] France, where if there should be any way
in which I can be of use to you I hope you will let me know.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

Henry Parkes Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 26. 1861

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

510.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Sept. 26. 1861

Dear Mr Fawcett

I am very glad to receive such a pleasant account of your proceedings at
the British Association,2 and glad also to have received it before
leaving England. We start for Avignon on Monday, and do not expect to be
in England again till after Midsummer, as we meditate a journey for next
spring.

I hear you are writing an elementary book on Political Economy.3
Something like a class book on the subject is much wanted, and besides
being a useful thing when done, it is a very useful thing to yourself to
do, as it is a much more complete exercise of the scientific intellect
to construct a treatise on a whole department of knowledge, than to
write essays, either scientific or popular, on detached points. My own
occupation, however, during this winter, will be of the latter kind, of
which I have several subjects. The paper on Utilitarianism which I think
I told you of, is coming out in the next three numbers of Fraser.4

In revising my Political Economy for a new edition,5 I have made use of
some of your observations on Strikes,6 of course mentioning to whom I am
indebted for them. Though they were published anonymously in the
Westminster, I hope there is no objection to connecting them with your
name. I am

Dear Mr Fawcett
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [745]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 10 octobre 1861

Saint Véran

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

511.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran

le 10 octobre 1861

Mon cher Monsieur

Bien des remercimens pour votre Préface.2 Sans rien dire des choses
amicales et flatteuses que vous avez bien voulu y mettre pour moi
personnellement, j’ai tout lieu d’être content de cet écrit comme
discours préliminaire. Il établit et caractérise vigoureusement les
bienfaits de la liberté, et il pose les questions principales du régime
représentatif, avec un sentiment très juste de leurs difficultés et des
conditions de leur solution. Il y a, en outre, un grand nombre
d’observations vraies et fortement exprimées. Je ne vois nul motif de
supprimer aucun des passages que vous avez marqués d’une note
d’interrogation. Je ne trouve guère, dans l’écrit, d’autre différence
sérieuse entre nos opinions que celle qui regarde la doctrine de
l‘Utile, et je suis bien loin de désirer que vous gardiez le silence sur
cette différence. A propos, je publie en ce moment même, dans Fraser’s
Magazine une exposition sommaire de la doctrine de l’Utile3 comme je
l’entends: celle-là, je serais fort curieux de la voir jugée par
l’Académie. Quand elle sera complette, elle formera un petit volume dont
je me promets de vous faire hommage. Vous verrez là les contorsions que
j’ai choisies. Il y a seulement une question de fait où vous me
paraissez mal informé. Comme beaucoup de Français, vous semblez être
d’avis que l’idée de l’Utile est en Angleterre la philosophie dominante.
Il n’en est rien. Je conçois qu’on puisse voir dans cette doctrine une
certaine analogie avec l’esprit de la nation anglaise. Mais en fait elle
y est, et elle y a presque toujours été, très impopulaire. La plupart
des écrivains anglais ne la nient pas seulement, ils l’insultent: et
l’école de Bentham a toujours été regardée (je le dis avec regret) comme
une insignifiante minorité.

En arrivant ici, j’ai trouvé votre livre sur les relations du Travail
avec le Capital.4 Permettez-moi de vous en faire, quoiqu’un peu tard,
mon compliment. Cet ouvrage me paraît d’un très grand mérite. Vous y
avez montré que pour être Centraliste vous n’en êtes pas moins
économiste de la meilleure trempe; très supérieur, ce me semble, à la
plupart de ces messieurs dans leur propre spécialité.

Je vous remercie encore de l’envoi du livre sur Phidias.5 Le sujet en
est pour moi du plus grand intérêt, comme tout ce qui se rapporte soit
aux grandes époques de l’art, soit à celles de l’histoire. J’ai lu avec
un grand plaisir, l’année passée, une étude de M. Beulé sur Phidias,
dans la Revue des Deux Edition: current; Page: [746] Mondes.6 Je me
rejouis de voir que le goût de l’antiquité grecque paraît renaître dans
la nouvelle génération en France. Il y a eu dernièrement dans la Revue
Nationale un article charmant, et très satisfaisant sous le rapport de
la vérité historique, sur la position et le rôle des poëtes à Athènes,7
article auquel la lecture de M. Grote n’a pas été étrangère; et plus
récemment encore, un article d’histoire et de critique sur Hyperide,8
qui fait très grand honneur à son auteur.

Ma fille vous prie de la rappeler aux bons souvenirs de Madame
Dupont-White et de vos demoiselles. Je vous engage en même temps à leur
faire mes hommages, et de croire toujours à mon estime et à mon
attachement.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November, 1861

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

512.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

[
November, 1861

]

[In 1861, he began to turn his thoughts to a review of Hamilton’s
Philosophy. Writing to me in November, he says,]

I mean to take up Sir William Hamilton, and try if I can make an article
on him for the Westminster.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November 1861

T. E. Cliffe Leslie

Leslie, T. E. Cliffe

513.


TO T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE1

[
November? 1861

]

[In reference to the argument that an exemption of savings would be an
exemption in favour of the rich who can afford to save, at the expense
of the Edition: current; Page: [747] poor who cannot, an eminent
political economist has suggested to the writer that] the rich get this
advantage only in so far as they save, and in so far as they do so, they
forego the advantage of being rich, and place themselves on a par with
the poor. If a rich man saved all the excess of his income above that of
his poor neighbour, he would, in fact, be equally poor, since all the
rest of his income would in fact be simply managed for him by the
public.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November, 1861

Saint Véran

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

514.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

[
Saint Véran

]

[
November, 1861

]

[A month before,2 he had written to Thornton, in terms that showed how
well he had recovered his natural buoyant spirits, and his enjoyment of
life.]

Life here is uneventful, and feels like a perpetual holiday. It is one
of the great privileges of advanced civilization, that while keeping out
of the turmoil and depressing wear of life, one can have brought to
one’s doors all that is agreeable or stimulating in the activities of
the outward world, by newspapers, new books, periodicals, &c. It is, in
truth, too self-indulgent a life for any one to allow himself whose
duties lie among his fellow-beings, unless, as is fortunately the case
with me, they are mostly such as can be better fulfilled at a distance
from their society, than in the midst of it.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 2. 1861

Saint Véran, Avignon

James Lorimer

Lorimer, James

515.


TO JAMES LORIMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Nov. 2. 1861

.

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for sending me your article.2 The tone in which
you write about the book,3 and the importance which, whether deservedly
or Edition: current; Page: [748] not, you attach to it, must tend
greatly to increase its influence. I am glad that there are so many
points on which we entirely, and heartily, agree. Of those on which we
differ, only one is practically important—the extension of the suffrage
to women. The fact of their not generally desiring it, instead of an
argument against its being given to them, is to my mind one of the
strongest reasons to the contrary. For it arises from that entire want
of knowledge and interest in politics, and of the very first and most
elementary notions of duty to the public, which makes the influence
that, as you truly say, they exercise, in 99 cases out of 100
destructive of public virtue in the men connected with them. I do not
know how to reconcile your refusal of votes to women because they
possess social influence, with the main principle of your system, that
of granting plurality of votes on account of, and in proportion to, the
social influence already possessed.

On this last subject, I confess, your answer to my objections has not
convinced me. I do not well understand the sort of social weight or
importance which you appear to contemplate; a sort which has no
influence either on people’s opinions or on their votes. I do not see
how persons whom the democracy, by your supposition, always votes
against, can be said to be looked up to by it. Being looked up to in
this sense, seems only to mean, being thought to be better off, not
better, than other people. And even if it meant the latter, it is surely
of more importance to single out, for a superior political position,
those who are better, than those who are thought to be so. The former is
exactly my plan; for the same general presumptions which must be
employed to classify the voters according to their probable degrees of
intelligence, correspond almost equally well with their probable degrees
of moral trustworthiness also.

What you tell me respecting the North British Review is very
satisfactory. It is excellent news that the Free Church party cannot
support a Review without the cooperation of persons more liberal than
themselves, and better still that one of the organs of opinion has
reached the point of discarding routine doctrines in politics, and
looking the question, whether universal suffrage shall be made a
blessing or a curse, fairly in the face. I wish the conducters of the
Review all success and prosperity in their new course, but I am quite
unable to accept their proposal of writing a political article for them.
My hands are already full, and even if they were not, there are other
periodicals which have a prior claim on me.

I am Dear Sir
 very faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [749]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 23. 1861

S[aint] V[éran]

Samuel Paull

Paull, Samuel

516.


TO SAMUEL PAULL1

S[aint] V[éran]

Nov. 23. 1861

Sir—

I have received your letter dated Nov. 19. I certainly think with you
that the estimates made by architects, engineers & others should be so
drawn up as to distinguish clearly the payments for labour from all
other payments, specifying both the quantity of labour & the rate at
which it is paid. This is essential to the idea of an estimate. & it is
on every account proper that the person who has to pay for the labour
should know what he pays for, & at what rate he pays it, & should not be
paying contractors’ profit when he supposes himself to be paying
labourers’ wages.

At the same time I shd not be sincere with you if I allowed you to
suppose that I attach much importance to this or any such matter of
detail as a means of benefiting the labouring classes, or that I look
upon questions of wages as capable of being settled in the way of
arbitration, on grounds of equity. The insuperable difficulty is that
there being no principle of equity to rest the settlement upon, any
decision must be arbitrary, dependent on the direction of the judge’s
sympathies. That the workmen should not starve may be said to be
equitable, & also that the employers should get some profit. But between
these limits I do not see what standard of equity can possibly be laid
down. As long as the employers & their families are able to live better,
& expend more on themselves than the labourers & their families, it may
always be said that wages are not what they ought equitably to be. I can
conceive Socialism, in which the division of the produce of labour is
made among all, either according to the rule of equality (Communism) or
according to any other general rule which may be considered more just
than absolute equality. But under a system of private property in past
accumulations in which no general rule can be laid down, I think that to
give any one the power of deciding according to his own views of equity
without a general rule would only perpetuate & envenom instead of
healing the quarrel between capital & labour. The only thing which
people will in these circumstances submit to as final, is the law of
necessity, that is, the demand & supply of the market, tested (when not
otherwise known) by the result of a strike. All that I consider
practicable in the present state of society is to strengthen the weaker
side in the competition, which can only be done by the prudence,
forethought, wise restraint, & habit of cooperation, of the working
people themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [750]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 25. 1861

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

517.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Nov. 25. 1861

Dear Sir

I am truly glad that matter so important at this time as what you have
written on Slavery2 is not to be buried in an anonymous article in a
review. It seems to me that what will most help to give a better
direction to public opinion, is that persons of talent, the more known
and respected the better, should put themselves forward ostensibly, and
even what in different circumstances might be called ostentatiously, as
champions of the right view of the subject. The abolitionist feelings
which were but lately so strong in England cannot have died out; they
must be still there, and to rouse them into activity it is perhaps only
necessary that the real state of the case should be well brought before
them. I shall be only too happy to be associated with you in the
demonstration, in the manner you propose. But the passage you think of
quoting3 seems to me scarcely fit for the purpose; it is only suited to
the expression of individual feelings between friends who think alike on
the subject. If I had been writing for publication I should not have
used that expression about a crusade without leading the reader up to it
by a gradual preparation. I have tried to do this in the inclosed
paper,4 which is in the form of a letter to you, and of which you are
free to make use in the way you propose or in any other.

As you say, the French are shewing to much greater advantage on this
question than the English. The writer in the Revue des Deux Mondes5
deserves all you say of him; he understands the subject and wrote
excellently on it in the Revue before the secession. There is in the
last number of the Revue Nationale (10th November)6 a noble and stirring
article by Pressensé,7 the most distinguished of the French Protestant
clergy, and in that character well known to the religious world in
England. Have you seen “Un grand peuple qui se reveille” by Agénor de
Gasparin?8 I only know it by extracts, but it seems to be very good.

Edition: current; Page: [751]
I am happy to find so very near an agreement in our opinions on the
utilitarian question. Indeed increased knowledge of each other seems
always in our case to disclose fresh points of agreement. I cannot enter
into this subject at present, but should like to discuss it with you at
some future time. There is to be a third paper in the next number of
Fraser,9 on the relation between justice and utility, which will
conclude the subject. The mode of treatment suggested in the last page
of your letter10 is very much to the purpose, and I should like
extremely to see the question handled from that point of view by
yourself or by some other competent person.

I am Dear Sir
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

P.S. Ever since I had the advantage of reading part of your MS. lectures
on Slavery, I have been anxious that you should write on the subject, in
a manner adapted to the general reader, and with express reference to
the American Edition: current; Page: [752] quarrel. Like yourself, I
have felt ashamed and grieved at the figure which English public opinion
exhibits in the face of mankind at this great crisis of human history.11
The people of this country have amply proved the sincerity and strength
of their anti-slavery convictions; and if most of their leading organs
now express themselves as if there was no distinction between right and
wrong on this momentous subject, it can only be because the public have
not yet realized the vastness of the stake which is at issue in the
present contest. Had they done so, would our most powerful newspapers be
able to argue the question as if the right to rebel in defence of the
power to tyrannize, were as sacred as the right of resisting by arms a
tyranny practised over ourselves? or as if a community which takes its
stand, not upon slavery merely but upon the extension of slavery as the
fundamental condition of its existence, and which has broken loose from
national ties because it feared lest something might be done to prevent
it from carrying this scourge through the whole of the American
continent, were a society just like any other—having the same moral
rights of every kind, & as fit to take its place in the community of
nations, as any body of human beings whatever. It is most deeply to be
wished that such a society may be crushed in its commencement, before it
has made itself such a pest to the world as to require and justify a
general crusade of civilized nations for its suppression.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

December, 1861

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

518.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

[
December, 1861

]

[He soon abandoned the idea of an article on Sir William Hamilton. In
December he said:—]

I have now studied all Sir W. Hamilton’s works pretty thoroughly, and
see my way to most of what I have got to say respecting him. But I have
given up the idea of doing it in anything less than a volume.2 The great
recommendation of this project is, that it will enable me to supply what
was prudently left deficient in the Logic, and to do the kind of service
which I am capable of to rational psychology, namely, to its Polemik.

Edition: current; Page: [753]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 4 Decembre 1861

Saint-Véran, Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

519.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint-Véran, Avignon

le 4 Decembre 1861

.

Mon cher Monsieur

Les traductions que vous donnez sont toutes deux admissibles surtout la
seconde; mais l’une et l’autre sont équivalentes plutôt qu’identiques à
l’idée que j’ai voulu exprimer. Il doit y avoir quelqu’expression
théologique qui rendrait encore plus exactement ce que j’ai voulu dire.
Nous entendons par “the canon of inspiration”2 l’ensemble des Ecritures
reconnues révélées. Ce canon a été incomplet aussi longtemps qu’on
croyait pouvoir y ajouter des écrits nouveaux. Quand on cessa d’y
ajouter, il fut complet.

Je ne sais pas si la traduction de l’Economie Politique, qui fut faite
sur la 3me édition, a été ou non, retouchée sur la 4me. Celle-ci du
reste est presqu’ épuisée et il y aura du nouveau dans la 5me. Mais il
n’y aura rien de changé quant au fonds.

Je ne sais pas où en est la 2me édition du représentatif. La préface
sera une excellente annonce de la traduction. L’article de Littré,3 dont
il m’a parlé, en sera une autre.

Mon écrit sur la Centralisation et sur vos deux volumes est fait et
expedié à Reeve.4 Il sera peutêtre trop long pour la Revue d’Edinbourg.
Mais je suis sûr de la faire publier quelque part. Je crois que vous
n’aurez pas lieu d’en être mécontent, bien que je vous aie passablement
maltraité sur plusieurs points.

Ma fille se recommande au bon souvenir de Madame Dupont-White et de vos
demoiselles. Je vous prie également de leur offrir mes hommages et de me
croire

votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 16 1861

S[aint] V[éran]

Arthur W. Greene

Greene, Arthur W.

520.


TO ARTHUR W. GREENE1

S[aint] V[éran]

Dec. 16 1861

Sir—

Your letter shows such openmindedness & candour, & so much desire of
truth for its own sake, that I would most gladly do anything I could to
help Edition: current; Page: [754] you through your perplexities. But it
is not easy for me to do so without knowing more clearly than your
letter tells me, what are the historical facts, which it appears to you
difficult to account for except on the Xtian theory, and what particular
Christian theory it is which you think accounts for them.

I am desirous to explain, that neither in the Logic nor in any other of
my publications had I any purpose of undermining Theism; nor, I believe,
have most readers of the Logic perceived any such tendency in it. I am
far from thinking that it would be a benefit for mankind in general, if
without any other change in them, they could be made disbelievers in all
religion; nor would I willingly weaken in any person the reverence for
Christ, in which I myself very strongly participate. I am an enemy to no
religions but those which appear to me to be injurious either to the
reasoning powers or the moral sentiments. Among such I am obliged to
reckon all those which, while holding that the world was made by a
perfectly good Being, declare that Being to be omnipotent; for such
persons are obliged to maintain that evil is good. That the world was
made by a good & wise Being, is in itself perfectly credible; but if
that Being has done, for Man & other creatures the best that it was
possible to do, the Maker must have been limited by extremely severe
conditions of some sort, whether the limit was set by the power of other
& malevolent beings, as held by Zoroaster,2 or as Plato thought, by the
intractability of the material.3

That, however, the world was made, in whole or in part, by a powerful
Being who cared for man, appears to me, though not proved, yet a very
probable hypothesis. Like all enquiries which ascend to a time beyond
credible records, & which suppose powers of the existence of which in
the historical times we have no evidence, it is, & must remain, as I
conceive, uncertain. In this respect it resembles the geological
theories respecting the [evolution?] of the earth, or Laplace’s
hypothetical explanation of the solar system.4 Since you have read the
“Logic” as attentively as I perceive you have, you will understand me
when I put the argument, such as it is, into an inductive form.

The eye, (let us say), is a very complicated phenomenon; it would be
begging the question to call it an instrument. But it consists of many
different parts, & these parts being found together, in a number of
instances far more Edition: current; Page: [755] than sufficient to
eliminate chance, their being found in that particular state of
coexistence in combination proves that they are connected through some
common cause. Going now a step further & comparing these facts together
to ascertain if possible something in which they agree, we can find no
single point of agreement except one very striking one, viz., that every
one of them contributes to render sight possible. We may therefore
conclude that there is some connexion through causation between the
sight which is to follow & the cause which preceded & as we say,
produced the eye. Induction can carry us no further than this. But the
only mode supported by any of the analogies of experience, in which a
fact to come can contribute to the production of the fact by which it is
itself produced, is by the preconception of that fact & the purpose of
producing it in the mind of an intelligent being.

In a case like this where a hypothesis has many strong analogies in its
favour, such as have not been, & do not seem capable of being
established in favour of any other hypothesis, & when there is not &
cannot be any evidence against it, I do not think that we are bound, in
regard of logic, to reject it. I consider it a case in which it is
allowable for each person to let his belief be affected (if such be the
tendency of his mind) by his own emotional needs, & the conditions
favourable to his moral culture. If (as is the case with all characters
of any elevation) he has privately consecrated an internal altar to an
ideal Perfect Being, to whose ideal will he endeavour to conform his
own; then disposed as he will naturally be to persuade himself that this
ideal Being is an actually existing one there is enough in the course of
Nature (when once the idea of Omnipotence is discarded) to give to that
belief a considerable degree of support. And the more especially so
since if we were made by an Intelligence, that Intelligence has made our
nobler capacities of feeling & principles of action, & can scarcely be
supposed to have made these unless there had been feelings & principles
corresponding to them in his own nature.

This is my position in respect to Theism: I think it a legitimate
subject of imagination, & hope, & even belief (not amounting to faith)
but not of knowledge.

If now we suppose that God made man & the world, not as he would, but as
he could, it might follow as a consequence that man’s faculties could
only be developed progressively & under many obstructions & the whole
course of history would admit of being set forth & explained on that
theory. I do not see, however, that the succession of historical events
requires any supernatural explanation. We cannot indeed trace its
natural laws back to the very beginning, but as far back as we have any
record, all that has happened seems perfectly capable of explanation
from human & natural causes. Of course I cannot prove this in the
compass of a letter; but it is the result to which the study of history
leads me. I could hardly recommend to you any Edition: current; Page:
[756] one book which treats history from this point of view with much
success unless it be Comte’s Cours de Phil. Pos.5 of which the
concluding volumes are historical but cannot well be appreciated apart
from the earlier ones which are scientific. There is much in the book
with which I do not agree, but there are few books from which I have
learnt so much or which afford more matter calculated to meet the
difficulty you meet in explaining history apart from the supernatural.

I shall be happy to hear from you again & to give such further answer as
I can to your difficulties. I shall be here till near the end of
January, after which I shall be travelling for some months. I am Sir

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 20. 1861

S[aint] V[éran]

T. E. Cliffe Leslie

Leslie, T. E. Cliffe

521.


TO T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE1

S[aint] V[éran]

Dec. 20. 1861

Dear Sir—

I received the proof of your article2 only this morning. It is an able &
will be a useful paper, & puts some points in a new & forcible way,
though I differ from it on several matters of detail & some of
principle. The chief of these is the question of exempting savings, on
which your arguments have not shaken my conviction. The strongest of
them is that a tax on expenditure is unjust to those professional
persons who are obliged to spend more than they gain in the early years
of their career. It is impossible to answer this argument completely.
But the force of it is much weakened by several considerations. In the
first place what the professional man is obliged to expend in
maintaining himself before his earnings come in, is capital, & as such,
would, on my plan, have been previously relieved from the portion of
income tax it now pays. The not taxing the capital when it was formed,
is an equivalent for taxing it, when it is laid out. In the second
place, the tax he pays on this outlay would, if savings were untaxed, be
entirely refunded to him by the exemption he would enjoy in the process
of replacing the outlay from his subsequent earnings. (This entirely
refutes the last sentence of the first par[agraph] of p. 114.) The
inconvenience is thus limited to that of making an advance. That is
doubtless a special disadvantage. But some inequalities are unavoidable
in all modes of taxation; & even your plan would not relieve him from
the whole of it, since taxing him on only two thirds of his income would
not come up to the requirements of the case of one whose income is less
than half of his present expenditure.

Edition: current; Page: [757]
I will not go into any of your other arguments on this point except to
say that in the note at pp. 114-5 where you reply to the passage from my
letter I do not think the words “to the disadvantage of the poor man”
state the case fairly.3 In the case supposed, the poor as a body would
lose a part of the rich man’s income tax & gain the whole of his income.

At p. 99 I think you overstate the case against taxes on articles of
general consumption. You say that a duke’s family does not consume very
much more “of certain things” than an artisan’s or a clerk’s. Not nearly
so much in proportion to their means; but much more absolutely, since
they pay for all that is consumed by their servants & dependants.

In the argument at pp. 101 et 109, you argue that it is unjust to tax
the owner of a precarious income on the whole of what he receives in a
prosperous year, because he cannot afford to spend it all in that year,
as he must lay by a part for an unfavorable year. In this of course I
agree, but you do not notice what seems the necessary complement of this
doctrine, viz. that when the unfavorable year comes, & what was reserved
before is brought out for consumption then on the same principle of
justice it ought to pay the tax: for in that (the unfavourable) year he
can afford to spend more than the year’s income.

At p. 109 I do not clearly understand the sentence near the bottom
beginning “they may well ask.”

P. 113 The concluding paragraph of this page does not seem to me fair to
Hubbard.4 His doctrine is that the industrial classes as a body save in
the ratio mentioned, (which he thinks he has statistical evidence of)
not that every individual among them does so: & that as it is impossible
to be just to every individual, we should endeavour to be just to the
body as a body.

I do not find anything else that I need touch upon. There are some bad
errors of the press, but as the proof seems to be an uncorrected one
they have probably been detected by yourself. I will only refer to p.
125 line 2, which is unintelligible, & to the first line of the note at
p. 115 where the sense is reversed: it should be by him for the public,
instead of “for him by the public.”

I have no idea who wrote the review of Austin & Maine in the Edinb.5 The
writer does not seem to know much of the subject beyond what he has
learnt from the two books he is reviewing. But they are a good
foundation of knowledge. I agree entirely with your admiration of Maine
& to some extent though not wholly with your criticism on Austin. He was
not addressing himself to Edition: current; Page: [758] the public but
to students, & that great quantity of repetition has its use. It is like
the repetitions in Euclid. It is much oftener wanted by learners than
one is apt to suppose & they often have not the patience to go
repeatedly over the ground for themselves. I am glad you are writing on
the study of Jurisprudence.6

I hope I am not wrong in directing this to Belfast.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 27. 1861

S[aint] V[éran]

Arthur W. Greene

Greene, Arthur W.

522.


TO ARTHUR W. GREENE1

S[aint] V[éran]

Dec. 27. 1861

Dear Sir—

I could easily write out an argument & send it to you on the historical
evidences of Christianity considered as a supernatural revelation. But
as you seem disposed to pursue, for the present, special studies, & in
the meanwhile to bear with whatever degree of uncertainty you may be now
feeling respecting these great questions, I will only say, that you do
not seem to have yet made yourself acquainted with the principles of
historical criticism, which are now familiar to advanced historical
enquirers throughout Europe; under the application of which the
evidences of the supernatural part of Jewish & Xtian history crumble so
completely that almost all theologians deserving the name (in Protestant
countries) now rest the proof of the divine origin of Xtianity not so
much on external evidence as on the intrinsic excellence of its ethics
or (as some think) the philosophical truth of its metaphysics.

On the other point referred to in your letter, the incompatibility of
omnipotence in the Creator (supposed morally perfect) with the
imperfections of the creation, I will observe, that the theory of the
fall only makes the contradiction worse: for (quite independently of the
Necessarian doctrine of Volition) no good Being would have created
mankind with the sure foreknowledge that they would fall, & thereby
condemn themselves to eternal perdition. You say that a Being, capable
of what I must call this horrible wickedness, may be perfectly good in
some higher sense than our faculties are able to conceive: but it must
be a sense not merely different, but contrary, to every sense in which
goodness has any claim to be loved or reverenced by us. A Being of great
but limited power may be forced to tolerate all the misery, Edition:
current; Page: [759] all the meanness & all the wickedness which we see,
for the sake of ulterior ends. But omnipotence is not restricted to
means, since it can attain all its ends without them; if therefore we
maintain that an omnipotent & good Being tolerates these things, we must
maintain them to be good in themselves, that is, we must (as I said in
my former letter) affirm Evil to be Good.

It seems to me anything but a presumption in favour of a religion that
“intolerance” is “of the very essence of it.”2 Other religions are not
correctly described as holding that it is a matter of indifference
whether they are believed or not. All religions calling themselves Xtian
(not to add Mohamedanism) hold that it is unspeakably important to
believe the true religion, & each believes itself to be the true: but
the Protestant forms of Xtianity, not claiming for themselves any
divinely confirmed infallibility, hold as a principle that the mode in
which truth ought to be arrived at & the only legitimate mode of
obtaining full assurance of it, is by the operation of the individual
reason & conscience: which makes the permission & even encouragement of
free enquiry indispensable, in theory at least, however much the
contrary may often be the case in practice.

Edition: current; Page: [760]


1862

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday 1862

Blackheath

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

523.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

Blackheath

Thursday evg
 [
1862

?]

Dear Thornton

Louis Blanc is coming to dine with us on Sunday, and it would give us
great pleasure if you could come and meet him. We dine at five.

The cheque arrived safely yesterday morning.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 10 janvier, 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

524.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 10 janvier, 1862

.

Mon cher Monsieur

Il est très flatteur pour moi que la Revue des Deux Mondes éprouve le
désir d’avoir de ma prose.2 Cela est si bien à ma convenance que j’ai eu
quelquefois l’idée de lui en offrir; mais j’ai tant d’occupations et de
projets plus au moins en train d’exécution, qu’il m’est difficile, et
même, pour le moment, impossible, de m’engager positivement à rien. A ce
propos, ma réponse à la Revue Nationale ne fut pas un refus; j’ai
seulement dit ne pouvoir rien promettre. Je présume qu’il n’y a pas
incompatibilité entre les deux Revues; je sais, du reste, combien l’une
d’elles est plus importante que l’autre. Cependant je voudrais
conserver, à cet égard, toute ma liberté.

Je suis bien aise que mon livre se soutient dans votre opinion favorable
au troisième examen. Peut-être aurais-je dû faire une note sur la
Constituante de 1789.3 Cet exemple ne compte pour rien en faveur de
l’élection à deux Edition: current; Page: [761] dégrés, car il y a des
momens où l’opinion générale se fait jour à travers tout obstacle, et où
les modes d’élection les plus divers aboutissent à des résultats à peu
près identiques: il en était ainsi en 1789, et je pense que le tiers
état aurait nommé, en général, les mêmes députés sous un système
électoral beaucoup plus défectueux. La question des renouvellements
partiaux n’est pas fondamentale: au reste, je ne crois pas les avoir
condamnés d’une manière absolue.

Mon article sur vos deux livres est accepté par Reeve,4 mais pour le
numéro d’avril, ou peut-être même pour celui de juillet. L’écrit sur la
doctrine de l’utilité a paru dans Fraser’s Magazine (Octobre, Novembre,
et Decembre).5 J’ai laissé mon éditeur le maître de décider le moment de
le réimprimer en volume, mais n’ayant rien appris sur ses intentions, je
présume que cette réimpression est ajournée.

Veuillez offrir à Madame Dupont-White et à vos demoiselles mes hommages
respectueux, auxquels ma fille vous prie d’ajouter l’expression de ses
sentiments amicaux. Votre tout dévoué.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 10. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

George Grote

Grote, George

525.


TO GEORGE GROTE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 10. 1862

.

My dear Grote

A long letter from you is indeed a pleasure. We are very sorry that you
and Mrs. Grote are unable to join us, but the reasons you give are
superabundantly conclusive.2 Your life and health are so important to
the world, and besides, so valuable to myself, that on either
interpretation of our common standard of ethics I have the strongest
reason against wishing you to expose them to any danger. I must be
content with the minor pleasure of writing to you from Athens, and
reporting to you what I have seen after our return.

Edition: current; Page: [762]
I do not see that the opinions you express in your letter on practical
ethics3 constitute any difference between us. I agree in them entirely,
and I consider them to follow conclusively from the conception of our
own happiness as a unit, neither more nor less valuable than that of
another, or, in Christian language, the doctrine of loving one’s
neighbour as oneself, this being of course understood not of the feeling
or sentiment of love, but of perfect ethical impartiality between the
two. The general happiness, looked upon as composed of as many different
units as there are persons, all equal in value except as far as the
amount of the happiness itself differs, leads to all the practical
doctrines which you lay down. First, it requires that each shall
consider it as his special business to take care of himself: the general
good requiring that that one individual should be left, in all ordinary
circumstances, to his own care, and not taken care of for him, further
than by not impeding his own efforts, nor allowing others to do so. The
good of all can only be pursued with any success by each person’s taking
as his particular department the good of the only individual whose
requirements he can thoroughly know; with due precautions to prevent
these different persons, each cultivating a particular strip of the
field, from hindering one another. Secondly, human happiness, even one’s
own, is in general more successfully pursued by acting on general rules,
than by measuring the consequences of each act; and this is still more
the case with the general happiness, since any other plan would not only
leave everybody uncertain what to expect, but would involve perpetual
quarrelling: and hence general rules must be laid down for people’s
conduct to one another, or in other words, rights and obligations must,
as you say, be recognised; and people must, on the one hand, not be
required to sacrifice even their own less good to another’s greater,
where no general rule has given the other a right to the sacrifice;
while, when a right has been recognised, they must, in most cases, yield
to that right even at the sacrifice, in the particular case, of their
own greater good to another’s less. These rights and obligations are (it
is of course implied) reciprocal. And thus what each person is held to
do for the sake of others is more or less definite, corresponding to the
less perfect knowledge he can have of their interests, taken
individually; and he is free to employ the indefinite residue of his
exertions in benefitting the one person of whom he has the principal
charge, and whose wants he has the means of learning the most
completely. These, I think, are exactly your conclusions. And they are
consistent with recognising the merit, though not the duty, of making
still greater sacrifices of our own less good to the greater good of
others, than the general conditions of human happiness render it
expedient to prescribe. This last distinction, Edition: current; Page:
[763] which I do not think inconsistent with the expressions about
perfection attributed to Christ, the Catholic theologians have
recognized, laying down a lower standard of disinterestedness for the
world and a higher one for the “perfect” (the saints): but Protestants
have in general considered this as Popish laxity, and have maintained
that it is the duty of every one, absolutely to annul his own separate
existence.

I am very glad that you like the papers on Utilitarianism so much.4 I am
not more sanguine than you are about their converting opponents. The
most that writing of that sort can be expected to do, is to place the
doctrine in a better light, and prevent the other side having everything
their own way, and triumphing in their moral and metaphysical
superiority as they have done for the last half century and as they do
in France still more than in England. In Germany the tide seems to be
turning; & there is a commencement of turning even here. It was only
lately that M. Schérer,5 one of the heretical Protestant theologians of
France (who gave up a theological professorship at Strasbourg because he
could not believe the doctrine of Biblical inspiration) declared in the
Revue des Deux Mondes that the inductive and utilitarian ethics were now
shewing that they could produce as good & noble fruits as the other
doctrine.6

My meditations on Sir W. Hamilton’s work have shaped themselves into an
intention that an examination of his philosophy considered as
representative of the best form of Germanism, shall be the subject of
the next book I write:7 for it cannot be done in anything less than a
book, without assuming points which it is of great importance to prove.
I have tolerably well settled in my own mind what I have got to say on
most of the principal points. But I do not feel properly equipped for
such a piece of work until I have read your account of Plato,8 in which
I expect to find much new and valuable thought on the great problems of
metaphysics. It is some consolation for your not going over Greece with
us, to think that you will be finishing Plato, which I hope may be ready
for publication by the end of the year.

Edition: current; Page: [764]
I have written nothing since coming here except an article on
Centralization,9 which has been accepted by Reeve but not for the
January nor perhaps for the April number. There will be nothing in it
new or particularly interesting to you. I meant to have written a paper
on the American question, but the miserable incident of the Trent10 came
in the way. If that goes off favourably, which now seems more probable
than the contrary, the world has had a narrow escape from one of the
greatest calamities of this century.

I quite agree in your high estimate of Bain’s new book.11

We think of leaving Avignon about the 29th, arriving at Athens about the
22nd of February.

With our kind regards to Mrs Grote I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

[P.S.]—As you truly say the Protagorean Socrates lays down as the
standard, the happiness of the agent himself;12 but his standard is
composed of pleasure and pain, which ranges him, upon the whole, on the
utilitarian side of the controversy.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 12. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Samuel Chapman

Chapman, Henry Samuel

526.


TO HENRY SAMUEL CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 12. 1862

.

Dear Chapman

I received your letter of August 26th here, and read it with great
interest. I have since watched the progress of politics in your colony
by means of the letters in the Times which I read with a degree of
confidence that I should not have given them if I had not known their
authorship:2 I should now, however, have been able to divine it, if you
had not told me. The course of affairs under your present Constitution
is exactly what it is likely to be under the falsely called democracy in
which manual labourers alone are really represented.3 The old countries
will in time come under similar influences, Edition: current; Page:
[765] and the only way to mitigate them is to struggle courageously
against them, as you do, but as the more educated classes in America do
not; and to strive always for a fair representation of minorities. I
look upon that as the sheet anchor of the democracy of the future. If it
is not adopted, there is no knowing that society may not be barbarized
down into not only a dead level of narrow minded stupidity, but into
lawlessness; what French writers call la souveraineté du but being
accepted as the supreme rule, and the but being, to make everything
conform to the will (even the passing and momentary will) of the
dominant majority. This particular feature of evil, which had scarcely
begun to shew itself in the United States even when Tocqueville wrote,
has made fearful advances since. We are here in the heart of a
difficulty and danger wholly brought upon us by that spirit. Governments
have often enough acted lawlessly, but even the first Napoleon, in the
height of his despotism, never professed lawlessness; he seized the Duke
of Enghien4 exactly as the Americans seized the senators in New
Granada;5 but he never did what the American Government by its organ Mr
Seward6 has done within the last month—profess in a public despatch that
in the position his country is now in it is not bound by international
rules or precedents. That open repudiation of law, and assertion of mere
will and convenience, by a great nation, though it has escaped even the
bitter comments of the Times, is to my mind the most alarming fact, for
the future of the human race, that has occurred for generations past.

In all other respects your country seems to be thriving wonderfully. The
particulars in your letter, of the reduction of household expenses from
the enormous rates which had kept up for some years after the gold fever
began, are very striking, and are most satisfactory indications of the
return of society economically considered, to a normal condition. What
you say about public libraries, schools, and the University, and about
the eagerness for the better sort of new books, is very pleasant to read
of, and very creditable to Edition: current; Page: [766] the country. It
gives me great pleasure to hear of your own prosperity, and to think of
the influence which your position both socially and politically7 is
likely to give you in turning things into the best channel which the
conditions of the state of society admit of. I was interested also by
what you say concerning your son,8 whom I shall be glad to see, and
should be still more glad to be in any way useful to. I shall not,
however, be in England for a good many months to come, as we set out in
a few weeks to travel in Greece and Turkey, and shall return here before
going to England.

Many thanks for the Argus.9 I received another number of it lately (but
I should think, not from you) containing a letter against Mr Hare’s
plan, the objections in which are the same inconclusive ones which have
been made in England. But I was glad to perceive by the first sentence
that the Argus has itself written in recommendation of the plan. It is
decidedly making its way and has now defenders in America and on the
Continent of Europe. I am

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 12, 1862

Herman Merivale

Merivale, Herman

527.


TO HERMAN MERIVALE1

[
Jan. 12, 1862

]

[I shall probably be encouraged to ask you a question] now and then
about Indian affairs. The rise of prices which you tell me has taken
place, I can throw no light on. If permanent it must, I suppose, depend
upon the same cause which is slowly raising prices through the whole
commercial world, namely, the gold discoveries;2 though why this cause
should have acted with so much greater visible force in Bengal than it
has hitherto done in Europe, I cannot perceive. Can it be (since India
has so long been the gulph into which silver has been constantly sinking
and never reappearing) that the great upturning of things and persons
which has taken place in India, among its other effects, has had
Edition: current; Page: [767] that of bringing some of the hoarded
silver into circulation? That would be an adequate cause, but scarcely
seems a probable one. In the case of rice, the great export trade to
Europe from the Bay of Bengal,3 which had sprung up within a few years
previous to my leaving India House, may go far to account for a rise of
price.

I am
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 20. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

528.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 20. 1862

Dear Sir

You have probably heard from Mr Leslie what is doing in the Political
Economy Club with a view to giving the privileges of Honorary Members to
the Professors in the Queen’s University. The proposal will be brought
before the Club on the 6th of February with the unanimous recommendation
of the Committee, consisting of Mr Newmarch, Mr Blake,2 and myself, and
I am very confident that it will be adopted.3

I have been hoping to see an advertisement of your essay on the American
question,4 or to hear from you respecting its progress. I fear that the
Trent affair may have delayed it, as there was no chance of getting a
hearing for the Northern side of the question while we seemed on the
brink of war with the United States.5 I seldom experienced so great a
feeling of consternation on reading a piece of public news, as I was
struck with on the arrival of the first intelligence of that affair. But
it is ended, and as well ended as such a thing could be; and I have
begun to look out again for tidings of your work. I also resumed a
purpose which had been suspended by that untoward affair, of myself
writing something on the American contest for immediate publication. The
article is finished, and is to come out in the February number of
Fraser.6 I much wished when writing it, that I had your papers on the
subject Edition: current; Page: [768] to help me, and that they had come
out first, so that I might have quoted them. But I hope they will follow
soon after, and that others will be encouraged by our example, to help
in bearing up against the stream.

We propose starting on the 29th of this month for Athens, and letters
addressed Poste Restante there, will reach me till near the end of May.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 22 janvier 1862

St. Véran

Célestin de Blignières

Blignières, Célestin de

529.


TO CÉLESTIN DE BLIGNIÈRES1

St. Véran

le 22 janvier 1862

Monsieur—

Le livre que vous avez eu la bonté de m’envoyer2 s’est trouvé être en
effet le même que j’avais reçu il y a trois ou quatre ans. Il ne m’est
pas pour cela inutile; je suis en train de le relire et j’en déjà relu
une grande partie. Ce livre me paraît très remarquable sous le rapport
de l’exposition et de l’expression. Il résume les plus importantes
doctrines de M. Comte avec une clarté que lui-même n’a pas surpassée, et
de manière à offrir souvent, pour ainsi dire, de nouveaux reflets de
lumière par la manière de présenter les idées. Quant à la question qui
fait, à ce qu’il paraît, votre principale différence avec M. Comte je
suis assurément et pleinement de votre avis. Je crois, pourtant, que mon
dissentiment va plus loin que le vôtre.3 On ne saurait faire mieux
sentir que vous ne le faites la distinction fondamentale des pouvoirs
temporel et spirituel, la nécessité de ce dernier, son existence
universelle sous une forme ou sous une autre, et les suites funestes de
sa réunion avec le pouvoir temporel. Voici maintenant en quoi je crois
être en dissentiment avec vous. Je suis très porté à croire (sans
vouloir décider positivement cette question pour l’avenir) que la nature
même d’un pouvoir spirituel légitime ne comporte pas une organisation
réelle. Tant qu’un accord essentiel de doctrines n’existe pas parmi les
chefs spirituels, toute tentative d’organisation, en la supposant
praticable, serait évidemment nuisible. Si au contraire, cet accord
existait il me semble que l’organisation en corps ne serait pas Edition:
current; Page: [769] nécessaire. L’autorité, qu’exerce dans les sciences
positives l’opinion des savants, ne repose pas, ce me semble, sur leur
réunion en Académies ou sous tout autre nom, mais sur le fait même de
leur unanimité. D’ailleurs, leur organisation me donnerait des craintes
sérieuses pour l’indépendance de la pensée. Tout corps scientifique
organisé est toujours plus ou moins porté à repousser les innovations
scientifiques, qui, pourtant, ne laissent pas d’être quelquefois
nécessaires même dans les sciences qui ont reçu définitivement leur
constitution positive. J’incline à croire que, lorsque l’accord général
des opinions de ceux qui ont fait les études nécessaires s’étendra aux
questions morales et sociologiques, la classe spéculative pourra être la
classe enseignante, et exercer une grande et salutaire autorité morale,
sans être organisée en corps sous une autorité dirigeante qui me semble
toujours dangereuse. Je sais que la morale positive repousse toute
prétention à se servir de moyens coercitifs pour agir sur les
rénovateurs; mais l’opinion générale, ralliée par une puissante autorité
morale suffit toujours pour exercer une pression tyrannique sur la
pensée; et je ne puis oublier que M. Comte lui-même est allé jusqu’à
vouloir détruire, à la manière des premiers chrétiens, les documents
historiques du passé.

Cette manière de penser me conduit à admettre une certaine modification
dans le principe de la non-participation des esprits spéculatifs au
pouvoir temporel. Je conviens non seulement que la capacité
philosophique ne doit nullement être un titre aux fonctions politiques,
mais encore que les philosophes ne doivent pas, en règle générale,
gouverner ni administrer, sauf les cas exceptionnels qui naissent des
exigences d’une époque de transition, sauf aussi l’avantage que pourra
retirer leur propre développement philosophique d’une certaine
initiation dans les affaires pratiques de la vie, laquelle doit avoir
lieu dans leur jeunesse et sous une autorité supérieure. Mais il me
semble que les philosophes peuvent être très à leur places dans les
assemblées politiques délibérantes; ce qui tient à ce que je conçois la
fonction de ces assemblées tout autrement que selon l’idée ordinaire. Je
les crois très peu propres à faire des lois, mais très utiles comme
organes de l’opinion, soit pour critiquer tant la législation que
l’administration, soit pour y donner ou refuser, en dernier lieu, la
sanction nationale. Vous voyez que c’est une sorte de pouvoir spirituel
que je leur accède, au sein même du pouvoir temporel. J’ai développé
cette idée dans un volume sur le gouvernement représentatif, dont une
traduction française est à la veille de paraître.4 Dès qu’elle aura
paru, je vous prierai d’en accepter un exemplaire. Je ne vous offre pas
l’ouvrage anglais, ne sachant pas si vous avez l’habitude de la langue
anglaise. Cet ouvrage, si vous lui faites l’honneur de le lire, vous
mettra au courant de la plupart des différences qui me séparent de
quelques opinions de M. Comte auxquelles vous semblez adhérer.

Edition: current; Page: [770]
Je compte partir dans huit jours pour un voyage en Orient,5 et ne
retourner ici qu’à la fin de l’été. Bien qu’une lettre adressée Poste
Restante à Athènes avant le milieu de mai me trouverait probablement, je
n’ose vous proposer de m’écrire pendant mon absence; mais ce serait
toujours pour moi un plaisir de comparer mes idées avec celles de
l’auteur d’un livre si recommandable par les qualités morales et
intellectuelles qu’on ne peut pas manquer d’y reconnaître dans le vôtre.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 26 janv. 1862

Saint Véran

Rev. Louis Rey

Rey, Rev. Louis

530.


TO REV. LOUIS REY1

Saint Véran

le 26 janv. 1862

Mon cher Monsieur

Comme je ne serai pas ici cette année, comme à l’ordinaire, au mois
d’avril, permettez moi de vous offrir dès à présent ma contribution
annuelle aux fonds de l’Eglise Protestante.

Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 26. 1862

S[t] V[éran]

Pasquale Villari

Villari, Pasquale

531.


TO PASQUALE VILLARI1

S[t] V[éran]

Jan. 26. 1862

Mon cher M. Villari—

J’ai lu avec le plus vif intérêt votre brochure.2 Elle soulève à chaque
page des sujets de discussions et d’entretiens dont l’occasion
s’offrira, je l’espère, quelque jour. Je ne trouve pas que vous ayez
fait la part trop belle aux peuples latins; d’ailleurs ce n’est pas un
mal que de donner aux nations renaissantes une haute idée de leur rôle
et de la place Edition: current; Page: [771] qu’ils sont tenus d’occuper
dignement dans l’avenir de l’humanité. Je trouve aussi que vous avez à
plusieurs égards justement apprécié les qualités et les défauts des
peuples germaniques. Après cela, j’aurais bien à vous faire quelques
critiques—D’abord, il me semble que, comme presque tous les penseurs des
pays latins, vous ne connaissez pas assez le protestantisme. Vous pensez
qu’il n’a qu’une efficacité négative. Nul anglais ne pourrait en avoir
cette opinion. Son côté négatif est presque accessoire, et a cessé de
prédominer, une fois que la séparation avec le catholicisme s’est
pleinement effectué. C’est par son côté affirmatif qu’il s’est maintenu
dans les pays protestants et surtout parmi les anglo-saxons. Si vous me
demandez ce qu’il a produit dans l’ordre moral, je réponds, le sentiment
du devoir, sentiment essentiellement religieux, qui est le trait le plus
saillant de la moralité anglaise. L’esprit anglais est peu sympathique:
il a très peu de point d’honneur national, mais il a, à un plus grand
degré que tous les autres peuples, le principe du devoir, et cela lui
est tellement particulier que jamais ni les hommes politiques ni les
opinions des autres nations ne comprennet ce qui, dans sa civilisation
et dans sa conduite, tient à ce principe. Ce qui vous fait croire au peu
d’efficacité sociale et politique du protestantisme, c’est qu’en effet
toutes les églises nationales protestantes, sauf celle d’Ecosse, ont
joué politiquement un fort triste rôle: celle-là seule a été l’église du
peuple; toutes les autres on été les églises des grands, c’est à dire,
elles sont tombées, dès leur origine, dans les errements que l’église
catholique n’a commis que dans sa décadence. Pour connaître le
protestantisme il faut l’étudier dans l’histoire écossaise, et dans
celle du puritanisme anglais et américain. Je suis très impartial en
vous disant cela, puisque je n’aime ni le protestantisme écossais ni le
puritanisme bien que la liberté politique leur doive beaucoup à tous
deux.

Ensuite, vous dites des peuples germaniques, qu’ils oscillent entre un
mysticisme tout abstrait et un matérialisme qui ne songe qu’aux choses
de la terre. Cela pourrait être vrai, jusqu’à un certain point de
l’Allemagne; mais je pense qu’il y a en Angleterre un plus grand nombre
que partout ailleurs de ceux qui, en théorie et en pratique se tiennent
à une égale distance de ces deux extrêmes, et dont les sentiments
religieux se montrent surtout dans la direction plus spirituelle qu’ils
donnent à la conduite pratique de la vie. Que pensez vous à cet égard
des quakers? Ce sont eux qui ont commencé tous les grands mouvements
philanthropiques modernes, l’affranchissement des nègres, l’instruction
populaire, l’adoucissement des peines, la réforme des prisons, etc. Je
vois qu’en nous accordant la poésie, vous nous refusez la philosophie;
c’est que vous n’estimez guère ni l’école de Locke, ni la forme
écossaise de la réaction contre elle. Mais nous avons la prétention
d’avoir produit quelques uns des meilleurs penseurs philosophiques qui
aient existé en temps modernes dans toutes les écoles.

Edition: current; Page: [772]
Je pourrais remplir plusieurs feuilles des observations que vous avez
bien voulu me demander sur votre brochure mais j’aime mieux réserver ces
questions pour un temps où, soit en Italie, soit ici ou en Angleterre,
nous pourrions discuter ensemble d’une manière plus satisfaisante les
grandes questions philosophiques. En attendant je vous prie de me tenir
au courant de tout ce que vous écrivez, car je tiens extrêmement à
suivre vos idées.

Il me reste de vous engager à m’écrire Poste Restante à Athènes, ce que
sera une adresse suffisante jusque vers la fin de mai. Lorsque cette
adresse ne suffira plus, je vous en donnerai une autre. Nous revenir ici
au mois de septembre c.à.d. ma fille et moi. Algernon Taylor ne demeure
plus avec nous, il s’est marié et demeure habituellement en angleterre.
Croyez toujours aux sentiments d’estime et d’affectation de votre dévoué

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 28. 1862

S[aint] V[éran]

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

532.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

S[aint] V[éran]

Jan. 28. 1862

.

Dear Thornton—

I have been very long in answering your letter of 25 Dec. The reason is
that I waited for the return from Paris of the only person I know here,
who has in any degree the same tastes, pursuits & opinions with myself,2
& from whom I hoped to be able to procure better information than I have
respecting the small landed proprietors here. He has not yet returned &
I am therefore less able than I hoped I should be to answer your
questions. But I hope you will be here next autumn, when you can see him
yourself & when we can investigate the matter together, so far as
relates to this district, which however is in many respects unlike many
other parts of France; as the south, also, is in many particulars unlike
the north. One point of unlikeness here, to many other French provinces
(but to how many I do not know) is that nearly all the working people
have large families—that is, when the greater part of the children do
not die. I fear that in many parts of France besides this, the
population is kept down more by death, and less by prudence, than I
formerly believed. There seems to be hardly such a thing as prudence in
pecuniary matters here, on the part of the men, though often a great
deal in the women, to whom exclusively the well-doing & prosperity of
any working family seems here to be attributable. In consequence
probably of the large families the idea of all the children supporting
themselves on the parental bit of land seems not to exist in this
country. Most peasants who have land, seem to farm other land with it,
as metayers or as bailiffs, & the majority of the children go out as
domestic servants or labourers or artisans; these Edition: current;
Page: [773] (one may suppose, & what little I know confirms it) do not
desire, when the parents die, to take their share of the land; as they
say, what could they do with it? but take their portion in money. This
payment in money, however, as I surmise, helps to encumber the little
landed properties. Another mode in which the large families tend to
prevent division is that when the parent dies there are usually children
under age, & as the legal difficulties of dividing the inheritance are
in that case considerable, it sometimes remains undivided in the first
instance, & is managed by one of the family on the joint account. There
is an example of this in the case of a woman servant of ours, one of a
large family, the youngest of whom, a son, is not yet of age, & the land
is managed for them by an uncle, who pays them nothing, but is censé to
expend the proceeds, whatever they are, on the land itself. Her notion
of what should be done is, that when the youngest brother comes of age,
those of the family who are well off, among whom she reckons herself,
should give up their shares to the rest, that of the remainder one
brother should retain the land & the others receive their shares in
money. Then, she says, when we are old we can go sometimes to see the
home of our childhood. This does not throw any light on the question of
indebtedness as regards the land generally. But in this aspect
Lavergne’s book,3 which I have read & which is on the whole very
favourable to peasant properties, is extremely rassurant. I have never
seen the burthens of the small properties estimated at so low an amount
by anybody as they are by this most careful and well-informed authority.
He says that the average indebtedness of the whole landed property of
France does not exceed a tenth of the value, & in the case of rural
property, a twentieth. The burthen of interest he estimates up to a late
period at 10 per cent, but thinks that it must now be considerably less,
as ‘les dernières crises ont amené une tendance générale vers [une]
liquidation:’4 which I suppose means that the usurers have sold up: but
the previous amount of mortgage debts, you see, is not at all consistent
with Louis Blanc’s impressions.

About Lord Canning’s measure5 I entirely agree with you. I have always
thought that a general redemption of even the permanently settled
revenues must be a bad bargain to the Government, for the simple reason
that it cannot answer to the proprietor to give as much for it as it
would answer to the Edition: current; Page: [774] Government to take. We
know that in all countries in which the good faith of the Govt is relied
on, the Govt can borrow at lower interest than an individual can do even
on good landed security. Suppose that the difference is no greater than
that between 4 & 5 per cent; the Govt makes a losing bargain unless it
can get 25 years’ purchase while the proprietor cannot afford to give
more than 20, since he must pay 5 per cent. for the money if borrowed, &
if he has it of his own, can get that or still better interest for it in
other ways. The effect on agriculture of the redemption must be wholly
injurious. If the proprietor has capital or can borrow it, he would do
much better by expending it in cultivating & improving the land than in
freeing himself from an annual payment, which being fixed, in no way
diminishes the profits of improvement. I observe that Lord Canning does
not mean to sell at less than 20 years’ purchase; this can only answer
if Govt will never be able hereafter to borrow under 5 per cent.

We start on Thursday for Athens, where we expect to arrive about the
22nd of February, stopping a week at Corfu by the way. Letters directed
poste restante Athens will find us for the next three months & more, for
we shall be either there or journeying about Greece till near the end of
May, after which we propose going to Smyrna & Constantinople but not
returning to England until after the time when I shall hope to see you
here, when I look forward to shewing you whatever is best worth seeing
in this district & having out the subject of Darwin & many others.

[P.S.] I have been writing a paper on the American question which will
come out in the February Fraser6 & which if noticed at all is likely to
be much attacked, as it is in complete opposition to the tone of the
press & of English opinion, a tone which has caused me more disgust than
anything has done for a long time. I shall therefore be glad to know
what is thought of the article by people who have not got pens in their
hands & shall be obliged to you for any information of that sort which
you may be able to communicate.

My kind regards to Major Couper.7 I shd much like to hear from him.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan 29. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John William Parker

Parker, John William

533.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan 29. 1862

Dear Sir

I am desirous to see anything of consequence which may be written on the
subject of my article in the forthcoming number of Fraser,2 especially
any Edition: current; Page: [775] attack; and should therefore be
obliged by your sending here, in the usual way, anything that may come
out up to the 8th, and to Athens (Poste Restante) anything worth sending
that may come out afterwards, and that can either be inclosed in an
ordinary letter, or sent by newspaper post.

I hope the remaining sheets of the Logic and Political Economy3 will be
looked through carefully. The reader who examines them is evidently a
painstaking and careful man, but it nevertheless happens at times that
one word is put instead of another with a very awkward effect.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 30, 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Nichol

Nichol, John

534.


TO JOHN NICHOL1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 30, 1862

Dear Sir

I hope that you heard of my absence from Messrs Parker in time to be
saved the trouble of a fruitless journey to Blackheath. I should be glad
to hear that you had succeeded in obtaining the Professorship, but I do
not see any way in which I could have helped you towards it. I have no
influence, or acquaintance, with either the present Home Secretary2 or
the Lord Advocate,3 and I, as yet, know too little of you (I hope this
will not always be the case) to entitle any opinion which I am in a
position to give in your favour to any attention in deciding a question
of this nature.

I write in great haste, as I am on the point of starting for a long
journey. If you should have occasion to write to me, a letter addressed
care of Messrs Parker, Son, and Bourn with “to be forwarded” written on
it, will find me.

I am
 Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [776]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 28 février 1862

Athènes

Charles Dupont-White

Dupont-White, Charles

535.


TO CHARLES DUPONT-WHITE1

Athènes

,
le 28 février 1862

Mon cher Monsieur

L’adresse de M. Reeve est Henry Reeve Esq. 62 Rutland Gate Hyde Park,
London; ou l’on peut lui adresser une lettre, Council Office, Whitehall,
London, en mettant “Private” sur l’adresse.

Vous voyez que votre lettre m’a suivi jusqu’ici, ou, pour mieux dire,
nous a précédé en arrivant. Ce pays-ci ne fournit pour le moment rien
d’intéressant en fait de nouvelles politiques. Vous avez probablement
entendu parler d’une tentative de révolution militaire,2 mais on pense
qu’elle se terminera, suivant l’usage d’ici, par une transaction sur les
intérêts personnels des chefs de l’insurrection.

Je vous félicite d’avoir terminé votre travail sur le Représentatif.3 Je
ne verrai la traduction qu’à la fin de mon voyage. La lettre que vous me
destinez sera toujours la bien venue, quoique j’eusse hésité à vous en
demander une. Jusqu’à la fin de mai mon adresse sera Poste Restante à
Athènes.

Votre dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 6. 1862

Athens

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

536.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Athens

March 6. 1862

Dear Mr Fawcett

I was very glad to receive a letter from you at this remote place, and
this particular letter contained many things which were specially
pleasant to me. I was glad that you agreed with me so completely on the
American question, glad that you thought the article2 was doing good,
glad that the Cambridge petition3 is going on so well, glad above all
that you are working with vigour, both orally and by writing, and that
your treatise on political economy is Edition: current; Page: [777]
making progress.4 The article on Cooperation in McMillan5 I have seen,
and liked. Such a paper was wanted, and will be useful. The facts
relating to the success of Cooperation require to be kept before the
public mind. There will be a good many additional details including the
Rochdale history, in the next edition of my Pol. Economy, which I have
ordered to be sent to you when published.6 I am glad that a right view
of the American question found favour with the Southwark meeting.7 The
democracy often has great injustice done it by those who though they
think themselves wiser, have not the industry, courage or public spirit
to stand up for their wiser opinions, but either remain silent, or if
they say anything, truckle to the low feelings and prejudices which they
affect to be personally superior to. I am not at all surprised that
Thornton is not with us in the American question. Though a superior man
on many points, on others he feels with the herd, and one never knows
which these last may be. I should be more surprised that Mr Hare is not
entirely with us, were it not that he probably has not much studied the
subject, nor is well in possession of the antecedent facts. I thought
his article in McMillan8 very good, and much better adapted for its
purpose than those he formerly wrote in Fraser. I observed in a letter
of the Sydney correspondent of the Times that Mr Hare’s plan is
attracting great attention there,9 partly through the exertions of Mr
Holden,10 and that the Senate has referred it to a Committee, to
consider about its practical applicability in that colony.

We have not been favoured by the weather in our journey hitherto: we
found the ground covered with snow in the North of Italy, almost
incessant rain at Corfu, and of the few days we have been here, very
much spoiled by a thick haze. However, we have seen Athens pretty
thoroughly, have climbed Edition: current; Page: [778] Hymettus and
Pentelicus, and are going to set out on an excursion for a week or ten
days to Sunium, Rhamnus, Marathon and other places on the eastern coast,
returning here afterwards, and when the weather is sufficiently settled,
starting again for Peloponnesus. You have noticed perhaps that the
garrison of Nauplia is in a state of rebellion against the government,11
but though the King12 and his ministers are very unpopular, the
insurrection has not spread any farther, and the matter will probably
terminate as such things usually terminate here, by the submission and
pardon of the chiefs of the revolt. It is a strange and half savage
country, but advancing most rapidly in material prosperity, which in
modern civilization is usually the first step towards moral progress.
The worst is that the government, and all or nearly all the politicians,
are bent solely on selfish objects, and the revenues of the country are
spent in jobbing while there is hardly a road passable to carriages in
the whole country; a striking contrast to the splendid roads which the
English made all over Corfu and the other islands, but which are now
very much falling off, because the legislature will not vote money to
keep them up.

My address will be Poste Restante, Athens, probably for two months to
come. When you write, pray tell me how the matter is settled about
Cairnes and Leslie,13 and also whether judgment has yet been given in Mr
Williams’ case,14 and to what effect. Our newspapers sometimes miscarry,
and I should not like to lose so interesting a piece of news.

I am
 Dear Mr Fawcett
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [779]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 11, 1862

Salzburg

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

537.


TO THOMAS HARE1

[Before
June 11, 1862

]

[It (proportional representation) has become a matter of philosophical
discussion in Germany; and in a letter which I received not long ago
from Mr. Mill, he informed me of the attention which the scheme had
attracted, and of its adoption by an able writer of Zurich. He adds]

It is encouraging to find that, though practical politicians are only
too glad to turn from the whole subject, right ideas, now that they are
promulgated, are making rapid way among thinking persons, the future
teachers of all parts of the world.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 11. 1862

Athens

George Grote

Grote, George

538.


TO GEORGE GROTE1

Athens

June 11. 1862

My dear Grote

I write, as I promised, from Athens, to tell you how our journey has
prospered. It has been a complete success: the tent travelling has
answered perfectly, and we have gone everywhere and seen everything,
without being in any way disturbed by the Nauplia insurrection,2 nor
experienced any of the dire consequences in the form of renewed
brigandage, which the English at Athens told us we might expect and no
one more than those connected with the Legation, always excepting poor
Sir Thomas Wyse and Miss Wyse.3 We have made two expeditions of six
weeks each, in which we have seen Greece more thoroughly than it has
often been seen: We encamped two days at the foot of Parnassus, and two
on the plateau of the mountain, climbed the mountain itself, encamped
three days in the valley of the Styx, one day and two nights on Kyllene,
saw nearly all Peloponnesus except the northwest corner, almost every
foot of Attica and the Megarid, the north of Eubœa, the coast of
Phthiotis, Lamia, Thermopylæ, Œta, Phokis and Bœotia, Delphi, the
magnificent coast from thence to Naupactus and the strait of Rhium,
where we crossed over. I look forward to many interesting conversations
with you Edition: current; Page: [780] about localities: for instance, I
walked from one end to the other of Sphakteria4 and wondered that there
should ever have been any puzzle about that matter. We both thought the
beauty of Greece quite incomparable: not so the air and the sky, about
which there is as much humbug current as about any purely physical
subject I know. The people are very backward, and full of the faults and
vices produced by long servitude, but improvement seems to be taking
place, though slowly. I hardly know what is most to be desired for them
at present. The whole people, even the civil and military officers of
the government, shew an unanimity in their detestation of it which I
should think has seldom existed in any country not held down by foreign
forces without producing a revolution; but though all sympathized with
the Nauplia insurgents, the people did not join them, but allowed them
to be put down, from fear, as it is said, lest brigandage should be
renewed, and the tranquillity by which they have begun to profit in
their pecuniary interests, brought to an end. Most people however say
that if the King does not now change his policy, there will be a
revolution within a year, and nobody with whom I have conversed thinks
that he will change it.5

There has been a mission of German archaeologists here, Böttiger6 and
another, from the Prussian Government, with whom Curtius7 and others
have voluntarily associated themselves. They have made some important
excavations—have uncovered the real entrance to the Parthenon, have
ascertained on what seems sufficient evidence the boundary which
separated the temple itself from the Opisthodomus, and the true position
of the statue of the goddess: they have made some discoveries at the
Erechtheion, though that subject is still mysterious; have ascertained
as they think, the true line of the city walls, and Curtius thinks he
has made great discoveries about the Pnyx. But their main achievement is
that they have opened up the Dionysiac theatre, have dug down to the
stone chairs of the magistrates, which are now seen in fine preservation
in the very front of the scene, and have converted the fact of its being
a theatre at all from a matter of faith into one of sense. They have
begun to publish the results of their operations, and I shall learn from
Mr Finlay8 and tell you where you may find them.

A friend and correspondent of mine, Professor Villari of the University
of Pisa, is now in England on a mission from the Italian Government,9 to
make enquiries into popular education in England, competitive
examinations &c. Edition: current; Page: [781] with a view to practical
application in Italy, where he holds an important post under the
minister of public instruction, and I have ventured to send him an
introduction to you. He wishes much to know you, and I think he will
both interest you, and derive real benefit from your ideas and
conversation. My first knowledge of him was as having commenced a
translation of my Logic,10 which however he has never yet had time to
finish. When I was in Tuscany seven years ago, I saw him, and we have
been frequent correspondents ever since. He is a man of talent and
knowledge and I think, much judgment and good sense, and his opinions
about Italy seem to me always marked by those qualities. He has at
different times sent me things which he has published, always of merit;
the most considerable is a life of Savonarola,11 full of new and
valuable historical matter from the documents of the period.

I have had an application of another sort with reference to you, from
one of my former colleagues in the India House.12 I inclose his note,
though the matter with a view to which it was written has probably long
since been decided. I have told him in reply, that there is no one more
unlikely than you to be influenced by any recommendation, unless, being
grounded on personal knowledge, it bears the character of actual
testimony; but that no one, also, can be more surely relied on for
giving conscientious and impartial attention to everything which comes
before you in the shape of evidence.

We propose starting on the 17th for Smyrna, and continuing our tent
journey from thence by the Troad to the Dardanelles, where as the season
will be getting too far advanced for travelling in Asia, we shall
probably take the steamer for Constantinople. One has not seen Greece
without seeing Ionia, the Hellespont, and the Bosporus. We had the
unexpected pleasure of seeing Mount Athos very clearly from near Oreos
in Eubœa.

We were sorry to see in the Times Mrs. Stanley’s death.13 That of Sir
Thomas Wyse occurred unexpectedly early, just before our first return to
Athens. He had very little the appearance, when I saw him, of a person
who had a mortal disease. He is much regretted and will be much missed
here.

I suppose you have now nearly if not quite, finished Plato.14 I am very
impatient for it. I am

my dear Grote
 ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

Our kind regards to Mrs Grote.

Edition: current; Page: [782]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 14. 1862

Athens

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

539.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

Athens

June 14. 1862

Dear Thornton—

I have been a long time without acknowledging your letter of March 20,
but you know enough of the little time which travelling leaves one, not
to be surprised at this especially as during the few days I have been
stationary here I have received an extraordinary number of letters which
required, or the writers thought they required to be answered
immediately. Our journey has been successful in every respect & we have
sustained no inconvenience at all from the insurrection or its
consequences, which, moreover, has been put down;2 but there are few who
do not seem to expect a much more serious one before long. This however
& all other matters relating to Greece will be better discussed in the
conversations I am looking forward to having with you in our little
hermitage not long after the conclusion of our journey. As to the time
of your coming, as you are engaged elsewhere for the first week in
October if it is still equally convenient to you to come to Avignon
after or before that time, I will if you allow me decide for the later
of the two periods, as it will leave us a wider margin for the time of
our return to Avignon. The weather will also probably be cooler for
walks & other excursions.

I confess I am surprised that you attach any importance to Forster’s or
any other exhibitions of what they call spiritualism.3 Since in all that
relates to the communicators with spirits, the men are manifestly
impostors, why should one feel any difficulty in believing them to be so
altogether, & their apparent marvels to be juggling or other tricks?
Their exploits certainly would never do anything to shake my total
disbelief in clairvoyance, of which apart from its extreme antecedent
improbability, I have never read of any case the evidence of which did
not leave the most obvious loopholes for fraud. That so many people
should have believed in it is to me one of the many proofs that honest
people do not in general at all appreciate either the facility of being
cheated or the frequency of the disposition to cheat.

Edition: current; Page: [783]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 15. 1862

Athens

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

540.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Athens

June 15. 1862

Dear Sir

Your letter of March 4 gave me great pleasure, but I have delayed
answering it, because I have been travelling about Greece for the last
three months; and when I was able to write, which was only from Athens,
the letters on personal or merely practical matters got themselves
answered first. Probably long before this time, your book is in print.2
It is as much wanted as when we first talked about it, and is probably
more likely to produce an effect than if published before the reaction
which, I was so glad to hear from you, had commenced against the
Southern feeling at one time so much fostered by the Times. The
victories of the North have had much to do with the change;3 the altered
tone of the Times itself is the measure of the greater chance it thinks
there is of the North being successful. I think with you that it is a
moot point whether the reunion of the North and South would be as
desirable an issue of the struggle as a separation confining slavery
within the Mississippi. Reunion would be best if the North could be
depended upon for not making concessions to slavery, but I agree with
you in having no confidence in their staunchness in this respect. I am
much obliged to you for the Economist. I liked your letter in it
exceedingly, and I value very highly your approbation of my article.4 As
to the one point on which you think we differ, I did not mean to defend
Seward’s despatch as a whole.5 His arguments to shew that the Trent was
violating international law were weak and sophistical, and have been
nowhere more strongly repudiated than by so high an American authority
as Sumner,6 whose speech in the Senate of the United States on Edition:
current; Page: [784] “maritime rights”7 is worth your reading, and who
goes the whole length of Thouvenel’s excellent despatch.8 I am not au
courant of the discussion on colonial emancipation originated by Goldwin
Smith.9 But I think it very undesirable that anything should be done
which would hasten the separation of our colonies. I believe the
preservation of as much connexion as now exists to be a great good to
them; and though the direct benefit to England is extremely small,
beyond what would exist after a friendly separation, any separation
would greatly diminish the prestige of England, which prestige I believe
to be, in the present state of the world, a very great advantage to
mankind.

We are about to start for Smyrna and Constantinople, after a very
pleasant tour in Greece, and shall go thence by Vienna and Switzerland
to Avignon returning to England at the end of autumn. When I return, you
are one of the persons I shall most wish to see.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 24. 1862

Constantinople

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

541.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Constantinople

June 24. 1862

Dear Sir

Since I wrote to you from Athens some ten days ago, I have received the
copy of your book2 which you did me the favour to send. I read through
it immediately, and I cannot help writing at once to tell you how
pleased I am with it. It seems to me exactly the thing which was wanted:
it brings the true Edition: current; Page: [785] aspect of the case, in
all its parts, before the public, in a manner so clear, full, and
impressive, that any one who reads it, unless strongly prejudiced
beforehand (if he possesses the feelings and moral convictions to which
it appeals) can scarcely fail to be convinced by it. The great thing now
is to get it read. I wish I was in a position to do something promptly
that might assist in making it widely known. I cannot doubt that the
Daily News,3 McMillan,4 and probably the National Review,5 will make
good use of it. Might it not be a good thing to send a copy to Lord
Brougham? He would probably talk about it, and help to get it read.

I do not think there is an opinion or a sentiment in the book with which
I substantially disagree; and this is so very generally the case when I
read anything you write, that I feel growing up in me, what I seldom
have, the agreeable feeling of a brotherhood in arms. This feeling being
one of the pleasantest which life has to give, I owe you thanks
privately as well as publicly for adding as much to it as you have done
by your present volume.

I am Dear Sir
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 5. 1862

Therapia, near Constantinople

Harriet Isabella Mill

Mill, Harriet Isabella

542.


TO HARRIET ISABELLA MILL1

Therapia, near Constantinople

July 5. 1862

Dear Harriet

My answer to your two previous letters must have reached you after all
was over.2 It seems to have been a strange disease. It is frightful to
think of the quantity of suffering which so often accompanies the
process of going out of life.

Edition: current; Page: [786]
I write by this post (the first since receiving your letter) to Messrs
Dymock and Paterson,3 to say that I have not the smallest idea of
disputing the will. I should never dream of taking advantage of a legal
technicality to defeat the moral right of any one to make what
disposition he pleased of his own property, even if I did not think, as
I do, that disposition to be a very proper one.4

I hope your health will not have suffered materially by what you have
gone through.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 17, 1862

Vienna

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

543.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Vienna

,

July 17, 1862

We have just arrived here—somewhat sooner than we expected, and are at
the Kaiserinn Elisabeth Hotel. If you are at Vienna, we should be most
happy to see you.2 If I knew where to find you, I would call on you
myself.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 21. 1862

Vienna

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

544.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Vienna

July 21. 1862

Dear Mr Fawcett

Many thanks for your interesting letter. None of my correspondents tell
me so much of what I want to know as you do; though on the subject of Dr
Williams’ affair2 you presuppose a knowledge I do not possess, for
though I receive an English newspaper, it sometimes miscarries, and
unluckily the paper containing the judgment has not reached me. I am
glad that it is on the whole favourable to latitudinarianism and
satisfactory to Dr Williams’ friends, though I am sorry to hear that
there is any question of recantation. Two other pieces of news in your
letter gave me great pleasure—that the Edition: current; Page: [787]
Cooperative Cotton Mills hold firm,3 and that Cairnes and Leslie have
been elected to the Pol. Ec. Club. Cairnes’ is a splendid book4 and if
it is but read, must tell. As it is impressively and popularly written,
it has, I hope, a good chance of readers. I see the National Review has
an article on it,5 with large extracts, and in an excellent tone. He has
one of the clearest intellects I know, combined, I think, with an
excellent moral nature, and is capable, if he has anything like fair
play, of doing great things. Buckle’s untimely end grieved me deeply.6 I
knew of it early, having met at Athens with his travelling companion Mr
Glennie,7 a young man of, I think, considerable promise, who occupies
himself very earnestly with the higher philosophical problems on the
basis of positive science. I look forward to much pleasure from your
book.8 I sought for your name in the reports of the Social Science
meetings,9 which were unusually interesting this year: Hare seems to
have made considerable way,10 and the movement against the disabilities
of women appears to be advancing in a most satisfactory manner.11 After
what passed at those meetings their admission to University degrees is
almost une cause gagnée,12 and that, (next to, if not even before, the
elective franchise) is the most important point of all practically, and
in its effect on their own minds.

I received at Athens a very pleasant note from Fitzjames Stephen,13 to
Edition: current; Page: [788] which I would gladly have returned a
fitting answer but had too many other letters to write, that I had not
time. When you see him, pray thank him from me, and say that I look
forward with pleasure to our better acquaintance.

We have enjoyed our journey extremely, and are bringing back a store of
most pleasant recollections from it. We do not go at once to England,
but first to Avignon, where we shall remain till the beginning of
winter. If you write soon, please inclose to Parker, with the words “to
be forwarded,” as he will know when to send your letter, which I should
be very unwilling to lose.

Remember me kindly to Mr Hare when you see him. I am

dear Mr Fawcett
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

August 1862

Florence Nightingale

Nightingale, Florence

545.


TO FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE1

[
August ? 1862

]

[A copy went to John Stuart Mill, who was much pleased with the
“Observations”,2 and was certain that] the publication of them would do
vast good.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 10. 1862

Salzburg

John Chapman

Chapman, John

546.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Salzburg

Aug. 10. 1862

Dear Sir

I have long been wishing to send something to the Westminster but my
good intentions have hitherto come to nothing, because I waited in hopes
of Edition: current; Page: [789] offering something elaborate, and every
paper I planned either required too much space, or I had not time to
write it. Without giving up all hopes of this kind, it occurs to me
however, that I might be more useful to the Westminster by occasionally
sending something slighter and of less pretension, which one has oftener
time for, and for which suitable subjects are more easily found. Perhaps
it might suit you to take a short paper on Professor Cairnes’s excellent
book “The Slave Power”.2 If so, I could perhaps get it ready in time for
the October number, though I cannot positively promise it for so soon,
as I shall be travelling for the next two or three weeks. If you like
the proposal, please write to me at Saint-Véran, near Avignon, Vaucluse,
France.

I was very sorry to hear of the loss and inconvenience you sustained by
Manwaring’s failure.3 I congratulate you on having produced, under all
difficulties, so good a number as that for July.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 31. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

547.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Aug. 31. 1862

Dear Sir

I have just arrived here and found your two notes. I will lose no time
in setting to work, and I can promise that you shall have something on
Professor Cairnes’ book by the 20th of September at latest.2 It is,
however, an unlucky time for writing on the subject, as even in so short
an interval events may have given an entirely new colour to the
prospect. But it seems better, if only for the purpose of making Mr
Cairnes’ book known as widely as possible, to write at once, rather than
wait till December. If the article, when it reaches you, appears too
slight for the subject, or is in any way superseded by the course of
events, I shall not only take in no way amiss your omitting it, but
should be obliged to you for doing so, and in that case shall be happy
to attempt a better article for the January number.

Edition: current; Page: [790]
From the shortness of the time, as well as for other reasons, I should
rather not review any other book along with that of Mr Cairnes. I am

Dear Sir,
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 31. 62

Avignon

Henry Huth

Huth, Henry

548.


TO HENRY HUTH1

St. Véran
Avignon

Aug. 31. 62

Dear Sir

On arriving here I found your two letters. I am extremely obliged to you
for the interesting particulars you give respecting Buckle whose [death]
no one, not personally intimate with him could regret more deeply than I
do.2 I sympathize sincerely with Mrs Huth3 and thoroughly appreciate the
loss both to herself and to her sons4 of a friend like him in such close
relations with them as he was.

I would most gladly respond to her earnest appeal by giving her any
advice in my power: but the intimacy and personal influence of a first
rate person morally and intellectually not only to young persons but to
all who are capable of receiving it, the loss of which as I know by my
own experience, nothing can replace—And such are the imperfections of
our educational institutions that they can hardly do any thing out of
the little which could be done to supply the place of such an
influence—If I knew of anyone whom I could recommend as a tutor, or of
any place of education fitted for forming the kind of persons whom I
conclude Mrs Huth desires her sons to be, I shd be only too happy to
recommend them, but I go so little into general society that I am not in
the way of hearing even of the best that is to be had. I am truly sorry
that I have so little to say which can either help Mrs Huth in her
difficulty or comfort her in her distress.

I am very glad to hear of the improvement in your own health and of the
Edition: current; Page: [791] approach to completeness of your own work
which I expect to read with much interest.

My address will be here, until the beginning of winter.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 2, 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Parkes

Parkes, Henry

549.


TO HENRY PARKES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 2, 1862

Dear Sir

On arriving here after a long journey only three days ago, I found your
note of 28th June. Allow me to thank you for the pamphlets on Australian
affairs. I take great interest in whatever affects the progress and
prospects of communities which are likely to be of so much importance in
the future history of mankind.

I shall be here for the next few months, but intend returning to England
early in winter. Should you be at that time in England and in London, I
shall hope to have the meeting with you which accidental circumstances
have so long postponed. I am

Dear Sir
 yrs very faithfully

J. S. Mill

Henry Parkes Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 7 sept. 1862

S[aint] V[éran]

550.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

S[aint] V[éran]

le 7 sept. 1862

Mon cher Monsieur

Je ne suis nullement disposé à acheter le pré de M. Cade aux prix de
1000 fr. l’éminée qui me paraît très au dessus de sa valeur. J’ai tout
lieu de croire que ce pré ne vaut pas même 700 francs l’éminée prix
ordinaire des prairies Edition: current; Page: [792] de ce côté-ci et je
propose à M. Cade ce prix-là avec les frais d’achat et la troisième
coupe d’herbe. Au reste on m’offre au voisinage des prés de meilleure
qualité à un prix très inférieur à ce qu’il demande.

Agréez mon cher Monsieur l’expression de ma considération la plus
amicale

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 11. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

551.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 11. 1862

Dear Sir

I send the article by this post,2 and I am glad to think that you will
receive it before the latest of the dates mentioned in your note of
Sept. 2. If you think it good enough for insertion, and are able to send
a proof, I shall be much pleased. If time forbids this, I hope that some
careful person will collate the proof with the manuscript.

It is hardly necessary for me to say that the article is gratuitous. I
am

Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 13. 1862

S[aint] V[éran]

E. R. Edger

Edger, E. R.

552.


TO E. R. EDGER1

S[aint] V[éran]

Sept. 13. 1862

Sir,—

On returning a few days ago from a distant journey I found your note
dated June last & I have read attentively the MS.2 which accompanied it.

Edition: current; Page: [793]
I shd have much to say against several of your positions, & especially
against your definition of liberty; but I do not understand that you
wish to discuss the subject with me, for which in any case I have not
time. I understand you as wishing me to tell you whether, as far as I
can judge from your MS., I consider you competent in point of ability to
pursue enquiries of this nature with a useful result and I need not
hesitate to answer, that I do think you competent. But what I seem to
myself to see in your paper is promise rather than performance. It gives
signs of several of the qualities which go towards making a genuine
thinker: a real desire to go to the bottom of a subject, & not merely to
skim its surface; a certain faculty of laying out a large subject &
looking at it as a whole; finally, whatever you see, you see clearly, &
are able to express clearly to others. I would therefore exhort you by
all means, not only to continue thinking, but to continue writing; not
however (I would recommend) with a view to early publication. The way to
cultivate a really philosophical intellect is to go on long thinking out
subjects for one’s own instruction—with a view to understand them as
thoroughly as possible oneself; reading in the meanwhile whatever is
best worth reading on the subjects one is studying, collating one’s own
thoughts with those of the books one reads & gathering from them new
materials for thinking. Those who do this, patiently & unambitiously,
without looking much to any ulterior object, are the most likely to be
able, sooner or later, to teach something valuable to others. They may
never discover any great new truths; to do this is a good fortune which
happens to few persons in a century, & the less we think of it as likely
to happen to ourselves, the better for us. But originality does not
consist solely in making great discoveries; whoever thinks out a subject
with his own mind, not accepting the phrases of his predecessors instead
of facts, is original, & it is hardly possible for any one to do this
even on the most hacknied subject without turning up some new or
neglected aspects of truths, or making some unexpected & perhaps
fruitful applications of them.

I would recommend to you, then, by all means to persevere in your
speculations; but, were you a Plato, a Locke, or a Bentham, I could not
advise you, unless you had a pecuniary independence, to give your time
to such pursuits to the neglect of other modes of gaining a subsistence.
I believe that to do anything in philosophy, tranquillity of mind, &
especially freedom from anxiety as to the means of livelihood, are
almost indispensable. To live by philosophy, unless as a public teacher
in an University, is wholly impossible; & if your daily occupation
leaves you even a little leisure, you will very probably in that little
do quite as much, in a favourite pursuit, as you would be likely to do
by devoting all your time to it. The mind, if strained too long on one
subject, works less pleasurably, & for that reason, even were there no
other, less vigorously; while combining two occupations makes each of
them, Edition: current; Page: [794] as I have found in my own
experience, a rest from the other. Regretting that you could not receive
this answer to your application at an earlier period,

I am yours very sincerely

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 13. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

553.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 13. 1862

Dear Sir

Your letter of Feb. 13 has only reached me within these few days, on my
return from a distant journey. I am not likely to forget the
correspondence I have had with you, and am glad that you would like to
continue it. There are many things which, in your position and with your
superiority to the prejudices of that position, you must see and know
much better than I do, and on which it would often be of great use to me
to receive the facts and remarks which you could give. It may also be
useful to both of us to compare our ideas on the practical questions
bearing on the elevation of the minds and condition of the operative
classes. I agree with you that more is expected from Cooperative
Societies than they can, as least immediately, realize, and that the
ready money principle is one chief cause of the success of the Rochdale
Store.2 As you say, if a private tradesman were always paid ready money
he could afford to sell cheaper. But would his goods be certain to be of
the perfectly genuine quality which those at Rochdale are? in addition
to which, the working people who buy at the Rochdale Store, share the
profits among them, and obtain, at the same time, the best possible
investment for their savings.

In the new edition of my Political Economy,3 I have somewhat altered and
enlarged what I had before said on the subject of Cooperation and on
that of Strikes. As you may not have seen the edition, I will, the first
time I write to my publisher, desire him to send you a copy; and it
would give me great satisfaction to receive any criticism which your
experience and judgment may suggest to you, on the view I take of those
subjects.

I am
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

Mr John Plummer

Edition: current; Page: [795]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 17, 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

554.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 17, 1862

We have now been rather more than a fortnight in this quiet harbour,
after our journey, and are fully enjoying its peacefulness. We did not
see so much of the Alps, as we expected, after leaving Ischl. . . .

I am doing little at present but reading up the French and English
reviews. But since I arrived I have written and sent off an article on
the American question (à propos of Mr. Cairnes’ book) which will be in
the Westminster Review next month.2 A very interesting series of notes
on America and on the war have been published this summer in an English
periodical (Macmillan’s Magazine)3 and are, I see, lately reprinted as a
volume under the title of “Six months in the Federal States”:4 the
Author is a Mr. Dicey, who had within the last two years published a
book on Rome and Italy.5 He writes very judiciously, as well as with
right feeling, on the whole subject, and what he says respecting the
people of the North, being evidently a faithful transcript of what he
has seen and heard, ought to have some influence. The Times, as might be
expected, is as bad as ever, and even more undisguised in the expression
of its bad wishes. It let out, however, a curious admission the other
day—that, whatever might be in other respects the issue of this war, it
must lead to the destruction of slavery.6 This will be true if the North
succeeds; but if the South should be successful, I expect the very
reverse.—In Europe things appear to be going on well, as far at least,
as mental progress is concerned. This is very visible in the higher
order of writers in France; among whom I invariably remark that what is
bad in thought and sentiment is found chiefly in the publicists who had
made themselves known before 1848, and that the generation of those who
have risen into notice since that time is both higher in morality, and
more philosophic in the intellect.—The Garibaldi affair is very painful,
but it has ended as litle mischievously as perhaps it could have done.
It has at least given Louis Napoleon no pretext for intervention and
less excuse than ever for keeping his troops in Rome; Edition: current;
Page: [796] while Garibaldi,7 it is to be hoped, is still reserved for
better times. If it also destroys Rattazzi,8 that will be another
benefit arising from it. . . . With our compliments to your sister I am
yours very sincerely,

J. St. Mill

P.S. I had written the preceding before I received yours. . . . I should
have written before, had I thought you would have felt any such anxiety
as you mention on our account.9 It will always be a pleasure for me to
hear from you; let me know what you are doing and thinking, and how the
political affairs of your country are proceeding. I can assure you that,
however little expression I may habitually give to such a feeling, you
are one of the few persons whose friendship I value and whom I would
gladly see asserting an influence on the current of public affairs.

J. St. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

September 17th, 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Lothrop Motley

Motley, John Lothrop

555.


TO JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY1

[
Saint Véran, Avignon

]

September 17th, 1862

.

My Dear Sir,

I value the permission you gave me to correspond with you much too
highly not to avail myself of it thus early, although I have very little
to say that will be new, and at the same time interesting, to one whose
thoughts are engrossed as yours must be. If you see Macmillan’s
Magazine, which has from the beginning been steadily on the right side
in American affairs, you must have remarked the ‘Notes of a Journey in
America,’which have been in the course of publication for some months,
ending with a general summing up in the September number.2 This last
paper especially appears to me excellent, Edition: current; Page: [797]
and likely to do much good in England. The whole series has been
reprinted in a volume,3 with the name of the writer, Mr. Edward Dicey,
author of a recent book on Italy and Rome. You will probably see the
Westminster Review of next month, which will contain an article of mine
on the American question, apropos of Mr. Cairnes’s book.4 It is hastily
written, and slight, for such a subject, but “every little helps,” as
the nursery proverb says. I am not at all uneasy about public opinion
here, if only the North is successful. The great number of well-meaning
people and sincere enemies of slavery who have been led into
disapproving of your resistance to the South, when carried to the length
of war, have been chiefly influenced by thinking the re-conquest of the
South impossible. If you prove it to be possible, if you bring the Slave
States under your power, if you make use of that power to reconstitute
Southern society on the basis of freedom, and if finally you wind up the
financial results without breaking faith with any of the national
creditors (among whom must be reckoned the holders of depreciated
currency), you will have all our public with you, except the Tories, who
will be mortified that what they absurdly think an example of the
failure of democracy should be exchanged for a splendid example of its
success. If you come well and honourably through one of the severest
trials which a nation has ever undergone, the whole futurity of mankind
will assume a brighter aspect. If not, it will for some time to come be
very much darkened.

I have read lately two writings of Northern Americans on the subject of
England, which shew a very liberal appreciation of the misdirection of
English opinion and feeling respecting the contest. One is Mr. Thurlow
Weed’s letter,5 which was published in the newspapers, and in which
those just and generous allowances are made for us which many of us have
not made for you. The other is the Rev. Dr. Thompson’s ‘England during
our War,’6 reprinted from the New Englander, which is even
over-indulgent to our people, but too severe on our Government. I
believe that our Government has felt more rightly all through than a
majority of the public.

We shall be at this address until the end of November; afterwards at
Blackheath Park, Kent. I need hardly say that if your occupations should
Edition: current; Page: [798] allow of your writing to me it would not
only give me great pleasure, but would make me better able to be of use
to a cause which I have as much at heart as even yourself.

I am, my dear sir,
 Very truly yours,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 24. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

556.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 24. 1862

.

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for the proof, of which I now return the
concluding page.2

I cannot think of receiving payment for any paper which I may offer to
the Review so long as it is not in a position to pay all its
contributors.

I shall be very happy to give you my best judgment on any matter on
which you may wish to have it. In the case of Italy I am entirely with
you as a matter of feeling; but going on the principle that one ought
not to urge upon a Government any course which, were one in their place,
one would not feel it right to adopt, I cannot think the immediate
incorporation of Rome with the Kingdom of Italy3 of such vital
importance to Italy or to the cause of freedom and progress, as to be
worth a war between England and France, while there would be nothing so
likely to turn the French nation against all that we wish for, and make
them identify themselves with their present ruler, as any attempt by a
foreign power to act upon them by intimidation. Italy has already our
moral support and events have proved that this is much. L[ouis]
N[apoleon] is detested in Italy; and the longer he remains at Rome, the
more certain it becomes that he will have no influence over the
destinies of the country but what force, or intrigue and corruption, may
give him. This is not a thing of small importance: for it was a great
question whether Italy would form its character as a selfgoverning
nation on French ideas or on English, and this question is now rapidly
deciding itself in favour of English. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [799]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 9. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

557.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 9. 1862

Dear Sir

It was a curious coincidence that I should receive a letter from you
dated Innsbruck, so soon after having left that place. I hope you had
better weather than we had during the latter part of our Alpine journey.

Since I wrote last, I am enabled to announce to you another valuable
adhesion. The Journal des Economistes (for June last) which now contains
some of the most important and thorough discussions not merely on
political economy but on morals and politics in general, that are to be
found in any periodical, contains a review of my book on Repr. Govt by
M. Eugène Véron,2 one of the most promising writers of the Revue
Nationale; in which article a clear and intelligent account is given of
your system, and a complete approval and support of it.

I have read your little book on what may be called the Building
Question,3 with great interest. It is much to be desired that Mr.
Peabody,4 whose influence, if exerted, would naturally be paramount in
the disposal of his own magnificent gift, may see that the only way of
making it useful is to erect such houses as will pay, and by selling
them when built, provide a sum to recommence with. Your plan is, I
think, evidently the best for combining remunerativeness with the social
object in view, by appropriating the upper stories (as in Paris) to
working people, the lower ones being laid out in middle class lodgings
and the groundfloor in shops. You have also done good service by
insisting on the fitness of having a single local government for the
whole of London; which gave you, moreover, an opportunity of shewing
that your plan of election, adapted as you propose, affords the only
mode in which such a government could advantageously be constituted. I
hope the writers in the London Review and the Nonconformist5 supported
this part of your proposal as well as the other. I hear very good
accounts of the London Review, which is said to be fitting itself more
and more to take the place of the Saturday.

Edition: current; Page: [800]
I suppose Mr. Morin6 of Geneva has sent you his second pamphlet,
containing the account of your plan. Competent advocacy of it seems to
be multiplying on all sides.

I cannot end my letter without expressing my exultation at the glorious
news of Lincoln’s having made up his mind to propose to Congress to
declare all slaves in the insurgent States free.7 The same scribes among
us who taunted him with not doing it will now, of course, snub him for
doing it; this is selon les règles. But it has come sooner than I myself
ventured to predict, and however little apparent effect it may have at
the first moment, it is the death-blow to negro slavery in America.

We expect to return to England early in December, up to which time we
shall remain here, and I need not say how glad I shall be to hear from
you.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 31. 1862

S[aint] V[éran]

John Lothrop Motley

Motley, John Lothrop

558.


TO JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY1

S[aint] V[éran]

Oct. 31. 1862

My Dear Sir—

Allow me to thank you most warmly for your long & interesting letter,
which if it had been twice as long as it was, would only have pleased me
more. There are few persons that I have seen only once,2 with whom I so
much desire to keep up a communication, as with you; & the importance of
what I learn from you, respecting matters so full of momentous
consequences to the world would make such communication most valuable to
me even if I did not wish for it on personal grounds.—The state of
affairs in America has materially improved since you wrote, by the
defeat of the enemy in Maryland & their expulsion from it,3 & still more
by Mr. Lincoln’s anti-slavery proclamation,4 which no American, I think,
can have received with more exultation than I did. It is of the highest
importance, & more so because the manifest reluctance with which the
President made up his mind to that decided step indicates that the
progress of opinion in the Edition: current; Page: [801] country had
reached the point of seeing its necessity for the effectual prosecution
of the war. The adhesion of so many Governors of States, some of them
originally Democrats, is a very favorable sign,5 & thus far the measure
does not seem to have materially weakened your hold upon the Border
Slave States. The natural tendency will be if the war goes on
successfully to reconcile those States to emancipating their own slaves,
availing themselves of the pecuniary offers made by the Federal Govt.6 I
still feel some anxiety about the reception which will be given to the
measures by Congress when it meets & I should much like to know what are
your expectations on the point. In England, the Proclamation has only
increased the venom of those who after taunting you so long with caring
nothing for Abolition, now reproach you for your Abolitionism as the
worst of your crimes.7 But you will find that whenever any name is
attached to these wretched effusions, it is always that of some
deeply-dyed Tory—generally the kind of Tory to whom slavery is rather
agreeable than not, or who so hate your democratic institutions that
they would be sure to inveigh against whatever you did, & are enraged at
being no longer able to taunt you with being false to your own
principles. It is from these also that we are now beginning to hear,
what disgusts me more than all the rest—the base doctrine that it is for
the interest of England that the American Republic should be broken up.
Think of us as ill as you may (& we have given you abundant cause) but
do not, I entreat you, think that the general English public is so base
as this. Our national faults are not now of that kind & I firmly believe
that the feeling of almost all English Liberals, even those whose
language has been the most objectionable, is one of sincere regret for
the disruption which they think inevitable. As long as there is a Tory
party in England it will rejoice at everything which injures or
discredits American institutions, but the Liberal party who are now &
are likely to remain much the strongest are naturally your friends &
allies & will return to that position when once they see that you are
not engaged in a hopeless, & therefore as they think an irrational &
unjustifiable contest. There are writers enough here to keep up the
fight, and meet the malevolent comments on all your proceedings by right
ones. Besides Cairnes,8 & Dicey,9 & H. Martineau,10 Edition: current;
Page: [802] & Ludlow,11 & Hughes,12 besides the D. News,13 & McMillan,14
& the Star,15 there is now the Westr16 & the London Review,17 to which
several of the best writers of the Sat. have gone over; there is Ellison
of Liverpool,18 the author of “Slavery & Secession” & editor of a
monthly economical journal “The Exchange”19 & there are other writers
less known who if events go on favorably, will rapidly multiply. Here,
in France, the state of opinion on the subject is most gratifying. All
Liberal Frenchmen seem to have been with you, from the first. They did
not know more about the subject than the English, but their instincts
were truer. By the way, what did you think of the narrative of the
Campaign on the Potomac in the R. des deux Mondes of Oct. 15, by the
Comte de Paris?20 It looks veracious & is certainly intelligent & in
general effect likely I shd think to be very useful to the cause.

I still think you take too severe a view of the conduct of our Govt. I
grant that the extra official dicta of some of the Ministry have been
very unfortunate, especially that celebrated one of Lord Russell on
which I have commented Edition: current; Page: [803] not sparingly in
the W.R.21 Gladstone, too, a man of a much nobler character than Ld R,
has said things lately22 which I very much regret though they were
accompanied by other things shewing that he had no bad feelings towards
you & regretted their existence in others. But as a Govt I do not see
that their conduct is objectionable. The port of Nassau23 may be all
that you say it is, but the U. States also have the power, & have used
it largely, of supplying themselves with munitions of war from our
ports. If the principle of neutrality is accepted,24 our markets must be
open to both sides alike, & the general opinion in England is (I do not
say whether rightly or wrongly) that if the course adopted is favorable
to either side it is to the U. States, since the Confederates owing to
the blockade of their ports have so much less power to take advantage of
the facilities extended equally to both. Then again if the Tuscarora was
ordered away,25 the Sumter was so too.26 What you mention about a
seizure of arms by our Govt must, I feel confident, have taken place
during the Trent difficulty, at which time alone (neither before nor
after) has the export of arms to America been interdicted.27

Edition: current; Page: [804]
It is very possible that too much may have been made of Butler’s
proclamation28 & that he was more wrong in form & phraseology than in
substance. But with regard to the watchword said to have been given out
by Pakenham at New Orleans,29 I have always hitherto taken it for a mere
legend like the exactly parallel ones which grew up under our own eyes
at Paris in 1848 respecting the socialist insurrection of June.30 What
authority there may be for it I do not know, but if it is true nothing
can mark more strongly the change which has taken place in the European
standard of belligerent rights since the wars of the beginning of the
century;31 for if any English commander at the present time were to do
the like, he never could shew his face again in English society even if
he escaped being broken by a court martial; & I think we are entitled to
blame in others what none of us, of the present generation at least,
would be capable of perpetrating. You are perhaps hardly aware how
little the English of the present day feel of solidarité with past
generations. We do not feel ourselves at all concerned to justify our
predecessors. Foreigners reproach us with having been the great enemies
of neutral rights so long as we were belligerents, & with turning round
and stickling for them now when we are neutrals, but the real fact is we
are concerned & have no hesitation in saying (what our Liberal party
said even at the time) that our policy in that matter in the great
Continental war was totally wrong.

But while I am anxious that liberal & friendly Americans should not
think worse of us than we really deserve, I am deeply conscious &
profoundly grieved & mortified that we deserve so ill; & are making, in
consequence, so pitiful a figure before the world—with which if we are
not daily & insultingly taxed by all Europe it is only because our
enemies are glad to see us doing exactly what they expected, justifying
their opinion of us, acting in a way which they think perfectly natural
because they think it perfectly selfish.

Edition: current; Page: [805]
If you kindly favour me with another letter here, it is desirable that
it should arrive before the end of November. After that time my address
will be Blackheath Park, Kent.

I am, my dear sir,
 Very truly yours,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 7, 1862

S[aint] V[éran]

Nikolai Ogareff

Ogareff, Nikolai

559.


TO NIKOLAI OGAREFF1

S[aint] V[éran]

Nov. 7, 1862

Monsieur—

Je vous remercie très sincèrement de votre lettre et de l’envoi de votre
livre.2 Loin de voir avec indifférence l’immense révolution morale,
politique et sociale qui s’avance à pas croissants en Russie,3 je la
regarde comme un des phénomènes les plus importants d’un siècle déjà si
riche en grands événements. J’en observe toutes les péripéties avec le
plus vif intérêt, quelque difficulté que j’éprouve à apprécier leur
portée autrement que sous un point de vue général. Vous pouvez donc
juger de la part que je puis tirer de votre Essai pour préciser mes
idées et pour donner plus de détermination à mes espérances.

Quant à vos conclusions dont vous pensez que quelques unes pourraient me
sembler douteuses il faudrait que je fusse bien présomptueux pour avoir
des opinions décidées sur la manière dont les principes généraux de
science sociale doivent être appliqués à un état de choses si éloigné de
tous ceux dont j’ai une vraie connaissance. Mais je n’ai aucune
répugnance doctrinaire envers l’administration communale des terres, et
je ne suis pas éloigné de penser avec vous que la réorganisation sociale
de la Russie doit respecter une institution si profondément historique
et si enracinée dans les mœurs populaires. Cela admis, la plupart de vos
conclusions en découlent naturellement. Quoiqu’il en soit, il me semble
impossible de ne pas accepter l’idée qui fait l’esprit de tout votre
livre—savoir que le fonctionarisme est le véritable fléau de la Russie
et qu’une réforme quelconque ne peut réussir qu’autant qu’elle émancipe
les personnes et les choses de ce joug insupportable, et fasse décider
Edition: current; Page: [806] les intérêts tant communs que particuliers
par les intéressés. Ceci est dans ma conviction plus important que le
système représentatif même le mieux ordonné, bien qu’en Russie les deux
choses paraissent devoir aller pas à pas et être nécessaires l’une à
l’autre.

Agréez Monsieur l’expression de mon respect et de considération toute
particulière.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 28, 1862

Sister Marie de St. Elie

Elie, Sister Marie de St.

560.


TO SISTER MARIE DE ST. ELIE1

[After
Nov. 28, 1862

]

Madame—

C’est avec les sentiments du plus sincère respect pour vous et pour
votre œuvre charitable que je me trouve dans l’impossibilité de
m’associer à cette œuvre par une souscription pécuniaire.

Je ne suis pas Catholique et votre établissement est essentiellement un
foyer d’éducation et par là de propagande catholique. Or dans un pays où
la très grande majorité des familles riches professe la réligion
catholique, il me semble que je suis plus dans mon dévoir en réservant
les modiques moyens dont je puis disposer pour être employés à appuyer
des efforts, également bienfaisants dans leur but, et plus en harmonie
avec mes propres convictions.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 5. 1862

Blackheath Park

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

561.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 5. 1862

Dear Sir

Your letter to Constantinople of 8th July arrived there after our
departure, and was forwarded here. I have consequently only received it
within the last two days. It gave me much pleasure on many accounts. I
have also to thank you for the newspapers containing your excellent
letters in the Daily News,2 and for a copy of your Lecture,3 which I
shall read with great interest. It is Edition: current; Page: [807] very
gratifying that your book should have already done so much good. There
is certainly a counter current in our favour, though the readers of the
Times are not allowed to hear anything about it. You probably recognized
me in the review of your book in the October number of the Westminster.4
You may add the editor, Dr Chapman, to the number of those on whom you
have made a great and useful impression. I have no doubt that, in
opinion, he was with us before; but your book raised him to greater
earnestness on the subject.

The article in the Edinburgh5 was in a very odious spirit. I should not
wonder if it were Senior’s.6 The wretched thing in Fraser which you so
justly characterize,7 with others as bad as itself by which it has been
followed, have quite disgusted me with the present conduct of the
Magazine.8

I had hoped to see you at the Political Economy Club this evening, but I
infer from your letter that you will not be there, as indeed neither
shall I; being at present not very well, and indisposed to be out at
night without stronger temptation than is held out by today’s question.9
I expect to be here for several months, and I hope it will not be long
before I see you. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [808]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

[December] 13. 1862

Blackheath

John Chapman

Chapman, John

562.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Blackheath

[December] 13. 1862

2

Dear Sir

The article I proposed to you is sent by book post today.3 I can answer
for the correctness of the information, and I agree generally in the
remarks, which are drawn from real and intelligent observation. I am
however particularly requested to say that if you do not think the
article sufficiently good either in matter or execution to be inserted,
the writer will be neither surprised nor discouraged. It was written,
and is offered, solely from interest in the subject and in the review,
and if thought worthy of acceptance, it will be gratuitous.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 14. 1862

Blackheath Park

Augustus de Morgan

Morgan, Augustus de

563.


TO AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 14. 1862

Dear Sir,

I am indebted to you for calling my attention to what certainly seems to
have been an oversight on my part,2 and I only wish I had known of it
before, instead of just after, the publication of a new edition. My
mistake was, that in setting out the number of cases I did not strike
out those in which the statement of the two witnesses conflict. As I now
understand the matter, out of twelve cases in which both witnesses make
an assertion, there will, (according to the figures in my example) be
six cases in which both are right: one in which both are wrong: three in
which A is wrong and C is right; and two in which C is wrong and A is
right. But the last two suppositions being known à posteriori not to
have been realized, the cases consistent with known facts are in all
only seven out of twelve; and among these the correctness Edition:
current; Page: [809] of the joint operation of A & B is realized in six.
The probability is therefore six to one, as you state.

I am, dear Sir, yours very truly

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 14, 1862

Blackheath Park, Kent

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

564.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park, Kent

Dec. 14, 1862

I will not wait for the further letter which you promise, before saying
how glad I shall be to see you in January, and thanking you as well for
the kind and friendly feelings shewn in your letter as for the very
interesting information contained in it. I am particularly glad of what
you have been doing on the Subject of the Principle of Contradiction, as
I have commenced writing something2 to which a full understanding of
that subject is indispensable, and I do not feel that I have yet
thoroughly mastered it. Your account of Austrian politics is very
valuable, and I thank you for the American news, which, as you
anticipated, was entirely unknown to me. The paper giving an account of
my article in Frazer reached me duly.3 I am much gratified that you
thought the article worth so full an abstract even for Germany, though I
am almost ashamed of the very flattering terms in which you spoke of it
and of me. I am very glad that you are so far advanced with the Logic
and I return your paper of questions duly filled up.4 I am much
interested also with your Herculanean speculations. . . .5

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 16. 1862

Blackheath Park

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

565.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 16. 1862

Dear Sir

I thank you very much for your very gratifying letter, and also for the
Daily News containing the admirable letter signed Anglo Saxon.2 I am
much Edition: current; Page: [810] mistaken if Goldwin Smith will not
grow into a power in the country, and this letter shews more than
anything I have yet seen of his, that he is likely to be a highly
beneficent one. But the value of the letter, both here and in America,
would be greatly increased if it were known from whom it comes and I
greatly regret that he has not published it with his name. Would it be
possible to ascertain from him whether he would allow me to make the
authorship known to some of my American friends and correspondents?
Every new name of importance, which is attached to sentiments like those
of his letter, is worth volumes in promoting a return to friendly
feelings between the two countries.

Things are already going better in both countries. Today’s Times
contains, along with the cheering intelligence of Lincoln’s proposal to
Congress to redeem all the slaves,3 the noble as well as wise act of the
New York Chamber of Commerce in opening a subscription for Lancashire:4
Meanwhile a strong Lancashire abolitionist5 writes to me as follows:
“The tone of public opinion both here [Manchester] and in Liverpool has
undergone a slight change for the better during the last three months.
Whilst formerly nearly all people frequenting the Manchester and
Liverpool Exchanges were openly professing to sympathize with the South,
they now mostly declare that they do not have any sympathies for either
of the contending parties. I fancy that before long they will come round
still more to the right side. As regards the working classes, I find
that their opinions on the American question have not altered in the
least, notwithstanding the enormous increase of the distress. It is even
intended to hold a public meeting in the Free Trade Hall on the 31st of
this month,6 the last day of slavery, in order to send an address of the
working men of Lancashire to President Lincoln. The address and the
resolutions are drawn up by Mr Francis Newman.7 It is not decided yet
whether any M.P.’s will be allowed to join in this demonstration; or
whether merely working men Edition: current; Page: [811] will be the
speakers. At any rate the principal representatives of the operatives
will be Hooson8 and Edwards,9 the President and Secretary of the Store
in Great Ancoats Street, two very intelligent men and good speakers, and
known as the leaders of the most advanced section of the Manchester
working men.”

I know this will delight you as much as it does me.

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 20. 1862

Blackheath Park

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

566.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 20. 1862

Dear Sir

I write at once to say that I have no objection to be quoted in the
manner you propose, as the writer of the article in the Westminster.2 I
should think Dr Chapman would not object, especially as it must be
through him that the authorship became so generally known as you tell me
it is; but I should prefer that the application should come from
yourself.

I have not yet seen the article in the Spectator,3 but will get it. I
was extremely pleased with your Lecture,4 and glad to hear that there
are several societies in different places anxious to circulate it. I
hope the enlarged edition of your book will soon come out.5 I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [812]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 24. 1862

B[lackheath] P[ark]

George Finlay

Finlay, George

567.


TO GEORGE FINLAY1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Dec. 24. 1862

Dear Mr. Finlay—

I am very much indebted to you for your most interesting letter & for
the important memoir2 which accompanied it & which I hope I may shew as
yours to any one who may be in a position to benefit by it. I suppose
the copy which you gave to Mr Scarlett3 will have served for the
information of the Government here; otherwise it might have been as well
to send a copy to Gladstone & indeed it would be worth while doing so in
any case. I have learnt very much from the paper & as far as I can judge
there is only one point in it on which I have any doubt, viz. the
preference you give to the abolition of the land tax over any change in
the mode of levying it. The rent of land is in itself so fit an object
of taxation that if there is any possible mode of rendering such a tax
unoppressive it seems desirable to retain it. No doubt the money &
valuation necessary for a great assessment would take too long and could
not be trusted to the present race of officials, but would it not be
possible to take a low average of what each landed property has actually
paid for the last five or ten years & lay this as a fixed annual charge
on the estate? I do not see that this would create any insuperable
difficulties in the event of mutations. If the mutation takes place
under the law of inheritance, the law when it decides the share of the
estate due to each claimant, would impose on him the same share of the
tax. If the case were one of bequest, sale, or gift, the owner might be
allowed to charge the whole, or any part, or no part of the tax on the
alienated portion as he pleased, provided always that if either the
portion alienated or the portion retained were burthened beyond its
total value, the remaining portion should be liable for the excess.

If it has been possible for Prince Alfred to accept. . . .4

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th December 1862

Max Kyllmann

Kyllmann, Max

568.


TO MAX KYLLMANN1

24th December 1862

.

Dear Sir—

I thank you very sincerely for your two letters2 & for the important
Edition: current; Page: [813] & most gratifying intelligence which they
contain. Hardly anything could do more good at present than such a
demonstration from the suffering operatives of Lancashire3—while there
is in the fact itself & in the state of mind which prompts it, a moral
greatness which is at once a just rebuke to the mean feeling of so great
a portion of the public on this momentous subject & a source of
unqualified happiness to those whose hopes & fears for the great
interests of humanity are as mine are, inseparably bound up in the moral
& intellectual prospects of the working classes.

I am very well pleased with the Resolutions & Address. I applaud your
endeavour to get the passage about the “rights of husbands” struck out
but taken with the context it does not necessarily bear the
objectionable meaning, though the phrase would not have been used by any
writer who had a just feeling respecting the equal rights of the two
sexes.4

On the subject of the query you put to me I perfectly agree in your
opinion as far as you have stated it. The improvement in the condition
of the working classes through the success of cooperation could not be
used up in increase of numbers in less than a generation, & in that time
the moral & intellectual influences of cooperation which are of still
greater value than the physical, will have had a considerable period in
which to operate. If cooperation were universal the necessity of
regulating population would be palpable to every one. And even a partial
application contains important lessons of the same kind.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 24. 1862

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Joseph Napier

Napier, Joseph

569.


TO JOSEPH NAPIER1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Dec. 24. 1862

.

Dear Sir—

I have had the honor of receiving your letter of Dec. 22nd.

I have not seen Bishop Fitzgerald’s publication,2 but you are quite
right in supposing that what I wrote about Miracles3 had not the
smallest reference Edition: current; Page: [814] to Butler, but only to
the writers who professed to reply to Hume, & especially Campbell.4 It
is many years since I read or looked into the Analogy & I cannot at
present remember whether my remarks apply even partially to anything
said by Butler. That in their main scope they are inapplicable to him is
evident, since it appears from your letter that he fully recognized the
distinction between improbability on the doctrine of chances &
improbability in the only sense which constitutes incredibility.

My view of the general question is briefly this: That a miracle,
considered merely as an extraordinary fact, is as susceptible of proof
as other extraordinary facts: That as a miracle it cannot, in the strict
sense, be proved, because there never can be conclusive proof of its
miraculous nature; but that to any one who already believes in an
intelligent creator & ruler of the universe the moral probability that a
given extraordinary event (supposed to be fully proved) is a miracle,
may greatly outweigh the probability of its being the result of some
unknown natural cause.5

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 29. 1862

Blackheath Park

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

570.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 29. 1862

Dear Sir

I am glad to hear that Mr Coningham2 intends to recommend your son.3 The
recommendation being to the parliamentary distributer of patronage,4 I
do not know through what office or for what vacancy it will be
available. But if Mr Stansfeld5 is intimate with Sir Charles Wood6 and
is willing to speak to him in your son’s behalf, you probably could not
have a better channel Edition: current; Page: [815] for promoting your
wishes in relation to the India Office. I have myself no title to ask
any favour of Sir Charles Wood, nor any reason to suppose that I have
any influence with him; but neither on this nor on any other occasion
have I any objection to be mentioned as one of those who would be glad
of any good fortune which happened to a son of yours, and would applaud
any one who would not be deterred by your opinions from giving your son
a fair chance. I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

G. J. Holyoake Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 30. 1862

Blackheath Park

Mrs. Henry Huth

Huth, Mrs. Henry

571.


TO MRS. HENRY HUTH1

Blackheath Park

Dec. 30. 1862

Dear Madam

It would be very gratifying to me if I had it in my power to say
anything which could be either useful or consoling to you. But even if I
thought myself competent to give advice in such a matter as that on
which you wish to consult me, I could not be qualified to advise
concerning the education of those of whom I have no personal knowledge.2
Since, however, you say that the points on which you wish for my opinion
are definite, and clearly before your own mind, I should be very happy
to give you the best answers I can under the circumstances; but I should
be able to do this much better, and should much prefer doing it, in a
written form.

I am
 Dear Madam
 Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [816]


1863

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 7. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

572.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Jan. 7. 1863

Dear Bain—

I have been here now for about a month & as it is a long time since I
either wrote to you or heard from you I think it is time to send you a
bulletin from myself & to ask for one from you.

I have done a good deal of work on Hamilton2 at Avignon & some here,
though in both places I have had & shall have for some time longer,
exceptional occupations which make me rather slow in getting on: My plan
has been to go deliberately through the whole writings of Hamilton,
writing down in the form of notes, the substance of what I as yet find
to say on each point. This will make it comparatively easy to write the
book3 when I have finished the preparatory work. The only point which I
have yet developed at any length is the formation of the idea of
externality,4 & consequently of matter, & this, I think I have brought
out more fully & clearly than had ever been done before, though my
theory does not differ essentially from yours or from Grote’s, as indeed
from our premises there can be but one theory. But I have grappled with
the details of the subject in a manner which I have nowhere yet seen. I
mean in this book to do what the nature & scope of the Logic forbade me
to do there, to face the ultimate metaphysical difficulties of every
question on which I touch.

By the way, is it not surprising that Hamilton shd have believed & made
the world believe, that he held the doctrine of the relativity of human
knowledge? As held by him the doctrine is little better than a play upon
the word knowledge, since he maintains that a great mass of Belief,
differing from Knowledge in the mode but not in the certainty of
conviction, may philosophically Edition: current; Page: [817] & ought
morally to be entertained respecting the attributes of the Unknowable.
Nor is even this all, for he does not hold to the doctrine of
unknowability even in his own sense; but thinks that the primary
qualities of matter are given in Consciousness as attributes of Things
in Themselves: I used to wonder at the catena of authorities he brought
to prove that almost all philosophers have thought as he did; but I
ought to have known that he was more likely to be right in his erudition
than in his philosophy, & I now find him so, for his own doctrine
amounts to no more than what was thought by the writers whom he quotes.
His speculations on the point seem to me of no philosophic value except
as refutations of Schelling5 & Hegel,6 while the use they can be
practically put to is shown in Mansel’s detestable, to me absolutely
loathsome book.7 We are taught there, from Hamilton’s premises, that as
we cannot know what God is in himself, nothing that we are told
concerning him is in the smallest degree incredible because it is
monstrous to the human reason or conscience; & that because we cannot
know what Absolute Goodness is, we are at liberty & in some cases are
bound to believe that it is not the perfection of human goodness but the
direct contrary of it. It is true that these conclusions are very
illogically drawn from Hamilton’s & Mansel’s own premises; these being,
that we do not know God as he is in himself, but know him as we do other
things, in his relation to us; in other words, phenomenally; which
places him in exactly the same category, as an object of thought, with
our human fellow creatures, & with Matter; which also we do not know as
they are in themselves. God, in fact, is a subject of knowledge insofar
as thinkable at all, namely as a subject of phenomenal experience, & as
such is amenable to the canons of phenomenal credibility; & if any
proposition concerning Man or Matter may & ought to be rejected because
it violates those canons, so for the same reason may any proposition
concerning God.

Having been so much disappointed by Hamilton’s conception of the
relativity of human knowledge I shd like to look again at Ferrier to see
if his is any better.8 I think you have my copy of the Institutes of
Metaphysic; if so, & if you are not at present needing it, I shd be
obliged by your sending it, but this need not be done for the next two
or three weeks, for I have enough in hand to occupy me during that time.

In Herbert Spencer’s “first principles” I do find a much better
conception Edition: current; Page: [818] of the doctrine of relativity9
though if he holds to it in its proper sense he must give up much which
he has said in his Principles of Psychology.10 The book is a remarkable
one in many respects & its wide reaching systematisation of so many
heterogeneous elements is very imposing. But was there ever so strange a
notion (for a man who sees so much) as that the doctrine of the
Conservation of Force11 is a priori & a law of Consciousness? He
expresses himself almost as if he thought that there is no objective
standard of truth at all, which is in one sense true, but not in the
obvious sense; inasmuch as each person’s phenomenal experience is to him
a standard relatively objective, & the correction of error consists to
each mind in bringing its ideas & their relations into nearer accordance
with what are or would be in the given circumstances, its sensations or
impressions & their relations. Of course Grote meant nothing at variance
with this,12 but the omission to state it explicitly seems to me both an
imperfection in the theory & a great stumbling block to its reception &
on my pointing it out he at once said that he would supply the defect.

We have just returned from a visit to Grote during which I had an
opportunity of reading some of his MS.13 I chose the Theætetus14 as
falling in with the subject of my present thoughts & I was delighted to
find how good it is. He has triumphed wonderfully over the difficulty of
rendering the thoughts or semi-thoughts of Plato & of those on whom
Plato commented, with the language of modern philosophy; the view of
Plato himself which goes through it will, I think, be recognized as
original & striking; & his own thoughts on the matters discussed are
good & well stated. I found however an oversight which you also must
have perceived in reading it, viz. that his mode of defending the
Protagorean maxim is very open to misconception.15

I do not know if I have told you how great an admirer you have in my
translator Mr Gomperz. (I call him my translator because his translation
of the Logic is nearly finished.) He is the most clearheaded German I
have ever yet known or known of. He is coming to London some time in
this winter & I am sorry the time of year will prevent me from bringing
you & him together Edition: current; Page: [819] unless indeed he shd
travel northward, in which case I am sure he will wish to be introduced
to you.

With our kind regards to Mrs Bain

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 7. 1863

Blackheath Park

Mrs. Henry Huth

Huth, Mrs. Henry

573.


TO MRS. HENRY HUTH1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 7. 1863

Dear Madam

The plan which has occurred to you for the home education of your sons
is excellent, provided that you can succeed in finding any person of the
calibre you require, who would be willing and able to exercise the
general superintendence which you contemplate. That, however, is the
difficulty; and it is one in regard to which I am not able to give the
smallest suggestion.

Whether, however, you are able to realize your wishes in this respect or
not, I think I should recommend as what would be ultimately desirable,
to send your sons to one or other of the two old Universities.2 Twenty
years ago these were about the last places which I should have
recommended in any parallel case; but they are not very much changed,
and free enquiry and speculation on the deepest and highest questions,
instead of being crushed or deadened, are now more rife there than
almost anywhere else in England. And the places not only afford great
facilities for study, but a strong stimulus to it, by the competition
for honours. If Oxford should be chosen, Balliol College, where they
would be under Jowett,3 would be preferable, not only on account of his
liberal tone of thought, but also of his remarkable success in training
pupils in the studies of the place. I mention this because I believe it
is necessary to apply a long time (even years) beforehand, in order to
be admitted to the College.

If you decide to look forward to one of the Universities, what is to be
done in the meanwhile will naturally be considerably influenced by that
decision. There is little difficulty, I believe, in finding persons well
qualified to prepare youths for the matriculation examinations.
Meanwhile, both for that purpose and for general cultivation, your sons
might probably with advantage attend some of the classes at University
College, London; and if they are still of an age for school, and you are
not able to do better for them at home, the London University School is,
I should think, one of the least objectionable Edition: current; Page:
[820] which could be found. Mr Key4 is a good scholar, a man of
considerable ability, and free from the ordinary prejudices of
schoolmasters, at least those of an ecclesiastical kind.

As you have allowed me to read Mr Buckle’s impressions respecting your
sons,5 I cannot help saying that I hope you will not be in the smallest
degree discouraged by his having thought one of them naturally slow,
since he also testifies to his being painstaking. Not only in the
pursuits of ordinary life, but in those of intellect, much more depends
on labour and perseverance than on quickness: the last is even often a
snare, since those who can do with ease, much that to others requires
labour, often get into the habit of not doing at all, anything which
they cannot do with ease; a habit as fatal to real and great eminence as
hopeless stupidity would be.

I am Dear Madam
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 9. 1863

Blackheath Park

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

574.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 9. 1863

Dear Sir

Many thanks for your note. I shall avail myself of every occasion that
offers for making known to Americans how powerful and warm a supporter
their cause has in Mr Goldwin Smith.2

Since I wrote last, I have seen the article in the Spectator on a negro
army3 and I think as highly of it as you do. That paper (which I had not
seen for a long time) pleased me so much both by its opinions and its
ability that I have commenced taking it in.

I thought your reply to the Saturday Review4 very good and effective,
and I agree in substance with the view you take of the interest of the
slaveholders, quoad the renewal of the slave trade. The true parallel
case is that which you Edition: current; Page: [821] put, when you
compare their position to that of the owners of existing machines, in
relation to an improvement in machinery. But I think, both in the one
case and in the other, their interest in keeping up the value of their
existing stock might, conceivably, preponderate over their interest in
cheapening the means of future production. Obviously it does so if they
are going to sell their slaves, or machinery. Even if they are not,
their present credit, or means of borrowing is increased by the high
price of their stock. If neither of these things is of importance to
them, still other and new producers starting with cheaper slaves or
machinery, would be able to undersell them, and by lowering the price of
the produce, diminish the annual returns to their capital in the full
ratio of the diminution in the pecuniary value of the capital itself.
They could not transfer part of their capital elsewhere, for they have
lost part of the capital itself. What would, I think, prevent their
interests from suffering on the whole, is the vastness of the market,
which is capable of absorbing a greatly increased quantity of produce.
By working their slaves harder, they could at once recover at least a
part of their loss: when the slaves were worn out by overwork, and
replaced by a cheaper article, the loss would cease altogether; and both
before and afterwards they would be in the situation of manufacturers
[in] a very brisk and thriving trade, who almost always gain more by
increasing the total production, than they lose by the depreciation, or
in many cases even by the total sacrifice of superseded machinery.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13 January, 1863

Blackheath Park

Henry Pitman

Pitman, Henry

575.


TO HENRY PITMAN1

Blackheath Park

13 January, 1863

I am sorry to hear that so useful a publication as the Co-operator has
to complain of want of encouragement.

A vehicle for Co-operative news and an organ for discussing the many
important practical questions which arise in the progress of
Co-operation, is very much wanted; and its discontinuance would be much
to be regretted. I have paid £1 . . . for the extension fund.

Edition: current; Page: [822]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 15. 1860

Blackheath

Henry Reeve

Reeve, Henry

576.


TO HENRY REEVE1

Blackheath

Jan. 15. 1860

Dear Sir

In going through Mr Austin’s Lectures,2 I find that one important
Lecture,3 numbered as the 40th, is wanting, and that an appeal is made
to any of Mr Austin’s pupils who possess notes of it, to supply them.

I made and wrote out rather full notes of the whole course, and though
the series is not complete—having been lent to various persons, by some
of whom it was returned imperfect—I find on reference that the missing
lecture (No. 46 in my numeration) is among those I have left. I shall be
very happy if the notes can be made useful to supply, in however
imperfect a manner, the hiatus.

All the other notes are equally at Mrs Austin’s disposal, if she should
wish to examine them in case the developments they contain of the
memoranda which it appears that Mr Austin often made for extemporaneous
exposition, should include passages worth subjoining to the Lectures in
an Appendix or otherwise. In looking for the missing lecture, my eye
fell upon a criticism on the Code Napoleon,4 which is not in the printed
sheets, and which seems to me exceedingly well worth preserving.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Henry Reeve Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [823]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 17. 1863

Blackheath

Henry Reeve

Reeve, Henry

577.


TO HENRY REEVE1

Blackheath

Jan. 17. 1863

Dear Sir

I have sent to your address by the Parcels Delivery Company, the whole
of the notes.2 The Lectures of which no notes remain, are Nos 17 to 24,
and 61. I have put separate from the rest No 46 (corresponding to the
missing No 40 in the printed sheets) together with the one immediately
preceding it, which contains the remarks on the Prussian and French
Codes,3 and which, though one of the most important Lectures of the
whole course, is also totally absent from the printed series.

I am
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 17. 1863

Blackheath Park

578.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 17. 1863

Dear Sir

I shall not be able to attend the meeting,2 but if I have an
opportunity, I will endeavour to place the tickets you sent
advantageously to the cause.

I read with great pleasure the report of your interview with Mr Adams,3
and am particularly glad that in his judgment, public opinion in this
country is improving on the subject of the struggle in America. My own
impression on the point coincides with his.

I am Dear Sir
 yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [824]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 21, 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Samuel Bailey

Bailey, Samuel

579.


TO SAMUEL BAILEY1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Jan. 21, 1863

Dear Sir—

Allow me to thank you very sincerely for the gift of your last two
works. The one on Shakespeare2 was very pleasant reading & many of the
conjectural emendations seemed to me happy, while in other cases I
fancied that a good deal might be said for the received text. But it is
almost an impertinence in me to make any observations on a subject on
which my opinion is so little worth consideration.

The new volume of your Letters is, I think, at least equal to either of
its predecessors.3 Like everything I have read of yours, it is both
instructive & interesting, & if, as might be expected on such a subject,
I sometimes differ from you, it is always as from a thinker, & from one
whose canons of thought are not fundamentally different from my own. You
may probably anticipate what are our principal points of difference. I
am not able to see how it is possible that the mind shd directly
perceive that one event produces another or how the idea of producing
could be suggested without repeated experience of the sequence of one
event upon the other. Neither can I see how a fact can be known to be
necessary by direct perception or how necessity can be in any way a
direct subject of human apprehension. Apart from these points & minor
ones connected with them I agree with you in essentials on almost [all]
the topics discussed. In several instances you have done, & done well,
what I have been long wishing to see done. This is particularly true of
your remarks on Comte’s depreciation of psychology:4 & on the improper
assimilation by Comte & others, of physical to moral laws, an
assimilation dictated by their desire to attach the idea of religious
obligation to a prudential regard for the warnings of physical science.

In the discussion on Personal Identity5 you have (I think for the very
first time) chosen the right starting point for the inquiry by
considering first what makes me the same person to the apprehension of
others while psychologists have usually started from the far more
complex question, what makes me the same person to my own apprehension.
You have in fact commenced the examination of personal identity by
considering what it is which constitutes Edition: current; Page: [825]
identity in the other & simpler cases in which it is predicated; & by
thus for the first time applying to the question the only philosophical
method of investigation you have as might be expected, arrived at much
better results.

On the subject of Language6 I of course agree in your principal thesis.
The origin & history of a word are not the appropriate evidence of its
present meaning. But have you not a little underrated the worth of this
kind of knowledge in its bearing on the great questions of metaphysics?
The most keenly contested questions in psychology are those which relate
to the origin of certain of our mental notions; & is not light often
thrown on this by the origin of the corresponding words? A certain
school of psychologists are always contending that such & such notions
must be part of the original furniture of the mind, on the ground that
there have always been names for them; & we know how strong is the
tendency to suppose that whatever has got a name, has a real existence,
not as a particular mode of contemplating things which when looked at
for other purposes are known by other names, but as an independent
entity. It seems to me very pertinent in opposition to this notion, to
shew (if it can be shewn) that, for instance, all abstract names were
originally concrete, & that all the more general words of relation were
once nouns or verbs.

The part of your book which treats of “Moral Sentiments”7 I value even
more than all the rest. Several important points of what we agree in
holding as the true theory I have not seen so well brought out anywhere
else. I am the more interested by what you have done because I have
myself been led into a very similar vein of thought & have published it
in a series of three papers which unless you are a habitual reader of
Fraser’s Magazine, you are not likely to have heard of.8 If I reprint
them separately as I am thinking of doing I will beg your acceptance of
a copy. In the last of these papers (December 1861) I derive most of the
peculiar characters of the moral sentiment from the element of
vindictiveness which enters into it. Our modes of developing the idea
are different but not conflicting.

I am Dear Sir

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 26. 1863

Blackheath Park

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

580.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 26. 1863

.

Dear Sir

I presume Mr Holden2 has sent to you, as either he or someone else has
sent to me, the Sydney paper containing the debate in the Lower House on
Edition: current; Page: [826] the bill respecting the Legislative
council.3 If you have seen it, you must indeed have been delighted. The
second reading carried, and a large majority of the speakers on both
sides (including the head of a late ministry4) strong supporters of your
system, with full understanding of it! How encouraging this is as to the
reception it will obtain here, when people once give their minds to it
as a question of the day. If we could obtain as good a debate as that
for it in the House of Commons, it would not be far from being carried.

I inclose a letter I have received from the Foreign Minister (I believe)
of the Sandwich Islands,5 announcing his intention to bring forward
there a proposal for the representation of minorities. Surely this is as
great a wonder as anything in our time, marked out as it is from all
former times by the universality of discussion and progress all over the
world. Please return the letter. I am

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 26. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

John Lothrop Motley

Motley, John Lothrop

581.


TO JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Jan. 26. 1863

Dear Sir.

You can imagine better than I can tell you how much your letter
interested me. I am obliged to you for the information respecting the
first settlers in New England. I did not know that there were so many
people of family among them though I knew there were some and I was
quite aware that the place which the refuse went to was Virginia. All
the popular literature of the century following shews that colony to
have been the one regarded as the Botany Bay of that time. But my
argument did not turn upon this nor was I thinking of race or blood but
of habits & principles. New England as I understand it, was essentially
a middle class colony: the puritans of the Edition: current; Page: [827]
higher classes who took part in its foundation were persons whose
sympathies went in a different channel from that of class or rank. The
southern colonies on the contrary were founded on aristocratic
principles, several of them by aristocratic men as such, & we know that
the greatest of them, Virginia, retained aristocratic institutions till
Jefferson succeeded in abolishing them.2

Concerning the Alabama, most people of sense in this country, I believe,
are reserving their opinion until they hear what the Govt has to say for
itself.3 My own first impression was, that the Govt was not bound nor
even permitted by international rules to prevent the equipment of such a
vessel, provided it allows exactly similar liberty to the other
combatant. But it is plain this notion was wrong since the Govt has
shewn, by issuing an order which arrived too late, that it considered
itself bound to stop the Alabama. What explanation it can give of the
delay will be known when Parlt meets; & what it ought to do now, in
consequence of its previous default, a person must be better acquainted
than I am with international law to be able to judge. But I expect to
have a tolerably decided opinion on the subject after it has been
discussed.

I write to you in much better spirits than I have been in since I saw
you. In the first place things are now going in an encouraging manner in
the West. Murfreesboro is an important as well as glorious achievement4
& from the the general aspects of things I feel great confidence that
you will take Vicksburg5 & cut off Arkansas & Texas6 which then by your
naval superiority will soon be yours. Then I exult in (what from
observation of the politics of that state I was quite prepared for,
though not for the unanimity with which it seems to have been done) the
passing over of Missouri from slavery to freedom:7 a fact which ought to
cover with shame, if they were capable of it, the wretched creatures who
treated Mr Lincoln’s second proclamation8 as waste paper & who described
the son of John Quincy Adams9 as laughing in his Edition: current; Page:
[828] sleeve when he professed to care for the freedom of the negro! But
I am now also in very good heart about the progress of opinion here.
When I returned I already found things better than I expected. Friends
of mine who are heartily with your cause, who are much in society & who
speak in the gloomiest terms of what the general feeling was a
twelvemonth ago, already thought that a change had commenced. And I
heard every now & then that some person of intellect & influence whom I
did not know before to be with you was with you very decidedly. You must
have read one of the most powerful & most thorough pieces of writing in
your defence that has yet appeared, under the signature Anglo Saxon in
the Daily News. That letter is by Goldwin Smith, & though it is not
signed with his name he is willing (as I am authorized to say) that it
shd be known.10 Again Dr Whewell,11 one from whom I shd not have
expected so much, feels, I am told, so strongly on your side that people
complain of his being rude to them on the subject & he will not suffer
the Times to be in his house. These, you may say, are but individual
cases. But a decided movement in your favour has begun among the public
since it has been evident that your Govt is really in earnest about
getting rid of slavery. I have always said that it was ignorance, not
ill will, which made the majority of the English public go wrong about
this great matter. Difficult as it may well be for you to comprehend it,
the English public were so ignorant of all the antecedents of the
quarrel that they really believed what they were told, that slavery was
not the ground, scarcely even the pretext, of the war. But now when the
public acts of your Govt have shewn that now at least it aims at entire
slave emancipation, that your victory means that & your failure means
the extinction of all present hope of it, many feel very differently.
When you entered decidedly into this course, your detractors abused you
more violently for doing it than they had before for not doing it, & the
Times12 & Saturday Review13 began favouring us with the very arguments &
almost in the very language which we used to hear from the W. India
slaveholders to prove slavery perfectly consistent with the Bible & with
Xtianity. This was too much; it overshot the mark. The Anti Slavery
feeling is now thoroughly rousing itself. Liverpool has led the way by a
splendid meeting14 of which the Times suppressed all mention, thus
adding according to its custom to the political dishonesty a pecuniary
fraud upon its subscribers. But you must have seen a report of this
meeting; you must have seen how Spence did his Edition: current; Page:
[829] utmost,15 & how he was met; & that the object was not merely a
single demonstration but the appointment of a Committee to organize an
action on the public mind. There are none like the Liverpool people for
making an organization of that sort succeed if once they put their hands
to it. The day when I read this I read in the same day’s newspaper, two
speeches by cabinet ministers: one by Milner Gibson16 as thoroughly &
openly with you as was consistent with the position of a cabinet
minister; the other by the D. of Argyll17 was a simple anti slavery
speech, denouncing the proslavery declaration of the Southern bishops,
but his delivering such a speech at that time & place has but one
meaning. I do not know if you have seen Cairnes’ Lecture18 or whether
you are aware that it has been taken up & largely circulated by
religious societies & is at its fourth edition. A new & enlarged edition
of his great book is on the point of publication19 & will I have no
doubt be very widely read & powerfully influential.

Foreigners ought not to regard the Times as representing the British
nation. Of course a paper which is so largely read & bought & so much
thought of as the Times is, must have a certain amount of suitability to
the people that buy it. But the line it takes on any particular question
is much more a mere matter of accident than is supposed. It is sometimes
better than the public & sometimes worse. It was better—on Competitive
Examinations20 & on the revised Educational Code21—in each case owing to
the accidental position of a particular man who happened to write in
it—both which men I could name to you. I am just as fully persuaded as
if I could name the man, that the attitude it has long held respecting
slavery, & now on the American question, is equally owing to the
accidental interests or sympathies of some one person connected with the
paper. The Sat. Review again is understood to be the property of the
bitterest Tory enemy America has, Beresford Edition: current; Page:
[830] Hope.22 Unfortunately these papers, through the influence they
obtain in other ways & in the case of the Times very much in consequence
of the prevailing notion that it speaks the opinion of all England, are
able to exercise great power in perverting the opinion of England
whenever the public are sufficiently ignorant of facts to be misled.
That when once engaged in a wrong line, writers like those of the Times
go from worse to worse, & at last stick at nothing in the way of
perverse & even dishonest misrepresentation, is but natural to party
writers everywhere; natural to those who go on day after day working
themselves up to write strongly in a matter to which they have committed
themselves, & breathing an atmosphere inflamed by themselves; natural
moreover to demagogism both here & in America, & natural above all to
anonymous demagogism, which risking no personal infamy by any amount of
tergiversation never minds to what lengths it goes, because it can
always creep out in time, & turn round at the very moment when the tide
turns.

Among the many lessons which have been impressed on me by what is now
going on, one is, a strong sense of the Solidarité (to borrow a phrase
for which our language has no short equivalent) of the whole of a nation
with every one of its members: for it is painfully apparent that your
country & mine habitually judge of one another from their worst
specimens. You say that if England were like Cairnes & me, there would
be no alienation; & neither would there if America were like you. But (I
need not use soft words to you, who I am sure detest these things as
much as I do) the low tricks & fulsome mob-flattery of your public men,
& the bullying tone & pettifogging practice of your different Cabinets
(southern men chiefly I am aware) towards foreign nations, have deeply
disgusted a great number of our very best people, & all the more so
because it is the likeness of what we may be coming to ourselves. You
must admit too that the present crisis, while it has called forth a
heroism & constancy in your people which cannot be too much admired & to
which even your enemies in this country do justice, has also exhibited
on the same scale of magnitude all the defects of your state of society,
the incompetency & mismanagement arising from the fatal belief of your
public that anybody is fit for anything, & the gigantic pecuniary
corruption which seems universally acknowledged to have taken place &
indeed without it one cannot conceive how you can have got through the
enormous sums you have spent. All this, & what seems to most of us
entire financial recklessness (though for myself I do not pretend to see
how you could have done anything else in the way of finance) are telling
against you here—you can hardly imagine how much. But all this may be, &
I have great hope that it Edition: current; Page: [831] will be, wiped
out by the conduct which you have it in your power to adopt as a nation.
If you persevere until you have subdued the South or at all events all
west of the Mississippi; if having done this you set free the slaves
with compensation to loyal owners & (according to the advice of Mr
Paterson in his admirable speech at Liverpool),23 settle the freed
slaves as free proprietors on the unoccupied land; if you pay honestly
the interest on your vast national debt, & take measures for redeeming
it, including the debt without interest which is constituted by your
inconvertible paper currency; if you do these things, the United States
will stand very far higher in the general opinion of England than they
have stood at any time since the war of independence. If, in addition to
this, you have men among you of a calibre to use the high spirit which
this struggle has raised, & the grave reflexions to which it gives rise,
as means of moving public opinion in favour of correcting what is bad &
strengthening what is weak in your institutions & modes of feeling &
thought, the war will prove to have been a permanent blessing to your
country such as we never dared hope for, & a source of inestimable
improvement to the prospects of the human race in other ways besides the
great one of extinguishing slavery.

If you are really going to do these things, you need not mind being
misunderstood—you can afford to wait.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 27, 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Joseph Napier

Napier, Joseph

582.


TO JOSEPH NAPIER1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Jan. 27, 1863

Dear Sir—

I have at your suggestion reread the second chapter of the second part
of the Analogy2 & the result is somewhat different from what you seemed
to expect. I am afraid I must admit that Butler’s authority is against
me & that he either overlooked, or did not admit the distinction which I
endeavoured to draw between two kinds of improbability, improbability
before the fact & improbability of an alleged fact. For though as you
say he does not deny that there is a certain small antecedent
presumption against a miracle, Edition: current; Page: [832] he looks
upon this as being exactly the same sort of presumption which there is
against any common event (of the conditions of which we have no special
antecedent knowledge) before it has happened. Now in my view it is a
totally different sort of presumption—one which constitutes, as far as
it goes, a ground of disbelief, which the other & universal presumption
does not even in the smallest degree. In proof of this: let there be a
million tickets in some repository, numbered & placed indiscriminately.
Of these I take out one. The antecedent presumption against its being No
72 is a million to one; but when I have selected a ticket & it is
affirmed to be No 72 the antecedent presumption does not render this in
the smallest degree incredible, because, instead of its being unlikely
that an event with a million to one against it could happen it was
certain that such an event would happen, & it is certain that such an
event did happen when I took out the ticket, whether it was No 72 or
not.

Now (without further purpose distinguishing miracles from any other kind
of extraordinary event) it seems to me clear that against any
extraordinary event there exists not a slight addition to this entirely
unimportant kind of improbability, but an improbability generically
different from it. And Butler surely must have thought so since he would
not have credited a statement that [illegible word] has on only a small
fraction more of evidence than that on which he could have believed an
ordinary man who said that he rose one morning with a headach[e]. But
though he must have habitually acted on this view of the subject I am
afraid he forgot it in his argument.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

31 January, 1863

Blackheath Park

John Wilson

Wilson, John

583.


TO JOHN WILSON1

Blackheath Park

31 January, 1863

Although I am much too occupied to be able to accept your invitation to
be present at the Soirée of the Liverpool Co-operative Provident
Association, I am glad of the opportunity you have offered me to
express, as I have done in my published writings, my warmest sympathy
with the Co-operative Cause. Of all the agencies which are at work to
elevate those who labour with their hands, in physical condition, in
social dignity and in those moral and intellectual qualities on which
both the others are ultimately dependent, there is none so promising as
the present Co-operative movement. Though I foresaw, when it was only a
project, its great advantages, its success has Edition: current; Page:
[833] thus far exceeded my most sanguine expectations, and every year
adds strength to my conviction of the salutary influence it is likely to
exercise over the destinies of this and other countries.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 2. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

George Finlay

Finlay, George

584.


TO GEORGE FINLAY1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 2. 1863

My dear Mr. Finlay—

Many thanks for your letter which was both interesting and encouraging.
I now write in high spirits on the subject of Greece as today’s
newspapers for the first time state positively & authentically that the
Duke of Saxe Coburg consents to be a candidate.2 I earnestly hope that
the Greeks will not throw away the opportunity of getting a king who
would bring them every possible advantage they could have had from
Prince Alfred,3 with the addition of being a man of mature age and tried
principles. It seems to me that they have drawn the one solitary prize
in the lottery & that his election & acceptance would be the very
happiest event which the chances of politics could have turned up for
Greece. I had never ventured to hope for anything so good as a prince
who is more liberal & constitutional than his German subjects understand
or care for & who is looked to by the liberals in Germany at large as a
possible head of the future German Empire. If he is elected, it will be
his object to make Greece a great country by making her a free &
prosperous one to begin with, & all the best European thought will have
a greater chance of access to her than to any crowned head in Europe
except his uncle Leopold.4

I was very happy to learn from you that there is a real desire in the
Assembly for moderate establishments & a great retrenchment of
expenditure. This is good not only in itself, but because it implies
putting a restriction on the evils of centralization & functionarism.
But the land tax or rather a land tax will be wanted nevertheless, for a
time at least, if they intend to be honest to their creditors.

Mr Grote was extremely interested by the plans & inscriptions you sent
to him through me. He did not know the existence in the character. . . .

Edition: current; Page: [834]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 3. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Robert Crichton Wyllie

Wyllie, Robert Crichton

585.


TO ROBERT CRICHTON WYLLIE1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 3. 1863

Sir—

I have had the honour of receiving your letter & the printed slips which
you have been kind enough to send. These I have read with the attention
due to any work of Dr Rae2 & they appear to me quite worthy of his
intellect and acquirements. The picture which he draws of the dangers
that menace the interesting community of which you are one of the
rulers, is most formidable.3 Of the remedies which he proposes, I cannot
be a competent judge, but as far as my means of judgment extend he seems
to be right in much, perhaps even in all, that he proposes.

The other paper will I think place Dr Rae very high among ethnologists &
philologists.4 After having reached by independent investigation the
highest generalization previously made, viz., that all languages have
grown by development from a few hundred words, Dr Rae seems to have
supplied the first probable explanation of the manner in which their
primitive words may themselves have originated. If this hypothesis is
made out, it is the keystone of the science of philology: it is a priori
extremely probable, & the facts he brings forward establish a strong
case of verification a posteriori. I hope that Dr Max Müller5 has been
put in possession of this important speculation.

It must be of great value to your country to have such a man as Dr Rae
settled among you.

It is very gratifying to me that you are disposed to carry the principle
of representation of minorities into practical operation. That such
should be the questions agitated in a country which three quarters of a
century ago was in the savage state, is surely one of the most
remarkable signs of the very hopeful times in which we live.

Edition: current; Page: [835]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 7. 1863

Blackheath Park

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

586.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 7. 1863

Dear Sir

Mr Curtis’2 letter gives one a very favorable impression of his own
sentiments, though in some respects a painful one of those of his
countrymen. Perhaps, however, it is no worse than was to be expected,
and the worse it is the more searching and the more prolific of good is
the present crisis likely to be. The danger of American democracy was
stagnation—a general settling into a dead level of low morality and
feeling. The strenuous antagonism now springing up in the better
Americans against the tone of mind of the worse, is the most hopeful
feature of the present struggle, and the battle against the devil could
not be fought on a more advantageous field than that of slavery.

I was delighted, as you were, with the Exeter Hall meeting, and the
Liverpool meeting which preceded it was even better. Leeds, Bradford,
Bristol,3 and other places have also roused themselves and there is to
be another meeting at Manchester on the receipt of Lincoln’s answer to
the Manchester address.4 There is, besides, a latent feeling on the
right side in many quarters, which will assert itself in time. For
instance; I have it under the hand of the Duke of Argyll that he agrees
entirely with my two articles—and I had yesterday a conversation with
Sir Stafford Northcote and the Mayor of Edition: current; Page: [836]
Liverpool,5 and was surprised and pleased to find how nearly right they
both are on the subject. When our whole strength comes to shew itself,
it will be seen to be very great. It is fear of the Times that makes
public men keep silence. Perhaps they do not overrate the power of the
Times, but they ridiculously exaggerate the danger to themselves of
braving it. The Times has been very often defeated; but as it is never
wrong without a great number of people to keep it in countenance, it
never suffers any permanent loss of influence. It has passed unhurt
through much severer blows than any it has had lately. It lost no credit
by its sudden turn round on Bernard’s trial,6 the very day after he was
acquitted—as strong a case as the sharp turn in 1834 from ultra Whiggism
to Peel Toryism.7 Such things would have ruined a writer who gave his
name; but anonymous journalism can dare anything with impunity.

I was glad that the noble spirit of the Lancashire operatives found an
exponent in Bazley,8 when he said in seconding the address, that the
work-people do not want cotton made by slaves.

I am Dear Sir
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 13. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

587.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 13. 1863

Dear Bain—

I thought Ferrier’s book2 quite sui generis when I first read it, & I
think so more than ever after reading it again. His system is one of
pure Edition: current; Page: [837] scepticism very skilfully clothed in
dogmatic language. To find the meaning of any of his propositions one is
obliged to invert it—to turn it as it were bottom upward, and discover
the purely negative underside, of which the side turned towards the
spectator is but the superficial outcome, and which negative underside
contains all the reality there is in the proposition. For example,
matter, according to him is the variable element in cognition. But he
avers that neither the world at large, nor thinkers, when they discussed
the subject of matter, ever imagined that they were affirming or denying
the existence of a variable element in cognition. Consequently the
entire purport of Ferrier’s proposition is, that if matter is not this,
“there is nothing else for it to be” (to use an expression of his own).
Again, the whole of his doctrine of the Absolute may be thus expressed:
Unless the Absolute is what I say it is, that is, unless a toothache,
regarded as my toothache, is the Absolute there is no Absolute. This
strikes me as very cool, in a thinker whose doctrines are of this
character, to class other people as sceptics, & present his own system
as the first & only real safeguard against scepticism. The truth is, it
outdoes in scepticism almost all the systems so called, inasmuch as it
abolishes noumena. According to it there are no “things in themselves”;
they have no locus standi anywhere, not even in Herbert Spencer’s region
of the Unknowable.3 To this doctrine I have little to object, but I do
object in toto to the mode in which it is arrived at. For the only
legitimate mode of arriving at it is by the psychology of which he
thinks he can never speak too scornfully, viz. by pointing out the
genesis through ascertained laws of the mind, of the belief that people
have that they do perceive, or have evidence of things in themselves.
Until this is done, this next to universal belief is primâ facie
evidence of its own truth, just as the impressions of the senses are.
All such attempts however he repudiates, rebuking philosophers in
general for commencing their study of the mind with the origin of an
idea & not seeing the very obvious truth (which it will be one of the
purposes of what I write on Hamilton to enforce) that since we cannot
observe the first moments of human consciousness, a theory of the
genesis of our notions is an indispensable condition of ascertaining
what those are which we possess originally. Despising this instrument of
investigation which he does not know how to use, he arrives at all his
conclusions, without one single exception that I remember—certainly at
all those which he declares to be of primary importance—either by
deduction from arbitrary definitions or by reasoning in a circle. How,
for example, does he prove the doctrine which he considers it his
greatest feat to have established, the principal proposition of the
Agnoiology?4 By arguing that as Ignorance is a defect, there can be no
ignorance but of things which might possibly be known. He erects the
accidental dyslogistic Edition: current; Page: [838] connotation of a
word into the chief constituent of its meaning, & from this definition
of his own concludes that there are no other things to be ignorant of, &
not (which is the only valid conclusion) that if there are we may be
ignorant of them without blame. His general mode of settling the
questions which divide philosophers is to transfer the names of the
things, real or unreal, which they contend about to things the reality
of which nobody ever thought of contesting; after which, as there are no
names left for the things which people do contest, the conclusion is
quietly slid into that there are no such things. I do not in the least
dispute that if this negative conclusion be true, there is much to be
said for transferring the existing words with all their associations
from nonentities to the realities which are the proper objects for those
associations; & what makes me to a certain extent tolerant of the book
is that I think philosophy will most likely ultimately use the words in
something like his sense of them, so that his system serves a mode of
stating a connected set of opinions grounded in truth, which connected
statement he mistakes for deducing them from one another. But the fact
that there is nothing else for the words to mean has to be proved first;
which cannot be done by begging it in the definitions of the terms.
What, again, can be a more glaring paralogism than that by which he
establishes his grand proposition that certain supposed laws of our
cognitions are necessary laws of all cognition existing, possible or
imaginary, finite or infinite? It all rests upon a double meaning of the
word Contradictory. He lays down as a principle that what is
contradictory cannot be known, not merely by our intelligence but by any
intelligence. He gets this admitted by presenting it as if it meant that
our intelligence cannot believe that a thing is & also that it is not.
So presented, the reader is not willing to admit that the impossibility
does not arise from the limitation of our intelligence, but is a law of
all intelligence. But when the time comes for drawing the consequences
of the admission, the Contradictory is found to be that which
contradicts not itself, but “the necessary laws of cognition,” & from
that time forward anything which we cannot, as the author expresses it,
“conceive to be conceivable” is placed, on that ground, among things
unknowable by any, even infinite, intelligence, though it may not
involve any self-contradiction at all. Thus, the proposition that the
human capacities of conception (in their second power at least) are a
measure of the possibilities of universal intelligence steals in as a
demonstrated truth without having been once faced.

Then how strangely absurd are his representations of other writers,
above all his romance about Plato. There has been plenty of nonsense
written about Plato’s Ideas, but I did not expect to be told that what
Plato means by them (though he failed to express his meaning distinctly)
was the Ego! This wonderful conclusion seems to be reached by the
following syllogism. The Ego is (according to my system) the universal
element in cognition; therefore Edition: current; Page: [839] Plato’s
Ideas were the Ego. How Plato would have stared at this interpretation
of what he conceived as the very opposite pole, the point furthest
removed from (& raised above) the Ego, of all the elements which enter
into the generation of Knowledge!

In spite of all this, however, & of the flourishing of trumpets which
accompanies every fresh paralogism or disguised assumption, one cannot
help being struck in almost every page with the ability of the writer,
though I cannot think that it lies in the direction of metaphysical
speculation. And the book, like all books by persons of talent on
difficult subjects of thought, helps more or less to clear up one’s own
ideas.

I have not left myself room for saying much on other subjects but I have
not much to say. I am reprinting the Utilitarianism5 & will send it to
you as soon as published. I have just received Lyell’s new book6 but
have not yet read any of it. Littré writes that he will very shortly
publish his life of Comte7 which I expect will be interesting & I shall
perhaps make it an occasion for writing something about Comte, though I
do not like being diverted from Hamilton. I have heard nothing very
lately about Grote. His new eight-volume edition is out.8

Your paper on the Methods of Debate9 must have given many valuable ideas
to those whom it was addressed to. There is a point in the appended note
that I shd like, at some time or other to discuss with you. It strikes
me that the principle on which the chances are estimated on the
[?subject] of Alexander differs in one respect from the true principle.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 15. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Max Kyllmann

Kyllmann, Max

588.


TO MAX KYLLMANN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 15. 1863

.

Dear Sir—

I wish there were somebody like you in every great town in the country,
for as soon as you see that anything is true & important you exert
yourself to get it acknowledged. The beginning you have made with the
operatives on the subject of Mr Hare’s plan2 is most valuable. They are
more Edition: current; Page: [840] open to conviction than any other
class, being the only class not prejudiced in favour of existing
institutions in general. And they have the strongest interest in
adopting this plan, since while it gives more complete expression &
fuller effect than anything else can do to the democratic principle, it
also completely removes the strongest & best founded of the objections
which are sincerely felt to that principle, considered as a practical
one. When difficulties can be removed not by compromising a principle
but by carrying it still more completely out, the advantage is well
worth gaining.

I should strongly advise keeping the demonstration respecting the
grievances of the working classes as distinct as possible from the
movement relating to America. It is good generalship in politics as it
is in war not to bring all your enemies upon you at once, but to divide
them, and fall upon each division apart from the rest. Bad principles
are but too ready to league with each other as it is, without being
provoked to it by each receiving a slap in the face at the same moment
from the same hands. And you cannot well afford to alienate those who
would agree with you as to one of the two objects proposed but not on
the other. For the same reason it seems to me desirable that the
question of the suffrage shd be kept apart from the other things
complained of & shd be made the subject of a distinct demonstration by
itself. The changes in the law that have made cooperation possible would
not have been obtained so soon if the demand for them had usually been
coupled with the question of the suffrage.

Thanks for your information about the Haslingden movement.3 Before I
received your letter, one of the circulars had found its way to me & I
shall the first time I go to town pay a subscription in the manner
directed. I will also send a subscription to Mr Bradlaugh.4

The Anthropological Society I hear of for the first time5 from your
letter. I shd suppose from the publications it announces that its
objects must be very much the same as those of the Ethnological Socty6
which already existed. The names mentioned are all new to me except two:
Capt. Burton, Edition: current; Page: [841] whom I know as other people
do from his books more as an enterprising traveller than as a man of
science,7 & Mr Luke Burke,8 who I shd think answers to your requisition
of willingness to carry out premises to all their consequences, but the
little I have seen of his speculations does not give me any confidence
in his soundness as a scientific thinker. It is possible that some of
the others may be distinguished names, for I am very little acquainted
with the present state of this class of studies.

Mr Lincoln’s answer9 is excellent—quite beyond my expectation.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 20, 1863

Blackheath Park

John Plummer

Plummer, John

589.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 20, 1863

Dear Sir

I thank you for your letter, and for the book and newspaper you sent.
Your friend’s paper in the Coventry Herald2 is of real promise. There is
a clearness and discrimination in his mode of expressing his thoughts
which augurs well for their quality. I will read Mr Chorley’s book3 as
soon as I have time and shall be very glad to see you and him if you are
able and disposed to come so far.

I am glad to hear that you are now chiefly employed in writing. Perhaps
hitherto your influence with the operatives may have been all the
greater for your remaining a factory workman, but henceforward, even if
it were not a matter of necessity, you can certainly do more good by
devoting yourself to such valuable writing as yours is. I am

Dear Sir
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

Mr John Plummer

Edition: current; Page: [842]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 21 [1863]

590.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Feb. 21 [1863]

Dear Sir,—

Although I am prevented by pressing occupations from accepting your
invitation to join you in celebrating the glorious memory of
Washington,2 and the great work of liberation in which he took so
important a part, I am thankful for the opportunity afforded me of
associating myself, if only by letter, with the principles and purposes
which are identified with that illustrious name.

The prospects of the human race are so deeply interested in the success
of the great experiment which is working itself out in the United
States, that the lovers of freedom and progress in other countries feel
whatever injures, and still more whatever dishonours, America as a
personal calamity. Foremost among all things which injure and dishonour
a country stands the personal slavery of human beings. Rather than
consent to the further extension of this scourge, the American people
have voluntarily incurred all their present sacrifices; and because what
was originally a war against slavery has grown into a war for its
extinction, my hopes for the future welfare and greatness of the
American Republic were never so high as in this, to superficial
appearance, the darkest hour in its history.

I have the honour to be, dear sir, very faithfully yours,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 23. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Charles A. Cummings

Cummings, Charles A.

591.


TO CHARLES A. CUMMINGS1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 23. 1863

Dear Sir—

I duly received your letter of Feb. 2 & I thank you for the favour you
have done me by sending me the Christian Examiner of January.2

Edition: current; Page: [843]
My object in writing is not solely to make my warm acknowledgments for
your kindly & generous estimate of my writings but also to set my
country right with you in one point & myself in another. You are under
some misapprehension in thinking that the writings which you honour with
such high praise, have been neglected in England in comparison with my
longer treatises. They have been much more widely read than ever those
were, & have given me what I had not before, popular influence. I was
regarded till then as a writer on special scientific subjects & had been
little heard of by the miscellaneous public. I am in a very different
position now.

For the other misapprehension I am probably myself accountable & I only
advert to it because if it were well founded, there would be less
sympathy between my feelings & yours than there really is. I do not, as
you seem to think, take a gloomy view of human prospects. Few persons
look forward to the future career of humanity with more brilliant hopes
than I do. I see, however, many perils ahead, which unless successfully
avoided could blast these prospects, & I am more specially in a position
to give warning of them since being in strong sympathy with the general
tendencies of which we are all feeling the effects, I am more likely to
be listened to than those who may be suspected of disliking them. You
think from American experience that I have overrated the magnitude of
some of the dangers. I am perhaps of all Englishmen the one who would
most rejoice at finding that I had done so & who most warmly welcomes
every indication which favours such a conclusion. But whatever may be
their amount, the dangers are real, & unless constantly kept in view,
will tend to increase; & neither human nature nor experience justify the
belief that mankind will be sufficiently on their guard against evils
arising from their own shortcomings shared by those around them. In
order that political principles, requiring the occasional sacrifice of
immediate inclinations, should be habitually present to the minds of a
whole people, it is generally indispensable that these principles shd be
embodied in institutions. I think it therefore essential that the
principle that superior education is entitled to superior political
might, shd be in some way constitutionally recognised. I suggested
plural voting as a mode of doing this: if there be any better mode, I am
ready to transfer my advocacy to that. But I attach far more importance
to Mr Hare’s system of election, which it gives me the greatest pleasure
to see that you appreciate as I do. It would be worthy of America to
inaugurate an improvement which is at once a more complete application
than has ever been made of the democratic principle, & at the same time
its greatest safeguard. With the system of representation of all instead
of majorities only & of the whole people instead of only the male sex,
America would afford to the world the first example in history of true
democratic equality.

Edition: current; Page: [844]
I omitted to say that I was not the founder of the W. R. though I was
one of its writers from the commencement. At a much later period of my
life I was for several years its proprietor & chief conductor.3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 24. 1863

Blackheath Park

Henry Samuel Chapman

Chapman, Henry Samuel

592.


TO HENRY SAMUEL CHAPMAN1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 24. 1863

.

Dear Chapman

I am very much obliged to you for the information in your letters and
for the newspapers and newspaper articles which you kindly sent,
relating to the proceedings in the Legislature of New South Wales. I was
not wholly uninformed on the subject, Mr Holden having opened a
communication with me and also with Mr Hare: but your information has
generally been both earlier and fuller than his. I was delighted with
the debate on the second reading of the bill.2 The fact that so many of
the speakers had so thorough and intelligent an appreciation of Mr
Hare’s plan, is a most satisfactory proof that its advantages will be
felt in other legislative assemblies when once they can be induced to
look upon it as one of the questions of the day. At present few engaged
in practical politics have begun to concern themselves about it. But
those few are an increasing body, and by the time the question of the
suffrage is again practically raised, it will not be possible to keep
this question out of the discussion. The plan is making its way into
America. The Christian Examiner, formerly the organ of Channing,3 and
still representing the best minds of New England, takes it up very
favourably in the number for January,4 and advises testing it by
application to State elections.

I had noticed the change for the worse in the Melbourne correspondence
of the Times. I used to read those letters with great interest while
they rested on your authority, because I knew that matters would be
regarded and judged on principles not very different from my own. They
cannot have the same interest to me now, even if they were to be
depended on as to facts, which you tell me they are not.

Buckle is, as you truly say, a great loss,5 and one which we are not
likely Edition: current; Page: [845] to see replaced. Notwithstanding
the undue breadth of many of his conclusions, and the want of a proper
balance in his mind, he was performing a most valuable function in
popularizing many important ideas, and stimulating the desire to apply
general principles to the explanation and prediction of social facts. He
has left, I am told, a great deal of manuscript, much of it in a state
approaching to completion.

If I possessed photographic cards, I would with great pleasure send you
one, but I have not adopted that fashion, and am not likely to adopt it;
and I have refused so many applications for photographs of myself (some
of them from persons whom I should have much liked to oblige) that I
could not now with any consistency, comply with any.6

I shall be very glad to see your son7 when he is in town. I cannot have
that pleasure at Easter, as I shall not be at home, but in the long
vacation I shall hope to see him.

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 25 [1863]

Blackheath Park

William James Linton

Linton, William James

593.


TO WILLIAM JAMES LINTON1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 25 [1863]

Sir

My time is so fully occupied that I am quite unable to attend the
meeting on Friday or to take any part in the proposed movement in favour
of Poland.2 I heartily sympathize in its object, and shall be very glad
if the general feeling can be manifested in an imposing manner.

I am Sir
 yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

W. J. Linton Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [846]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 25. 1863

Blackheath Park

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

594.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 25. 1863

.

Dear Sir

I am obliged to you for your letter, and if the sheet is not struck off
(which I fear it is) I will add to the note in which you are mentioned,2
what is necessary to prevent the misapprehension you desire to guard
against.

Your explanation narrows the ground on which we differ, though it does
not remove our difference; for, while I agree with you in
discountenancing a purely empirical mode of judging of the tendencies of
human actions and would, on that subject as on all others, endeavour to
reach the widest and most general principles attainable, I cannot admit
that any of these principles are necessary, or that the practical
conclusions which can be drawn from them are even (absolutely)
universal.

As I am writing I cannot refrain from saying that your “First
Principles” appears to me a striking exposition of a consistent and
imposing system of thought; of which, though I dissent from much, I
agree in more.

I hope your health is much better than it was some time ago.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 28. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

595.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 28. 1863

.

Dear Sir—

I send you the leaf of my reprint2 containing the passage in which you
are mentioned. I wish to be permitted to say that the corrected
statement Edition: current; Page: [847] of your opinion derived from
yourself, but I do not feel at liberty to say so without your
permission.

I have thought it best to leave the note as it stood, & make the
correction in an additional paragraph.3 But if you can suggest any
alteration in the first mention of the note which would save me from
seeming still to ascribe to you an opinion which you do not hold, I
shall be happy to adopt it.

I am happy to hear that your health is so considerably improved.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 9, 1863

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

596.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 9, 1863

Dear Chadwick

I send a paper on the Polish question, in the form of a letter to the
Editor.2 If you like you can alter the form to that of an article from a
correspondent; but on the whole probably it is better as it is. I have
signed it with my initials, and have no objection to being known as the
author.

I also inclose an article by my daughter on Greek politics,3 which is at
your service if you like it. It is entirely her own, but I quite agree
in all of it.

I will look out passages from the book on the Alps, and send you
references to them.

Proofs would be agreeable if there is time and it is not inconvenient.

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 10 [1863]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

597.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 10 [1863]

Dear Chadwick

I have returned the proof,2 corrected, to the Editor.

I have no objection to being named in your leader, but I wish only my
initials to be put to the letter itself; and I would rather that, in
your first sentence, Edition: current; Page: [848] my name was
introduced more indirectly. You might say “we feel thankful to a
correspondent, whose initials sufficiently indicate his name” or some
such words, and you might then go on mentioning me by name as at
present.3

I would rather you did not add the sentence proposed in your letter,
because I do not wish to be understood as having peculiar sources of
information. Herzen’s and Ogareff’s writings are open to all the world,
and the notification by the Insurrectionary Committee4 to which my
letter refers was mentioned by the correspondents of some of the English
newspapers.

Many thanks for your offer of separate slips, but I do not care to have
any.

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 13. [1863]

Blackheath Park

Mr. Jones

Mr. Jones

598.


TO MR. JONES1

Blackheath Park

March 13. [1863]

Mr Mill requests Mr Jones to make up a parcel for him of such books on
the accompanying list as he is able to send by the end of next week.

These are independent of Kinglake’s Crimean War,2 which Mr Mill wishes
for as soon as it can be had, and which will be returned within a
fortnight from the present time.

The “Inquiry into the Theories of History”3 if not already sent, may be
dispensed with. If sent, this also will be returned in a short time.

Several other books in Mr Mill’s possession are sent in the present
parcel.

Edition: current; Page: [849]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 14, 1863

Blackheath

John William Parker

Parker, John William

599.


TO [JOHN WILLIAM PARKER?]1

Blackheath

,

March 14, 1863

Dear Sir

I have sent the cover which I have selected.2

Please add to the list of those who are to receive copies, Professor
Cliffe Leslie, 1, York Street, Belfast.

I am
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 16. 1863

Blackheath Park

John Chapman

Chapman, John

600.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Blackheath Park

March 16. 1863

Dear Sir

M. Littré has nearly ready for publication a life of M. Comte,2 which
would afford a very good occasion for a general estimate of M. Comte and
of his philosophy. If you would like to have such an article from me, I
would undertake it.3 I cannot exactly say how soon it could be ready, as
I have more than one thing in hand which I should like to finish before
commencing it. But I would promise it as early as is possible without a
very inconvenient interruption of other things. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 22, 1863

Blackheath Park, Kent

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

601.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park, Kent

March 22, 1863

Dear Sir,

I thank you very much for your note, and look forward to talking over
the subject of it with you, when you come, which I hope will be very
Edition: current; Page: [850] soon.—I need hardly say that a translation
by you of anything I write, will be, in every sense of the word, an
authorized translation.2—Your idea supplementary to the remarks on the
sense of dignity, is well worth following out, and it would give me
great satisfaction, if you would write something on the subject, and
publish it with the translation.—I am, yours very truly,

J. St. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 24. [1863]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

602.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 24. [1863]

Dear Chadwick

The wine can be had in as few dozens as you please, and I will with
pleasure take out, when we leave for Avignon on Saturday next, any order
you like to give.

My daughter thinks that you can select passages from Senior2 better than
she can. She sends by this post, several scraps about America that she
has copied out from books which she has been reading; and will make
extracts from Prince Dolgoroukov’s book on Russia3 if we get it, as we
expect to do, to take with us to Avignon. She also sends a short
article, of no pretension, on one of the points we talked of, the other
day—the effect of the cheap press in keeping things right in
Lancashire4—in case you think it is worth putting in your paper. I am,

Dear Chadwick
 yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [851]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 25. 1863

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

603.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

March 25. 1863

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for your note, and for the papers you sent. The
letter of the Daily News correspondent2 is good and satisfactory. All
recent information seems to confirm the statement that there is a
renewal of excitement in favour of the war and that the bulk of the
Democratic party now share it. It is impossible not to participate in
your doubts as to the success of the North in effecting a complete
reunion; but if it could be effected, I am not convinced by your letter
that there need be any sacrifice of the principles of free government.

You will have observed Forster’s notice for Friday on the subject of the
war ships fitting out for the Confederates.3 I have long been wondering
why he did not make this move sooner. There is to be a meeting of Trades
Unionists tomorrow in favour of the North, at St James’s Hall, at which
Bright will preside. They have sent me an admission, and if I can, I
intend to go.4

It will be a disgrace to Cambridge if Macleod gets the Professorship.5
Fawcett’s qualifications I shall be better able to judge of after the
publication of his book.6 But at any rate I am very glad that there is a
candidate of whom you are able to speak so highly as you do of Mr
Courtney.

Honorary members of the P. E. Club can and do bring forward questions,
and I will hand in yours (which are excellent) on Friday.7 I regret that
Edition: current; Page: [852] you are not to be there, the more as I
leave for Avignon on Saturday, but expect to be back for the June
meeting and hope I may still see you this summer.—I will return your
Daily News today or tomorrow. When at Avignon I shall have it sent to me
regularly. The Spectator I shall regret to lose, but I believe it is not
admitted into France. I am

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 2. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

604.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

April 2. 1863

Dear Mr Fawcett

Mr Kyllmann’s office at Manchester is at 28 Brazennose Street; his
lodgings are at 35 Ducie Street, Oxford Road. Mr Kyllmann will be very
glad to see you, and hopes that he may be of some service to you, if you
come to or through Manchester.

The work of Ogareff which I told you of, is entitled Essai sur la
Situation Russe,2 and is published by Trübner, in Paternoster Row.

I have brought your book3 with me here, and hope to have time to read it
before I return to England. I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 6. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

Henry Solly

Solly, Henry

605.


TO HENRY SOLLY1

S[aint] V[éran]

April 6. 1863

Dear Sir—

I am obliged to you for your letter, and am glad of the information it
gives respecting the Working Men’s Club & Institute Union2 of which I
previously knew very little. I have no doubt that in so far as these
Edition: current; Page: [853] clubs take the place of the public house,
they will be very useful, but I confess to some uncertainty whether they
are a movement sufficiently in advance to meet the demands of the
present time. I am doubtful whether an organised movement &
subscriptions for the purpose of making the men of the working classes
more comfortable away from the women & children, is the thing wanted
now, so much as an effort on a large scale to improve their dwellings, &
bring cooperative arrangements for comfort & mental improvement home to
all of them without distinction of sex or age. I do not say this to
discourage you, nor with any fear of its doing so, but to account for my
not taking so warm an interest in the scheme as you seem to expect that
I should do. I think your plan likely to do good, but that there are
others likely to be still more useful.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 17. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

606.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

S[aint] V[éran]

April 17. 1863

Dear Thornton—

The wine merchant yesterday dispatched to you a packing case containing
six dozen of the Chateauneuf wine which you drank at Blackheath.
According to the rate of speed of the French railways in the transport
of goods you may expect to receive it some time between a fortnight & a
month hence. I have paid for the wine & all expenses here & I inclose
the receipted bill. The duty & charges of carriage you will have to pay
on delivery.

It was pleasant to receive a letter from you dated Marlow. I know not
only the country but the house, & remember well its view over that
beautiful valley.2 I am glad that I have carried you with me to so great
an extent on the subject of Utilitarianism. What you say respecting the
supposed case of Iphigenia3 does not at all contradict my opinion, as I
never contended that the feeling of justice originates in a
consideration of general utility, though I think it is that
consideration which gives it its binding, & properly moral, character,
and you yourself seem to think that in such a case as the one you
suppose, the feeling of justice ought to yield to general utility.4 More
than Edition: current; Page: [854] this no utilitarian can possibly ask.
But I am inclined to think that such a case cannot possibly arise, or
that the feeling of justice (except where, being divided against itself,
it can be appealed on both sides) never need come into conflict with the
dictates of utility. The case of Iphigenia was one of supposed religious
duty, which where it intervenes, takes away the conflict, by removing
the sense of moral wrong from the sacrifice. The nearest approach to it
that occurs to me within the purely social or political sphere is the
case of a people required by a powerful enemy under penalty of
extermination to surrender some distinguished citizen, say the
Carthaginians in the case of Hannibal.5 Now in such a case as this I
think there can be no doubt that the morality of utility requires that
the people should fight to the last rather than comply with the demand:
not only because of the special tie between the community & each of its
members, & between the community & a benefactor who in the case supposed
is demanded as a victim precisely because of the greatness of his
services—but also for a more general reason—namely the reason which
makes it right that a people inferior in strength should fight to the
death against the attempt of a foreign despot to reduce it to slavery.
For such iniquitous attempts, even by powers strong enough to succeed in
them, are very much discouraged by the prospects of meeting with a
desperate though unsuccessful resistance. The weak may not be able
finally to withstand the strong if these persist in their tyranny, but
they can make the tyranny cost the tyrant something, & that is much
better than letting him indulge it gratis.

I think such a case as that of Hannibal comes within these reasons, &
indeed is a mere case of the same principle.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 23, 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

607.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

S[aint] V[éran]

April 23, 1863

Dear Sir—

Your letter of the 18th only reached me yesterday evening on our return
from an absence of nearly a week.

Come by all means if you like, though I should not for an instant have
thought of proposing it to you. I do not invite my friends to this
place, unless in very rare cases when I happen to have an interval of
leisure—because it is impossible for me when here, to give them the time
I shd wish to give, or shew Edition: current; Page: [855] them the
attention to which they are entitled. The greater part of all my
intellectual work is done in the virtual solitude in which we live here,
& the time which is not taken up in writing (in which at present both of
us are occupied) we spend in wandering alone about the mountains and
wilds of this part of France, gathering the health & spirits which are
necessary to render life in England endurable to us.2 If, knowing this,
you still like to come, I can only say that I shall be glad to see what
I can of you; & I should not have said so much if you had not expressed
yourself as if your motive for coming to Avignon was chiefly to see us &
I shd very much regret that you shd either be disappointed or think us
unfriendly in case you shd see less of us than you expect.3

I am much gratified by what you say about Mr Grote,4 & am glad that you
have seen enough of him to appreciate him so fully. I had no doubt that
he would be interested by your Herculanean investigations, which I am
glad to hear are going on favourably.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 23. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

608.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

.

April 23. 1863

.

Dear Sir

I am sorry that your visit to London should have been during one of my
frequent absences, and no less so that your note could not receive an
answer in time. As I expect to return in June, I hope to be more
fortunate in the course of the summer. I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [856]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 24. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

609.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saint Véran, Avignon

April 24. 1863

.

Dear Chadwick

Your letter was put into my hand just as we were starting for an
excursion to Mirabeau and among the lower Alps of Provence. We have just
returned, and I send by this post an article on Greece by my daughter,2
if you should still think it suitable. She is now occupying herself in
translating extracts from some exceedingly interesting articles in the
late numbers of the Revue des Deux Mondes on the present state of
Turkey,3 which she will forward before long.

I have to ask you to excuse me to Mrs Chadwick for having so long
delayed an answer to her letter about the wine, but the delay has been
caused by my not having been able to get the facts from the wine
merchant before now. I now find that the same wine you tasted at
Blackheath will cost 75 francs (£3) for a cask containing 50 litres, or
about six dozen; the cask will be about 18 francs extra, and the cost of
journey and duty amounts to about eight shillings a dozen. I have since
we arrived here, tasted a different quality of wine, which I think good,
and even prefer to the other, and of which I mean to lay in a small
stock myself—which is considerably cheaper. The Chateauneuf you tasted
at Blackheath is of the vintage of 1858; this of which I now speak is
also Chateauneuf, but of 1861, and grown by a different proprietor. It
is less dry and rough and approaches more to the quality of Burgundy. It
is only 50 francs (£2) the 50 litre cask; the other expenses being of
course the same. I believe it would be excellent wine for keeping, and
very good in two years time. If you should like to have either of these,
I shall be very glad to order and forward it for you. If you prefer to
have the wine in bottles, I do not think the additional cost would be
much, as the wine here is all charged by the litre measure, and the
bottles cost scarcely more than the cask.

I quite agree with you about the great importance of the principle of
Scholefield’s bill,4 and I was glad to see that it appeared to be
received more favourably than most of the former extensions of the
principle of limited Edition: current; Page: [857] responsibility. It is
a good sign that the Saturday Review supports it,5 which, on such
subjects, in general servilely follows Lord Overstone. I will watch the
progress of the bill, and if I see need, I will send you something about
it, but it seems to me that you have yourself treated it extremely well.
I am

Dear Chadwick
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 4. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

T. E. Cliffe Leslie

Leslie, T. E. Cliffe

610.


TO T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE1

S[aint] V[éran]

May 4. 1863

Dear Sir

It is my full intention to be present at the June meeting of the
P[olitical] E[conomy] Club & your letter gives me additional reason for
doing so. I am glad your question2 is to come on then instead of in
July.

It does not seem to me that taskwork even if it could be made universal
would destroy the partial opposition of interests between employers &
employed. There would still remain the question of the rate of payment &
the employers & workmen, supposing them both to be entirely selfish,
could not have the same wishes as to that point. Nothing that I can
imagine except cooperation would entirely take away the antagonism. But
in order to do so, it is not necessary that cooperation should be
universal. If it was only very frequent, a labourer who remained in the
employment of an individual & who received from him as much (for labour
of the same efficiency) as he could earn under cooperation, would see
that he had no reason to complain. The employer’s profits would then be
a mere consequence of increased efficiency in the instruments of
production, occasioned by private ownership of them. The capitalist
would only take from the workmen what he first gave them.

Not to mention that cooperation in the form of participation of the
labourers in the profits, would be perfectly compatible with individual
ownership & would go much nearer to producing identity of interest than
taskwork would.

Hoping to see you in a month’s time, I am

Edition: current; Page: [858]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 6. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

611.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saint Véran, Avignon

May 6. 1863

Dear Chadwick

I send you by this post an article on Servia2 by my daughter. You will
see she avails herself of your permission to undertake the Eastern
question. If however there should be a debate of any consequence on
Servia in the H. of Commons in the meantime, this article would not be
fit for insertion without alteration, and she would be glad in that case
either to alter it or to write another in its place, if you think the
subject likely to interest your readers.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 9, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

612.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

,
May 9, 1863

I did not for an instant make any of the suppositions which you
deprecate, in reference to your first note. What I did fear, was that
you were perhaps a little hurt at my not having met with greater warmth
the intimation of your project of coming to Avignon.2 I should extremely
regret if this were the case, and I do not think it would be so, if you
were fully aware of the great esteem and respect I have for you and of
the sincerity of my wish to cultivate your friendship. I hope the
additional letter you promise will set me at ease on this subject.—I am
much pleased, though not at all surprised, at the feelings you express
towards Mr. Grote.—I am glad that you will see something of Oxford. The
two old universities are a feature in English national life which
foreigners seldom see enough of to possess the key to many of the
peculiarities of character of the lettered classes of England, compared
with those of other countries. I suppose you will see Professor Max
Müller, who has been there long enough to understand the place, and will
be able to assist you with many explanations. I hope your visit will
enable you to make good progress with your Herculanean labours.

Edition: current; Page: [859]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 17. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

613.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

May 17. 1863

.

Dear Mr Fawcett

I inclose a testimonial, which renders it needless for me to express any
otherwise the high opinion I have of your book2 and the great pleasure I
had in reading it. Through the whole volume I did not find more than a
few half sentences here and there which appeared to me defective in
point of Political Economy, and even there I found, by things you said
elsewhere, that you were in no error on the points involved. Some of the
modes you have employed of shortening and simplifying the exposition
seem to me happy; others are perhaps discussable. In particular, that of
going at once to money prices, without first discussing the general laws
of exchange value, answers very well in the simpler questions, but you
were not able to adhere to it when you came to international values and
in consequence that part of the book has not all the clearness which you
have generally succeeded so well in attaining: the natural difficulties
of that intricate question being increased by requiring the readers to
adopt the statement by barter, for which nothing preceding has prepared
them. I think, too (as Ricardo thought) that it is of importance to
cultivate in learners the habit of arguing questions at first on the
supposition of barter, in order to adjourn the difficulties which arise
from the wrong and confused associations which cling to the idea of
money. All this however can be better discussed between us viva voce.

I should have liked to hear the discussion on Cooperation.3 I suppose
what your opponents questioned was merely the probability of its success
in the more difficult kinds of industrial enterprise. Of such a doubt
one can only say, Solvitur (or Solvetur) ambulando. The thing is
practicable or not, according to the intellectual and moral qualities of
those who attempt it. Doubtless many will attempt it and fail, but some,
and in the end, many, will succeed. It is not necessary that all should.
The success of cooperation on any large scale, will establish a
practical minimum of wages, and will strike at the root of the
opposition of apparent interest between employers and labourers, since
whatever profit the capitalist can obtain in the face of cooperation,
must be a mere equivalent for the advantage the enterprise derives from
his capital, skill, and unity of management. I have put this view of the
case before Leslie in answering a letter from him on the subject.4

Edition: current; Page: [860]
Roebuck’s5 and Horsman’s6 speeches were well calculated to provoke a
reaction and I am glad that you think they have done so. I am afraid
however that Horsman’s will do much harm in the United States. The news
from America is encouraging. The North seems to be, for the first time,
in possession of the whole Mississippi,7 and cutting off the supplies
from Texas must tell on the weakest point of the Slaveholders’
Confederacy. (One should never use any other designation for it than
this, the one adopted by the Emancipation Society of Manchester). But
the best thing of all is that the North does not seem to be in the least
discouraged. If only their patience and determination hold out, they
must yet succeed. I am

Yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 17, 1863

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

614.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Testimonial to Henry Fawcett.

Having been asked by Mr. Fawcett to express my opinion respecting his
qualifications for the office of Professor of Political Economy, I have
no hesitation in saying that I think them of a very high order. Mr.
Fawcett’s “Manual of Political Economy”,2 a book to which justice is
hardly done by so unambitious a title, shews a really scientific
knowledge of the subject, both in its principles and in their
applications; the exposition is clear and precise, and many of the
illustrations of the more difficult points are original, and go into the
heart of the subject. The objection which might possibly have arisen
from Mr. Fawcett’s inability to read his Lectures is obviated by his
great practice and readiness in extemporaneous speaking. Altogether I
think that the selection of Mr. Fawcett to fill the Chair of Political
Economy in the University of Cambridge would be creditable to the
University, and beneficial to the purposes of the Professorship.

J. Stuart Mill

May 17, 1863

Edition: current; Page: [861]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 18 mai 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

615.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 18 mai 1863

.

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Votre lettre, quoique portant la date du 2 mai, ne m’est parvenue que
depuis trois jours. M. Parker ne m’a jamais rien dit de l’intention
qu’on lui suppose. Cependant, le bruit dont parle M. Trübner2 ne m’est
pas inconnu, m’ayant été porté par un autre libraire qui désirait
devenir mon éditeur,3 et à qui je donnai un acceuil assez favorable,
sans pourtant me lier par aucune promesse. Si le cas arrivait, et que
j’eusse à choisir un nouvel éditeur votre recommandation de M. Trübner
et votre amitié pour lui seraient pour moi un grand motif de préférence.
Ceci n’est pas un vain compliment, mais l’effet de la véritable estime
que j’ai depuis longtemps pour vous.

Nous serons de retour à Blackheath au mois de Juin, et ce serait un vrai
plaisir pour moi de vous revoir. Si vous me faites le plaisir de venir
me voir, je vous engage à m’écrire un mot la veille d’assez bonne heure
pour que j’aie le temps de vous avertir si je suis empêché d’être chez
moi le jour que vous aurez choisi. Je voudrais vous éviter l’ennui de
faire inutilement une si longue course.4

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 6 [1863]

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

616.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

,
June 6 [1863]

.

We have just returned and shall be very glad to see you.—Will you do us
the pleasure of dining with us to-morrow, when I hope to be able to
introduce you to Professor Bain, who is in London for a short time. Ever
yours truly,

J. St. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [862]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 11, 1863

Blackheath, Thursday

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

617.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath, Thursday

[
June 11, 1863

]

M. Louis Blanc . . . has fixed to dine with us on Sunday (at five). We
shall therefore hope to see you and Mr. Wessel2 on Sunday . . .

Very truly yours

J. St. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 16, 1863

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

618.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

,
June 16, 1863

.

Be assured that I shall never refuse to hear anything you may wish to
communicate, either about yourself or any other subject. Whatever you
desire to say, it is for yourself to judge of the necessity of saying
it. As to there being any need of justifying, of excusing, or explaining
anything to us, there is not the smallest shadow of anything of the
kind. I am not aware of your having been maligned by anyone2—certainly
not to us. Nobody has ever said of you, in our hearing or to our
knowledge, so much as an uncomplimentary word. And if anyone had, it
would not have produced a particle of effect on either of us. We know
enough of you to judge for ourselves, and our esteem and respect could
be of very little worth, if it could be lessened either by anybody’s
tittle-tattle, or by such small matters as those you mention in your
letter, even if we perceived them. So that if this is all, you may be
perfectly at ease.—But some expressions in your letter make me fear that
this is not all, and that you wish to say something quite unexpected on
our part, the answer to which no conviction, however strong, of our
regard and friendship could make other than painful to you. If I rightly
understand the wishes you speak of3—which I sincerely hope I do not—, it
does not rest with me to say Edition: current; Page: [863] anything, but
that I should never willingly be the smallest obstacle to them. But you
seem to ask my opinion, and if I give it sincerely, I have no choice but
to say—painful as it is to say it—that I do not think you have any
chance. If there were any unfavourable impression respecting you, that
might be altered. But there is not the smallest particle of it,—but an
unchangeable high opinion of you and the most genuine friendly
feeling.—If your letter did not mean what I suppose, I must trust to
your kindness to forgive the misunderstanding. But if it did, do not for
a moment suppose that I am unwilling to hear anything you wish to say.
If you think fit to carry the matter farther, either by speech or
writing,—even if only for the relief of your own feelings—, you will
have my truest sympathy, as you have my sincere friendship and
esteem.—We hope to see you and your friend to-morrow, and I hope,
nothing that has passed will make any difference in your feelings
towards us, who remain unchanged to you, and that you will not allow it
to affect in any degree our future intercourse.

I am yours very sincerely

J. St. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 16. 1863

Blackheath

Harriet Grote

Grote, Harriet

619.


TO HARRIET GROTE1

Blackheath

June 16. 1863

Dear Mrs Grote

I am extremely obliged to you for Dr Schlesinger’s2 note. When it came,
I was on the point of writing to tell you and Mr Grote the same good
news about Gomperz. I have seen him twice, the last time for a whole
evening, and he was, to all appearance, quite himself again. Dr
Schlesinger’s expectation of his immediately returning to Vienna has not
been fulfilled. He is not now with Dr Schlesinger, but is at the
Victoria Hotel, Euston Square, with a friend named Wessel who has joined
him from Vienna. What his intentions are about staying or going, I do
not at present know.—Pray thank Mr Grote for his note and the kind
trouble he took about the luggage.

I am
 Dear Mrs Grote
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [864]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Summer 1863

F. W. Jones

Jones, F. W.

620.


TO F. W. JONES1

[
Summer? 1863

]

I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your communication dated the 18th
inst. and to express my thanks to the Society for having done me the
honour to elect me an honorary member. The subject of a Wholesale
Agency2 which is occupying the attention of the Society is one of great
importance, and I hope it will be found practical to establish such an
agency, both as a great means of saving expense, and as a valuable
extension of the Co-operative principle. It is the enormous number of
mere distributors who are not producers that really eat up the produce
of labour, much more than the mere profits of Capital, which, in a great
majority of cases, are not more than a reasonable equivalent for the
industry which created the capital and the frugality which prevents it
from being squandered. The direction in which I look for the greatest
improvement in Social economy, is the suppression of the vast number of
middlemen who share among themselves so large a proportion of the
produce of the country, while the service they render though
indispensable, might be as well and better performed by a tenth part of
their number.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 2, 1863

Blackheath

621.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath

,
July 2, 1863

Madam—

I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note, dated June the 30th,
which has just reached me. It will not be in my power to attend the
meeting of the society, but I highly applaud its intention of proposing
a test for the education of women—a proposition which I hope goes the
length of affording them the same advantages in respect to examinations
for certificates and degrees which are open to men. If these are useful
and necessary means of Edition: current; Page: [865] rendering education
efficient in the case of men, they must be equally so in the case of
women, and will certainly be adopted as soon as the latter object is as
seriously desired as the former.—I am, &c.,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 3. 1863

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

622.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

July 3. 1863

Dear Sir

Many thanks for your very interesting letter. I am sorry that I shall
not see you at the Club2 this evening. If it is not inconvenient to you
will you come on Sunday next (5th) and dine with us at six? My friend
Professor Bain is coming, and would, I am sure, like much to see you;
and I cannot ask you to come in the morning, as I may perhaps be out. I
am the more desirous that you should come on Sunday, because I have an
engagement of some standing, which will take me out of town on Monday by
an early train, and I shall certainly not return till Thursday evening.
If you cannot come next Sunday, can you the Sunday after? but if you
leave town before then, I must arrange to return by Friday or Saturday,
and so should be glad to know what your plans are. If you address a line
here saying on which of these days you will come, it will be forwarded
to me. Come to dinner if possible, otherwise at any hour of the day that
suits you.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 5. 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

623.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

July 5. 1863

Dear Sir—

I have been intending to write to you almost from the time when you
left, but delayed, partly because I thought I might hear from you &
Edition: current; Page: [866] partly because I was expecting an
opportunity of seeing Mr Grote, who would certainly have wished to send
you a friendly message. I have been disappointed however & shall not be
able to see him for more than a week & will therefore no longer delay
writing to you, though I have nothing particular to say except to
express our earnest hope that your health is by this time completely
restored,2 & our unalterable feelings of friendship and regard.

Our life which has been more than usually broken in upon during the last
month owing to the presence of several persons3 in London whom I highly
value, or to whom attentions were due from me which I have few
opportunities of paying—is now about to relapse into its usual wholesome
tranquillity; & I have been enabled to have a few days work at my book
on Hamilton with which I now mean to persevere steadily. I have always
found that real intellectual work is to me all that Cicero in his
oration pro Archia says of literature—when one wants healthy excitement,
an outlet for energy, active pleasure, or consolation, nothing else
affords it in the same degree.4 It would give me great comfort to see
you reaping the same benefits from the same cause. Your clear, firm
intellect & your great store of acquired knowledge qualify you to take a
high position not only as a scholar but as a writer & thinker, & I know
nothing to prevent your doing so unless you allow yourself to be
discouraged by too great dissatisfaction with what you produce. That you
must be dissatisfied is inevitable, for nobody ever does anything of
much value unless his standard of excellence is much above his present
powers of execution. But if one gives way to discouragement this
disparity is always increasing, for self-culture raises one’s standard
always higher & higher, so that unless one keeps one’s powers of
execution in such full exercise as makes them also grow pari passu, one
is driven to absolute despair. Ever since I have had eight or ten years
of intellectual activity to look back upon I have often said to myself,
If my judgment were what it is now, & my powers of execution only what
they were a few years ago, I shd perhaps never have had the heart to do
anything. I have gone on chiefly because my standard though always far
above myself never seemed at an absolutely unattainable distance, and I
have generally found that however discontented I might be with the best
that I could do, others who had not by dwelling on the subject formed
the same high idea of what there was to be done, did not perceive a
tenth part of the shortcomings which I myself saw, & that what was not
good enough for me was often sufficient to be very useful to them. And I
feel certain that you will find exactly the same.

With compliments to [Mrs?] J. Wertheimstein5 & kind regards to Mr
Wessel, I am

Edition: current; Page: [867]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday July 7, 1863

Victoria Hotel, Ashford

Helen Taylor

Taylor, Helen

624.


TO HELEN TAYLOR1

Victoria Hotel, Ashford

Tuesday ev’g
 [
July 7, 1863

]

Dearest Lily—

I had a long detention in town on Monday from having omitted to procure
the July time table. The train had been changed from 9/45 to 9/15 and
when I arrived it had been just five minutes gone. So I had to wait for
another train at half past 11 during which I had my hair cut and gave
Peppercorn2 a commission to buy Brighton stock. I arrived here just
before two and had only half a day’s walk. That however was pleasant,
and we have been out from six in the morning to six in the evening
today.

I have decided to return home on Friday instead of Thursday. I found
Irvine3 disposed to stay—and it appears that he took a walk before I
came, to a boggy neighbourhood where he found quantities of plants that
I want to find, and I cannot in conscience ask him to go there again
with me until I have gone with him all the walks he wants to take—which
will fully occupy Wednesday & Thursday. So you may expect me, dear, on
Friday evening. I will write again on Thursday.

This new disturbance in Greece is vexatious4—but I hope it is only the
soldiery, who we knew are bad, and that it will be put down.

Your affectionate

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 13 juillet 1863

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

625.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

le 13 juillet 1863

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

M. le professeur Cairnes, l’auteur du livre que sans doute vous
connaissez sur l’esclavage américain,2 doit diner avec nous jeudi à 6 h.
et ce serait un grand plaisir pour nous si vous pouviez et vouliez y
venir.

votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [868]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 13, 1863

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

626.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

July 13, 1863

Dear Sir

I shall be here for the next two months at least, and if you will give
me a line two or three days before you come I will take care not to miss
you. I am much interested by what you tell me of your proceedings and
shall be happy to lend you any books I have that will be likely to be of
use. I am

yours very sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 17. 1863

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

627.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

July 17. 1863

.

Dear Sir

If your arrangements should make it convenient to you to be here at five
o’clock p.m. to dine with me on Monday next, it will give me great
pleasure. If not, I shall be happy to see you at 12 o’clock as you
appoint in your letter.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 18 juillet 1863

Blackheath Park, Kent

Gustave D’Eichthal

D’Eichthal, Gustave

628.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 18 juillet 1863

Mon cher d’Eichthal

Je vous remercie de votre bon souvenir, et aussi du cadeau de votre
livre,2 bien qu’il ne soit pas encore arrivé. Le sujet dont il traite
est comme vous le Edition: current; Page: [869] dites très bien à
l’ordre du jour, et je tiens la critique des Evangiles comme encore plus
importante au progrès dans ce pays-ci qu’en France. L’échange d’idées
avec vous est pour moi une trop vieille habitude pour ne pas la
reprendre avec plaisir. Je me suis souvent rappelé les paroles de M.
Enfantin3 lors de la dispersion de la société de Ménilmontant4—que
l’héritage du Saint-Simonisme allait fournir des pensées et des moyens
de combat à toutes les opinions qui divisent l’Europe. Il en a été
ainsi, et les anciens Saint-Simoniens ont joué un rôle important et
j’ajoute, utile, dans tous les camps. Je me ferai un plaisir d’aller
vous voir la première fois que je me trouverai à Paris pour y rester
quelques jours. Ordinairement je ne traverse Paris qu’en courant, et
sans m’y arrêter même une seule nuit.—Avec des compliments amicaux pour
M. votre frère,5

je suis toujours, mon cher d’Eichthal,
 votre bien dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 18, 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

John Gorham Palfrey

Palfrey, John Gorham

629.


TO JOHN GORHAM PALFREY1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

July 18, 1863

Dear Sir—

Want of time has prevented me from sooner acknowledging the present of
your two works; as it still obliges me to postpone the pleasure I expect
to derive from your History of New England.2 But I will not any longer
defer expressing to you my sincere thanks for your having given me the
opportunity of reading your two series of papers on the Slave Power.3
Had but such a book as yours been in the hands of our people at the
commencement of the present contest, I think that it would have saved
many from disgracing themselves & their country by sympathizing with the
atrocious slaveholding conspiracy.

Edition: current; Page: [870]
They had a slight though wholly insufficient excuse in their total
ignorance of all the antecedents of the question. But now they have
contracted the habit of siding with tyrants & the most complete proof
that could be laid before them of the character of the tyranny would now
make comparatively little impression on them. I feel the warmest
sympathy with the tone & spirit of your book & the highest admiration
for the band of men, of whom you are one, who founded & led the
AntiSlavery party in the U.S. in still worse times than these, and I
have found myself often exclaiming as I read your book that the noble
Commonwealth of Massachusetts will yet redeem America & the world.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 23 juillet 1863

Blackheath Park

Gustave D’Eichthal

D’Eichthal, Gustave

630.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

Blackheath Park

le 23 juillet 1863

Mon cher d’Eichthal

Le livre2 que vous avez bien voulu me destiner, m’est parvenu avant
votre seconde lettre. Je n’avais pas d’inquiétude sur son arrivée, étant
de longtemps accoutumé aux délais de libraires français. Je n’en fis
mention dans ma lettre que pour expliquer pourquoi je ne vous disais
rien d’un livre que je n’avais pas encore reçu. Maintenant que je le
possède, je me promets de le lire avec le plus grand intérêt. Je me
souviens que je vous dois déjà la connaissance des écrits si importants
de M. Salvador3 sur la même question, et sur bien d’autres étroitement
liées avec elle. Je suis charmé d’avoir une étude de ce sujet, faite de
votre point de vue.

Moi aussi j’ai été frappé de l’article du Westminster Review sur le
Saint-Simonisme,4 sans avoir même des soupçons sur la source d’où il
provient. Votre confirmation de son exactitude serait très précieuse à
l’auteur quel qu’il soit.

Excusez si je n’écris pas davantage, étant actuellement très occupé.

votre très dévoué

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [871]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 23, 1863

B[lackheath] P[ark]

J. Stuart Stuart-Glennie

Stuart-Glennie, J. Stuart

631.


TO J. STUART STUART-GLENNIE1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

July 23, 1863

Dear Sir—

Dr Tyndall’s2 answer to your question must be considered, I shd think,
to set at rest all doubt respecting the complete establishment of the
law of Conservation of Force so far as regards the mutual convertibility
of Heat & Mechanical motion. Though the law is not yet similarly
established in any other of its subdivisions, there is good reason to
expect that it will be so, & I am quite willing to accept it
hypothetically as established.

Supposing this mutual convertibility to be an universal law it will
necessarily modify at least in the mode of expression, much of the
received physical & metaphysical philosophy; & in endeavouring, even in
the present state of the subject, to discover what these modifications
ought to be, you are engaged not only in a very useful undertaking,3 but
in one for which the letter you have written to me shews that you have a
considerable amount of qualification. I would therefore encourage you to
go on, and as the best help I can give you, is to offer such remarks as
occur to me on any part of your speculations which you may communicate
to me, I will begin doing so with your letter.

With regard to Matter, there has long been a growing tendency in
thinkers to regard its particles as mere centres of force—even as local
centres arbitrarily assumed to facilitate calculation and not implying
the hypothesis of an absolute minimum. I think also that philosophers
have long since given up the conception of Inertia in the sense in which
you contend against it. No one any longer speaks of a vis inertiae,
sufficient of itself to neutralise part of an impelling force. It is
quite understood that as much force as is lost by the impinging body is
always transferred to the impinged, at least in the form of pressure, &
that if this is often imperceptible to the senses it is because a small
amount of force is distributed over so great a bulk that the effect on
the whole is that of an inappreciable fraction. We may now add as the
complement & correction of this doctrine that force which is lost as
motion, reappears in some other shape. With respect to Cause I confess I
cannot see that the philosophical conception of it is at all altered by
the new principle. The existence of force, no doubt, must now be placed
as the existence of Edition: current; Page: [872] matter was before,
among those facts which having in their nature no beginning are not
dependent on any Cause. The existence of a certain quantity of Force, as
of a certain quantity of Matter, becomes itself one of the primeval
causes. But every change of state, from one manifestation of force to
another (as from locomotion to heat or conversely) remains an event,
dependent on a certain combination of previous conditions & our
conception of Causation is still, in regard to such events, exactly what
it was before. Not to mention that the ultimate effects, which follow
from these different manifestations—e.g. the locomotion which we see, &
the heat which we feel—remain essentially & irrevocably different as
they were before. They are shewn indeed to be consequences of the same
Primeval Cause, under different sets of collateral conditions, but
neither this, nor anything else, can make them identical in themselves;
the sensations are different—& do not coexist as the causes do: they are
effects dependent as they have always been considered to be upon a law
of sequence.

The mutuality of action, of which the range is so greatly extended by
the discovery of the Conservation of Force, does not as it seems to me
affect the idea of Cause. Even if established as the universal law of
all action, it would only shew that all, instead of merely some, Causes
are reacted upon by their effects; that there is reciprocal succession
between the different links of two series. This phenomenon is always
allowed for in the inductive theory of Cause. It is always recognized,
for example, in the phenomena of gravitation. The position of every body
in the solar system is the joint effect of the position of all the other
bodies of the system, and it also itself exerts an influence on the
position of each of them. But this is still a case of succession not of
coexistence, for only one of these relative positions of all the bodies
can exist at a time, & the change from one position to another is
effected by motion which is successive. If the position of each body
were merely a fact in correlation with the position of every other, all
the different positions mutually determining one another, the system
would be in equilibrium & all motion would cease. That it does not cease
proves that the present position of each body is determining not the
present position of every other, but a change in that position. So that
even in this example (the most favourable of all to you because
gravitation has not been proved to require time for its transmission)
you need the old idea of Causation to account for the facts.

I may add that if a different definition is now wanted of Cause & Effect
it would be necessary to look out for clearer expressions than “a
relation” & the “realization” of that relation, terms which as it seems
to me require explanation still more than Cause & Effect do.

I shall always be happy to discuss these matters further with you either
by word of mouth or in writing.

Edition: current; Page: [873]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 26. 1863

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

632.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

July 26. 1863

Dear Sir

I thank you for sending me some more of your writings. Independently of
the value of their matter, I have been struck with the goodness of the
composition, which, in self-instructed writers even of great merit,
often remains far below the standard of their thoughts. One who has so
much both useful and interesting to say, and who can say it so well, is
right to seek admittance into some of the higher periodicals. If you
like to send your article to McMillan through me, I shall be happy to
take charge of it; or, if you send it direct to the editor, and let me
know just before, I will write a note to Mr Masson2 which may perhaps
cause it to be earlier attended to.

My daughter thanks you for your present, and will be very happy to see
both yourself and Mrs Plummer should you be again in London.

I suppose you have received by this time a parcel from my publisher
containing all my writings which you did not already possess, except a
small volume of Political Economy essays,3 which is out of print. The
other books which I promised to send you will speedily follow. I am

Dear Sir
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 29, 1863

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

633.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

,
July 29, 1863

.

I have delayed writing to you for several days after receiving your
letter of July 18, because that letter made me hope that I should before
this time receive another which might perhaps explain some part of the
first. I wish that anything I could say would relieve the unhappiness of
which your letter contains so much proof. In so far as it is caused by
the notion that you have Edition: current; Page: [874] in England—at
Oxford or anywhere else—enemies who plot against you and delight in
making you suffer, I am convinced that you will some day look upon this
as the most visionary phantom which morbid nervous excitement could
conjure up.2 Consider the total absence of motive for such malignity,
and the extreme improbability that it would be harboured against one the
whole of whose character and demeanour inspire the most friendly as well
as respectful feelings. But what makes this delusion so painful to us,
is the measure it gives of what you are suffering from other causes. The
alleviation of that can not, in the nature of the case, come from
others, but must come from yourself. There is a remedy for most
sufferings. But as far as my experience goes, it is to be found only in
resolutely turning the mind to other things. You have noble objects: you
have intellect and acquirements, which can be made useful to the world,
and public spirit to desire to put them to that use. It is uphill work,
at first, to prescribe to yourself as a task, what could be more
agreeably and easily done from a genial impulse; but it is what
everybody has to do, who accomplishes anything considerable, for nobody
can command genial impulses at pleasure. If you would only set yourself
in a determined manner to complete any of the literary undertakings you
have had in view, forcing yourself to work at it a certain (not too
great) number of hours every day till it is finished, you will find that
existence will become much more bearable to you even from the first. But
this should be done regularly, as men transact official or professional
business; and it should not be done to the detriment of the health. The
thoughts can be trained to flow in a given channel only by the aid of
habit.—You express yourself, as you always do, much too warmly about
what you consider as your obligations to me. It is a very small claim on
gratitude to give a little of one’s society to a man whom one esteems
and likes, and I have not had an opportunity of shewing my regard for
you in any other way, except the very easy one of introducing you to Mr.
Grote. You say that I have two different languages to you, and that one
of them makes you fear that you are destined always to be the subject of
the greatest misconceptions. If you mean that I misconceive you, I
entreat you, my dear friend, to speak plainly to me, and tell me in
what—that I may either clear the matter up by shewing that I do not
think of you as you suppose, or if I really do misunderstand you in any
respect, that the error may be corrected. Any thing uncomplimentary to
you, anything that it could give you pain to know, I am the farthest
possible from thinking, and am anxious to know what, in my language to
you at any time, can have given you so groundless an idea.—Our health
which you inquire about in so kind a manner, is much as usual; but we
are not at all easy in our minds, for we are really anxious about you.
It would be a great relief to us if we knew that you had exchanged a
life of brooding over painful thoughts Edition: current; Page: [875] for
a healthful exertion of the active faculties.—Mrs. Grote has many times
inquired after you with kind interest, and Mr. Bain regretted your
departure, as he had hoped to have some more conversation with you. When
I last saw Mr. Grote, he said, he was going to write to you. . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 30. 1863

Blackheath

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

634.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath

July 30. 1863

Dear Sir

I am sorry to have put you to inconvenience by my bad writing. My
address when in France is Saint-Véran, Avignon. Avignon, France, is
however a sufficient direction.

I have had some thoughts of printing a cheap edition of my Political
Economy,2 but as I cannot do so without my publisher’s consent until the
edition now on sale is exhausted, I should be glad of any information
you could give me, that might lead him to think his interest would not
suffer by it. I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 1. 1863

Blackheath

John Chapman

Chapman, John

635.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Blackheath

Aug. 1. 1863

Dear Sir

My proposal to write on Comte was connected with the Life, with extracts
from his Correspondence, which has long been in preparation by M.
Littré,2 and which may now, I believe, be expected very soon, but
perhaps not so soon as October. In any case my being able to write the
article depends on your being able to wait some time for it, as I have
work in hand which requires continuity of thought, and which would
suffer very much if I were to break it off and take up a quite different
train of ideas. In anything I write for you on such a subject, I desire
to do my very best, and to be able to give it my undivided attention. I
cannot, therefore, say at present how soon I shall be able to write it,
certainly not for the next number. I regret that I am Edition: current;
Page: [876] unable to help you at a time when help would be particularly
useful to you. Your time and thoughts may well be taken up by so
important a medical discovery,3 which I earnestly hope may prove as
beneficial both to the world and to yourself as there is reason to
anticipate. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 3 août 1863

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

636.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

le 3 août 1863

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc,

Etes-vous libre quelque jour de la semaine prochaine commençant Lundi le
10 août? En ce cas vous nous feriez beaucoup de plaisir si vous voulez
venir diner avec nous. Nous dinons à six heures.

Votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 24. 1863

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

637.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Aug. 24. 1863

Dear Mr Fawcett

Stephen’s2 letter contained some very interesting information which I
have seen nowhere else; the manifestations in Massachusetts on the
setting out of Edition: current; Page: [877] a negro regiment,3 and
still more, the prospect of a more thorough Emancipation Act in
Missouri.4 I showed the letter to Mr Hare, who happened to be here, and
then sent it by post to your father as you desired.

Everything now looks encouraging,5 both for the success of the North,
and for the cause of negro emancipation. But nothing that has come from
America has so strongly impressed me, as the manifesto of the Committee
of negroes to induce their fellow negroes to enlist6—so absurdly
ridiculed for its highflown language. I was not at all prepared for
anything so admirable in tone and feeling. Degraded and looked down upon
as these people are said to be, their strongest feelings were not as
negroes but as citizens and republicans—what they expected to tell on
the negroes of the north and make them give their lives for the cause
was not the interests or the wrongs of their race; it was the idea that
they were to fight for liberty, and humanity, and civilization, and that
the improvement of the world would go back if the North did not prevail.
Is not this noble? And not a soul seems to have noticed it. One would
think that the most highminded and heroic feelings, impelling to
corresponding actions, were the commonest and most natural things in the
world, in a despised and downtrodden race. I suppose the truth is,
nobody read the manifesto.

We leave for Avignon about the end of the month, and shall not return
till February. Let me hear from you sometimes.

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 25. 1863

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

638.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

Aug. 25. 1863

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Nous partons pour Avignon au commencement de la semaine prochaine, mais
avant de partir je vous prie de m’informer quels sont ceux de mes écrits
Edition: current; Page: [878] dont je vous ai envoyé des exemplaires,
afin que je me donne le plaisir de vous offrir les autres.

Je serais charmé s’ils pouvaient vous donner autant de plaisir que j’ai
retiré de la lecture de votre grand ouvrage historique.2 Une histoire de
la Révolution du point de vue socialiste, manquait auparavant, et il en
rejaillit mille lumières nouvelles. Je me trouve souvent, à votre égard,
dans un désaccord d’opinions, non total, mais partiel, que vous n’aurez
pas de peine à concevoir. Mais l’impression toujours dominante est
d’estime et d’admiration. Même lorsque je vois les faits autrement que
vous, il est très important de reconnaître qu’ils peuvent être vus comme
vous les voyez.

votre tout dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 25 août 1863

Blackheath Park, Kent

Josephine von Wertheimstein

Wertheimstein, Josephine von

639.


TO JOSEPHINE VON WERTHEIMSTEIN1

Blackheath Park, Kent

,

le 25 août 1863

.

Madame, pardonnez-moi, de n’avoir fait jusqu’ici aucune réponse directe
à la lettre que vous avez bien voulu m’écrire. Je croyais mieux remplir
votre désir en écrivant à celui qui est, à si juste titre, l’Objet de
notre commune sollicitude.2 J’écrivis sans délai, mais comme depuis lors
je n’ai pas eu de ses nouvelles, je n’ose presque pas lui écrire de
nouveau sans avoir préalablement demandé à vous ou à M. Wessel dans quel
état d’esprit il se trouve maintenant. En même temps je remplis le
devoir de vous assurer directement, à quel point nous partageons votre
peine et votre inquiétude. Vous vous êtes servie, Madame, dans votre
lettre, d’expressions de reconnaissance très audelà de mon droit. Je
serais trop heureux de pouvoir les mériter, mais jusqu’ici je ne vois
presque rien que j’aie fait pour lui. S’il y a quelque chose que
j’aurais pu faire, c’eût été peut-être de lui donner, par des preuves
d’estime, la confiance qui lui manquait en lui-même. Ces preuves
d’estime il les a eues, non seulement de moi, mais de M. Grote, et, je
le crois sincèrement, de tous ceux qui l’ont connu ici. Cela n’a servi à
rien quant à présent, mais il faut croire que cela ne sera pas perdu
dans l’avenir. J’ai reconnu en lui, dès le commencement, une haute
capacité intellectuelle: cette impression est allée toujours en
s’accroissant, tandis-qu’une connaissance plus intime y a ajouté une
véritable estime morale. Ce n’est que plus tard que j’ai reconnu chez
lui cette extrème sensibilité aux impressions pénibles qui le rend en
Edition: current; Page: [879] même temps très susceptible de souffrance
et peu accessible aux consolations. En lui écrivant je m’efforce
toujours à le décider à en chercher dans les hauts travaux intellectuels
dont il est si capable, et dans la carrière utile et honorable qu’il
peut remplir dans le monde de l’intelligence comme dans celui des
interêts sociaux. Si j’ai quelque pouvoir sur son esprit, je ne me
lasserai pas de l’exercer dans ce sens: et, ses autres amis aidant, nous
finirons peut-être par réussir. . . . Si [M. Wessel] est encore avec
vous, je lui aurai une véritable obligation toutes les fois qu’il voudra
bien nous donner des nouvelles de son ami. . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 28. 1863

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

640.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

Aug. 28. 1863

Dear Sir

I have received your article, and after reading it have sent it to Mr
Masson with a strong recommendation of it and of its author.2

Though it is not a striking article, it is a very good one, and not only
such as I think he would do well to print but calculated to make him
wish to try what other things you can write which would suit him.

My daughter (Miss Taylor) thanks you for the volume of poems, and
desires to be remembered to Mrs Plummer.

Letters will not find me here beyond Monday morning after which they had
better be directed to my publisher with “to be forwarded” written on the
cover.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 2. [1863]

Hotel Windsor

Harriet Grote

Grote, Harriet

641.


TO HARRIET GROTE1

Hotel Windsor

Rue de Rivoli [Paris]

Sept. 2. [1863]

Dear Mrs Grote

We deferred our departure from England till yesterday in the hope of
your being in Paris today, but I have inquired for you at the Hotel
Meurice Edition: current; Page: [880] and find you have not arrived, and
as we are expected at Avignon tomorrow morning we have missed the sight
of you for this time.

We took Daisy to Savile Row and duly delivered him there on Monday. He
is out in very fine flower at present. It cost both Helen and me an
effort not to make use of your kind permission to take him with us to
Avignon, but prudence prevailed, on account of the absence of any fence
capable of restraining his wandering propensities. He is a most
beautiful and amiable dog and his pleasant ways have been a great source
of enjoyment to us.

Helen thanks you for your letter, and hopes you have continued to enjoy
your excursion. She is very sorry to have missed seeing you here.

I hope Mr Grote is quite well. I enjoyed his visit, two or three days
before he left London. I need not say how glad we should always be to
hear from either of you. I am

Dear Mrs Grote
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 6. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

642.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 6. 1863

Dear Sir

On arriving here, three days ago, I found M. Littré’s volume on Comte,2
which is just published. After reading it, I feel an increased desire to
make it the subject of an article for you. But I feel some embarrassment
for the following reasons. What I wish to write is an estimate of
Comte’s philosophy. But the book suggests much to be said about the man
himself, his character and career, the conduct of others in relation to
him, and various points in the character of his country and of the age,
which some of the incidents of his life illustrate. It, therefore, is
worth reviewing merely as a biography, independent of the great
philosophical questions raised in it; and as the attempt to combine both
points of view in one article would not only run to too great a length,
but would almost necessarily spoil both, two articles seem to be
required, one of which, though I should not be unwilling, I have no
particular wish to write, while I could not possibly set about either
before next year. In these circumstances, you would perhaps like to have
an article on the biographical aspect of the book without waiting so
long for it; and I should myself Edition: current; Page: [881] prefer to
be relieved from that part of the task, if you have any other
contributor to whom you would not be unwilling to confide it. I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 15. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

T. E. Cliffe Leslie

Leslie, T. E. Cliffe

643.


TO T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE1

S[aint] V[éran]

Sept. 15. 1863

.

Dear Sir—

You wished to be informed, of anything worth reading which came out on
the gold question. If you have not yet returned to England you may not
be aware of Fawcett’s paper read at the British Association,2 & the
newspaper discussion which has followed it, at the rate of two or more
long letters in the Times every day3—Cairnes, among others, taking part.
If you have not yet done so, you will find it worth while to look
through a file of the Times, as well as to read Fawcett’s paper which I
doubt not he will gladly communicate to you. The Daily News4 had a
fuller report of it than the Times. It seems to me that three important
ideas have emerged from the discussion, all tending to explain in their
several degrees why the apparent depreciation has been so much less than
might have been expected from so great an addition to the quantity of
gold in the world. The first is, that the increase must be compared, not
with the gold alone which existed before, but with the gold plus the
silver, which last is said to be double the value of the gold. This was
brought forward by Cairnes. Second: one writer5 has urged that railways
& free trade are rapidly producing an approach to equality of prices all
over the world in place of the great inequality that existed before,
England being the place where they were, as a rule, highest. This
change, if there had been no gold discoveries would have taken place by
a fall in some Edition: current; Page: [882] places, & a rise in others:
conseqently the operation of the new gold for some time in such places
as England, would chiefly consist in preventing a fall; & its only
manifest effect might for some time be that of raising prices in the
cheap countries to nearly the level of the dear ones. This, which is an
original & I think a just, remark, Cairnes notices but rejects,6 having
I think been set against it by a stupid metaphorical way of putting it
in a leading article of the Times.7 The third idea is one I have myself
for some time entertained, & it has been taken up by one writer in a
newspaper letter.8 It is this: We are already suffering a much greater
depreciation than appears on the surface, because the diminished
purchasing power of money is experienced in the form of deteriorated
quality rather than of higher price. It is the interest of dealers thus
to disguise the progressive rise of prices. There are always things to
be had at the prices or something like the prices one has been
accustomed to pay, but they are no longer of the same quality. The same
purpose is also often effected by giving smaller & smaller measure
without change of name.

Of course all these circumstances affect only the rapidity of the
depreciation & have nothing to do with determining what it will
ultimately amount to, which is a question of permanent cost of
production, and as the business gets out of the hands of private diggers
into those of quartz crushing companies conducting it on ordinary
mercantile principles, gold will ultimately be of the value which will
yield to such companies the ordinary rate of companies’ profit.

We propose remaining here till the end of the year or about the meeting
of Parliament. I shall be happy to hear from you sometimes in the
interval.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 17, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

644.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

,
Sept. 17, 1863

Let me begin by saying how much I rejoice to hear that you are better
both in health and in spirits, and are vigorously at work, with a result
satisfactory even to yourself, which is always the most difficult thing
to a good Edition: current; Page: [883] writer.—Let me next thank you,
which I do sincerely, for telling me frankly what you have in your mind
against me. The only way to clear up misunderstandings, is to speak
plainly about them, and some of the impressions which seem to have been
made upon you are such as, if you had not told them to me, I certainly
should never have guessed. I feel as strongly as you do the
ludicrousness of your having to ask me what I have seen to make me
entertain I know not what mean opinion of you, and I wonder that what
you feel to be so ridiculous you should nevertheless have thought to be
probable. I may in my turn ask you, what have you seen in me which made
it likely that, absolutely without cause, I should have formed an
unfavourable opinion of one for whom I have professed, and continue to
profess, so much esteem and regard? As to the idea that any intimate
friend of mine or any person deriving information from me has spread any
reports or communicated any impressions disadvantageous to you, I am
sure, since you say it, that you yourself fully believe it, but I tell
you with the same frankness you have used to me, that I disbelieve it
totally.—Surely, too, I may well be surprised that you should think
anything of a bad joke about Vienna, which I have not the smallest
recollection of making, but which, I am quite sure, had not the
slightest reference to you? I can only have meant, that the next time we
went to Vienna, there would perhaps be something new to be seen
there.—My letter from Avignon2 was quite another thing, and knowing as I
now do the state of your feelings, I can well understand your being
pained by it. But you must recollect that I did not know then what I
know now,3 and it never entered into my head that your object in coming
was to say anything particular, which you thought you had not had an
opportunity of saying before. I thought that you simply desired to see
the place and to see us, and in so doing I neither thought you
obtrusive, nor imagined that you expected anything but what your
knowledge of our friendship for you perfectly entitled you to expect.
But knowing that my time was much occupied, I feared you might be
disappointed, and it seemed right to let you know that I could not give
you so full and free an invitation to come whenever it might be
convenient to you, as I had done in England; and to tell you so, before
you had undertaken so long a journey under what might have been a
mistaken impression, that I had more leisure for seeing friends here
than in England. I thought I was using a freedom which I could not have
taken with a mere acquaintance, but which I am even bound to use with a
friend. . . .4

Edition: current; Page: [884]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 17, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Harriet Isabella Mill

Mill, Harriet Isabella

645.


TO HARRIET ISABELLA MILL1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 17, 1863

Dear Harriet

It is very fortunate that you received the offers you mention in time to
save you from the unpleasant and perhaps dangerous voyage to Shetland.2

Even had I been at home when your letter arrived, an answer from me
could not possibly have reached you in time by return of post. As it
happened, I did not receive your letter till after the date you fixed
for deciding the question. Perhaps however this is not to be regretted,
as it is well that you should decide for yourself on a question of which
you have fuller means of judging than anyone else. I sincerely hope that
your troubles are over, and that your health will now speedily recover
itself.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 18. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

646.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 18. 1863

Dear Sir

Since you wish it, I will undertake both articles,2 provided that on
further consideration I think it desirable that the biographical one
should be written at all. My doubt arises from the fact that neither
Comte nor the French national character appear at all in a favourable
light in Littré’s book, and there are so many people disposed to think
and say the worst possible of both, that I am not sure of its being
desirable that we should add our voices to swell the cry. If I write
both articles, the first will be on Littré’s book combined with another
biography of Comte by a more thorough disciple, Dr. Robinet;3 and the
second will combine the biography by Littré with his Paroles de
Philosophie Positive4 and with a very well made compendium of Comte’s
final doctrines, by Célestin de Blignières.5 I have not much prospect
Edition: current; Page: [885] of being ready for the April number but I
will give you the longest notice I am able. I am

Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 24. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

John Appleton

Appleton, John

647.


TO JOHN APPLETON1

S[aint] V[éran]

Sept. 24. 1863

Dear Sir—

Though I did not immediately answer your letter of July 18 it was by no
means for want of being greatly interested by it. But it so exactly
coincides with my own interpretation of passing events as to leave me
hardly anything to say. I have just been reading it again, for the third
or fourth time since I received it, & I find that we think alike on
every point which you touch upon. This cannot but confirm me very much
in my way of thinking. But indeed the true nature of all that is going
on in America just now is so simple & obvious that to see it as it is
requires only that one should not be totally ignorant of American
affairs during a few years before the secession. As almost everybody
here from the prime minister down to the smallest newspaper writer is
thus ignorant, they naturally see, in what is now going on, only what
their wishes or their prejudices prepare them to look for.

The general direction of the sympathies of nearly all classes here
except the working, & the better part of the literary class, is
disgraceful enough to this country. But things are mending a little. The
worst enemies of America are becoming convinced that it will not do to
let any more Alabamas go out from these islands. It is curious to see
the Times daily arguing, in total opposition to its former doctrines,
that to allow vessels of war to be in substance, even if not literally,
fitted out in this country for a belligerent is wrong as well as
inexpedient.2 The government, as a government, has always been better
than the public in all that relates to this contest; & I am persuaded
that this country will not give you any serious cause of complaint
against its conduct, but only against its inclinations. Some members of
the Cabinet too, have been all along warm friends of the cause. The D.
of Argyll & Milner-Gibson have not disguised it in their speeches & my
opinion is that even Lord Russell is Edition: current; Page: [886] more
with the North than against it. The sentiments of the others will, I
doubt not, be very greatly modified by your success of which there can
now be little doubt, from the gradual but constant progress of the
Northern army & the increasing exhaustion of the South, & the dogged
pertinacity for which no one originally ventured to give the people of
the Free States credit for as much as they have shewn. Complete victory
may not yet be very near at hand, but it is a consolation to think that
provided the success is complete at last, the longer the war continues
the less possibility there is of a compromise preserving slavery, & the
more thoroughly the war will have become one of principle, tending to
elevate the national character.

The thing I most wish to hear from you now is what you, & men like you
are thinking about the mode of settling Southern affairs after the war.
I cannot look forward with satisfaction to any settlement but complete
emancipation—land given to every negro family either separately or in
organized communities under such rules as may be found temporarily
necessary—the schoolmaster set to work in every village & the tide of
free immigration turned on in those fertile regions from which slavery
has hitherto excluded it. If this be done, the gentle & docile character
which seems to distinguish the negroes will prevent any mischief on
their side, while the proofs they are giving of fighting powers will do
more in a year than all other things in a century to make the whites
respect them & consent to their being politically & socially equals.
Such benefits are more than an equivalent for a far longer & more
destructive war than this is likely to prove.

I am in hopes too that this great trial of American institutions which
has necessarily brought all that is defective in them to the surface,
will have done the work of a whole age in stimulating thought on the
most important topics among the people of the Free States. I have long
thought that the real ultimate danger of democracy was intellectual
stagnation & there is a very good side to anything which has made that
impossible for at least a generation to come.

Many thanks for the documents you kindly sent.3 I have received so many
from various quarters in the U. States that I have not yet had time to
read half of them. All that I have read are extremely interesting &
valuable. I am &c

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 25, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

648.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 25, 1863

Dear Sir

Since I wrote to you I have read the volume on Comte’s life and
doctrines by Dr Robinet.2 The result is, that I think it desirable to
abandon the biographical Edition: current; Page: [887] article. There is
so bitter a feud between those who followed Comte in the last
developments of his opinions and those who only went a certain way with
him, among whom was Littré; and the two parties differ so widely in
their statements of fact, that there is no chance of getting at the
truth: and any remarks founded on mere conjecture would be of course
utterly valueless, besides the possibility that they might be unjust to
one side or the other. I therefore propose to limit myself to one
article, which I will set about as soon as I am free from my present
occupations and in which I shall pass slightly over Comte’s personal
history and character, and confine myself in the main to an estimate of
his doctrines and method. I am Dear Sir

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 25, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

649.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 25, 1863

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for the notes. When I return to England, I will
sound Mr Parker on the subject of publishing at once a cheap edition of
at least the Political Economy.2 The other books may perhaps follow.

The British Association documents3 have not yet reached me, printed
matter not being forwarded unless by express directions. But when there
are enough of them to make a parcel of, I shall probably order them to
be sent, and shall then be enabled to read your papers. I am

yours very faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 3. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

650.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 3. 1863

Dear Sir

I am glad to hear so much good news concerning you, and especially that
you are to be at Edinburgh and to read papers there,2 and that you are
forming Edition: current; Page: [888] a connexion with the Telegraph, as
the large sale of that paper makes it an important vehicle for opinions,
besides enabling it, I should hope, to remunerate you liberally. I am
glad, too, on all accounts, that you have been asked to write for Mr
Chadwick’s paper.3 I am disappointed that you have not heard (nor I
either) from Mr Masson,4 but I consider it a sign that if he has not yet
determined to print your article, at least he has not decided to reject
it. I agree with you that Mr Herbert Spencer, in his Social Statics,5
carries his hostility to government agency beyond reasonable bounds. I
attempted to strike a more correct balance between the considerations on
both sides in the concluding chapter of my Political Economy.6 I am glad
you have found the books useful. I can often send you reviews and
magazines, and you are welcome to the loan of any of my books. If,
during my absence, you should want any book which you remember to have
seen at my house, let me know, and I will send directions for its being
sent or delivered to you. It is a pleasure to lend books when one knows
that they [will] be really useful to the borrower.

My daughter begs to be remembered to Mrs Plummer and I am Dear Sir

very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

October 5. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Samuel Chapman

Chapman, Henry Samuel

651.


TO HENRY SAMUEL CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

October 5. 1863

Dear Chapman

I find I have not yet acknowledged your letter of 25th May last. You
have probably, however, heard something about me from your son,2 between
whom and me some communications have passed, though I have not yet seen
him, as he remained at Cambridge until after I had left England. I shall
hope to see him when I return. I heard with regret of your father’s
death.3 A life seldom lasts so long as his unless it has been a pleasant
and desirable one, so that one may reasonably be glad of its
prolongation and sorry when it comes to an end.

Edition: current; Page: [889]
I am much obliged to you for the interesting documents you sent. I duly
received, I believe, all of them, and have looked into them as much as
time allowed. I was much interested by your account of the kind of new
books which are sought after in the colony, and the ardour to get them.
Australia seems to go ahead in opinions as well as in industrial
occupations. In this country it is quite amusing to see how speculations
on religious and other subjects, which have for generations been
familiar to instructed people here, and to people of all sorts in the
rest of Europe, are just now getting down to the inferior strata of
cultivation, and (as a great part of the current literature now springs
from those inferior strata) are being written about as startling
novelties both by friends and enemies.4 The consequence, however, is a
stir in the middle and lower intellectual regions such as has not been
seen for centuries, and the effects of which, in one way or another,
cannot fail to be considerable.

Do not direct to Parker any more, as he is retiring from business,5 but
direct to me at Blackheath Park, Kent, from whence letters are regularly
sent to me when I am at Saint-Véran.

I am at present writing chiefly on metaphysics;6 but the forthcoming
Edinburgh Review has an article of mine on Austin’s Lectures7 which may
interest you.

I am Dear Chapman
 ever yours sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 14. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

652.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 14. 1863

Dear Mr Fawcett

I thank you very much for your letter, and for the extract from that of
Mr. Stephen.2 The tidings from America may be considered good. It is a
Edition: current; Page: [890] question if Rosecranz’s check3 is to be
regretted, since if the war ends too soon, it may end without the
complete emancipation of the slaves; but if it is ended by the aid of 40
or 50,000 negro soldiers, and after another year’s experience of
enfranchised negroes growing cotton and sugar for wages not only slavery
will be extinguished, but the South will probably settle down into a
free country much more easily than is supposed, and the anti negro
feeling in the free states will have, in a great measure, disappeared.
We shall then have nothing to regret but the exasperation of the
Americans against England, which is a great evil to both countries, but
the English have brought it upon themselves.—I have read in the Daily
News two speeches of yours at Edinburgh:4 they seemed imperfectly
reported, but I thought both of them good. There was also, I am glad to
see, a useful discussion on the admission of women to degrees.5 The most
numerous as well as the best speakers seem to have been on the right
side. Hastings6 in particular deserves praise and encouragement. He is
very much in earnest on the subject. He told me he had succeeded in
getting women included in the Cambridge local examinations.7—I am glad
you are writing on the gold question.8 Cairnes’s letters9 were good, but
I think him wrong in rejecting an important remark made in a letter to
the Times.10 It was to this effect. Railways and free trade are
producing a comparative equalization of the prices of things in
different and distant places. Had there been no gold discoveries, this
would have been effected by a rise in the remote out-of-the-way places,
and a fall in the great markets. The new gold has caused the
equalization to take place almost wholly by a rise of prices in the
remote places to something near the level of the great markets; and in
effecting this, a great deal of the gold has necessarily been absorbed;
just as if the gold had physically spread itself over the lower levels,
before reaching the higher. The writer having used this metaphor,11
Cairnes, disgusted by it, and thinking that the metaphor was the
Edition: current; Page: [891] argument, rejected the doctrine
contemptuously.12—I have not yet seen Cairnes’s pamphlet13 which you
mention. Is it a secret who is the writer of the review of your book in
the Saturday Review?14 It ought to help you with the
professorship.15—Fitzjames Stephen’s article on America in Fraser16
begins excellently, and goes off quite poor and weak. He assumes all
sorts of bad consequences in case of the subjugation of the South, which
the facts that are daily occurring prove to be neither necessary nor
probable.—I am glad to hear such a good account of Mr Potter.17
Kyllmann18 is a most valuable person and I fully expected you would like
him. You could not do better than give him carte blanche to draw upon
you for copies of your pamphlet. I understand from Mr Hare that two
pamphlets in favour of his plan have been published in America.19 The
stir in the national mind gives a good chance for the opening of all
subjects which, like the constitution of the American democracy, have
been prematurely closed.—We are here till January, and I hope to hear
from you now and then. I am

Dear Mr Fawcett
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 23. 1863

S[t]. V[éran]

William Thomas Thornton

Thornton, William Thomas

653.


TO WILLIAM THOMAS THORNTON1

S[t]. V[éran]

.

Oct. 23. 1863

Dear Thornton—

I am glad you are so earnestly engaged on the subject of Edition:
current; Page: [892] Cooperation.2 I shall be very glad if the Edinburgh
takes your article, & confident that if it does not the Westminster
will. I suppose you will be able to get useful information, or
indication of sources of information, from Kyllmann. Plummer also might
be very useful to you, & would be delighted to be so. If you were to
write to him, Mr. John Plummer, Kettering, is a sufficient address
(unless indeed he has removed to Northampton which he talked of doing).
He would be glad to send you information, or, when in town for a day
which he is sometimes, to call on you.

Have you considered the subject of the taxation of charities? If not,
perhaps when you do, you may not agree with Gladstone.3 I have not
hitherto agreed with him, though a little shaken, not by any of
Gladstone’s arguments, but by some of Hare’s.4 Hare is, I suspect, the
teacher if not prompter of Gladstone on this subject. My counter
arguments are: 1st. That the charities which are not useful, as the
majority are not, should be reformed altogether instead of being merely
taxed, &c. That anything, really useful to the public or a part of the
public, which an individual has thought worth giving a part of his
fortune for, deserves so long as its usefulness continues, as much
encouragement from the State as is involved in not taxing the income so
appropriated. 2nd That of those among whom the funds are distributed,
all whose income from that & other sources together exceeds £100 pay
their proper quota to the tax already, & those whose income is below
£100 have, on the general principle of the tax, the same claim as all
other such people to be exempted from it. 3rd You are aware that I
would, if I could, exempt savings from income tax, & make the tax on
income virtually a tax on expenditure.5 By this rule, any portion of
income should be only taxed if spent on private uses, but should be free
from taxation (at least at its origin) when devoted to public ends.

As for the American question, if you had time to read one or two books I
could recommend to you, & if you were reading the Daily News every day
(as I am whenever L[ouis] N[apoleon]’s post office lets it pass, which
it does nearly four times in every week), I think you would soon come
over to my opinion. In the pro-Southern English papers which I see the
facts favourable to the Northern side of the question are always
suppressed, & in the Times & Saturday Review the grossest lies told, in
simple recklessness of assertion Edition: current; Page: [893] without
knowledge: The D[aily] N[ews] is the only daily paper of which I can say
(though the Star which I know less of may deserve the same praise) that
what I think the just view is supported with adequate knowledge, &
without prejudice, & the facts favourable to it fairly presented. The
American correspondent of that paper is an intelligent man, not like
that poor gobemouche Mackay,6 in the Times, who simply retails the stuff
he hears from a disreputable clique at New York, almost all of them
personally interested in slavery either through commerce or politics,
who used to be held up to contempt in the English papers as the worst
section of the democracy. Their following consists chiefly of the mob of
Irish emigrants. It is with these & their clients in the press & the
town council that our journals have allied themselves. Everything high
or intellectual or noble-hearted or that used to be friendly to England
in the North is heart & soul with the war. But you will soon hear all
this from Leslie Stephen7 better than from me.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 31. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

654.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 31. 1863

.

Dear Mr Fawcett

As you are writing on the gold question,2 I have copied out, and send
you, an interesting passage on the enormous absorption of the precious
metals by hoarding,3 since the gold discoveries, in the agricultural
parts of Germany, which have absorbed a great deal in that time, through
the increased price of their produce occasioned by railways and the
opening of the English and French markets. The passage is from an
article on the question of Salaries, published in 1857 in a German
review, which the translator in the Revue Germanique for October (from
which I take it) calls the Revue Trimestrielle Allemande.4

Edition: current; Page: [894]
I was very glad to see the prominent part you were able successfully to
maintain at the Social Science meetings.5 I suppose the contest for the
Professorship will be decided shortly.6 I am

Dear Mr. Fawcett
 vry truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 31, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

655.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

.

Oct. 31, 1863

Dear Sir

I have received your note, and also one from Mr Masson, in which he says
that he likes your article,2 but cannot publish it for want of room. I
do not know if he has expressed to you a willingness to insert anything
else: but if you have anything in view, on any subject, that you think
suitable for McMillan, you need not, I think, be discouraged, as you
will be pretty sure to get it accepted either there or somewhere else.

I am glad to hear that the Quarterly is even tolerably good on
Cooperation.3 My friend Mr Thornton, who is very ardent in the cause, is
writing on the subject,4 and I should not wonder if he were to
communicate with you respecting it. Your proceedings at Edinburgh5
interested me much. I was glad also to hear that you had seen so much of
the three persons you mention in your note. They are all of them persons
of great knowledge and public spirit and they may be able to help you
and you them, to very good purpose, in the pursuit of public objects.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer I am Dear Sir

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [895]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 4. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

Henry Chenevix

Chenevix, Henry

656.


TO HENRY CHENEVIX1

S[aint] V[éran]

Nov. 4. 1863

.

Dear Sir—

Your communication raises a great many more points than can be properly
discussed in a letter, & more than I have time to discuss at all. You
have seen in my Logic my opinion on the subject of miracles generally,
viz. that no event, however extraordinary, can be proved to be
miraculous, & therefore that no such event can prove the existence of a
supernatural power;2 but that to one who already believes in such a
power, any miracle, consistent with his theory of the character &
purposes of the Power he recognises, is no more incredible than any
other extraordinary fact. I cannot say I ever saw any advantage in the
theory which supposes miracles to be manifestations of unknown general
laws, or in other words, feats of knowledge & skill, not of power. If
any one has been endowed by God for the special purpose of working
wonders to serve as credentials for a divine message, I see no
antecedent reason for supposing that this power would have been given in
the form of a knowledge of laws yet undiscovered rather than in that of
a power of superseding all laws, while in the former case to work the
wonder & keep the knowledge secret, implies a charlatanerie which one
would not willingly impute to a person divinely inspired & which is not
implied in the other case.

Unless I could pretend to know either that there is no supernatural
power or that such Power never works but in one way, I cannot presume to
say that Christ may not have worked miracles: & I confess if I could be
convinced that he ever said he had done so, it would weigh a great deal
with me in favour of the belief. But in my opinion there is not a single
miracle in either the Old or New Testament the particular evidence of
which is worth a farthing. Those of Christ seem to me exactly on a level
with the wonderful stories current about every remarkable man, &
repeated in good faith in times when the scientific spirit scarcely
existed. We know that in the time & place he lived in, no one thought
miracles in the smallest degree incredible; those who rejected his
mission did not trouble themselves to dispute his miraculous powers but
preferred ascribing them to evil beings. With regard to prophecies, in
the sense attached to the word by modern theologians I do not believe
that any such ever were made. The splendid religious & patriotic poetry
of Isaiah, Jeremiah & others so far as it contains any predictions of
future events contains Edition: current; Page: [896] only such as are
made by Carlyle or anybody who argues that moral degeneracy in a people
must lead to a catastrophe. The catastrophe they specially looked
forward to was that which everything shewed to be then imminent, a
Babylonian conquest. This again they as Hebrews naturally believed not
to be permanent inasmuch as the Babylonians being wicked & idolaters
could only be suffered to prevail temporarily over God’s people as
instruments for their punishment. The only exception I am aware of to
this character of the prophetic writings is the book of Daniel which
predicts events in such minute detail down to the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes & with such extreme vagueness afterwards that I firmly believe
(with Coleridge) that it predicted only what had already happened.3

I do not suppose that what I have said will help you much in your
difficulties, but it will shew you that I judge of the credibility of
alleged miracles from the probabilities of each particular case & the
value of the evidence adduced in it & no other principle of judgment
seems to me tenable.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 6 novembre 1863

St. Véran

Antoine Élisée Cherbuliez

Cherbuliez, Antoine Élisée

657.


TO ANTOINE ÉLISÉE CHERBULIEZ1

St. Véran

,
le 6 novembre 1863

Monsieur—

Si j’ai tant tardé à vous remercier de l’envoi de votre important traité
d’Economie Politique,2 c’est que j’ai dû attendre le moment où un loisir
suffisant me permettrait de le lire attentivement et d’en parler avec
connaissance de cause. C’est seulement depuis hier que j’ai pu en
achever la lecture, et je ne remplis qu’un devoir en vous disant que
vous avez fait, à mon sens, l’un des meilleurs ouvrages qui aient encore
paru sur l’Economie Politique. Vous en avez saisi toutes les lois
générales, même celles qui sont loin d’être encore reconnues par la
plupart des économistes, et vous les avez exposées et groupées d’une
façon qui en démontrant une vrai originalité d’esprit met souvent ces
lois sous plusieurs rapports dans un jour plus ou moins nouveau. Dans la
science abstraite je ne me suis jamais trouvé en désaccord avec vous, si
ce n’est dans quelques détails peu importants; encore ces divergences
apparentes disparaîtraient probablement devant des explications aisées.
S’il n’y a pas tout à fait la même unanimité en ce qui se rapporte
Edition: current; Page: [897] aux applications, cela est dans l’orde des
choses humaines. De même les dissentiments ne tiennent pas à des
différences de principes. Le plus saillant d’entre eux se rapporte à la
question de l’assistance légale. Les économistes anglais, dont la
plupart étaient autrefois très opposés à la taxe des pauvres y sont en
général devenus favorables depuis l’enquête qui a amené la réforme de
1834.3 Ils ont cru connaître que l’assistance bornée au strict
nécessaire, et assujettie à des conditions plus désagréables que le
travail libre, ne produit plus l’imprévoyance et la démoralisation que
vous signalez, à si juste titre, comme effets de l’aumône mal ordonnée:
tandis que la charité publique et privée telle qu’elle existe en France,
n’étant pas susceptible d’une organisation aussi vigoureuse, me paraît
produire tous les mauvais effets qui résultèrent du système anglais lors
de sa plus mauvaise administration. J’ajoute qu’il me semble que la
haine des pauvres contre les riches est un mal presque inévitable là où
les lois ne garantissent pas les pauvres contre l’extrémité du besoin.
Le pauvre, en France, malgré l’assistance qu’il reçoit, a toujours
devant les yeux la possibilité de mourir de faim, tandis qu’en
Angleterre il sait qu’en dernier ressort il est créancier de la
propriété jusqu’à concurrence d’une simple subsistance, que tout
prolétaire qu’il soit il n’est pas absolument déshérité de sa place au
soleil, à quoi j’attribue que malgré la constitution aristocratique de
la propriété et de la vie sociale en Angleterre, la classe prolétaire y
est rarement ennemie soit de l’institution de la propriété soit même des
classes qui en jouissent.

En me félicitant, Monsieur, que la chaire d’Economie Politique dans une
des institutions les plus importantes de la Suisse soit remplie par une
intelligence aussi forte et aussi éclairée que la vôtre, je vous prie
d’agréer l’expression sincère de ma considération la plus distinguée.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 14. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

T. E. Cliffe Leslie

Leslie, T. E. Cliffe

658.


TO T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE1

S[aint] V[éran]

Nov. 14. 1863

.

Dear Sir—

I have read the papers you sent.2 I think there is a great deal of
valuable matter in them, & I would encourage you on every account to go
on with your project. There is very little in them that I at all
disagree with—only Edition: current; Page: [898] a sentence here &
there. Wherever this is the case I have made a pencil note, or will do
so, for I will venture to keep the MS a day or two days longer for the
purpose of reading it again. I am not sure that I rightly understood a
sentence in one of your letters in which you seemed to speak of sending
the paper for the editor’s consideration before completing it. You know
the editor & all the elements of the case much better than I can do but
I shd think that this would very much diminish the chance of the
article’s being accepted. If I were you I would give it the very utmost
finish of execution in my power before letting him see it. There are
very few editors who would not, on such a subject, care very much more
about what an article seems than about what it is. Your paper will be
judged by its composition, its mode of laying out the subject, & the
degree in which it makes its theory plausible. As to whether the theory
is true or not the editor probably is not political economist enough to
think himself able to judge, & most likely cares very little.

At present the MS is little more than material for an article. The
reader has to make out for himself what you are trying to prove, & what
you do prove.

I have read Cairnes’s article3 a second time & I only think him
materially wrong in two things—first, in overlooking & even rejecting
the point of view which is the prominent one in your article—the altered
distribution of the precious metals which is in progress, & the tendency
of prices to rise earliest and most in the more backward & remote
countries. This is the great point of originality in your paper. The
second mistake which I perceive in him is a much smaller one—it is one
of terms only: he says that if prices did not rise at all, but were only
prevented from falling this would still be depreciation of the precious
metals. I shd not call this depreciation. It is exactly the absorption
without depreciation, which is affirmed by some of those whom he
attacks.

With respect to the question whether credit in any of its shapes is to
be counted on either side in addition to the metals, is not the real
state of the case, that the increase of gold would not produce any
increase of credit until prices had first risen? As soon as they had
risen from the action of the gold alone, larger sums would be required
for all purchases, & as the ordinary Edition: current; Page: [899]
object of credit is to make purchases, the nominal amount of credit
called into operation would (all other things remaining the same)
increase exactly in the ratio in which prices had risen. So that the
difference in the credit employed before & after would not be a cause
but an effect of the different state of prices before & after, & might
be struck out of the account on both sides, so far as the consequences
of the increase of gold are concerned—only taking care to remember that
every fluctuation of credit from other causes would act as a disturbing
agency & vitiate the comparison.

If the new gold has, as you suppose, anywhere taken the place of
credit—which if a fact, is to me a surprising one—it must be, I think,
from some local cause tending to a substitution of money for credit,
which would equally have acted if the new gold had never been
discovered—& must be classed with hoarding & the other things which
cause more gold to be used without lowering its value.

I believe your interpretation of the state of things in India to be
perfectly correct.4 But I do not see that it conflicts with Cairnes’s.

I do not like Courcelle-Seneuil’s Etudes,5 though his treatise on
Pol.Econ.6 seemed to me very sound & sensible. But I agree with him more
than I believe I do with you about the influence of race—which (it is
pretty certain) is only the influence of external circumstances
transmitted by inheritance & capable of being modified ad libitum or
actually reversed by change of circumstances. Those of your remarks
which bear on the possibility of a science of society do not seem to me
to have the degree of weight you seem to attach to them. But the subject
is too long for the end of a letter, or indeed for a letter at all.

If the second reading of your paper suggests any additional remarks
worth sending I will write again. If not I will merely post the MS.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 18 Novembre 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

659.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 18 Novembre 1863

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Ce serait un grand plaisir pour moi que de faire ce qui pourrait vous
être agréable, dans l’affaire de la proposition de M. Trübner2 comme
dans toute autre. Mais je suis empêché, au moins pour quelque temps
d’ici, d’accueillir Edition: current; Page: [900] aucune des demandes
qui m’ont été faites à ce sujet. Mon éditeur M. Parker étant
co-intéressé avec moi quant à plusieurs de mes ouvrages, et jusqu’à un
certain point dans tous, j’ai cru devoir ne pas m’opposer à ce qu’il se
défît de ses droits de la manière qu’il jugeait lui être la plus
avantageuse. Ceci entraîne de ma part des relations au moins
temporaires, avec la maison Longman;3 mais je suis très décidé à ne
prendre avec MM Longman aucun engagement qui enchaîne ma liberté à
l’égard d’ouvrages ou d’éditions à venir.

Nous sommes en bonne santé tous deux, et vous remercions de votre bon
souvenir. Croyez toujours à l’amitié sincère de votre dévoué

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 22. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

660.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

S[aint] V[éran]

Nov. 22. 1863

.

Dear Bain—

I also have been for some time meditating a long letter to you, & the
receipt of yours has brought my intention to a crisis.

I am very glad that the Grammar is at last out.2 I shall receive it
probably before my return to England as I shall most likely need to have
a parcel sent here from Blackheath in which case all books received
there will be put into it. I am the more glad to hear of your progress
in revising the Senses3 for the new edition as I shall soon be in the
position of waiting for it. For I have finished my book on Hamilton,4 as
far as regards the first writing; & I shall not commence rewriting until
I have your analysis of the Primary Qualities in its most matured form.
I have got much help from the first edition from which I have quoted
largely, but hope to get still more from the second.5

Do you remember the proof which Hamilton thinks he gives,6 that
extension & figure are perceived directly by the eye? If one colour is
laid upon part of another so that both are seen, the boundary which
divides them must be also seen, & this is a line, i.e. extension. If the
one colour is surrounded by the Edition: current; Page: [901] other, the
line returns into itself, i.e. forms a figure. I hope you will notice
this argument. I shd like to know fully your opinion of it. There is one
obvious answer: viz. that the extension & figure thus perceived are
different things from the extension & figure perceived by touch & the
muscles, & are only identified (or rather connected) with them by
experience. This is true but what are this ocular extension & figure?
Can we call them mere modifications of colour, or are they colour with
the addition of outness, or what? I want a better theory of them than I
am able to give.

I will read again Spencer’s Psychology. I remember thinking his account
of Extension very good;7 & I shall be glad not only to profit by it but
to have an opportunity of quoting from him something with which I agree.
I sometimes regret (considering that he is, & deems himself
unsuccessful) that when I have had occasion to speak of him in print it
has almost always been to criticize him. He is a considerable thinker
though anything but a safe one—& is on the whole an ally, in spite of
his Universal Postulate.8 His speculations on Mathematical axioms9 I do
not now remember, but when I read them I did not attach any importance
to them. His notion that we cannot think the annihilation or diminution
of force I remember well—& I thought it out-Whewelled Whewell. The
conservation of force has hardly yet got to be believed, & already its
negation is declared inconceivable. But this is Spencer all over;10 he
throws himself with a certain deliberate impetuosity into the last new
theory that chimes with his general way of thinking & treats it as
proved as soon as he is able to found a connected exposition of
phenomena upon it. This is the way with his doctrine of “Heredity”11
which however will very likely prove true.

At present my table of contents is as follows:12 . . . On all these
heads I have written chapters which are not unfit to print even now, but
I hope to improve all of them very much before I do print them. I am now
covering the blank pages with notes for additions & improvements
grounded on a third consecutive reading of Hamilton’s philosophical
writings from beginning to end. You see if I fail to give a true
character of them it will not be for want of being well acquainted with
them. I was not prepared for the degree in which this complete
acquaintance lowers my estimate of the man & of his speculations. I did
not expect to find them a mass of contradictions. There is scarcely a
point of importance on which he does not hold conflicting theories, or
profess doctrines which suppose one theory while he himself holds
another. Edition: current; Page: [902] I think the book will make it
very difficult to hold him up as an authority on philosophy hereafter.
It almost goes against me to write so complete a demolition of a
brother-philosopher after he is dead, not having done it while he was
alive—& the more when I consider what a furious retort I shd infallibly
have brought upon myself, if he had lived to make it.

Before the rewriting I mean to read or reread as many books as I have
time for, from which I can hope to get suggestions for enriching the
book. What is the title of the work of the younger Fichte13 which you
advised me to read? Do you know the psycho-physiological writings of
Vogt14 & Mohlschott,15 said to be the heads of the new materialist
school in Germany?

I have been reading, I may say studying, Tyndall’s Lectures on Heat.16
The equivalence of a certain quantity of heat & a certain quantity of
mechanical power seems to be very completely established. But the theory
is still very imperfect, & Tyndall is hardly the man to perfect it.
There is a terrible phrase “potential energy” which covers a great dark
spot in the subject. How do they resolve such questions as this? By the
trifling mechanical motion of applying a match, I light a great heap of
coal and disengage an enormous force in the form of heat. Where was the
previous equivalent of this? No equivalent amount of mechanical motion
existed just before, to be converted into it. Must we seek for the
equivalent at a distinct geological period when the force was as they
say, stored up in the coal? That is conservation of force with a
vengeance, in one sense of the term; but not in the sense in which it is
taken in the theory, if I understand it rightly: nor according to the
philosophical meaning of force: for in that meaning there is a force
where there is no activity, & the conservation of force can only mean
that one of the modes of activity only ceases when another takes its
place. I say nothing of the purely hypothetical machinery, the
interstellar & interatomic ether. I shd like to know your opinion on the
whole subject, & how far you consider the new doctrine to authorize a
new attitude towards the undulatory theory.17 Indeed I shd be much
obliged if in the two or three years which will elapse before a new ed.
of the Logic18 is called for, you would make a note of such alterations
in any part of it as may be required by the progress of science.

Edition: current; Page: [903]
Does Dr Clark still continue his studies on the origin of the Gospels?19
If so, there is a book which he ought to have—Les Evangiles by Gustave
d’Eichthal published at Paris by Hachette.20 Only the first part is yet
out, containing the examination of the first three gospels. The author
proceeds in the same way as Dr Clark, collating the parallel passages in
opposite columns, & many of his conclusions are almost identical: he
thinks Matthew’s the genuine history, & his opinion of Mark & Luke is
very similar to Dr Clark’s. Only instead of thinking that Mark copied
Matthew & Luke, he thinks that Mark copied Matthew, & Luke copied
Matthew & Mark. He rejects many passages of Matthew as interpolations
made subsequently, & not known to either of the others. Another recent
book which would probably interest Dr Clark is called Etudes sur la
Bible (Nouveau Testament) par Michel Nicolas.21 It is a reprint of
review articles only one of which I have seen—the one on St John; but in
that I thought there was considerable merit. Dr C is probably acquainted
with Baur22 & the Tubingen school, at all events through Mackay.23

I only remarked your name once in Littré’s citations from Comte’s
letters,24 & the mention, I think, was very harmless. At the time when
he lost his Polytechnic appointment & had to consider what he should do
for an income it seems I suggested that he could perhaps write articles
for English reviews & offered to translate them for him, adding that
probably both you & Lewes would be willing to help him in the same
way.25 In his answer he desired me to thank you & Lewes for the offer,
in case either of you had made it. That is all I find on the subject.

I have not made any arrangement with Longmans26 as yet, wishing to take
this opportunity of buying back Parker’s interest in the Logic & P E
Essays, the only books of which I did not retrieve the entire copyright.
I have made a proposal to Longmans to this effect & am still expecting
their answer: In the meantime the transfer of my books to them is only
provisional.

With our regards to Mrs Bain

Edition: current; Page: [904]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 23 novembre 1863

Saint Véran

661.


TO THE ADMINISTRATORS OF THE HOSPICES D’AVIGNON1

Saint Véran

le 23 novembre 1863

Messieurs,

Etant possesseur d’une petite campagne attenant au côté septentrional du
chemin vicinal No 1, je désirerais jouir de la cep des saules et autres
arbres qui bordent la route de ce côté au voisinage de ma propriété. Si
donc il pouvait convenir à votre administration, Messieurs, de me céder
ce droit, moyennant la somme annuelle de 25 fr. au benefice des pauvres
de la ville, je vous en aurais une véritable obligation. Les arbres en
question seraient au nombre de cinquante, à commencer en face du Moulin
de la Folie, en suivant le chemin vers l’Est.

Veuillez agréer, Messieurs, l’expression de ma considération la plus
distinguée.

J. Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 29, 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

William Rathbone, Jr.

Rathbone, William, Jr.

662.


TO WILLIAM RATHBONE, JR.1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Nov. 29, 1863

Dear Sir

Nothing can be more true than your observations on the importance of
having a definite plan of constitutional reform grounded on intelligible
principles, to present to the nation at the time (perhaps not far
distant) when the temporary indifference to the subject will have given
place to a renewed and possibly an eager interest in it. The ruling
classes are singularly shortsighted in not perceiving that they will
certainly, in no long time, have to deal with a reaction of this nature.
But they have been in a fool’s paradise ever since they succeeded in
stifling Lord Russell’s reform bill,2 and it will require stirring
events to raise them from their dream.

Edition: current; Page: [905]
I have no doubt that the plan of election which you propose, and which
is not very different from that established by the present Prussian
Constitution, would be a considerable improvement on our present
electoral system; at least if the one-third of the House, which you
reserve for the democracy, were elected by universal suffrage. What I do
not see is, that the plan rests on any principle of justice or
expediency which could, or which should, induce the democracy to accept
it in any character but that of a more or less temporary compromise. I
have never been able to see any clear ground on which it can be
maintained that the State does more, or incurs more cost, for the
protection of the class who have independent property, than for that of
the class who earn large incomes, and for these than for the great mass
of the earners of small incomes; still less that the work and costs
incurred for the sake of these three classes are in the proportion of 3,
2, and 1. I do not feel the force of this consideration as a ground even
for the apportionment of taxation. As regards representation, I speak
with great deference to those who know more of the feelings and modes of
thought of the English working classes than I can pretend to do. But I
do not think them likely to be persuaded of the justice of any
limitation of the suffrage, or inequality in its distribution, grounded
theoretically on property. An educational qualification I think they
might in principle assent to: at all events the restriction of the
suffrage to those who can read, write, and cipher, would probably be
approved of by most of those whom it would not exclude. But a property
qualification, even as a mere index and presumption of education, would,
I think, always remain odious, and would even compromise the principle
of educational qualification, if imprudently identified with it.

You are probably aware that the plural voting involved in your plan does
not, in my mind, necessarily constitute an objection to it;3 but I could
not, as a matter of principle, defend plural voting in consideration
merely of property nor would it, I think, if placed on that footing be
looked upon by the working classes as any thing but an invention of the
oligarchy to enable them to frustrate the practical effect of universal
suffrage in case they found themselves impelled nominally to concede it.

I am very sensible of the great practical difficulties of the subject,
and I confess that I have no hope of soon seeing what I think the true
principles embodied in a specific plan likely to obtain any very wide
acceptance. In the meanwhile I see nothing better to be done than to
stand up on all occasions for certain general principles about which I
have no doubt—e.g. that of personal representation (Mr Hare’s plan); an
educational franchise of some sort; non-exclusion on such irrelevant
ground as that of sex, &c: and practically to support by way of a step,
any proposal having a chance of being Edition: current; Page: [906]
carried, the effect of which would give to the mass of ed. people what
so many small minorities possess—a share of influence in the
representation.

I am
 Dear Sir
 very faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

William Rathbone Junr Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30 Nov. 1863

S[aint] V[éran]

663.


TO THE ADMINISTRATORS OF THE HOSPICES D’AVIGNON1

S[aint] V[éran]

30 Nov. 1863

Messieurs

J’ai eu l’honneur de recevoir votre lettre du 27 novembre et je vous
prie d’agréer mes remercîments de la complaisance dont vous avez usé en
voulant bien accéder à la proposition faite dans ma lettre du 23.2

Recevez, Messieurs l’assurance de ma considération la plus distinguée.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 4. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

664.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 4. 1863

Dear Mr. Fawcett

It gives me very great pleasure to hear of your election,2 which you had
previously expressed so much doubt about that my hopes were anything but
confident. Your success is an excellent sign of the feeling of the
University, and the more so since so many warmly supported you who did
not agree in your political opinions. I wish that Whewell had been with
you, and rather wonder that he was not.3 I suppose he felt interested
for some one of the other candidates. Mayrs4 (is that his name?) had
influential supporters, and Edition: current; Page: [907] Courtney, I
believe, has considerable qualifications for the office, but it seems
strange that Macleod should have got so many as fourteen votes.

A History of Political Economy is not a kind of book much wanted on its
own account, but it would afford an opportunity for interesting
discussions of all the contested points, and for placing them in the
strong light which results from the comparison of conflicting opinions
and from a study of their origin and filiation. Though, therefore, it is
a work I should hardly suggest to anyone, yet if any competent political
economist with a talent for philosophical controversy feels
spontaneously prompted to undertake it, the result is likely to be both
useful and interesting to those who care for the subject.

About Cooperation, I recommend to your attention the first article in
the Journal des Economistes for last month (November).5 It is by J. E.
Horn, who is somewhat of an authority on commercial subjects, and is not
only good in itself, but contains the important information that a
revival of Cooperation has begun to take place in France. When I speak
of revival, I do not mean that the old Associations had ceased to exist
and to flourish, but that the movement for forming new ones, which had
been intermitted, has lately recommenced. Are you aware of the form of
cooperation which is spreading in Germany, under the leadership of Mr.
Schulze-Delitsch,6 one of the prominent political men of the Progressist
party in Prussia—the Societés de Crédit Populaire (I forget the name in
German).7 One of these associations has also been started in Paris, and
if it succeeds, others are likely to follow. Knowing that Thornton is
writing on Cooperation,8 I called his attention to these points the last
time I wrote to him.

As for me, I have had little time to think on any scientific subject
except Metaphysics, on which I am making good progress in the work I am
about.9 I hope to meet you at the February meeting of the Club.10

I am Dear Mr. Fawcett
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [908]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 5 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

665.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 5 1863

.

Dear Sir

You have no reason to feel at all discouraged by Mr Masson’s
non-acceptance of your article.2 It is no proof at all of want of merit
in the article. He probably preferred some other mode of treating the
subject, or preferred to have it treated by some other writer.

Mr Thornton writes to me that he has made great use of your account of
Cooperation in the Companion to the Almanac,3 and that he means to write
to you shortly; perhaps by this time he has done so.

In the volume of Miscellaneous Essays by Mr Herbert Spencer there is, I
believe, a criticism on Comte’s classification of the Sciences.4 Will
you be kind enough, if there is, to return the volume to Blackheath
Park, as I have occasion to consult that particular paper and a parcel
will probably be sent to me from Blackheath Park in two or three days.

I hope an Edinburgh Review which I sent to you by post from here,
arrived safely.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer, I am

Dear Sir
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 16. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

666.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 16. 1863

Dear Sir

Your letter of September 102 did not miscarry, but arrived safe, which I
am sorry to hear was not the case with my answer. I wrote you a long
letter dated Sept. 22, which I did not direct to the place from whence
yours was Edition: current; Page: [909] dated (Stameen, Drogheda) but,
as I confidently believe, to your address in Dublin. I cannot account
for its not having reached you, as I have no evidence that my letters
are ever stopped at the Post Office. That establishment, as far as my
experience goes, confines its rigours to newspapers, or, at most, to
printed matter.

I have to thank you for your article in the National Review.3 I stated
in my letter the only material point on which I differ from you. I seem
to myself to see a meaning through the mist of an absurd metaphor in the
“hydrostatic theory” of the spread of the new gold through the world.4 I
expounded this at some length in my letter, and am vexed that its loss
has deprived me, all this time, of the benefit of your remarks. This
subject must now be deferred till the next time I write: but I must not
omit to thank you for the Bombay dissertations. The young
Competition-wallah5 has shewn a great deal of knowledge and talent; and
neither is Sir A. Grant’s paper,6 which he criticizes, devoid of merit.
Will it be sufficient if I bring them with me when I return to England
at the end of January, or do you require them sooner?

To come to the subject of your last letter I agree with you in thinking
very highly of Mr Loring’s series of papers.7 It is true, he sometimes,
I think, attempts to make out too much; especially when he contends that
the sale of ships of war to belligerents even in their own ports, is a
violation of neutrality. But, on the whole, his argument is triumphant,
and the temperate manner in which he states his very strong conclusions,
gives them additional force. As to altering people’s opinions on the
general question of the right and wrong in the American contest, I am
very much of the way of thinking of Mr Goldwin Smith.8 People do not
want to be convinced. But it is very different with the practical
question of neutrality. Nobody, the Tories as little as the Liberals,
Edition: current; Page: [910] desires to be at war with America, or to
give the United States what, according to international law, is just
cause of war. Accordingly even the Times and Saturday Review, base as
they are on the main subject, are, on the whole, on our side on the
shipbuilding question.9 I can conceive that a well reasoned discussion
like Mr Loring’s might have a decisive effect on a public man who had
not quite made up his mind, and might even shake one who had. But how to
induce them to read it? It might perhaps be useful to send the pamphlet,
with a letter, to some few persons of influence, both friends and such
as are open to conviction. If you think it desirable, and if there is
nobody willing to do it who is better acquainted with them, I should
have no objection to write to the Duke of Argyll10 and to Mr
Gladstone.11 It is just possible that Mr Vernon Harcourt12 might make
some use of it either in the Times or Saturday Review, but I have no
acquaintance with him. Should you know no other channel, I have no doubt
that Fawcett would be able and glad to get it recommended to him. The
only other thing I can think of is to get, if possible, the Daily News
and the Spectator to write about the pamphlet in a manner to give it
importance as a discussion of the legal question. I must add that if
anything is to be written on the subject, I am not a fit person to write
it, as I have never studied international law, and should not like to be
caught tripping on some matter of detail.

I am very glad that you have been writing on this subject for
Macmillan,13 and that you have been able to resume your article on
Ireland for the Edinburgh.14 As I receive both publications, I need not
avail myself of your kind offer.

Every mail now brings good news from America. Things look more and more
promising both for the success of the North, and for the rapid
destruction not only of Slavery but (what seemed far more difficult and
distant) of the antipathy and contempt of the white American towards the
negroes. In the lost letter I gave my reasons for not sharing in your
misgivings about the state of things which would follow the complete
occupation of the South by the Northern armies. Many signs indicate that
the difficulties will settle themselves much more easily and quietly
than any one expected. I have been Edition: current; Page: [911] right
in all I ventured to prophesy thus far, and I am very confident that I
shall prove so in this.

I hope you have quite recovered from your last summer’s indisposition.

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 22. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

667.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 22. 1863

Dear Sir

I am obliged to you for your information about cheap editions. I shall
probably have the power shortly to bring out a cheap edition of my
Political Economy.2

I inclose £5 towards your new project and am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 26. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

668.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 26. 1863

Dear Sir

I have written the inclosed notes to accompany the copies of Mr Loring’s
pamphlet,2 which had much better be sent to their destination directly
than in the roundabout way via Avignon.

Mr Lincoln appears to me a very favourable specimen of an American
public man, and a credit to the nation which elected him, as he seems to
be simply honest without any trick or charlatanerie. He is the “rusticus
abnormis sapiens” whom America has not taught us to expect to find among
her politicians, even when they have commenced life as rail splitters.
That which a great man, in his position, would have foreseen and
designed from the first, he, without designing it, has in the main
executed, through the force of circumstances gradually shaping the
conviction of a sincere and upright mind. Edition: current; Page: [912]
He is an example how far singleminded honesty will often go, in doing
the work and supplying the place of talent. As Solomon, I think, said,
and as my father used to say, “The righteousness of the righteous man
guideth his steps.”3

The Times has made a miserable figure in the Cobden affair,4 and though
Cobden would have served his cause better had he shewn less iritation,
he deserves honour in having, for once, brought the slanderer to book,
and shewn him that it is not always safe to put forth calumnious
inferences from an opponent’s doctrine as the opponent’s own opinions.
The incident is every way fortunate, and will have a chance of making
people think on both the questions you mention—anonymous journalism and
peasant proprietorship—both of them subjects on which it is very
difficult to make the English public think at all. In England (unlike
Ireland) the agricultural labourer thinks so little about the possession
of land as a matter in any way concerning him, that the emigration which
will doubtless go on extending itself in both countries will probably,
as far as England is concerned, take effect only in a considerable rise
of agricultural wages—which it will render inevitable, and which, I
incline to believe, the English peasantry will be contented with.

What I wrote in the missing letter5 respecting the gold question was to
this effect. Shortly before the gold discoveries, there had begun to
take place, and has been taking place ever since, a great increase of
facilities of communication and a great enfranchisement of trade; having
for their necessary effect to bring the prices of many commodities, in
different parts of the world, far nearer to equality than they had ever
been before. Had there been no gold discoveries, this equalization would
have taken place, partly indeed by a rise of prices in the more remote
and poorer regions of the earth, but partly also, and perhaps still
more, by a fall of prices in the great manufacturing countries. The
influx of gold had first to make this phenomenon disappear, before its
effect would be apparent at all in a rise of English prices. During the
interval it would be steadily raising prices in the distant countries
and in those Edition: current; Page: [913] which export raw produce. In
those regions the gold would cooperate with other causes tending to a
rise; in England it would be acting in opposition to causes tending to a
fall; consequently there would be little or no rise of prices in England
until there had been a rise in the distant markets sufficient to bring
about that nearer approximation of prices in the two regions, which
corresponds to the increased facilities of trade. This seems to me to be
what the promulgator of the “hydrostatic theory” had in his thoughts;6
and it would account for the rise of general prices in England being in
a considerably less ratio than that of the increased quantity of gold in
the world. It certainly appears that the rise of prices has been much
more marked and considerable in the places where their range had
previously been low; especially those in which hoarding does not
prevail, but to some extent even where it does.

I am truly glad of the improvement in your health, and am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 26. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

William E. Gladstone

Gladstone, William E.

669.


TO WILLIAM E. GLADSTONE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 26. 1863

My dear Sir,

The accompanying pamphlet2 seems to be so well worthy to be read by
those who, as English statesmen, have the power of determining the
public attitude of this country towards the American belligerents, that
I hope you will excuse the liberty I take in inviting your attention to
it. There has been much able discussion in this country on the points of
international law involved in the shipbuilding question; and through
that discussion the opinion which previously existed in this country has
been greatly modified, and the Government is now well supported in the
course which, to the credit of its justice and firmness, it has in the
main adopted. Still, there are many points which may yet have to be
discussed with the Government of the United States; and this pamphlet,
if you are not already acquainted with it, will shew, more completely
than anything else I have seen, the light in which these Edition:
current; Page: [914] points appear to an able and instructed American,
whose feelings are strongly with the North, but who is moderate and
reasonable—and the strength of the arguments by which his case can be
supported. I do not profess to agree with him on all his points; but, as
far as I am qualified to judge, I do on most of them, and when I do not,
it still seems to me that his opinions are such as may naturally, and
without any great unreasonableness be shared by his countrymen in
general. I am

My dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [915]


1864

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 22. 1864

S[aint] V[éran]

William E. Gladstone

Gladstone, William E.

670.


TO WILLIAM E. GLADSTONE1

S[aint] V[éran]

Jan. 22. 1864

My dear Sir—

When I took the liberty of sending you Mr Loring’s pamphlet2 nothing was
farther from my thoughts than to engage you in a controversy of any
sort. I am much honoured by your having spared time to write to me so
fully on the subject, & am very glad to find in the view you take of it,
nothing from which I differ in principle. I did not mean to identify
myself with all Mr Loring’s sentiments; I think him decidedly unjust to
our Government, which has shewn itself throughout in a far more
favourable light than the predominant portion of our public. But as he
seemed to me to be often right, & when wrong, only in a manner in which
it is most natural & scarcely unreasonable that an American shd be so, I
thought that his statement would interest you & that your being
acquainted with it might perhaps be of use.

In addition to the two important points touched on in your letter, it
seems to me that several others are raised by Mr Loring. I pass over
those which are evidently untenable, or which have a moral, but not a
jurisprudential value. But he argues—

1st. That a State which professing itself neutral does not make all
reasonable exertions to enforce the obligations of neutrality upon its
own subjects, gives, to the belligerent who is prejudiced by their acts,
just ground of complaint, & in certain cases, lays itself open to a
demand of indemnity, and that the Gvt of the U. States has faithfully
acted on this principle at times when we were belligerents & they were
neutrals.

2nd. That the use of neutral territory as a place where an expedition
may be fitted out, & from which it may issue & execute warlike
operations without having acquired the right to do so in the country of
the belligerent whom it serves, is, by international law, not a
commercial operation but a hostile act.

3rd. That the Alabama, &c., in burning their prizes before condemnation
Edition: current; Page: [916] by any prize court, are acting in a manner
forbidden by international law, & which deprives them of any claim to
the privileges or immunities which distinguish regularly commissioned
cruisers from pirates.

4th. That those cruisers have made use of the British flag in a manner
which brings them within the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 17
and 18 Vict., chap. 104.

As to the argument which Mr Loring founds on the fact that the ships
were built by contract, his reason for insisting so strongly on that
point probably is that it makes the precedent of the Santissima Trinidad
so far inapplicable.3 He would no doubt be very glad to get rid of that
case altogether, & to have it ruled that ships of war must not be sold
at all by a neutral country to a belligerent. This opinion—which I hope
I am not mistaken in thinking that you are not far from agreeing in—is
forcibly maintained in an article by Professor Cairnes in Macmillan’s
Magazine for the present month,4 which seems to me one of the ablest &
most valuable papers which this controversy has called forth. But to
return to Mr Loring. He regards the building by contract as
intrinsically important simply as evidence of intent. You think that the
intent of the Confederate agents may admit of proof, but not that of the
builder. Doubtless it is in general neither provable nor probable that
the motive of the builder was one of hostility or was any other than the
profit of the transaction, but his intention, I apprehend, depends only
upon whether or not he knew that he was selling the ship to an agent of
a belligerent. I presume that on the general principles of law any one
would be held to have intended all such consequences of his actions as
he foreknew or expected.

I shd be much to blame in replying to your letter by so long a one as
this, did I not add my sincere hope that you will not consider it
necessary to make the smallest answer to it.

I thank you heartily for your kind invitation to your breakfasts5 & I
promise myself to make use of the privilege. I do not expect to be in
England for the first two months after Easter, but shall be there in
June

I am my Dear Sir
 very truly yours

Edition: current; Page: [917]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 24. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

671.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 24. 1864

Dear Sir

I thank you for the separate copy of your article, which I had already
read in Macmillan,2 and which seems to me extremely valuable. I have
recommended it to Mr Gladstone in my answer3 to a long and on the whole
very satisfactory letter which he wrote to me on the subject of Mr
Loring’s pamphlet. Though he was not favourably impressed by the
pamphlet, he appears to have spontaneously arrived at a conclusion very
similar to yours—namely that the whole subject of building warships for
foreign belligerents requires an “international overhauling”, as a
consequence of which, the case of the Santisima [sic] Trinidad4 will
have to “go to the wall.” I gather from various expressions that he
thinks the sale of ships of war by neutrals to belligerents should not
be regarded as a legitimate commercial enterprise even in the
circumstances and to the extent authorised by that precedent. It is very
satisfactory to find a man in Mr Gladstone’s position so far advanced on
the subject.

I have not heard from the Duke of Argyll,5 but that he is with us on
this as he is on the main question, there can be little doubt.

Things continue to advance in the right direction in America. It does
one good to read of negroes at the President’s levee:6 One is consoled
for the madness of all Germany7 by the progress of the cause of freedom
in America, and by the wonderful resurrection of the spirit of liberty
in France,8 combined with a love of peace which even sympathy with
Poland does not prevail over.

Do not write again here, as we return to Blackheath early in February. I
Edition: current; Page: [918] wish I could hope that you would be at the
meeting of the Political Economy Club9 but I suppose your professorial
functions interfere. I am Dear Sir

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 27. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

672.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 27. 1864

.

Dear Chadwick

I did not answer your last letter when I received it, but waited in
hopes that I might have something interesting to say, or to send. But
the spirit has not yet moved my daughter to write anything further about
Greece. The information seems insufficient as to what is going on there,
and it is longer than usual since we have heard from any of our
correspondents at Athens. We have received the Penny Newsman regularly,
and are very well pleased with it, all but the articles on foreign
affairs. I wish you had some regular writer who understands European
politics, for respecting America I have no fault to find. You deserve
success, for you are working very hard against many difficulties.

Do not write again to Avignon, as we expect to be at Blackheath next
month in time for the Club meeting.2

We have just sent you some honey from Mount Hymettus which we have
lately received from Athens and which I hope you will do me the pleasure
to accept. I am

Dear Chadwick
 ever yrs truly

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 27. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

673.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 27. 1864

Dear Sir

My chief object in the present letter is to ask you not to write again
to Avignon, as we return to Blackheath next month.

Edition: current; Page: [919]
I was much interested by what you told me in your last respecting the
progress of opinion on the subject of your plan—especially the accounts
from Frankfort.2 I have not seen the article you mention in Fraser,3 but
will make a point of seeing it while in England. I should have very much
liked to have seen the article which you wrote on the land and house
question.4 The editor of Macmillan is a great goose for not publishing
it. Whatever people may say against Cobden, his controversy with the
Times5 has for the first time in the country turned people’s minds to
the question of small properties in land—a thing I tried hard to do,
seventeen years ago,6 at the time of the Irish famine but without the
slightest success.

Your labours about Christ’s Hospital7 are sure to be useful some day,
and not a distant one, even if Gladstone is not able to do anything with
the subject at present.8 The overhauling of the great misapplied
charitable endowments cannot be long postponed after his great speech.

We have ventured to send you a small portion of some honey from Mount
Hymettus which we have just received from Athens, and which you will
give us great pleasure by accepting.

Helen joins with me in begging to be remembered to your daughters.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [920]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 17 [1864]

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

674.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Feb. 17 [1864]

Dear Chadwick

My name is disengaged for the Club meeting,2 and I hold it at your
disposal.

Your appointment by the Institute3 does them credit and is of some
moment, as it authorizes you to invite their attention to various
important subjects by sending them your writings and other documents.4
It is probably owing to Senior5 and his many friends in the Academy and
in Paris generally that you are so justly appreciated there. I am

yrs ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 22. 1864

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

675.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

Feb. 22. 1864

Dear Sir

I duly received your interesting letter of the 5th, which I have ever
since waited for leisure to acknowledge.

Your article on Ireland2 seems to me excellent, and, as far as I can
see, stands perfectly well without the omitted part; but I much regret
the omission, as a discussion by you, of the nature and grounds of
property in land, would have been the most valuable part of the article.
The editor may have been, and probably was, short of room, but had this
reason not existed, I should Edition: current; Page: [921] have expected
beforehand that some other would have been found for avoiding the
insertion of anything fundamental on that question. It is one of the
subjects which the Edinburgh Review and those by whom it guides itself
are shy of, and on which they act as long as possible on the maxim
quieta ne movere.

The conversation at the P. E. Club was good and interesting, but
scarcely a discussion, being all on one side.3 All thought that
financial embarrassments are no hindrance to the carrying on of a really
popular war, or of any war by a government strong enough to enforce
sacrifices.

I have not yet told you the dénouement of my correspondence with
Gladstone. In my answer4 to him I enumerated a number of points, raised
by Loring, to which he had not adverted in his letter. The result was,
that he referred the pamphlet and my commentary on it to the Judge
Advocate General.5

About the time when I heard from you, I received a note from the Duke of
Argyll6 in a very satisfactory tone respecting the pamphlet and the
subject generally. I found a copy of the pamphlet waiting for me here,
so that if your copies from America have not arrived, I have one at your
call which I will send to any one whose attention you may wish to direct
to it.

I send this letter to Dublin from whence I presume it will be forwarded
if you are still absent.

I am Dear Sir
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 24, 1864

B[lackheath]

William Longman

Longman, William

676.


TO WILLIAM LONGMAN1

B[lackheath]

Feb. 24, 1864

Dear Sir—

The prices you mention for the Liberty & the Representative Govt will do
very well, but I am disappointed that there is so little difference
Edition: current; Page: [922] in the case of the Pol Econ.2 between the
estimated price of a double column edition & one in the ordinary form.
In the estimate you favoured me with at Avignon the proposed price for
the cheaper of the two forms was 10/6 to 12/. From this & from what
seemed to be your own impression I had hoped that a double column
edition could be offered at 7/6 or 8/. A smaller difference would not
bring the book within reach of a much larger class, and could hardly be
an equivalent to the purchasers for the difference of type.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 29. 1864

B[lackheath] P[ark]

William Longman

Longman, William

677.


TO WILLIAM LONGMAN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Feb. 29. 1864

Dear Sir—

I am very glad that you will be able to afford the Pol. Econ. at a lower
price.2 I propose giving up all pecuniary advantage to myself from the
popular editions, to enable them to be sold cheaper. With regard to
advertising you are the best judge. I shd think that the most useful
advertising would be in the papers which are most read by the more
intelligent of the working classes—namely, I suppose, principally the
cheap press, but there may be higher priced papers which are taken at
working men’s clubs, mechanics’ institutions &c. It is probable that in
revising the book for the cheap edition I may be able to save some space
by omitting some of the long quotations in notes, especially those in
foreign languages. I do not however expect much saving from this cause,
but there is an Appx to the first volume of considerably more than a
sheet, which it is quite unnecessary to include in the popular edition.
To set against this there may be some small additions to the text, but I
do not anticipate their extending to anything like the same number of
pages.

I have no objection whatever to the publication of Mr. Stebbing’s
analysis of the Logic.3 I remember thinking very favorably of it.

Thanks for the account. I was quite unprepared to find that the balance
is in my favour.

Edition: current; Page: [923]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 6. 1864

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

678.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

March 6. 1864

Dear Sir

I beg you to accept the few volumes I sent. Your doing so will be a
favour to me more than to yourself, as I am clearing out the books I do
not want, to make room for those I do. Lord Brougham’s book is a rich
collection of facts respecting the institutions and constitutional
history of all countries, and you may find it useful for reference.

I like your Essay on the Colonies2 very much, though I do not go the
length of all you say respecting their advantages. But I agree in many
of your arguments and in your conclusion. I have not seen the reply to
“Utilitarianism”.3 The author has not sent it to me, and most of the new
books on the foundations of morality are such trumpery that it would be
waste of money to buy any of them without first seeing it, or being
credibly informed that it is worth reading. I shall endeavour to see it,
however, and the more so if you determine on reviewing it, that I may be
better able to appreciate your review. Your letter in this week’s Penny
Newsman4 is well calculated for the effect you wish to produce by it.

My daughter and I join in best remembrances to Mrs Plummer, and I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 14. 1864

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

679.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 14. 1864

.

Dear Chadwick

I had already read Mr Christie’s paper,2 and liked it very much. I
should Edition: current; Page: [924] be very well disposed to become a
member of such an association3 as is projected if it were started with a
fair prospect of support from influential persons of the bribing
classes.

ever yrs truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14 March 1864

Blackheath Park

Thomas Bayley Potter

Potter, Thomas Bayley

680.


TO THOMAS BAYLEY POTTER1

Blackheath Park

14 March 1864

I am grieved that there is a prospect of a discontinuance of the
Co-operator;2 which is so valuable for the means of keeping before the
minds of Co-operators the principles and rules on which their success
depends. I hope there will be a few subscriptions towards paying the
debt; which is the immediate difficulty: but the Co-operative Societies
ought to feel the value of such an organ and not to leave it dependent
on outsiders for its existence.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 17. 1864

Blackheath

Thomas Bayley Potter

Potter, Thomas Bayley

681.


TO THOMAS BAYLEY POTTER1

Blackheath

March 17. 1864

Dear Sir

Since receiving your letter of the 14th, I have thought a good deal
about the scheme for a Political Science Association.2 It has prima
facie much to recommend it, and your willingness to encounter the many
difficulties and Edition: current; Page: [925] great trouble of starting
it is worthy of the energy and zeal in a good cause of which you have
already given so many proofs. There are, however, many things to be
considered before embarking in such an experiment. If the thing cannot
be made a decided success, an abortive attempt would only do harm;
while, even in case of success, if the composition of the Society and
the character of its proceedings were such as to identify it in
appearance with any particular set of opinions, it would be equally a
failure as to the end proposed, which I understand to be, not a
Parliamentary Reform League but a public arena for the discussion of
general principles and their applications. The success of the Social
Science Association I take to be owing to the fact that it really brings
together persons of all opinions consistent with the profession of a
desire for social improvement. To be successful, the Society you propose
must do the same; to admit all varieties of opinion is not enough, it
must be able really to succeed in bringing them together. There is
another principle of the Social Science Assocn, adherence to which seems
to me indispensable. That body has made a great step in advance by
admitting women, in theory and in practice, to take part, equally with
men, both in its administration and in its proceedings. Not to do the
same in founding a rival society would be a step back, and (speaking for
myself) would prevent my feeling justified in giving my adhesion to the
project. In any case, while I feel the very high compliment of your
thinking of me for such a position as that of President, I must beg to
be excused from accepting it. I am convinced that with the same amount
of time and trouble I can do more for my opinions as an individual
writer than by taking an active part in any Association. Neither is a
person with such decided opinions as mine, desirable as President. It
would be injurious to the Society to be identified with any unpopular
opinions, while it would be a disadvantage to the opinions to be held
accountable either for the failure of the Society, or for anything in
its proceedings which might be disliked. The sort of President you
require would be some one known to be liberal in a general way, and on
questions generally (not on some kinds of questions only) but not
strongly connected in the public mind with any special opinions which
are in a small minority—in a sort of neutral position as to politics,
and of a standing and personal position to be looked up to independently
of his opinions. After much consideration, I can think of no one but
Lord Stanley3 who would suit your purpose. What chance there would be of
his consenting I have no means of knowing. You could not make the
proposal to him without having a good list to shew of persons who would
consent to be Vice Presidents if he would be President; and it is of
importance that these should be of as various a character as possible. I
am quite willing to be one of these (if the plan, when matured, seems to
me a good one) as that would only shew general approbation, without the
grave responsibility Edition: current; Page: [926] necessarily attaching
to the President, and which I could not undertake unless I were prepared
to give an amount of time and thought to the conduct of the Association
which I sincerely think would not, in my case, be attended with any
equivalent benefit to its objects.

I return the letters which you inclosed—Mr Cobden’s suggestions seem to
me, as far as they go, very right and judicious.

I am not acquainted with M. Renan,4 otherwise I would with great
pleasure have given you an introduction to him. I should think you could
easily obtain one.

The Cooperator is most welcome to any use it can make of my note.5

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

T. B. Potter Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 18, 1864

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

682.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

.
March 18, 1864

Dear Bain—

I was much delighted by receiving your new edition.2 You must have
worked very hard to get it out so soon. I have not yet come to much of
the new matter as I am reading the book regularly through from the
beginning, but the remaining portion of my task with Hamilton will now
be plain sailing. I am very glad the additions are considerable as they
will all tend to the more complete clearing up of difficulties.

I have read your Grammar3 with considerable care & attention. It is a
great improvement on any other grammar that I have seen & as far as I
can judge I think you right on all the questions of theory. Nobody has
so completely got to the bottom of Shall & Will.4 As to minute details I
found myself every now & then differing from you—chiefly though not
always in cases where you seemed to me to draw grammatical principles
too tight, to the exclusion of modes of speech which have a real raison
d’être. But all these are points open to discussion & I should not have
much confidence in my own Edition: current; Page: [927] impressions if
you did not agree with them when stated. I have not written them down,
but I have made references by which I can recal[l] them if wanted.

In consequence mainly of your last letter I have been reading Spencer’s
First Principles over again. On the whole I like it less than the first
time. He is so good that he ought to be better. His a priori system is
more consistent than Hamilton’s, but quite as fundamentally absurd—in
fact there is the same erroneous assumption at the bottom of both. And
most of his general principles strike me as being little more than
verbal or at most empirical generalisations, with no warrant for their
being considered laws. As you truly say, his doctrine that the
Persistence of Force is a datum of Consciousness is exactly Hamilton’s
strange theory of causation. But how weak his proof of it. We cannot (he
says) conceive a beginning because all consciousness is consciousness of
difference, & when the two terms of the comparison are Something &
Nothing, one of the two is not a possible object of consciousness at
all. This is surely a play on the word Nothing, very like the one which
Hamilton shews up in his discussion of the different theories of
Causation. “Nothing” cannot be an object of consciousness, but the
absence of Something may be. We can be conscious of x, & conscious of
the universe minus x, or of ourselves minus x, and the difference
between these two states is the difference required by the law of
Consciousness.

Neither does Spencer, any more than Tyndall,5 remove any of my
difficulties about the Conservation of Force. The law of Conservation as
exhibited in the cases which go farthest to prove it, consists in
this—that one form of force only ceases to manifest itself when a force
equivalent in quantity, but of a different form, manifests itself
instead. When a ball strikes another ball, the force which the first
ball loses does not become latent; the motion lost is either transferred
entire to the other ball, or if any of it is lost sight of, the
corresponding amount of force reappears in an increase of temperature.
As, however, we know that there is latent heat, I can conceive that
force in general may become latent, & remain unmanifested even for many
geological periods, reappearing identical in quantity at their close.
But I have not seen the formulae of the theory so expressed as to place
such a fact as this in a rational & comprehensible light. I require a
great many explanations respecting the molecular motion which is
supposed to be the material antecedent of the phenomenon heat. Force may
be latent, but what is the meaning of latent motion? Is the molecular
motion supposed to continue during the period of latency? When an object
is at a fixed temperature, is then a fixed degree of molecular motion
always taking place in it? Spencer’s doctrine, as a connected theory,
fails entirely if there is not. Yet surely all that can be proved is
that a molecular motion takes place at every change of temperature, and
surely it is Edition: current; Page: [928] contrary to all our knowledge
of material forces to suppose that a motion either of bodies or of
particles can be perpetually going on for a cycle of ages in a resisting
medium without diminution.

With regard to the general theory, difficulties multiply6 round me the
longer I consider it. Spencer says, “Just that amount of gravitation
force which the sun’s heat overcame in raising the atoms of water is
given out again in the fall of those atoms to the same level,”7 thus
implying that the force of gravity is not acting all the while & kept in
equilibrium by a counter force, in the cessation of which it again
manifests itself, of course neither increased nor diminished in amount;
but is actually (so to speak) absorbed & again restored by the
annihilation of an equivalent quantity of heat. Now if this be so, none
of the heat can be expended as heat; for if the agent which destroys the
heat, has its own temperature raised by the process (which it surely
has), there remains so much the less heat to be reconverted into
gravitation, & the body will not fall, as I apprehend it does, with a
force exactly equal to that which was overcome in raising it.

Again, Spencer says “The investigations of Dulong,8 Petit,9 & Neumann10
have proved a relation in amount between the affinities of combining
bodies & the heat evolved during their combination.”11 I should much
like to know the numerical law of this relation, as it could not fail to
enlarge our conception of the meaning of the negative sign. It would be
interesting to know what strength of the affinity corresponds to the
“heat evolved” by a freezing mixture.

Again, I do not understand how the theory adjusts itself to the ordinary
phenomenon of accelerating force. If the earth were falling into the
sun, it would, when it had passed through half the distance, be acted
upon by four times the original force to begin with, & in addition, by
the enormous momentum generated by the acquired velocity. In what
antecedent form did this enormous additional force exist? Is it all
acquired at the expense of heat? & would its development be attended by
an inconceivably great amount of diminution of temperature? If these are
not difficulties to you their being so to me can only arise from my
ignorance of the subject; but as I desire very much to understand it, I
warn you of the demand which will be made upon your didactic faculties
when we have the opportunity of discussing it together.

I am particularly glad that you will be in London up to a later date
than last year, as I shall not return to England so early in June as
usual; notwithstanding Edition: current; Page: [929] which we shall now
have plenty of time for discussion and comparison of notes. I hope to
have at least some chapters of the Hamilton in a state to shew to you
when we meet.

With kind regards to Mrs Bain

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 18, 1864

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

683.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

March 18, 1864

Dear Chadwick

Many thanks for your kind proposals. I have, however, declined the
invitation of the Duc d’Aumale.2 The fact is, my sympathies with the
Republican party in France are so strong that I cannot willingly place
myself under an obligation to a conspicuous person of any other party,
however high a respect I may have for him individually, and however glad
I should be to meet him at any other person’s house.

I hope we shall find some other opportunity for a walk together. I am

Dear Chadwick
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 28. 1864

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

684.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

March 28. 1864

Dear Sir

I thank you very much for the opportunity of reading Mr Loring’s two
letters. I do not see how our Government can get over the breach of
international obligation (even on the principles of Historicus)2 in not
interdicting to the Alabama all British ports. The question of culpable
negligence in letting her get out originally, like all questions which
turn on degree, is open to endless dispute, but on the other I cannot
see that there is a word to say.

On the question in your postscript, so far as I am qualified to have an
opinion, it agrees with yours. Several copies of Loring’s pamphlet3 have
been Edition: current; Page: [930] sent to me from different quarters,
so if you want one or two, I can supply you. Do you wish the Boston
papers to be returned to you? and in what way shall I return the Bombay
documents4 which I am indebted to you for the pleasure of reading?

“Plutology”5 has been sent to me, but I have not yet had time to look
into it, and shall now think many other duties more urgent than that of
reading it. I should ascribe the opinions given of it by the Spectator
and Reader not to defects of honesty, but to sheer ignorance and
incompetence on the subject.

I am very happy to hear of your intended volume of Essays.6 Thornton’s
book is out of print.7 In consequence of the popular attention now, for
the first time in England, raised on the subject I have urged the author
to reprint it, which he will probably do. Meanwhile I will either find
you a copy, or send you mine. The discussion of the subject at the Club8
was interesting and well supported, but, like all discussions by that
body of the questions of the future as distinguished from those of the
past, it was a sad exposure of the nakedness of the land. I almost think
we need a Junior Political Economy Club. But the same end may be better
attained by getting good recruits into this. I do not yet know what will
be the question for April 8th. Is there a chance of your being there? I
shall; but it will be my last time until July.

yours ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 29. 1864

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

685.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

March 29. 1864

Dear Sir

I thank you very much for the various writings of yours that you have
lately sent me, and which I have read with the usual pleasure. The
number of the National Magazine which contained two of your papers2 that
you might Edition: current; Page: [931] like to give the benefit of to
others besides us, I included in a parcel which I made up for you,
containing the last Westminster Review and some numbers of Fraser. But
by the mistake of a servant, it was taken to the office of the London
Parcels Delivery Company instead of the Railway Office, and I am afraid
that it may not have reached you.

As I have another copy of Herbert Spencer’s “Essays, Scientific,
Political and Speculative,” I beg that you will accept as a gift the
copy I lent you. I neglected to make a note of the books I lent you, but
I think Herbert Spencer’s volume on Education3 was one: this, and the
two volumes of Buckle, are the only books, so far as I remember, which I
wish returned; but about those there is not the smallest hurry.

We leave England for the spring about the 10th of April.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer

believe me always
 yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 30 mars 1864

Blackheath Park, Kent

Gustave D’Eichthal

D’Eichthal, Gustave

686.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 30 mars 1864

Mon cher d’Eichthal

Je serais bien aise de lire la préface de Saint-Simon, sachant bien
qu’Auguste Comte a été injuste envers lui,2 comme en général envers tous
ceux qui avaient cessé de lui plaire. Du reste, ne vous donnez pas la
peine de la faire copier d’abord parceque je ne puis pas encore
m’occuper du travail sur Comte,3 et je pense bien que je vous reverrai
auparavant; secondement, parceque dans ce travail il sera peu question
de la biographie de Comte; d’autant plus que ceux qui disputent autour
de son tombeau sont tellement en désaccord sur les faits, que je
désespère d’arriver à la vérité.

Edition: current; Page: [932]
J’ai trouvé excellente votre lettre à M. Guéroult,4 et j’ai vu avec
grand plaisir que vous vous proposez de la faire suivre par d’autres
lettres ou articles sur le Saint-Simonisme.

Lord Houghton5 est, comme il vous a paru, un homme d’un mérite réel.
Connaissez-vous ses poësies?6 Il y en a gré méritant de vivre. Comme
homme politique, il a toujours eu une conduite très louable, malgré une
famille et une éducation Tory de vieille trempe.

Veuillez bien remercier votre frère de son travail sur les banques.7
Sans partager toutes ses doctrines, je trouve son livre très utile, et
fait pour dissiper les nuages qui dans la plupart des esprits français
obscurcissent encore les principes les plus élémentaires de la thème du
crédit.

Tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 1. 1864

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

687.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

April 1. 1864

Dear Chadwick

There is great justice in what you say in your letter, and the question
altogether is an unfortunate one to be presented to the working people.
But since the Mazzini and Stansfeld affair2 has forced the subject on,
it seems neither right in itself nor just to individuals that it should
be discussed as if there was only one side to it. We think that what you
have done is exactly the best that Edition: current; Page: [933] could
be done, viz. to publish, from a correspondent, one side, accompanied by
your own strong adhesion to the other.3

I meant to attend the discussion at the Law Amendment Society4 even
before I heard from you. If it would suit you to take dinner here on
Monday at five, we could go to the meeting together, and could thus get
an opportunity for a little talk. We leave for Avignon in about a week

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 2. 1864

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

688.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

April 2. 1864

Dear Sir

I write at once to say that it is needless to send the N. American
Review,2 as I also have received a copy of it, which I have not yet had
time to read.

Mr Loring’s last letters3 seem to me very inferior to his first.4 His
line of argument is sometimes almost silly. How absurd to say that
England ought not to recognise the South as belligerents because they
have no ports. Have they no ports because their ports are just now
blockaded, a blockade which may cease at any moment, or become merely
nominal?5 Besides they were Edition: current; Page: [934] not, I
believe, even blockaded when the recognition took place. Again, are
inland countries never to be recognised as belligerents? It seems to me
that drawing attention to such weak productions would do more harm than
good to the cause.

The change of the New York Herald on the subject of slavery6 is indeed
most significant. The Times article7 is also a valuable indication
though it will not prevent, and has not prevented the Times, a day or
two afterwards, from returning to the old tone. And such is the
obtuseness of the public that it will not discover any contradiction.

I, also, suspect that L.S. is Leslie Stephen,8 but as I have no proof of
his knowledge of the subject, and great proof of yours, I have little
doubt that he has in this case shewn ignorance of it.

I will send to you by post two of the three copies of Loring which I
believe I possess.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 3. 1864

Blackheath

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

689.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath

April 3. 1864

.

Dear Sir

I am fortunately able to send you the letter you want.2 No Englishman
who has read both you and Comte, can suppose that you have derived much
from him. No thinker’s conclusions bear more completely the marks of
being arrived at by the progressive development of his own original
conceptions; while, if there is any previous thinker to whom you owe
much, it is evidently (as you yourself say) Sir W. Hamilton. But the
opinions in which you agree with Comte, and which as you truly observe,
are in no way peculiar to him, are exactly those which would make French
writers class you with him; because, to them, Comte and his followers
are the only thinkers who represent opposition to their muddy
metaphysics.

I myself owe much more to Comte than you do, though, in my case also,
Edition: current; Page: [935] all my principal conclusions had been
reached before I saw his book. But in speculative matters (not in
practical) I often agree with him where you do not, and, among other
subjects, on this particular one, the Classification of the Sciences.3
The fact you mention, of your having read only a portion of his Cours de
Phil[osophie] Positive, explains some things to me which I did not
understand previously: for, if you had read the entire book, I think you
would have recognised that several of the things which you urge as
objections to his theory, are part of the theory.

I have lately had occasion to re-read, and am still reading, your
Principles of Psychology. I do not agree any more than I did before with
the doctrine of the Introduction; but as to the book itself, I cannot
help expressing to you how much my opinion of it, though already high,
has been raised (I hope from a progress in my own mind) by this new
reading. There is much in it that did not by any means strike me before
as it does now: especially the parts which shew how large a portion of
our mental operations consists in the recognition of relations between
relations. It is very satisfactory to see how you and Bain, each in his
own way, have succeeded in affiliating the conscious operations of mind
to the primary unconscious organic actions of the nerves, thus filling
up the most serious lacuna and removing the chief difficulty in the
association psychology.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 10. 1864

B[lackheath] P[ark]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

690.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

April 10. 1864

Dear Bain—

I hope you have received the number you wanted of the Revue des [Deux]
M[ondes].2 If not, let me know. I shall wish it returned, as we keep the
review for binding, but it will be time enough when you come to London,
or later if you have need of it longer.

I have finished your new edition.3 I have not compared it minutely with
the old, but I think you have greatly improved the book; both as to the
Edition: current; Page: [936] thoughts & the mode of exposition. The
only point on which I find much matter for comment is the account you
give of Association by Contrast.4 No doubt, the relativity of all
Consciousness (in your sense of relativity, which is not the same as
Hamilton’s) accounts for part of the phenomena, & seems to be the real
explanation of some cases which you have very successfully analysed. But
I do not think it will do as a general explanation, nor do I think it
fits your leading instances. According to the law of relativity the
correlative which shd be suggested by large is not small but ordinary.
If a thing is only large relatively to what is small we do not call it
large, simply. I am myself inclined (I speak under correction) to solve
the question of Contrast as a source of Association by denying its
existence. I cannot find in myself that present suffering has any
tendency to recall my idea of former happiness. On the contrary, it
tends, I think, as one might suppose beforehand, in the way of
obstructive association to exclude that idea. What is real in the case
is, I think, that during the state of suffering, the idea of previous
enjoyments may be recalled by something which is associated with it in
the way of resemblance or contiguity, & that then the clashing of the
two simultaneous emotions arrests the attention upon them, intensifies
the consciousness of them both, suggests the additional idea of change
or vicissitude, & the painful one of change for the worse, & all this
being intimately mixed up with the state of present suffering, people
fancy it is the suffering which suggested the remembrance when, in
truth, it was an obstacle to it.

I have also read through Spencer’s Princ. of Psychology, which is as
much better than I thought, as the First Principles are less good. He
is, no doubt, a great deal too certain of many things, & on some he is
clearly wrong, but much less so than I fancied (barring the Universal
Postulate,5 on which he now tells me that my difference from him is
chiefly verbal, but I do not think so). He has a great mastery over the
obscurer applications of the associative principle. As you say, he is
particularly good on the subject of resistance & extension. Still his
argument against Hamilton does not thoroughly satisfy me. There seems to
be an occult petitio principii in it. He argues that we cannot acquire
the idea of extension from sight alone because that idea involves
muscular feelings, which last is just the point to be proved. Of course
the idea such as we now have it involves muscular feelings, & any idea
we could have got from sight must have been very unlike our present
notion of extension; but that distinction is perfectly well drawn by
Reid, in his Geometry of Visibles.6 What I want to know is, exactly what
idea of one thing as outside another we could have obtained by sight:
whether merely the vague feeling of two simultaneous colours or what
more than this. A similar question arises Edition: current; Page: [937]
as to touch: if two distinct parts of the skin came simultaneously into
passive contact with objects, should we apart from other experience
distinguish two sensations or only one mass of sensation; & if we should
distinguish two simultaneous sensations, is this simultaneous
consciousness of a plurality of sensations what we mean by outness; as
if so, we might acquire that idea from the simultaneity of a taste & a
smell.

I cannot quite make out why you advised me to read the Fichte.7 I find
nothing at all in it. It is a fanciful theory to account for imaginary
facts. I do not see how his preconscious states can have had the merit
even of suggesting to you or Spencer the first germ of what both of you
have written with a real science & philosophy to connect our conscious
with our purely organic states.

We leave this week for Avignon but it is not quite certain on what day.
If you should be writing this week it does not matter whether you
address your letter here or to Avignon, as if it does not find us here
it will be forwarded.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 13, 1864

Blackheath Park, Kent

691.


TO THE SECRETARY OF THE ROYAL HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY1

Blackheath Park, Kent

April 13, 1864

.

Sir,—

I have the honour of submitting through you to the Council of the Royal
Horticultural Society a memorial from twelve botanists, accompanied by
vouchers, on the subject of the prizes offered by the Society for
country herbaria;2 also an original memorial from five Manchester
botanists on the same subject.—I have the honour to be, sir, your most
obedient servant,

J. S. Mill

The Secretary of the

Royal Horticultural Society

Edition: current; Page: [938]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 15. 1864

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

692.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

April 15. 1864

Dear Chadwick

As I think you expressed a wish to know something about the history of
the American Sanitary Commission, I have sent to you by Book Post a
number of the North American Review containing a valuable account of its
commencements.2

I inclose an expression of gratitude to the Penny Newsman which I have
found in one of the best of the American papers—edited by the poet
Bryant.3

ever yrs truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday April 18, 1864

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

693.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

Monday evening
 [
April 18, 1864

]

Dear Sir

Your note was only delivered here at six this evening. We were a little
anxious on account of your not coming, and are very sorry for the cause.
I Edition: current; Page: [939] hope most sincerely that you were
sufficiently better today, to be able to see Garibaldi.2 Mr Thornton3
was very much pleased when he heard you were coming, and disappointed at
not seeing you, but I hope he may be able to meet you here the next time
you come.

We leave for Avignon on Thursday.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer, I am

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 26. 1864

Apt (Vaucluse)

Isa Craig

Craig, Isa

694.


TO ISA CRAIG1

Apt (Vaucluse)

April 26. 1864

Dear Madam

I learn with great satisfaction from your letter, which has only just
reached me, that the funds of the Society for the Employment of Women2
are really used for enlarging the number of occupations open to them;
and I enclose a donation towards the object from myself and my daughter
Miss Helen Taylor.

My absence from England will of course prevent me from attending the
meeting on the 29th but I need hardly say that I should consider its
object as a most important step in advance towards the improvement both
of women themselves and of their position.

I am Dear Madam
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Miss Isa Craig.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 13, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Earl Grey

Grey, Earl

695.


TO EARL GREY1

Saint Véran, Avignon

May 13, 1864

My dear Lord

I am much obliged by the opportunity you have given me of reading the
new chapters of your Essay on Parliamentary Government in the present
Edition: current; Page: [940] stage of their progress.2 As you have
added to the honour of a very flattering mention of what I have written
on the subject, that of inviting any remarks which occur to me, I
readily avail myself of the invitation, though much of what I have to
say has probably presented itself to your own mind.

You already know, as well as I could state, and better than I could
state in a few words, in what respects we agree and differ on the
general principles of the question. I presume that, my principles being
such as you are aware of, what you are desirous of knowing in the
present case is the impression made on me by your practical suggestions.
I entirely agree with you that Parliamentary Reform is a subject which
can only be usefully considered as a whole; since, the unobvious
consequences of political changes being still more important than the
obvious ones, a change in only one part of a political system, though in
itself desirable, may do as much harm as good, while several changes
made at once, and well adapted to one another, may secure all the good &
guard against the harm. In your various proposals you have been guided
by this just idea, and it seems to me that they have been suggested by a
more enlarged conception than is at all common among politicians, both
of the evils which exist, and of those which there might be danger of
introducing by the remedies.

To some of your proposals I attach great importance. The first place
among these, I give to the representation of minorities, which would be
obtained, to a very useful extent, by the cumulative vote. Mr Hare’s
plan, however, seems to me vastly superior both in the direct and in the
indirect benefits it would produce; and the supposed difficulty of
working it would, I am almost certain, in a great measure disappear
after a little experience. The plan has been several times discussed in
the legislatures of the two principal Australian colonies,3 and though
not yet adopted, I have been struck by the proof given in the debates
how perfectly the great majority of the speakers, both Conservative and
Radical, understood it, and how generally the best of them, on both
sides, supported it. I feel confident that it would require nothing for
success but a real desire in the public to make it succeed. This does
not yet exist in England, but in a colony there is less prejudice
against novelties. In Australia, Conservatives favour the plan as a
check to the absolute power of numerical majorities, and Democrats
because it is a direct & obvious corollary from the democratic
principle.

Edition: current; Page: [941]
Your proposal for allowing the House of Commons to join to itself by
cooptation a certain number of members, I am more doubtful about, though
quite alive to the inconvenience which it is intended to meet, that of
governments with so small a majority that they cannot carry, and dare
not propose, anything disliked by even a small number of their
supporters. But it does not seem likely that a plan, even if adopted,
would be permanent, of which the avowed object would be that a
Government or a policy might have a considerable majority in the House
for the remainder of a Parliament, though it had ceased to have a
majority in the constituencies. This would scarcely, I think, be
accepted, unless combined with a great reduction in the duration of
parliaments—perhaps even to annual. But there is another mode of
cooptation which though it would not attain so completely the particular
object, would probably attain it partially, and would be much less
objectionable in other respects, viz. that the House should elect a
certain number of members, not by lists, but by a modification of Mr
Hare’s principle, in the mode which I have recommended for a portion of
the House of Lords,4 and which you yourself propose in another case.
This would add a very valuable class of members to the House: while it
would effect the objects you have in view in your proposal for the
election by Parliament of fifteen life members; a proposal open to
objections, both apparent and real, which cannot have escaped your
notice.

The objections I have urged against two stages of election5 are,
certainly, considerably weakened, though not removed, by your suggestion
that the election of electors should take place in the regular course of
affairs, without waiting till Parliament is dissolved or a vacancy
occurs in the representation. But if there is to be indirect election,
an idea occurs to me which may be worth bringing under your
consideration. I attach great importance to giving a vote of some sort
to every person who comes up to such an educational standard as can be
made accessible to all. But as long as manual labourers are a separate
class, I do not wish them to have the complete command of the House.
You, again, think it desirable to admit that class to a considerable,
though not a preponderant influence. Might not these desirable
conditions be all realised, at least for some time to come, by such an
arrangement as this: The present electoral qualification, with the
improvements it admits of, to remain in force for direct votes: but all
the non-electors who can read, write, and calculate to be allowed to
choose electors, say one in ten or one in five of their number, who
should form, along with the direct electors, the parliamentary
constituency? By this plan the working classes would obtain a
substantial power in Parliament but not the complete control of it. And
this is perhaps the only shape in which the attaching of unequal value
to the votes Edition: current; Page: [942] of different electors, which
I have proposed in the form of plural voting, would have much chance of
being adopted.

The only remark of a non-practical character which I will make on any
part of your two chapters, is, that though there are many great faults
in the working of democratic institutions in America (some of which the
salutary shock that the American mind is now undergoing, will have a
tendency to correct) I do not think that the protective tariffs can
justly be laid to the charge of democracy; for I believe that
Protectionism is the creed, in America, of the majority, both of the
wealthy and of the literary classes including even the political
economists; & though I am far from thinking that they are in the right,
there are some things to be said for their opinion, in the circumstances
of America, which are not applicable to the old countries of Europe.

Allow me to add that Mr Hare’s name is not Julius but Thomas, and that
his book (not pamphlet) is entitled, A Treatise on Representation,
Parliamentary and Municipal. There is a pamphlet by Professor Fawcett6
which explains the plan more simply and clearly than the book, but I
believe it is out of print. Mr Fawcett himself had however some copies a
short time ago. I am

my dear Lord
 very faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 14, 1864

Avignon

Peter Alfred Taylor

Taylor, Peter Alfred

696.


TO PETER ALFRED TAYLOR1

Avignon

,
May 14, 1864

Dear Sir—

I do not know whether you are aware that Messrs. Currie are returning
cheques sent to them for the free testimonial to General Garibaldi. I
enclose the letter they have sent to me with two cheques returned, and I
send them two new ones for the same amount.

I am, dear Sir, very truly yours,

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [943]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 16. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

697.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

May 16. 1864

Dear Sir

I was very glad to hear from you, and to hear such good accounts of your
proceedings. By good luck I have two French newspapers which together
contain the whole of Emile Ollivier’s report.2 I will send them to you
either by this post or the next, and along with them some other numbers
I have, containing part of the debate on the subject in the Corps
Législatif. I will also procure Casimir Périer’s pamphlet3 and send it
to you.

Having a great deal to do I cannot say more at present. I am

yours very sincerely

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 31, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

698.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

May 31, 1864

Dear Sir

I think your projected paper2 has a chance of being very useful, and I
will willingly contribute to the “Publicity Fund” £20 if it is to be
paid down, or be responsible for £50 if it is a question of guarantee.
About literary help I cannot as yet say anything.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [944]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 9, 1864

Avignon

699.


TO THE NATIONAL REFORM UNION1

Avignon

June 9, 1864

Dear Sirs

I have had the honour of viewing your communication dated June 3rd,
informing me that I have been nominated one of the Vice Presidents of
the National Reform Union2 and requesting me to accept that office.

I entirely agree in the wish that a new movement should be commenced for
Reform and feel myself much honoured in being thought, by a body of my
countrymen, a fit person to take a prominent part in it. To justify me,
however, in doing so it would be necessary that my opinions, and those
of the promoters of the movement, should coincide much more than appears
to be the case. I do not agree in all the points of the Society
programme;3 and those which I do agree in, I could not join in agitating
for, unless in conjunction with others on which the programme is silent.
For these reasons it is not in my power to accept your flattering
proposal.

I am,
 Very truly yours,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 26, 1864

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

700.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

,
June 26, 1864

.

. . . I have now been so long without news of any kind from you, that I
much wish to know how you are in health, and how you are going on in all
respects. You would be very much mistaken if you thought that I feel
less interested in you, or less desirous to hear from you, than before
the painful circumstances which were the subject of our latest
correspondence.2 If these circumstances Edition: current; Page: [945]
make any difference, it is the contrary way. And, besides my interest in
you, I feel a strong interest in what you do. I believe you to be
capable, as few are, of doing important things, both in philosophy and
in erudition—the former of a kind specially required at the present
time, and perhaps even more so in Germany than elsewhere: and I am
anxious that such a capacity should be turned, as much as possible, to
the benefit of the world.—I have little to tell you which regards us.
Our life has been going on in the usual manner. I have been working hard
at my book on Hamilton, and it is now well advanced towards completion.
You are one of the most competent judges of such a book, and one of
those whose approbation of it I most desire.—I lately saw M. Littré at
Paris and, in conversing with him on the state of German philosophy, I
mentioned your name. I was glad to find that he is in correspondence
with you and, to the extent of his opportunities, appreciates you
justly. . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 27. 1864

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

701.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

June 27. 1864

Dear Sir

I write this to thank you for the interesting papers you sent, and to
say that we are now here, that you may not send anything more to
Avignon. I need hardly say that it will always give us pleasure to see
you here, and renew the interesting conversations from which I am very
glad that you have derived any encouragement and which have been
encouraging also to me.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer, I am

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 2 juillet 1864

Blackheath Park

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

702.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath Park

le 2 juillet 1864

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Quand aurons-nous le plaisir de vous revoir? J’espère que vous viendrez
diner avec nous quelque jour, pas trop éloigné, et je vous prie de fixer
le jour qui vous conviendra. Nous dinons à 6 heures.

tout à vous de coeur

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [946]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 2, 1864

Blackheath Park, Kent

703.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath Park, Kent

,

July 2, 1864

.

Sir:

On returning from abroad I have had the pleasure of finding the copy of
the “Rebellion Record”2 and of the pamphlets of the Loyal Publication
Society,3 which the distinguished body of citizens of New York,
mentioned in your letter of April 26, have done me the honor to send me.

I beg to return my sincere thanks for the present in every sense so
valuable; and in doing so I take the opportunity of renewing the
expression of my warm admiration for the energy and constancy displayed
by the people of the Free States in their present gigantic struggle, to
the success of which I look forward as full of the most important
consequences to humanity, stretching into the remotest future.

I am, sir, with greatest respect,
 Yours very truly,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 4. 1864

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

704.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

July 4. 1864

.

Dear Chadwick

You can of course reprint my letter2 if you like it, but I should not
like to print what has already appeared in one paper, as a letter
addressed to another.

Edition: current; Page: [947]
I go a certain length with you on the point of resistance against
hopeless odds, but not the length you go. There would be a great deal
more tyrannical aggression by the strong against the weak, if those who
knew they were not strong enough to succeed in the struggle, gave way at
once and allowed the aggressors to carry their point without its costing
them anything. A big boy will think twice before tyrannizing over a
little one if he expects that the little fellow will fight to the last
and make him pay for his victory.

Spirit and obstinacy themselves count for much, and for how much can
never be known till they are tried. The Greeks would never have resisted
Xerxes nor the Dutch, Philip II if they had merely calculated numbers.

yrs very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 6. 1864

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

705.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

July 6. 1864

Dear Sir

I find in the May number of the Journal des Economistes a review of the
budget of this year, 1864,2 which contains the amounts of receipt and
expenditure classified under general heads in a manner probably
sufficient to answer your purpose. If this does not, I do not think that
anything else in the Journal des Economistes will do better. I send it
by this post, and I beg you to keep it as long as it can be of any use
to you.

I wish you were not so far off and were not going away so soon, as I
would gladly see more of you than a mere glimpse once a year.

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 7 juillet 1864

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

706.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

le 7 juillet 1864

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Parmi les trois jours que vous offrez, je choisis le plus proche—jeudi
14 juillet, anniversaire mémorable.2 Nous dinons à 6 heures ¼.

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [948]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 18. 1864

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

707.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

July 18. 1864

Dear Sir

I am very glad the Journal des Economistes will answer your purpose.2 I
am not likely to want the Plea for Peasant Proprietors,3 but as I do not
know whether this will find you at Bangor or whether you would like to
have the book sent there, I wait before sending it, to hear further from
you respecting time and place.

The news from America looked bad, but the letter of the Daily News
correspondent this morning restores one’s spirits.4

I am
 Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 18, 1864

Blackheath Park

708.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath Park

July 18, 1864

Dear Sir

I have only recently seen, on returning from abroad, the number of the
Hortic. Society’s Journal which records the agitation against their
offer of prizes, or rather, against the conditions on which their prizes
were offered. I have been surprised to find that a passage from your
letter to me, distinguishing the useful from the hurtful part of the
proposal, is published in the Journal as a postscript to a letter of
mine,2 so that I have the appearance of tendering as mine what belongs
to you. The passage had nothing whatever to do with the letter to which
it has been annexed. I sent it as an inclosure in a private letter to a
member of the Council, informing him that I had received it from an
eminent botanist3—and I should have told him from whom, if I had not
thought that it would be acting in opposition to your wish that the plan
should be brought forward by Mr Babington4 rather than by yourself
Edition: current; Page: [949] directly. By whose mistake or improper
liberty it was printed in its present form I have not learned.

I am Dear Sir
 very faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 29. 1864

Blackheath

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

709.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Blackheath

July 29. 1864

Dear Sir

I return Mr Curtis’s very interesting and encouraging letter.2 Is he the
same Curtis who wrote a book—a clever one I remember it was—about Egypt?

I hope Thornton’s book arrived duly.3 Keep it for as long as you like; I
have no prospect of wanting it for the present. I expect to derive much
instruction from what you propose writing on that question in reference
to Ireland.4 I know tolerably well what Ireland was, but have a very
imperfect idea of what Ireland is or how far, if at all, the changes
there ought to modify my former opinions as to remedial measures. And I
shall soon have to give an opinion on the matter myself, in revising my
Pol. Economy for a new edition.

I shall not fail to look into the Victoria for your article on Norman.5
I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 2. 1864

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

710.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Aug. 2. 1864

Dear Mr Fawcett

I cannot think of anything to your purpose treating directly of the
question Edition: current; Page: [950] of introducing a gold currency
into India. There is a very good article by Leslie in this month’s
Macmillan2 on the gold question generally, in which that point is
incidentally touched upon. I do not know that it will tell you anything
on the particular point, but it is well worth reading on other accounts.

I have never read Morrison’s book,3 but only reviews of it, which gave
me very much the same idea of it which the book itself has given to you.

I am very glad that there is already a demand for a new edition of your
Manual.4 I will endeavour to recollect if anything worth mentioning to
you occurred to me when reading it.

You have chosen a good subject for your October lectures,5 and one which
is worth the trouble it will cost you.

I agree with you in seeing nothing discouraging in the state of things
in America. The South must be on its last legs to allow Sherman to
advance as he has done; and if he has really taken Atlanta6 I am in
hopes we are at the beginning of the end, I am

Dear Mr Fawcett
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 5. 1864

Blackheath

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

711.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Blackheath

Aug. 5. 1864

Dear Mr Fawcett

I send by this post a pamphlet published at Bombay,2 and a Minute by Sir
W. Mansfield, Commander in Chief of that Presidency, on the question of
introducing a gold currency into India.3 The author of the pamphlet has
probably prompted the author of the Minute, though they differ on some
points. There are some decided mistakes in the Minute, but one did not
expect to find a Commander in Chief writing so like a practised
Political Economist as he does. If the paper does nothing else, it turns
over the question in a great number of ways.

Edition: current; Page: [951]
I send also, in case you have not seen it, the Report and Circular of
the ex-Law-Amendment-Society,4 on measures to check Bribery and Election
Expenditure. You will see their notions of what they can do, and I think
we ought to give them what help we can.

I do not want any of the papers back.

yrs vry truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 7. 1864

Blackheath Park

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

712.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath Park

Aug. 7. 1864

Dear Sir

The subscription I sent was intended for yourself, towards preventing
you from being out of pocket by your experiment.2 It was not for the
paper, which, I am sorry to say, I do not like. The few numbers I
received before leaving Avignon contained many things of which I
disapprove, & in those you sent yesterday the first thing I saw was the
monstrous assertion that a woman who says, at least in any public
manner, that she is “heart-broken” must be out of her mind.3 It goes on
to make a distinction between “ladies” and “women in the humbler ranks”
as though it were permitted to “women” to show affectionate feelings
which are inconsistent with the dignity of “ladies”. What should we
think of this in a Tory paper!4

I should very decidedly object to have my name mentioned in connexion
with the paper, towards the support of which I could not conscientiously
contribute, although I am happy to assist in indemnifying you against
pecuniary loss.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [952]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 11 août 1864

Blackheath

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

713.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Blackheath

le 11 août 1864

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

Puisque M. Lytton2 était en Angleterre, vous ne pouviez faire autrement
que vous n’avez fait. Le résultat de vos démarches est très
satisfaisant. Maintenant il faut espérer qu’on n’a pas trop supprimé au
Foreign Office qui a depuis longtemps une mauvaise réputation à cet
égard.

J’ai pris copie du Memorandum pour la communiquer à M. Hare, qui vous
saura beaucoup de gré de l’avoir obtenu. M. Hare est maintenant en
voyage.

Vos deux lettres sur son système qui ont paru dans Le Temps3 sont
excellentes. J’espère qu’il n’y aura pas d’obstacle à la publication des
autres. Elles ne pourront manquer d’être très utiles. Les tentatives de
Guadet,4 d’Emile Augier,5 etc. prouvent que l’intelligence du public
français se porte maintenant vers les questions de cet ordre.

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 16. 1864

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

714.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

Aug. 16. 1864

Dear Sir

I have just received the enclosed note, which is a complete puzzle to
me, as I never had any intention of writing anything of the kind
mentioned. If you can in any way account for Mr. Barlow’s2
misapprehension, will you kindly explain it to me, at the same time
returning the note.

Edition: current; Page: [953]
I hope you and Mrs Plummer are well. Pray give our kind remembrances. I
am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 17. 1864

Blackheath

Mrs. Henry Huth

Huth, Mrs. Henry

715.


TO MRS. HENRY HUTH1

Blackheath

Aug. 17. 1864

Dear Madam

I have this morning seen one of the Messrs Longman and have spoken to
him on the subject of Mr Buckle’s papers.2 He seems well disposed to
publish any of them that are found suitable for publication, and to take
the initiative by applying to Mr Buckle’s sisters for a sight of them.
To enable him to do so he asked me for their address, which I was not
able to give him. As you have kindly expressed so much interest in the
subject, and as you are probably acquainted with the address, may I
venture to beg you to make me acquainted with it, or to tell me from
whom you think I am most likely to be able to obtain it.

I am Dear Madam
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 22, 1864

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

716.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

Aug. 22, 1864

Soon after I last wrote to you, I received the copy of your Philodemus,2
for which I thank you cordially. It is a most beautiful edition, and
your preface makes me look forward with great interest and curiosity to
the dissertation which you promise and without which I scarcely hope to
be able to make much of so very fragmentary a production as this
wonderfully preserved treatise even now is.3—Your edition has had a
short complimentary notice Edition: current; Page: [954] in the Saturday
Review,4 which I enclose.—My book on Hamilton is now finished, with the
exception of a final revisal which I shall give it a few months hence
before sending it to press. The next thing I propose to write will be a
paper on Comte for the Westminster Review.5—I saw Mr. Grote a few days
ago. He told me that part of his book6 was in the printers’ hands and
that he expected it would be ready for publication in January. I doubt
not that it will be a most important accession both to history and to
philosophy. Mr. Bain, who has seen a great part of the manuscript,
expresses the highest admiration of it. . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 1. 1864

Blackheath

John Plummer

Plummer, John

717.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Blackheath

Sept. 1. 1864

Dear Sir

On receiving your note of Aug. 17, I wrote to Mr. Barlow as you
suggested, and I now return his note.2

The particulars which you gave me at the same time about your literary
occupations were very satisfactory.

I sent you today a few more periodicals on the chance of their being of
use.

We leave tomorrow for Avignon, where we shall always be glad to hear
from you. Letters sent here will be forwarded at least as often as
weekly.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer, I am

Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 6 Septembre 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Louis Blanc

Blanc, Louis

718.


TO LOUIS BLANC1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 6 Septembre 1864

Mon cher Monsieur Louis Blanc

J’ai lu dans le Daily News le support de M. Lytton,2 et j’en suis
extrèmement satisfait. Son exposition du système de M. Hare est très
complète, et je Edition: current; Page: [955] n’osais pas même espérer
d’y trouver une appréciation aussi philosophique de ce système et une
aussi pleine adhésion. Le système de M. Andrae3 y ressemble en effet à
s’y méprendre. Je regarde la publication de ce rapport comme un
événement important. Il en est de même de celle de vos lettres dans le
Temps.4 Nous sommes à un moment où cet ordre de questions attire
l’opinion publique en France. On se demande maintenant quelles sont les
institutions qui conviendraient à une démocratie libre, et c’est le
moment où les bonnes idées, une fois plantées, s’enracinent dans le sol.
Je serais bien aise de connaître le projet de M. Simiot,5 mais au lieu
de m’envoyer sa brochure, je vous engage à m’en donner le titre la
première fois que vous m’écrirez, et je pourrai sans difficulté la
procurer ici.

tout à vous bien sincèrement

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 12. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

William Dougal Christie

Christie, William Dougal

719.


TO WILLIAM DOUGAL CHRISTIE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 12. 1864

Dear Sir

I have continued to read your letters in the Daily News, as well as
those of your adversary.2 It is a great pity that the public are not
told the facts Edition: current; Page: [956] about him which your letter
contains, and also those about the Rio correspondent, and the influences
at work in the Times.3 The simple facts without comment are all that
would be necessary: for instance, that the writer of the Times City
Article, Mr Simpson,4 is a Director of a Brazilian railway company. For
want of knowing plain facts like these, public opinion is poisoned, and
not only on the particular subject in question but on others. Who can
wonder, for instance, that a man personally interested in a railway
leading to a great mining district worked by slaves, should be a
strenuous supporter of the Confederates?5

Still, I do not see how I can help you by such a communication to the
Daily News as you suggest. I cannot claim to have any knowledge of the
subject. It adds to the difficulties, and to the merit also, of those
who struggle like you to draw attention to a subject which very few but
those who have a sinister interest know anything about, that you
necessarily struggle almost alone, there being hardly anybody in a
position to be able to cooperate with you. I am glad to see that one or
two who are so, have come forward to support you by letters in the Daily
News. If anything I could write could be useful at all, it would be, I
think, when the subject comes up again as you expect in the next
session. What is then said on the Brazilian side, collated with the
facts in your volume,6 may admit of comments of a telling kind from a
bystander who has no peculiar sources of information. I had rather,
therefore, adjourn the subject, as far as relates to my participation. I
am

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [957]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 12. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

720.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 12. 1864

Dear Mr. Fawcett

Your note followed me here. I am sorry to have missed you, and only hope
you did not take the trouble of going to Blackheath, nor were put to any
other inconvenience by not receiving an answer.

We shall be here now for the remainder of the year, and I shall hope to
hear from you. I was glad to see the advertisement of your elementary
book.2 I am

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 3. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

721.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 3. 1864

Dear Sir

Your letter, which has been forwarded to me here, gave me much pleasure.
I was already acquainted with Mr Bemis’s book,2 of which, I think, I had
received two copies, but from whom, I do not know. I quite agree in your
estimate of it. It is a very effective piece of argument, and makes out
a strong case. There are the seeds of very serious mischief in that
compensation question, and our public men will probably find things as
different from what they expect in regard to the liability of England
for the acts of cruisers unlawfully fitted out, as they have already
found in regard to the original obligation to prevent the outfit.

The course of military events in America is going very much in favour of
the right, and if Lincoln is reelected, I should think that the end is
really drawing near. There are such evidences of the exhaustion of the
South as there have never been before. But everything depends upon the
reelection of Lincoln, or at all events upon the election of some one
representing the same Edition: current; Page: [958] opinions and who
will continue the same policy. It is impossible not to feel uneasy until
the election is over. If the Democratic party is disunited, Lincoln is
probably safe, but from the last accounts it would appear that the Peace
Democrats were reconsidering their intention of not supporting
McClellan.3

Lytton’s report4 is of the greatest importance; the Danish plan is
almost exactly identical with Mr Hare’s, and has advanced the quota
system from the position of a mere project to t[hat] of an institution
actually realized and found workable. It has, moreover, caused an amount
of discussion of the subject already, which we might otherwise have
waited a long time for. The idea is spreading also on the Continent. It
has been discussed and has received some support at the International
Congress at Amsterdam,5 and M. Louis Blanc has published an admirable
series of letters in the Temps,6 showing a thorough understanding of the
plan, and a full appreciation of its advantages, indirect as well as
direct. One is not at all surprised that English politicians do not
catch at it, for when were they in advance of the public in adopting any
new idea? I was, like you, disagreeably surprised not so much by
Fawcett’s saying nothing about representation of minorities, but by his
saying things which are repugnant to the most obvious argument for it.7
I cannot, however, think that Fawcett meant to throw over the principle,
nor does Mr Hare think so. He probably thought only of justifying
himself for supporting a great extension of the suffrage without waiting
until representation of minorities could be carried too. If so, he will
find out his mistake by perceiving how he has made himself
misunderstood, both by friends like the Spectator and by enemies like
the Saturday Review.

Thornton will be much pleased by your feeling towards him, and will, I
am sure, fully reciprocate it. He is a person I particularly respect and
like. In perfect candour, sincerity, and singleness of mind, few men
come near him.

Edition: current; Page: [959]
The Journal des Economistes, I am almost sure, was duly received. Your
notice of Norman8 I missed through its postponement, but will not fail
to procure and read it.

We shall be here till January. I have much work cut out for me to do
during this autumn and winter, part of which is that of correcting my
Political Economy for a new edition.9 I should be very glad to make any
improvement in it which you can suggest, and especially to know if there
is anything which you think it would be useful to say on the present
state of Ireland.10 My speculations on the means of improvement there
have been in a state of suspended animation, from which it is almost
time that they should emerge.

I am Dear Sir
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 17. 1864

Avignon

Augustus de Morgan

Morgan, Augustus de

722.


TO AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN1

Avignon

Oct. 17. 1864

Dear Sir

Your note of Oct. 10 has followed me here. My abridgements of a few of
Plato’s dialogues have not been reprinted, nor are likely to be;2 but
those who wish to get, as you say, at the pith of Plato, will be sure to
find it in Mr Grote’s new book,3 now printing; and there will be,
besides, Mr Jowett’s,4 which, together with a full translation of the
Republic, will contain, it is said, some account of all the principal
dialogues.

I can assure you from my own case as well as from various others that it
is quite possible to admire and enjoy, in a very high degree, both Plato
and Aristotle.

I am glad of this opportunity of asking you whether your Elements of
Edition: current; Page: [960] Trigonometry5 (which I have not been able
to procure) are really out of print, and if so, whether they are likely
to be soon reprinted. The philosophy of Mathematics is a favourite
subject with me, and in your Algebra6 you have treated some of its
metaphysical difficulties (especially those connected with the idea of
infinity) in so highly philosophical a manner that I am very desirous to
read what you have written in the Trigonometry respecting the great
mystery of impossible quantities, a part of the subject which I have not
yet been able completely to make out from my own thoughts. I know that
the square roots of negative quantities are capable of geometrical
interpretation, and I have myself found out this very day one such
interpretation for them, but I cannot be sure I am right until a
mathematician tells me so; and in any case I have a great deal to learn
from one who has gone so deeply into these subjects as you evidently
have.

I am &c

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 28, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

723.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Oct. 28, 1864

Dear Chadwick

I was glad of the opportunity of reading your Address2 in extenso though
I had read with attention and interest as much of it as appeared in the
Times and Daily News. You have put several important points in a
striking light. I attach particular value to the display of the enormous
economy which remains to be effected in the expense of distribution. It
is the distributors who eat up the greater part of the produce of
labour; and the success of cooperation is, no doubt, mainly owing to the
minimization of that charge, and to ready money payments: though I
attach also much more importance than you do to an identification of the
interest of every labourer with the prosperity of the concern, more
complete than mere piece work will effect, and I therefore regret, and
even blame, the conduct of those Cooperative Societies which Edition:
current; Page: [961] engage labourers to receive wages only. This is the
sole point on which I find myself differing from your address. I have
nothing to suggest except the correction of a few errors of stile. In
slip 5, line 3, I would put which for as. At line 18 for price (of
production) I would say expense. At line 8 from the bottom, for of read
with. I find I have not marked any others.

You ask if I know any writers who have treated your points. The
Socialist writers in France especially, and I believe in England also,
have said a great deal about the waste from superfluous distributors.
Fourier, in particular, is very strong on the point. He calls the
middlemen, en masse, the “parasites.”3 On the other points you are much
in advance of anything I have seen written elsewhere. About the
economical advantage, touched upon in your letter, of a consolidation of
railways,4 you are not likely to find any help in the French economists.
They are, nearly all of them, much more hostile to consolidation and to
government action than I am; and I am more so than you.

It is a great pity that the newspapers did not print your dispute with
the mercantile public of Liverpool about the rams.5

My daughter sends, for your approval, by this post, an article suggested
by Lord Stanley’s remarks on America.6 She had not thought of writing on
Turkey until you suggested it, but will do so if anything should occur
to her.

I inclose, in case you have not seen it, a circular respecting the rooms
just opened in London by the United States Sanitary Commission,7
chiefly, it would seem, as a place of meeting and resort for Americans
and friends of America. You may perhaps be inclined to make some mention
of it in the Newsman. I am

Dear Chadwick
 yours very truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [962]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 28. 1864

Saint-Véran, Avignon

Augustus de Morgan

Morgan, Augustus de

724.


TO AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN1

Saint-Véran, Avignon

Oct. 28. 1864

.

Dear Sir

I thank you most heartily for the kind present of your Trigonometry,2 as
well as the paper from the Cambridge Transactions,3 which looks very
tempting. I expect great pleasure and instruction from both.

My little bit of speculation has no pretension to be a general solution
of the question as to the meaning of imaginary quantities. It relates
only to a single case, and there must be hundreds of other cases similar
to it. I must premise, that I have forgotten almost all my mathematics;
but my memory being more retentive of methods than of results, I have
kept a sufficient hold of the former to be able to find my way back to
the easier general theorems without book, and I sometimes amuse myself
with doing so, especially in my walks. In this way I have re-discovered
for myself the general formulae of quadratures, rectifications,
tangents, &c. As one of these mathematical exercises, it occurred to me
to ask myself what is the curve of which the equation is xy = a2? I soon
came to the conclusion that it is a pair of opposite equilateral
hyperbolas, referred to the asymptotes. This being the case: what is
there to say about the other pair of hyperbolas, considered as referred
to the same axes? The coordinates being in this case of opposite signs,
the equation must be xy = -a2, from which it follows that the parameter
(in the larger sense of the word) of this last pair of hyperbolas, the
constant mean proportional between the variable coordinates, has for its
symbolic expression a negsqrt1. This (in which I hope there is no
mistake) does not shew the way to any large general view of the subject,
but it would, if it stood alone, suffice to shew that impossible
quantities in algebra do not necessarily point to impossible operations
in geometry or applied mathematics. In fact it is no more wonderful that
an imaginary numerical quantity should represent a real line (or force)
than that a surd should do so, since a surd also represents an
impossible numerical operation: and the one like the other is only such
an incident as we might expect to arise, in the attempt to represent
continuous quantity by discontinuous.

Edition: current; Page: [963]
It is so pleasant to be allowed to refer one’s mathematical difficulties
to a mathematician who is a psychologist, that I venture to ask whether
I am right on another point. One sees it often mentioned as an
imperfection and a proof of the little progress made in the integral
calculus, that there [are] such multitudes of expressions which no
mathematician is able to integrate. Is not this very much as if it were
made a reproach to arithmetic that there are so many numbers of which no
one is able to extract the square or cube root? Have we any reason to
suppose that every combination of differentials which can be put
together must correspond to an integral? Is it not, on the contrary,
natural, if not even demonstrable, that by far the greatest number
cannot—that there must be many more possible differential expressions
than possible integrals, for the same sort of reason as there must be
many more numbers than there are exact square or cube roots?

I shall be anxious to see your paper on Infinity.4 I have a controversy
with Sir W. Hamilton on that subject5 in a book I have been writing,
which I hope to offer to you next spring. From your letter I have much
hope that you will agree with at least that part of the book. You are
one of those whose opinion of it I shall feel much interested in.

I am glad that Mr Baynes6 has a Professorship, though not the one he
stood for. The change from writing leading articles (very good ones by
the way) to teaching Logic, is not quite so great as that which had been
made by a young scholar I met at Corfu during the Crimean war,7 who had
just resigned an Oxford Tutorship for a place in the Commissariat.

I am Dear Sir
 very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 6. 1864

S[aint] V[éran]

William Longman

Longman, William

725.


TO WILLIAM LONGMAN1

S[aint] V[éran]

Nov. 6. 1864

Dear Sir—

I this morning received your letter. I have finished revising the
“Representative Government”2 & it will be sent by the Messageries
Impériales Edition: current; Page: [964] (that is, in effect, by
railway), tomorrow. It can go to press as soon as you please, & if you
will have the proofs sent to me here by book post I will return them
without delay. I will set about the revision of the Political Economy3
and get on with it as quickly as possible.

I have no present intentions to publish cheap editions of any of my
writings except the three you mention. It is very satisfactory that you
are able to publish the Pol. Econ. & Repr. Gov. at the prices you
mention.4 According to the proportion, I shd have thought the Liberty
could have been sold at 1/—& I shd be very glad if it could be so. I
shall be happy to accept your offer of reducing the Pol. Econ. to
5/—after the sale of 4000 copies. As the books are to be stereotyped, it
certainly does seem desirable that some duration should be fixed for the
agreement, & I shd be glad to hear what term would, in your estimates
afford a sufficient profit.

The number of copies to be printed of the dearer edition, I leave
entirely to your better judgment.

It will probably be best that the three cheap editions shd be advertised
together & published at the same time, but if you would like to print
the two smaller ones at once in order to diminish the pressure
afterwards I shall be happy to correct the proofs here. I expect to be
in England about the end of January.

I shd very much like to see the papers mentioned by Mr John Buckle5 with
the “fragmentary papers” & the Common Place books6 & I shd be obliged if
you would keep them for me till I return.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 8. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

726.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Nov. 8. 1864

Dear Sir

Your letter of the 13th October was as your letters always are,
extremely interesting to me. I am very desirous of any suggestions that
may occur to you for the improvement of this edition of my Political
Economy, as it will be the foundation of a cheap popular edition which
will be stereotyped.2 I have just heard from the publisher that the old
edition is so nearly out, as to Edition: current; Page: [965] require
that the new one should be got on with sooner than I expected when I
wrote to you, and I am therefore obliged to lay aside what I was writing
(a paper on Comte for the Westminster Review)3 to set about the
revision. Consequently, the sooner I can have even a part of your
remarks,4 the better: but what is not ready for the revision may easily
be in time to be made use of in the proofs.

I expect to learn much respecting the state of Ireland from Judge
Longfield’s address.5 But I at present feel considerably puzzled what to
recommend for Ireland. It cannot be said any longer that the English
system of landlords, tenant farmers, and hired labourers is impossible
in Ireland, as it was in the days before the famine. But it does not
seem to me to suit the ideas, feelings, or state of civilization of the
Irish. And I cannot see that the changes, great as they are, have
abolished cottierism. They have diminished competition for land, and the
evil of rackrents, and tenants always in arrear. But I do not see that
the tenant has an atom more of motive to improve, or inducement to
industry and frugality, than he had. He finds all this in America: if he
could find it at home, he probably would not emigrate.

I read with much pleasure the report of your Lecture on the Colonies.6
The arguments for Separation could hardly, I think, be more clearly and
forcibly stated. But I am more unwilling to sever the tie than you seem
to be, and I do not at all agree with Goldwin Smith in thinking the
severance actually desirable;7 my reasons for which being in print,8 I
need not repeat them here. The confederation plan for British America
seems a very good one. The opposite roads which, as you remark, Canada
and the United States are taking to meet the same evil,9 are natural
enough, since they start from opposite positions: Canada from too much
union, the United States, as they seem to think, from too little; though
the degree of union they have Edition: current; Page: [966] hitherto had
would probably suffice them still if they were well rid of the one
stumbling block, Slavery. Happily it becomes less and less doubtful that
they will get rid of that. Their superiority in arms over the
Slaveholders seems now permanently established and Lincoln’s reelection
tolerably certain. The latest opinion I have heard on the latter point
is in a letter from Hamilton, (the grandson, I think, of the eminent
Hamilton) who has just republished the Federalist.10 He says “I am happy
to be able to assure you” (the underlining is his own) “that the
President is firm in his purpose to extinguish slavery. He will
certainly be reelected—and with him a Congress of which 2/3ds will
recommend a National Convention, and this body will so amend the
Constitution that Slavery will cease at once.” It will be worth a life,
to have lived to see this done.

Merivale’s11 mode of disposing of Hare’s plan is very like Merivale. His
mind is an instrument which works well for some purposes, with as borné
a general range as that of men who do not set up for theory at all.

Fawcett excuses himself by laying the blame on bad reporting.12 He says
that the reporters omitted what he said virtually in favour of Hare’s
plan. But even by his own account, it seems to have been too veiled; and
some of his arguments for extending the suffrage would if well grounded
have removed the most obvious and urgent reasons for representation of
minorities.

I am Dear Sir
 ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 21, 1864

Saint Véran

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

727.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Saint Véran

Avignon

Nov. 21, 1864

I have read Messrs. Briggs’2 prospectus with very great pleasure. They
have done themselves great honour in being the originators in England of
Edition: current; Page: [967] one of the two modes of Co-operation which
are probably destined to divide the field of employment between them.
The importance of what they are doing is the greater, as its success
would make it almost impossible hereafter for any recreant Co-operative
Societies to go back to the old plan of paying only fixed wages when
even private capitalists give it up.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 1. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

728.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 1. 1864

Dear Sir

Am I right in thinking that among the improvements consequent on the
Irish famine and emigration, the desuetude of cottier tenancy is not
one? My impression is that the land is still mainly let direct to the
labourer, without the intervention of a capitalist farmer—and if so,
other things in Ireland being as they are, all the elements of the
former overpopulation are still there, though for the present
neutralized by the emigration. I very much wish to hear from you whether
I am right.2

Have you formed any opinion, or can you refer me to any good authority,
respecting the ordinary rate of mercantile and manufacturing profit in
the United States?3 I have hitherto been under the impression that it is
much higher than in England, because the rate of interest is so. But I
have lately been led to doubt the truth of this impression, because it
seems inconsistent with known facts respecting wages in America. High
profits are compatible with a high reward of the labourer through low
prices of necessaries, but they are not compatible with a high cost of
labour; and it seems to me that the very high money wages of labour in
America, the precious metals not being of lower value there than in
Europe, indicates a high cost as well as a high remuneration of labour.
Supposing profits to be lower than in Europe instead of higher, it is
yet quite intelligible that interest might be higher. Edition: current;
Page: [968] There is, I apprehend, in America, scarcely any unoccupied
class, living on interest: almost everybody is in active business,
needing all his own capital and more too. In New England even the banks
have scarcely any deposits, the class who in England would be depositors
being there shareholders. Consequently the loan market is hardly
supplied at all from native sources, except the capital and notes of the
banking companies: and when there is a great demand for loans it has to
be supplied from the European money market, and therefore at a rate of
interest so high as to be a temptation to foreigners. I should be much
indebted to you if you could help me on this subject, as, if I have been
misleading the readers of my Political Economy, it is very desirable
that the error should be corrected in this edition.

I have been obliged to read, with a view to my new edition, the most
recent & most voluminous of Carey’s writings, his “Principles of Social
Science”:4 because his attacks on the Ricardo political economy and on
free trade are, some of them, if not new, at least made in a new shape,
and I have thought it good to give a brief refutation of them, the
rather as the book is a good deal thought of by some of the French
political economists, and is helping to muddle their ideas. The parts of
his speculations which I have had to attack are really the best parts,
as it was not worth while to notice any of his errors but those which
had some affinity with truths. But it really would be a useful exercise
for any clearheaded and painstaking student of political economy to shew
up the book, for I think I never met with any modern treatise with such
an apparatus of facts and reasonings, in which the facts were so
untrustworthy and the interpretations of fact so perverse and absurd. I
do not imagine that it would be worth your while any more than mine to
take the trouble of reviewing it, but I should very much like to see it
properly done. To give a really adequate exposure of the book would be
out of the question, for there would be something requiring comment in
every page: but a selection might be made, in a moderate compass, which
would suffice to destroy any authority the book might have. Withal I
cannot dislike the man, for his feelings, and his way of thinking on
general subjects, so far as I can perceive, are usually right.

I have not yet had any application from Longman to begin printing, but I
think it will not be long before I have.

Lincoln’s triumphant reelection is a grand event; and it is perhaps a
still greater that there is now the majority in Congress necessary for
the Anti Slavery amendment of the Federal Constitution. The value of
this last cannot Edition: current; Page: [969] be overrated, for it
ensures not only that there will be no reunion retaining slavery, but
that after reunion the Federal Courts will have a right to set aside any
tricky legislation in the Southern States intended to reestablish
Slavery under another name. I am Dear Sir

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 1. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

729.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 1. 1864

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for your letter, and for the other things you
sent, all of which arrived safely. Your own printed note2 interested me
historically as shewing the gradual progress of your thoughts on the
subject, and the Frankfort newspaper3 as giving a glimpse of the notions
of German reformers on constitutional subjects. I am glad that the note
I wrote to be appended to my chapter on Personal Representation meets
with your approval.4 I dare say you may be right in limiting your new
Preface to something like the same scale, but the matter which you at
first intended for the preface, if too long to be used for it, might, I
should think, be useful as an Appendix at the end of the volume.

Lord Grey’s book5 is, I believe, mainly a reprint of his old one, which
I happen never to have read; but I have read the new chapters, before
publication. His ideas of representation of minorities do not go beyond
Marshall’s plan,6 but the importance he attaches to it helps to stir up
the subject, and I expect considerable good of that kind from the
publication. The best point is his emphatic declaration that a
considerable change is necessary and that changes which only consist in
going further in the beaten track are neither safe nor useful; that it
is necessary to have recourse to new ideas.

Our Southern climate has been scarcely recognisable this autumn; the
rains have only ceased two or three days ago, and now we begin to have
winter cold, Edition: current; Page: [970] generally but not always with
winter brightness. You had decidedly the best week of the autumnal
season during your stay.

With our kind regards to your daughters and son, I am Dear Sir

ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec.2.1864

S[aint] V[éran]

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

730.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

S[aint] V[éran]

Dec.2.1864

Dear Bain—

I have not written to you since I received your answer to my note
concerning Prof. Fraser’s review of Abbott2 & other matters. I was very
glad to hear that Fraser is capable of writing anything so good & that
he is editing Berkeley.3 An account of the subsequent developments of
Idealism by the author of that article is likely to be good.

When I last wrote to you I believe I had not yet read Prof. Tait’s
articles on the Conservation of Force.4 They have made some parts of the
theory much clearer to me than before. I now understand better what is
meant by potential energy & how the force may be said to be constantly
preserved even when not acting in its usual way: but I am not sure that
my way of comprehending it fits all the cases. When air is compressed a
reaction equal to the compressing force exists in the form of pressure
against the sides of the vessel. When a projectile is thrown into the
air, the force of gravity which ultimately brings it to the ground
exists all the while though counteracted, for it shows itself in
retarding & finally stopping the upward motion before it begins to
determine the downward one, and it is calculably the same amount of
force all the time. But the force said to be latent in coal: being that
which would be generated by its chemical combination with oxygen does
not manifest itself by any pressure or tendency to motion, or
neutralisation of counter force for ages on Edition: current; Page:
[971] ages. Still, if it can be shewn that a force was lost, or used up,
in making coal out of the carbonic acid gas of the atmosphere equal to
that which is generated by the reconversion of an equal quantity of coal
with carbonic acid gas, I admit that there is a virtual conservation of
force, though as force it was non existent during the long interval; but
so, you will say, is the latent heat of the water in the ocean, & of the
gases comprising the atmosphere. Therefore, though I do not know how the
equality of the force lost & that reproduced is in this case
ascertained, I can understand that it may be so. But I complain of a
great want in Tait as well as in Tyndall,5 of proper clearness in making
out what it is that is conserved. They speak as if the case of the
compressed air or the projectile were exactly like that of the coal,
when in reality it is extremely different. They would probably say that
the force in the coal is alive all the time, creating molecular motion.
But this unprovable hypothesis is just the part of the theory which I
cannot swallow.

There is a difficulty, to my comprehension, in the old theory of heat,
which I have long intended to mention to you, but have always forgotten,
and I do not know whether the new theory takes it away. It relates to
the common mode of explaining the law by which objects of unequal
temperature tend to equalise their temperature by radiation. The theory
is namely that all bodies are constantly radiating heat, & if of equal
temperature radiate it in equal quantity but every body radiates in
proportion to its temperature, so that all bodies constantly exchanging
heat, the hotter give more than they receive & the colder receive more
than they give. On this theory it seems to me that if two bodies at the
temperature of the atmosphere are placed in the foci of opposite
parabolic mirrors they ought both to rise in temperature: for there is
nothing to make them give out less heat than previously, & they
certainly receive more. Even if one of the bodies is a lump of ice it
ought even then to raise the temperature of the other body instead of
cooling it as it does for even the ice sends out some heat which would
not have reached the other focus if it had not been collected &
concentrated by the mirrors. There is probably an answer to this, but
none is given in the usual explanation of the apparent radiation of
cold.

The Association Psychology is decidedly getting into France. Seeing a
short newspaper article of an “Etude sur l’Association des Idées” by a
writer named P. M. Mervoyer, written as a thesis for the degree of
Docteur ès Lettres, we sent for the book6 & found that it was in great
part composed of translated extracts from your writings, for which he
professes warm admiration, & has very well mastered a great many of the
thoughts. He is a complete Edition: current; Page: [972] disciple of
yours, & I may say also of mine, & will do good, though not apparently a
person of great vigour of mind, his own part of the exposition
contrasting not advantageously, in clearness & precision, with his
translations from us, which are very well done. I wish it may come into
his mind to translate you into French. I will bring the book with me to
England as you will I think be interested, as I have been, by it.

The writer in the N. American Review has followed up his article on Time
& Space by one on Hamilton,7 the most severe one I have seen, but a
striking contrast to my controversy with him, being a judgment of him
from the opposite point of view: wherever H. is right the reviewer
contrives to be wrong, & wherever H. is wrong, he is still more wrong
than H.

I am glad you are to lecture at the R[oyal] I[nstitution],8 though your
time of lecturing will probably fall during our absence. The managers of
the Inst. seem laudably desirous of recruiting their staff with fresh
notabilities. They have invited over Jules Simon to lecture,9
fortunately not on metaphysics.

After finishing the first draft of my first article on Comte10 I had to
leave off & set about revising the Pol. Econ. for a new edition.11 This
I have now finished & am on the point of returning to Comte. The
opportunity is a good one for saying various things that I am glad to
say. It is for the April number, as it will not be in time for January.

I suppose Grote has nearly finished his printing by this time.12

With our regards to Mrs Bain

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 2. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Augustus de Morgan

Morgan, Augustus de

731.


TO AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 2. 1864

Dear Sir

Much occupation prevented me from sooner thanking you for your
interesting and valuable letter of Nov. 14, as it has also hitherto from
studying Edition: current; Page: [973] the Trigonometry.2 I have found
time to go through the paper for the Philosophical Society3 with some
care, and have learnt a good deal from it, though, as you are aware, I
do not go with you in regarding even the truths of pure mathematics as
necessities of thought—i.e. necessities originating in thought, for that
incessantly repeated experience has made them necessities I should not
think of denying. Short of that, all that you were aiming at seemed to
me, as far as I am a competent judge, to be right. I was much struck
with the view taken in your letter of the possibilities of extension of
the integral calculus, which opens a way to large and far reaching
speculations, if not to great practical applications. I am glad to find
that what I ventured to write to you on that subject, as well as about
imaginary quantities, was right as far as it went. I never supposed that
it went very far. But I expect to be much more competent on such
subjects when I have read more of your writings. The real philosophy of
mathematics is now fairly launched, and in good hands.

What you say about the origin of + and - is an interesting historical
curiosity.4

I keep your letters carefully for reference, and will write again when I
have gone through the Trigonometry. I am with many thanks

yours very truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 2. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henry Fawcett

Fawcett, Henry

732.


TO HENRY FAWCETT1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 2. 1864

Dear Mr Fawcett

I have been a long while without answering your letter of Oct. 31,
having at present more work than usual to be got through in a given
time. I was sorry to hear of your attack of fever, but very glad that
you were able to lecture, and had so numerous a class. It is curious
that you should have had fever at Salisbury and got rid of it at
Cambridge.

I do not know that your speech at Brighton2 made any unfavourable
impression on Hare, and the impression on me was much more favourable
than unfavourable. We were struck with the contrast it presented to
electioneering speeches generally, by the number of ideas it contained.
What I could Edition: current; Page: [974] have wished otherwise was not
the omission to speak more definitely respecting Hare’s plan, but the
employment of an argument which tells against the need of such a plan,
and which I think unusual, namely, that the working classes are greatly
divided in opinion. Like other classes they are divided on points not
involving the class interests or prejudices, but not therefore less
likely to be united on those which do.

It will be a great triumph of your eloquence to induce the Brighton
electors to forego £2000, but there is enough latent honesty and public
spirit in any large constituency to make such things possible, and when
you have done it you ought to have a gold medal, or perhaps a civic
crown would be preferable. I wish equal success to Christie,3 but he
will have still more uphill work.

We are in high spirits about America, not only on account of Lincoln’s
triumphant reelection, but also on account of the majority in Congress
which is now sufficient to decree an appeal to popular suffrage for an
amendment in the Federal Constitution interdicting slavery in the
States. The great value of this is that not only will it remove all
chance of the sacrifice of Abolition for reunion, but after reunion it
will empower the Federal Courts to nullify any State legislation tending
to restore slavery under another name: which, moreover, makes it
possible to readmit the seceding States with the same constitutional
rights as formerly in every other respect. Goldwin Smith’s speech at the
dinner given in his honour was good,4 and promises much valuable matter
in his future contributions to the Daily News.

I am Dear Mr. Fawcett
 vry truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 10. 1864

S[aint] V[éran]

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

733.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

S[aint] V[éran]

Dec. 10. 1864

.

Dear Sir—

I have had the pleasure of receiving your letter of Dec. 7. An organ
such as it is intended that the Reader2 should be, will be of the
greatest Edition: current; Page: [975] use, & when such men as yourself,
& Mr Cairnes, Mr Huxley,3 & Mr Tyndall, to mention no others, are
sufficiently interested in it to take a share in its management,4 there
need be no fear of its disappointing any reasonable hopes. With such a
list of names as you have it might be possible to run it against the
Saturday Review were it not that I am afraid your plan excludes
temporary politics. Of course it does not exclude political philosophy,
& I hope original articles will be inserted as well as reviews. I shall
be happy to take a share & will pay the £80 whenever required.5

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 12. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

734.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 12. 1864

Dear Sir

I do not know how sufficiently to thank you for all you have done for
me. That you should have taken the trouble to write out your thoughts so
fully on so many points, only for my use, is a favour such as I should
never have presumed to ask from you. It is like nothing but the
philosophic correspondences in which the thinkers of the 16th and 17th
centuries used to compare notes and discuss each other’s opinions before
or after publication—of which we have so many interesting specimens in
the published works of Descartes. I shall keep the notes2 carefully and
return them to you, for I do not like that so much thought, so clearly
worked out on paper, should have no reader but me: besides, it enables
me with a better conscience to use their contents.

On most of the minor points I think you are right, and shall profit by
your suggestions. On Ireland3 I shall cancel all I had newly written on
that subject, and wait for the further communication you kindly promise.
On the few points of doctrine on which our opinions differ, you have
not, thus far, convinced me, though you have taught me much. Among these
I do not count the theory of the rate of interest, for I agree entirely
with your explanation of the phenomena, and the article in the North
British Review4 appears to Edition: current; Page: [976] me excellent. I
had, even before I heard from you, inserted a passage pointing out how
the new gold, as long as it continues to flow in, must tend to keep down
the rate of interest. We differ, I believe, only on a question of
nomenclature, and at present it seems to me that the objections to your
phraseology are stronger than to mine. But I have not done thinking on
the subject, and I shall in any case have to modify several expressions,
if nothing more.

In the matter of the operation of duties on international values, I see
that I have omitted one of the elements of the question, viz. the
competing demands of other commodities on the purse of the consumer; but
it does not seem to me that this omission materially affects the
conclusion. Suppose that I have a given sum, say £10 a year, the
expenditure of which I am determined, whatever happens, to divide
between two commodities, A and B. I conceive that even then, if A rises
in price and B falls, the effect in the average of cases will be that I
shall buy more of B and less of A.

On the Wakefield system I scarcely understand your argument.5 In the
supposed case of the settlers, and in every other, I apprehend the
separation of employments to be a real cause and indispensable condition
of a larger production. It is true that territorial separation of
employments, by international trade, often suffices: but the main
justification of Wakefield’s system is, that this trade does not take
effect when families settle, each of them many miles from its next
neighbour in the wilderness.

The point on which we seem to differ most, & to be least likely to come
to an agreement, is the income tax.6 You think it fair to take from
different people in a single year, an equal percentage of what their
incomes, whether permanent or temporary, would sell for in that year:
because (you say) the payment in each year should be compared with what
the income is worth in that year to its owner. In this I agree; but I
answer, that the income is, in that year, worth to him its capitalized
value only on the supposition that he actually capitalizes it, and
spends the whole value within the year. Then indeed, he will have been
fairly taxed: but then, he will not have to pay the tax in any future
year, for the income will have passed into other hands. On any other
supposition the income is only worth to him its capitalized value spread
over the whole of its duration, that is, in each year the total amount
divided by the number of years. I agree in what you say about equality
of sacrifice, but in estimating this, I only exclude necessaries. I do
not think a distinction can be fairly made between comforts and
luxuries, or that I am entitled to call my tea and coffee by the one
name, and another person’s melons and champagne by the other. I allow
for nothing but what is needed to keep an average person alive and free
from physical suffering.

Edition: current; Page: [977]
Touching colonies, I understand you to differ from me chiefly in
thinking that the advantages obtained by a quasi-federal union with them
might equally be obtained by an alliance. My answer to this is, that
there is no such thing as an alliance. There are only coalitions between
countries for a temporary purpose. No nation associates its foreign
policy generally with that of another nation, unless either subject to
its power, or united with it by a federal tie. As soon as the colonies
separate from us, we shall have only the same chance of having them for
even temporary allies, as of having any other independent nation.

I have read with the greatest interest Judge Longfield’s address,7 and
two of your articles on it in the Daily News.8 There may be others which
I have missed, as the paper is often stopped at the French post office.
Though I thought the Judge wrong in much of what he said on fixity of
tenure, I agreed with, I think, every part of his address which was
praised in your articles, and I think it altogether a most important
paper. I give him the greatest credit for speaking out so plainly, and
so much to the purpose. It is particularly timely, coming so soon after
the speech in which Gladstone included remedial measures for Ireland
among the things which he put in the front of his policy.9 We see there,
as usual in Gladstone, the man who speaks from his own convictions, and
not from external influences. No other minister would have put forward
Ireland, any more than Reform, just at this time, when there is no
public outcry about it.

Did you read Buxton’s three closely printed columns in the Times about
Parliamentary Reform?10 They are a sign of tendencies, and a prognostic
of much that the Times and Saturday Review would like to shut their eyes
to.

Ever, Dear Sir, yours truly

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [978]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 12. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

735.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 12. 1864

Dear Sir

You wished me to let you know as soon as I could find a time when I
should be able to send you an article on Comte.2 I find that the subject
can only be treated as I wish to treat it, in two articles—one on his
principal work, the other on the speculations of his later years. The
first of these is all written; except two or three references which
remain to be put in when I return to England at the end of January. I
can therefore promise it for the April number. But it is very long;
sixty pages of the Westminster, if not more; and I see no possibility of
either dividing or shortening it, consistently with its being what I
meant it to be. It is for you to judge whether, under these conditions,
it will suit the Review. If accepted, as I wish it to be known as mine,
I should be glad, if you have no objection, to put my initials.

The second article, which will probably be much shorter, I feel
tolerably certain of getting ready for the next following number, should
you desire it so soon. I am Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J. S. Mill

Dr Chapman

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 12. 1864

S[aint] V[éran]

Robert Harrison

Harrison, Robert

736.


TO ROBERT HARRISON1

S[aint] V[éran]

Dec. 12. 1864

.

Dear Sir—

Your estimate of Black’s2 character is true to the letter & such as all
who were intimate with him would confirm.

I do not know how soon after his coming to London he knew my father. I
was a child at the time & up to the beginning of 1814 my father lived so
far on the north east side of London that I suppose they did not often
meet. All Edition: current; Page: [979] I know is that when Black became
editor of the Chronicle, in the autumn I think of 1821, they were
already old friends. After that time he constantly frequented my father
& no doubt often expressed opinions imbibed from him but he was far from
being a mere follower of any one. As an example of this, Black as I well
remember, changed the opinion of some of the leading political
economists, particularly my father’s respecting poor laws,3 by the
articles he wrote in the Chronicle in favour of a poor law for Ireland.
He met their objections by maintaining that a poor law did not
necessarily encourage overpopulation but might be so worked as to be a
considerable check to it & he convinced them that he was in the right.

I have always considered Black as the first journalist who carried
criticism & the spirit of reform into the details of English
institutions. Those who are not old enough to remember those times can
hardly believe what the state of public discussion then was. People now
& then attacked the Constitution & the boroughmongers but none thought
of censuring the law or the courts of justice & to say a word against
the unpaid magistracy was a sort of blasphemy. Black was the writer who
carried the warfare into these subjects & introduced Bentham’s opinions
on legal & judicial reform into newspaper discussion. And by doing this
he broke the spell. Very early in his editorship he fought a great
battle for the freedom of reporting the preliminary investigations in
the Police Courts in which Fonblanque4 who just at that time began to
become known occasionally helped him, but he had little other help. He
carried his point & the victory was permanent. Another subject on which
his writings were of the greatest service was the freedom of the press
in matters of religion. His first years as editor of the Chronicle
coincided with the prosecutions of Carlile5 & his shopmen & Black kept
up the fight against those prosecutions with great spirit & power. All
these subjects were Black’s own. Parl. Reform, Catholic emancipation,
free trade, &c, were the liberal topics of the day & on all of these he
wrote frequently, as you will see by any file of the Chronicle. One of
the remarkable things is that nearly all the leading articles at least
in those early years, were his own writing. He now & then had an article
sent to him by a friend but there was I believe for a long time no one
regularly associated with him as a writer of leaders. This I believe is
not generally known. He was constantly bringing into his articles
curious passages & scraps of recondite information from old books which
people thought must have been furnished by a host of friends behind him:
But they all came from his own great miscellaneous reading. He used to
walk about London, stopping Edition: current; Page: [980] at all the
bookstalls & got together a large collection of books not generally
known from which he had a knack of picking out & using whatever they
contained that was interesting or instructive.

Why Cobbett attacked him6 I do not remember & it is scarcely worth
knowing. Somebody said of Cobbett, very truly, that there were two sorts
of people he could not endure, those who differed from him & those who
agreed with him. These last had always stolen his ideas. I do not know
that he selected Black for a very special object of attack. If he had a
controversy with him about anything he was sure to load him with comical
abuse.

I shall be happy to give you any further information I have & to answer
to the best of my ability any questions, but the real source of the
information you want is the Chronicle itself. He poured out his whole
mind into it, as indeed he had much need to do considering how many
volumes yearly he wrote in it.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 13th, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Daniel Reaves Goodloe

Goodloe, Daniel Reaves

737.


TO DANIEL REAVES GOODLOE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Vaucluse, France

Dec. 13th, 1864

.

Dear Sir:

Having been absent from England some months, I have but lately received
the pamphlet you did me the honor to send me. You are so clearly right
as to the political economy of the question, that one is only surprised
at its being necessary to take so much pains to make the matter obvious
to others. But the absurdest opinions are often the most tenacious of
life. What can be more ridiculous than to suppose that a laboring man is
an item in the wealth of the country that possesses him, when he is
owned by a fellow-man, but not an item in it when he owns himself! But
great merit may be shown in explaining Edition: current; Page: [981]
truths which ought not to need explanation, and that merit your pamphlet
possesses in a high degree.

I am indebted to you for an excellent illustration of the point you
notice in my Principles of Political Economy, which I shall not fail to
make use of in a new edition which I am now preparing.2

As a native of a slave state, who twenty-five years ago saw and
proclaimed the doctrine of common sense as well as justice respecting
slavery, you must be highly gratified by the prospect now opened of the
early realization of your utmost wishes on that subject, however painful
to you in many respects may be the process by which it is coming to
pass.

With sincere respects, I am,

Dear Sir, very truly yours,

J. S. Mill

Daniel R. Goodloe, Esqr.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 13, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Rowland G. Hazard

Hazard, Rowland G.

738.


TO ROWLAND G. HAZARD1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 13, 1864

Dear Sir

I have not received your work on the Will,2 nor any copy of “Our
Resources”3 but that which you have now done me the favour of sending.
They may have been sent to my house in England since the last parcel I
received from thence.

Edition: current; Page: [982]
I have read your series of papers with great interest and pleasure. You
have the merit of seeing and pointing out clearly that the expense of
the war can only come out of the spare produce of the national labour,
and that people cannot expend this on the war and on their own
indulgences too. It is a question of will, not power. A nation which has
increased its wealth by 126 per cent in ten years, cannot be put to
really great inconvenience by even a much larger debt than the present
one. And I agree with you in thinking that a reunited nation, freed from
the incubus of slavery, abundantly provided with the appliances for
economizing labour, and resorted to by the superfluous hands of the old
countries in so great abundance, will start forward at the end of the
war at a pace hitherto unexampled. The question is not whether America
can keep her engagements, but whether she will consent to pay taxes for
the purpose, and of this I do not permit myself to have any doubt.

Your paper “Contraction versus Expansion”4 seems to me sound. I do not
mean that I agree with every word of it, but I concur in the main drift
of your argument. I cannot doubt that a gradual drawing in of the
surplus currency is the wisest course for the general prosperity: but
its practicability depends on the willingness of American citizens to
pay taxes and lend money to the government. For a long time, the issue
of inconvertible paper in government payments operated as a forced
taxation on all holders of currency, and the reception of it back at a
fixed rate in exchange for United States Bonds, redeemable and the
interest payable only in specie, operated as a series of forced loans;
since the paper, being legal tender, could not be refused in payment,
and the holders, to avoid loss by depreciation, were glad to get rid of
it by taking bonds. I do not know whether the same practice is followed
by Mr. Chase’s successor;5 but if the Government loses this resource for
raising the money indispensable to it, an equivalent can only be found
in the patriotism of the monied classes and the tax payers generally. If
that can be depended on, the course you propose has everything to
recommend it, and the danger from further depreciation is so great that
your Government cannot too soon begin the process of contraction.

I cannot close this letter without offering to you, as an American
citizen, my warmest congratulations on the result of the late election,
and on the present hopeful prospect of affairs. I am delighted to
recognize in you feelings like my own on the subject of slavery. I am
Dear Sir

very sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [983]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 20. 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Elliot Cairnes

Cairnes, John Elliot

739.


TO JOHN ELLIOT CAIRNES1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 20. 1864

Dear Sir

I wrote to you some days ago a letter addressed Dublin and “to be
forwarded,”2 thanking you for the two packets of notes you kindly sent
and remarking generally on their purport. I have since carefully revised
all the passages you referred to, and there are very few of the notes by
which I have not, to some extent, profited. In a great many cases I have
entirely adopted your view. I have rewritten the fourth section of the
chapter on the Rate of Interest3 and have much enlarged it; completing
my exposition of the causes on which the rate of interest depends, by
adopting nearly all you have said on the subject that involves doctrine.
In what merely involves the mode of stating the theory, I still prefer
my own: but I see that the whole truth of the subject may be expressed
in either way, and may usefully be so in both. Your remarks on the
definition of money4 I have not used, for a different reason: I cannot,
in conscience, take without necessity what belongs to you. When it is
for the correction of an error I have less scruple, but all I have said
on this matter tended to your opinion, though less thorough and
conclusive. Even on the Interest question, I should like, if you will
permit me, to acknowledge my obligations to you in a note.

One of my American correspondents, Mr Barnard,5 of Boston, is so
obliging as to send me the semiweekly edition of the New York Evening
Post, the paper edited by Cullen Bryant,6 and under him by Parke
Godwin,7 and, teste Barnard, the best paper in the Union. I send you by
this post one of the numbers, on account of some fine samples of the
theoretical advocacy of slavery by the public writers of the South,
which you will find in the first and also in the second page. I inclose
a most interesting letter from another correspondent, Mr Brace,8 the
author of a very creditable book on “The Races of the Old World.”
Perhaps after reading it, you may think [it] useful to send it, or part
of it, to the Daily News or Spectator, as there are things in it which
Edition: current; Page: [984] it is highly desirable to make known. To
me it is most encouraging. I never expected to see already so much
progress made towards the fulfilment of all I predicted. It will cheer
every friend of the cause who reads it. I except, of course, from
publication, the first page, and the first six lines of the second.

I have taken a share in the Reader,9 partly influenced by seeing your
name in the subscription list, and being told that you were willing to
look after the politics and political economy of the paper. With such a
set of writers it may be made a most valuable organ. I have advised
running it against the Saturday Review.

Ever yours truly,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 26, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

Rowland G. Hazard

Hazard, Rowland G.

740.


TO ROWLAND G. HAZARD1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 26, 1864

Dear Sir

I shall be very happy to see you if you are passing through Avignon. The
people at the Hotel l’Europe can tell you how to find my cottage.

I thank you by anticipation for your book,2 which will probably arrive
tomorrow. I am Dear Sir

very faithfully yours

J. S. Mill