June 2nd, 1820

My dear Father,

I arrived at the Chateau last night, or rather this morning, at about 2
o’clock, and according to your injunctions, I write you immediately an
account of my journey. I have kept a pretty accurate journal, as you
will see.

May 15

[J] When we set off there was no body in the coach except an old lady
who was going to Boughton near Canterbury. At the Elephant and Castle on
the Kent Road an officer in the army joined us. When we reached Dartford
we were asked if we chose to breakfast; but we did not. After Dartford
the country becomes very pleasant, and we have many pretty views of the
river Thames. We passed through Gravesend: at Gad’s hill near Rochester
the officer left us. At Canterbury the coachman begged us to ride
outside, as four ladies had come as far as Canterbury in another coach,
and if we would ride outside we might all go in one coach. We consented,
and he returned us the difference of the fare. I had 16 shillings to pay
for luggage. From Canterbury to Dover the country is extremely hilly. We
did not, as we expected, pass through Margate. Dover is a very dirty
place. At the King’s Head we sat down with a very good appetite to a
beef steak, having eaten nothing all day. We had a very good pair of
beds.

Edition: current; Page: [4]
[N] Rose early, prepared every thing for journey, walked with my father
to the coach office, met there Mr. Ensor,1 set off with him for France
in a Dover coach professing to pass through Margate, Ramsgate, and Deal.
There was an old lady in the coach, going to Boughton near Canterbury.
At the Elephant and Castle on the Kent road a gentleman in the army
joined us. The road is not at all pretty as far as Dartford; there we
come to the banks of the Thames, and it begins to be extremely pretty.
We passed through Gravesend, the officer got out at Gad’s hill near
Rochester. We went on to Canterbury, a large town, very pretty. Here the
coachman begged us to ride outside, because the whole inside of the
coach was taken: we did so accordingly, and he returned us the
difference of the fare. From Canterbury to Dover the country is very
hilly. We did not, as I expected, pass through Margate, Ramsgate nor
Deal; I suppose because there were no passengers for any of those
places. We arrived at Dover about six o’clock; it is a considerable
town, but dirty and ill built. At the King’s Head we ate a beef steak
with great appetite; the beds were excellent.

May 16

[J] After having breakfasted and discharged a very high bill, we set off
for Calais in the Trafalgar packet. The instant I set my foot on board,
I began to feel a little sick; I therefore immediately went into a
birth, lay down, and shut my eyes. I thus avoided sea-sickness: though
indeed I felt a little sick at stomach during the latter part of our
voyage: for our passage was so rough that even Mr. Ensor was sick, which
he has not been for 25 years. The rolling of the ship was so great that
at one time half the deck was 3 feet under water. We accomplished our
passage in 3 hours, and set foot on French ground at 3 o’clock
precisely. We were immediately called upon for our passport: this we
produced, after which my sac de nuit was searched by one of the gens
d’armes, but nothing was taken. We went to a very good hotel, that of
Detant, au Grand Cerf, Rue Royale, Calais, where we dined, and our
trunks were taken to the Custom House, but as every thing was exactly in
the condition you put it, after the officers sent it back, I do not
think they searched it. No one offered to search our pockets. The town
has a very large open market place: The city walls are a pleasant
promenade. The room was furnished, chiefly, more in the English than in
the French manner. Melle Detant spoke very good English.

[N] After breakfast, having discharged an enormous bill, we set out for
Calais in the Trafalgar packet. We accomplished the passage in three
hours; it was an exceedingly rough passage; so much so that even Mr.
Ensor, who has not been sea sick for 25 years, was so this time. I
escaped by lying down directly in a birth and shutting my eyes. But
during the latter part of the passage, I was a little sick at stomach;
the rolling of the ship being so great that the deck was in some parts
three feet under water every time the vessel rolled. Set foot on French
ground, May 16, 1820, at 3 o’clock exactly. We were instantly made to
produce our passport which was examined by two gens d’armes; we then had
to pay 2 francs for another. My sac de nuit was searched, but nothing
taken. We went to the Hotel du Grand Cerf, Detant, Rue Royale, Calais,
where we dined, and our trunks were taken to the Custom House, but
nothing seized; I think they did no more than open the trunks, for every
thing was Edition: current; Page: [5] in the same order as before. Went
out to see the town. It is not very large, the streets are neat, and
many of them have paved foot paths. The promenade of the town is the
wall which surrounds it, and which commands a distant prospect, though
not a very delightful one. We had two closets opening into our room at
the inn. Each contained a bed. The room was furnished more in the
English than in the French manner. Mademoiselle Detant spoke very good
English. The population of Calais is 7,000 inhabitants.

May 17

[J] We set off at 10 o’clock by the diligence: a coach supported on two
wheels: divided by a partition into two apartments each of which
contains six much better than an English stage coach holds four. We
arrived at Paris in about 32 hours. The country near Calais is very flat
and unpleasant, but towards Boulogne it becomes more hilly as it
continues for the rest of the way. At Boulogne we dined at the table
d’hôte, which is far the cheapest way: during dinner a woman played on
the Spanish guitar and sung. Boulogne consists of two towns: the Haute
Ville, and the lower. A magnificent street called Rue Grande connects
them. We next arrived at Montreuil, a large town on a very steep hill,
which we could hardly climb on foot, the streets were so steep. Our
company was all English except one gentleman. We supped at Abbeville.

[N] Set off at 10 o’clock by the diligence for Paris. It is much more
than twice as long, and considerably broader, than an English stage
coach: yet it is supported on two wheels only. It is divided crosswise
into two apartments having no communication with each other except by a
little window; each apartment contains six people much better than a
common English stage coach holds four. The country which we first pass
through is extremely flat and unpleasant, but it becomes more hilly, as
we proceed. We passed through the little village of Marquise in the
bottom of a valley, and arrived at Boulogne, where we dined at the table
d’hôte, paying a certain fixed sum; we were entertained with French
songs on the guitar by a woman, during dinner. Boulogne is at the mouth
of the little river Iane,2 it is a trading town, the chef lieu of an
arrondissement, population 13,000 inhabitants; it consists of two
separate towns, the Haute Ville and the Basse Ville; the former is
surrounded by a high wall. They are connected by a magnificent street
called Rue Grande. Here as at Calais there are as many inscriptions in
English as in French.—On leaving Boulogne, the country presents nothing
remarkable as far as Montreuil. This town is built on a very steep hill,
which makes it extremely difficult to mount, even on foot, as we did. It
is situate on the right bank of the Canche, the only river of
consequence north of the Somme. The town itself is dirty, and far from
presenting the pleasing appearance of Calais or Boulogne; it is however
a large town though it contains only 3,500 inhabitants. On leaving
Montreuil we crossed the river Canche and proceeded to Abbeville,
skirting a great number of forests, in particular that of Cressy,
celebrated in English and in French history.3 It was dark before we
arrived at Abbeville, where we supped.—

—The department of the Pas-de-Calais is larger than the greater part of
the departments, as it contains 328 square leagues. It is also one of
the best peopled, being exceeded in Edition: current; Page: [6]
population only by the departmens of the Nord, the Seine, and the
Gironde. The Canche and the Aa are the only rivers of note which it
contains, though the Lys has its rising there.—

—Abbeville is situated on the Somme; it is celebrated for its cloth
manufacture. The tide comes up as far as this town. It has 18,000
inhabitants. There are two roads from Abbeville to Paris; the one by
Amiens and the other by Beauvais, that which we took is the Beauvais
road. We travelled all night, passing through Airaines, Poix, and
Grandvilliers.

May 18

[J] After travelling all night we arrived at Beauvais to breakfast: as I
could not eat any thing, I walked about the town. We entered Paris about
6 P.M. by the Barrière de St. Denis: the custom house officer opened the
trunks on the coach top. We stopped at the Messageries Royales, Rue
Notre Dame des Victoires, whence we took a fiacre to the Hotel Vivienne,
Rue Vivienne, where we dined and slept. As I slept on a temporary bed, I
escaped being infested with bugs, a misfortune to which Mr. Ensor was
subjected to such a degree that he could not sleep till 3 o’clock, and
in the morning the bed was covered with blood in some places.

[N] Arrived at Beauvais to breakfast; but not being able to eat any
thing, I walked about the town, which is considerable: Beauvais, chef
lieu of the department of the Oise, is celebrated for having been
besieged by the Duke of Burgundy in 1472, and defended against him by
the women, under the command of Jeanne Hachette; who at last forced him
to raise the siege.4 Having never been taken, though often besieged, it
is called la Pucelle. It is situated on the little river Thérain; and is
a manufacturing town. The number of inhabitants is 13,000. About one
o’clock we arrived at Beaumont on the left bank of the Oise, a
considerable town. We passed then through a country very well
cultivated, seeing sometimes some vineyards; we entered Paris by the
barrier of St. Denis, having first passed through the village or small
town of that name. The customhouse officer went to the coach top, but I
do not know whether he searched the trunks. We stopped at the
Messageries Royales, Rue Notre Dame des Victoires, whence we took a
fiacre to the Hotel Vivienne, Rue Vivienne, where we dined and slept; as
I slept on a temporary bed, I escaped the misfortune, to which Mr. Ensor
was subjected, of being infested with bugs.

May 19

[J] In the morning we walked to the Palais Royal and breakfasted at one
of the Café’s there. This immense building belonged to the profligate
Duc D’Orleans (in the time of Louis XVI) who, having ruined himself by
debauchery, resolved to let the arcades of his palace to various
tradesmen:5 whose shops make a beautiful appearance. The upper rooms are
appropriated to gaming, and all species of vice. Edition: current; Page:
[7] We went after breakfast to M. Say, who occupies the upper part of
Rue du Faubourg St. Martin, No. 92.6 He was at home: he read your
letter, and asked me to stay with him, which I did. His family consists
of himself, Mdme Say, their eldest son, M. Horace Say, who is a
merchant, and goes every day to business, and one of his daughters. He
has another daughter, who I believe is married; and Alfred, his younger
son, is at a Pension, but lives at his father’s house every Sunday and
Monday. None of them except himself and his eldest son can speak a word
of English. M. Say said it was 2 months since Mr. Bentham had written to
him to say I was coming. Mdme Say told me of a young German who had come
to their house from England two days before the departure of R. Doane,7
who said he was acquainted with me: I forget what she said was his name:
I do not know who he can be. I walked out with her on the Boulevards: we
went to the Palais and the Jardin des Thuilleries: the garden is nothing
comparable to Kensington Gardens, but the palace is much finer than any
in London. We returned to dinner.

[N] In the morning, walked with Mr. Ensor to the Palais Royal and
breakfasted at one of the Café’s there. As Mr. Ensor had many places to
go to, he hired a laquais de place, and by those means saved me the
expense of a cabriolet. We went first to the Rue du Faubourg St. Martin,
No. 92, the upper part of which house is occupied by M. Say and his
family. Found him at home; sent in my father’s letter of introduction,
saw him and Mme Say who does not understand English, so that I was
obliged to speak always French to her, and commonly also to M. Say. They
were very kind to me, and begged me to stay at their house; I accepted
the offer, Mr. Ensor returning to the Hotel. M. Say said that Mr.
Bentham had written two months ago to tell him that I was coming, but
that he thought I had passed without calling on him. Mme Say told me
that a young German had come to their house from England two days before
the departure of Richard Doane, that he said he was acquainted with me I
did not know him by name. Walked out with Madame Say and Mademoiselle
Octavie; saw the palace and garden of the Thuilleries, the palace much
finer than any I have seen in England, the gardens not so pretty as
Kensington, Kew, or Hampton Court. Returned, dined with M. Say, Mme Say,
M. Horace and Melle Octavie. The floors are sometimes of tiles and
sometimes of polished wood, without any carpet.

May 20

[J] After breakfast, I went out with M. Say to the Louvre: the beauty of
the architecture struck me very much: we inspected the Museum of Antique
Statues etc. The statue which pleased me most was that called the
Fighting Gladiator: I saw Edition: current; Page: [8] some antique
Mosaic pavement: The Belvidere Apollo is no longer there.8 We staid so
long in the Museum that we had no time to see the Gallery of Paintings.
We crossed the Pont des Arts and called on Dr. Swediaur,9 Rue Jacob No
11; we delivered your letter; he told us that a Spanish gentleman10 had
lately come from Montauban, and advised me to see him before taking my
place—At Dr. Swediaur’s we met with Mr. Kinloch, who is at Paris under
the name of Mr. George Smith:11 Dr. S. introduced me to him, and he
himself told me who he was, and asked me to call on him. After leaving
Dr. S. we crossed the Petit Pont and saw the church of Notre Dame: the
architecture I reckon much upon a par with Westminster Abbey, but the
organ is finer—We saw the Ecole des Médecins, which is a large
amphitheatre: and before we returned home we saw the remains of the Bath
attached to the Palace of the Emperor Julian,12 and we traversed the
caves beneath. The same day, I believe, we saw the Halle au Blé, an
immense building, which serves as a corn market, and has a dome larger
than that of the Pantheon at Rome.

[N] In the morning after breakfast went out with M. Say to the Louvre.
The architecture is very fine; we saw the Museum of ancient Statues,
mosaic pavements, etc. Struck with the beauty of the statue of the
Fighting Gladiator, as it is called. Called on Dr. Swediaur, delivered
my father’s letter, the Doctor said he would write an answer tomorrow,
that a Spanish gentleman had come lately from Montauban and that I had
better see him; and that Sir Samuel Bentham and his family13 were going
to Madrid in winter: Saw, at his house, Mr. Kinloch, who was at Paris
under the name of Mr. George Smith; he gave me his card and begged me to
call on him.—We went next to the Cathedral of Notre Dame, which has a
finer organ than that of Westminster Abbey with which in other respects
it is much upon a Edition: current; Page: [9] par. We saw also the
Palais des Thermes, that is, the remains of the emperor Julian’s palace;
the bath is pretty entire; there is underneath a range of caverns which
we traversed; M. Say thinks it probable that there may have been
treasure concealed in those caverns. Saw l’Halle au Blé, a large
building in the form of a rotunda, the diameter greater than that of the
Pantheon at Rome. Saw l’Ecole des Medecins; the students sit in an
amphitheatre; dissection was taking place when we were there. Returned
to M. Say’s house.

May 21, Sunday

[J] It was so hot that I did not go out, but played at battledoor and
shuttlecock with young Alfred. The lower part of the house is occupied
by Mr. Clement a chemist.14 The young Russian who dined with you several
months ago is now studying chemistry with Mr. Clement. In the evening I
went to the Palais Royal, with Mr. Ensor, who had dined at M. Say’s. The
P.R. in the evening, especially when it is a holiday as at present (it
being Pentecost) is much thronged with people, who walk about or drink
coffee in the quadrangle.

[N] Breakfasted with M. and Mme Say, M. Horace, Melle Octavie, young
Alfred Say, Mr. Jackson,15 an English gentleman, and another young man.
Did not go out on account of the heat: conversed with Mr. Jackson,
played at battledoor and shuttlecock with Alfred.—The lower part of the
house is occupied by M. Clement, the celebrated chemist, with his
family: the young Russian who was in England some time ago and who dined
with us is learning chemistry under the tuition of M. Clement.—Dr.
Swediaur came in the evening, and asked me to go with him the next
morning to call on the Spanish gentleman, M. Buron. There was company in
the evening; Mr. Ensor came, and took me with him to the Palais Royal,
which was thronged with people throughout the quadrangle, as it always
is in the evenings of holidays.

May 22

[J] Went with Dr. Swediaur to call on the Spanish gentleman (M. Buron)
he was not at home. We went to the public library, but it was shut on
account of the Pentecost. Among the books belonging to the Librarian who
has the care of the Oriental Manuscripts, he shewed me your history
beautifully bound.16 As it was very hot, I staid at home till the
evening, when I went with Alfred as far as his Pension, and saw the
Chateau d’Eau, a beautiful fountain in the Boulevards.

[N] With Dr. Swediaur to call on M. Buron, who was not at home; Dr. S.
left a note. Went with him to see the public library, but as it was
Pentecost, the library was closed; the guardian of the Oriental
manuscripts has a considerable number of books, chiefly relating to
Oriental nations; he showed me among them my father’s history
beautifully bound. Returned home to M. Say’s house and did not go out
again.

Edition: current; Page: [10]
May 23

[J] I breakfasted with Mr. Ensor, who sent for my passport: I called on
Mr. Kinloch, who gave me a packet for Don Austin de Argueillas from
Major Cartwright17—Mr. Ensor added to it his Population and his Answer
to the Quarterly Reviewers,18 and promised to send them to Dr. Swediaur
who would give them to M. Buron to take with him to Spain—Mr. Kinloch
desired me to thank you for the interest you had taken in his affair.
The man who was sent for the passport returned with word that the
passport could not be obtained without Mr. Ensor’s going in person. Mr.
E. introduced me to Col. Young.19 I went with Mr. E. Col. Y. and three
ladies to see the Luxembourg: the garden was very pretty as well as the
gallery of paintings; the paintings which pleased me most were, a
picture by David, of Leonidas and the Spartans at Thermopylae;20 and
another of the Queen of France giving liberty to slaves, so delicately
done as to resemble a miniature.21 I returned home to dinner. After
dinner M. Buron called: he said that Sir S. Bentham and Miss Clara were
at Montpellier and that the whole family was going to Madrid in winter—I
went with M. Say to Rue Salle au Comte and executed the commission of
Miss Brown: he then shewed me the Halle aux Innocens, an immense market,
or rather a suite of markets, much like Covent Garden and Billingsgate
joined into one: Even in the evening, when I saw it, I can safely say it
was the most dirty, noisy, and crowded place in Paris—In one part of it
is the Fontaine des Innocens, a very handsome fountain—I saw the street
where Henri Quatre was stabbed by Ravaillac.22 We then took my place in
the Diligence for Saturday next.

[N] Breakfasted with Mr. Ensor, who sent for my passport; called on Mr.
Kinloch, who gave me a packet from Major Cartwright to Don Austin de
Argueillas, which I left with Mr. Edition: current; Page: [11] Ensor,
who added to it his book on population and his answer to the Quarterly
Reviewers, and promised to send it to Dr. Swediaur for M. Buron. Could
not obtain passport without Mr. Ensor’s going to procure it. With Mr.
Ensor, Col. Young, and three ladies to see the Luxembourg; the palace
and gardens are exceedingly pretty; the gallery of pictures was
magnificent; I admired chiefly a painting by David of Leonidas and the
Spartans at Thermopylae, and another, I forget by whom, in the miniature
stile, of the queen of France giving liberty to slaves. Returned home to
dinner; after dinner M. Buron called, and said that Sir Samuel Bentham
and Miss Clara were at Montpellier, but the remaining part of the family
at Pompignan,23 and that it was intended that they should all go to
Madrid in winter.—Went with M. Say to the Rue Salle au Comte, and
discharged Miss Brown’s commission; saw the Fontaine des Innocens, and
the Halle of the same name, which can only be compared to Covent Garden
and Billingsgate joined together. Saw the street where Henry IV was
killed. Took place in the diligence for Grizolles for the 27th.—With M.
Say to make a call, saw M. Destutt-Tracy author of the Idéologie.24

May 24

[J] I wrote to Lady Bentham to tell her when to expect me—After
breakfast I went into a cabriolet to Arcueil, and delivered Mr.
Bentham’s paper to Count Berthollet.25 I saw Madame Berthollet26—she
shewed me her garden, which was very beautiful—They begged me to call on
them at my return, and (as I have since learned) I am to meet La Place
at their house.27 In coming from Arcueil I called on Mr. Ensor, who was
not at home. In returning I digested the matter for the first part of a
second dialogue as a sequel to yours; and after returning home, I wrote
a few pages.28

[N] Wrote to Lady Bentham to tell her when she might expect me. After
breakfast went in a cabriolet to Arcueil—M. and Mme Berthollet were very
kind to me, and shewed me their pleasure grounds, which are very pretty.
Left Mr. Bentham’s paper on the preservation of grain with M.
Berthollet; they begged me to go to see them on my return.—Called on Mr.
Ensor who was not at home. Returned to M. Say’s house. Began to write
the skeleton of a dialogue in continuation of my father’s dialogue on
government.

Edition: current; Page: [12]
May 25

[J] Mr. Ensor sent my passport. I could not go out on account of the
rain: but I set about my dialogue in good earnest, and brought the
subject to a conclusion: but I think several additions will be required.
In the evening I went out to tea with M. Say and Madame Say.

[N] Mr. Ensor sent my passport: Could not go out on account of the rain.
M. Horace and Melle Octavie dined out; M. and Mme Say and myself went to
the same place to tea. This day, finished outline of dialogue.

May 26

[J] It rained in the morning: I afterwards called on Mr. Ensor, but he
was from home: I went to the public library, which is immense; and any
one may read any book he pleases while he remains in the house, or, if
known there, he may take it home with him. There are two immense globes.
I also saw a large orrery, and a piece of rock, on which was cut out a
facsimile of the pyramids of Egypt and the country round. In a Cabinet
adjoining are several curiosities, but that which pleased me most was a
suit of ancient armour. From the Library I went to the Jardin des
Plantes where I saw the Cabinet d’Histoire Naturelle, a complete
collection of shells, fossils, minerals, stuffed beasts, birds, fishes,
insects, serpents, etc. of all descriptions. In the Jardin is also a
Menagerie of wild beasts, which I saw, and also of tame ones, which I
did not see. From this place I went to the Rue d’Enfer, where I received
the paper which I had left with M. Berthollet, and a letter of Mme B. to
Lady Bentham. I saw also the Pantheon, as much as possible, but as the
Guardien was not there, I could not see much of the building: I saw
however the stile of the architecture. I returned home in a cabriolet.

[N] Rain in the morning; went to Mr. Ensor’s; he was from home; saw the
immense public library. Besides the number of books, there were several
other things worthy of notice: particularly, two globes of such a size
as to require two stories to contain them; an orrery; a petra as it was
called of the pyramids of Egypt, which seems to be a model in rock of
the country round; and a cabinet, where among other curiosities there
was a suit of ancient armour.—To the Jardin des Plantes: saw the Cabinet
de l’Histoire Naturelle; animals of all descriptions, fossils, minerals,
and shells, without number. Saw the Ménagerie des Animaux Feroces;—to
the Pantheon, saw the architecture, the style is noble and light—to the
Rue d’Enfer, received back Mr. Bentham’s paper from Monsieur and Madame
Berthollet with a letter from the latter to Lady Bentham; returned home
in a cabriolet.

May 27

[J] In the morning, I packed up—I went after breakfast to Mr. Ensor and
took my leave of him. Afterwards I saw M. Buron, who gave me a packet
for Mme Buron at Montauban. I had an early dinner and set off at 2 P.M.
in the cabriolet of Edition: current; Page: [13] the diligence.29 We had
chosen the cabriolet, thinking the interior would be too hot: but I had
reason to repent of my choice on account of the inferiority of the
company. We passed through Longjumeau, the place where one of the mock
treaties with the Hugenots was signed.30 I observed that the country
south of Paris was inclosed in many parts, which Picardy is not. We
supped at Etampes. After travelling all night, in the morning of
[continues in the entry for 28 May]

[N] Packed up; to Mr. Ensor’s to take leave of him; saw M. Buron and
received from him a letter to his wife at Montauban. Set off in the
cabriolet of the diligence at two o’clock in the afternoon.

—Paris is situated on the banks of the Seine, a little below the
junction of that river with the Marne. It is built on no regular plan,
many of the principal streets are both narrow and dirty. In the heart of
the city lie the two islands of Notre Dame and of St. Louis, the former
of which formed the ancient Lutetia. The city is surrounded by a large
street, with footpaths, and rows of trees on both sides, which forms the
great promenade of the city. On the west side, however, this street is
interrupted by the Jardin des Thuilleries. This street is called the
Boulevards; in one part of it is a beautiful fountain called le Château
d’Eau. Without this street lies that part of the town called the
Faubourg’s, (though in truth all south of the river is also Faubourgs).
The whole is surrounded by the Nouvelle Enceinte, in which there is a
gate or barrière corresponding, I believe, to each faubourg. The
faubourgs are by much the pleasantest and cleanest part of the town.
There are in the Boulevards some triumphal arches, called Portes, mostly
in honour of the victories of Louis XIV.31—With the exception of the
Bridges, the Quais, and the Boulevards, there are few streets which
possess a separate footpath. This renders walking in the streets as well
dangerous as dirty. The principal streets are the Rue St. Honoré and the
Rue St. Antoine, which form a continued line east and west, the Rue St.
Denis and the street which continues it, north and south. Parallel to
the two last runs the Rue St. Martin and its continuation the Rue St.
Jacques. M. Say’s house stands in a passage from that part of the former
which passes through the Faubourg St. Martin. The most centrical street
for almost all which is worth seeing at Paris is the Rue de Richelieu
parallel to the Rue Vivienne where Mr. Ensor lodges. There are many
arcades in the city, but chiefly in the Palais Royal. That which bears
the greatest resemblance to Burlington Arcade is the Passage des
Panoramas. The Places are either squares or triangles, or indeed of any
shape whatever. The two prettiest are the Place Vendôme, where there is
a pillar descriptive of Napoleon’s victories,32 and the Place de Louis
XV, between the Jardin des Thuilleries and the Champs Elisées, where the
statue of Edition: current; Page: [14] Napoleon is pulled down, and they
are now replacing that of Louis XV.33—Attempts have been made to light
the streets with gas, but on account of the dearness of coals compared
with oil, and the difficulty of finding a market for coke, this project
has failed. The streets are now lighted with oil; each lamp has large
metal reflectors, and is suspended over the street; when they wish to
light it they let it down by ropes. The French number the houses of
their streets differently from us; the even numbers are all on one side
and the odd numbers on the other, so that we can directly know on which
side to find the number we seek. The post horses are wretched and
halfstarved: the private ones seem generally good. The hackney carriages
are of two kinds; the fiacre, which resembles the English hackney coach
and the cabriolet, which is a clumsy gig with a cover. This last, as it
is less expensive than the former, having but one horse, and the vehicle
itself being less costly, is very convenient for a single person. The
drivers pay every day a fixed sum to the owners of the vehicle; all the
surplus belongs to themselves.

—It is commonly said that the French are an idle people; this I do not
think true, as I have never seen the labouring people sauntering about
in time of work (though it is true I have seen plenty of beggars.) They
only make themselves merry, and danse, on the jours de fête, which are
pretty numerous in this country; and they do not work for so many hours
a day as English labourers.—There is a severe censure on the daily
press;34 so that truth can come before the public only through the
speeches of the deputies. M. Say has shewn me a plan of the chamber of
deputies, in which is pointed out the place habitually occupied by each
member. The liberals are to the left, the ultras to the right, the
ministerialists in the middle, and the trimmers and waverers in the
intermediate spaces. The charter granted by Louis on his restoration35
is daily violated; at present a question is on the carpet with respect
to the electoral suffrage.36 At present every one is entitled to a vote
who pays 300 francs per annum of direct taxes: the ministers wish to
make some alteration in the law; the import of the proposed law I do not
yet know, but it is for the advantage of the rich; the ultras quarrel
with the ministers for making too small an alteration; the liberals, for
making any alteration Edition: current; Page: [15] at all.—The
institutions for education are all essentially in the power of
government; for although the pensions or boarding schools are individual
establishments, yet the government has the watch over them and can
prevent any thing from being taught there more than they please.37

—We left Paris by the barrière d’Enfer, and drove over a spacious plain
without any thing very remarkable. We passed through Longjumeau, leaving
Arcueil to the left, and in the evening arrived at Etampes, a pretty
town, not very large, population 7,000 inhabitants. The country south of
Paris is much more inclosed than in the north. As far as Orleans, the
road is paved. (N.B. This diligence, unlike the former, has four
wheels.) We supped at Etampes, and travelled all night.

May 28

[J] we arrived at Orleans. Here I saw the statue of Joan of Arques.38 A
marchand de boeuf, with the largest belly I ever saw in my life, who was
continually smoking tobacco, got here into the cabriolet: you may
imagine how I was annoyed. We had a dejeuner, that is to say, a dinner,
at Noan,39 a little place beyond Orleans. At Massay we got out for the
night, and had an excellent supper, that is, another dinner still more
sumptuous than the first, and excellent beds, very cheap.

[N] In the morning we arrived at Orleans, but did not breakfast there; I
walked a little about the town. Orleans, chef lieu of the Loiret, is one
of the largest towns in France; it is well built, and situate on the
right bank of the Loire. A statue of Jeanne d’Arques has been erected in
the great market place. It is a manufacturing town, and contains 42,000
inhabitants. On leaving Orleans we pass over a very pretty bridge on the
Loire. A troublesome fat marchand de boeuf, who was perpetually smoking
tobacco, mounted the diligence here, and as he sat in the cabriolet. I
was not a little incommoded by his smoking.—Hereafter if I travel in a
diligence I will always go inside on account of the superiority of the
company. We crossed the little river Loiret, which though a very small
stream, gives nevertheless its name to the department; we crossed also,
I believe, the Cossan40 at la Ferté Senneterre, the road presents
nothing remarkable; we crossed the Beuvron at la Motte-Beuvron, and
arrived at the village of Nouan-le-Fuselier, where we had a dejeûner à
la fourchette, and walked on for some distance before the diligence. We
passed the Saudre near Salbris, and arrived at Vierzon. This town
situate on the Cher, a considerable river, which, like those I have
mentioned, throws itself into the Loire, is Edition: current; Page: [16]
chiefly remarkable for the great number of islands and bridges which we
are obliged to cross in passing through it. We proceeded to Massay, a
little village where we got out for the night. The company inside the
diligence was excellent, particularly M. Longayrou, a very agreeable
young gentleman who speaks English very passably. There were besides
four gentlemen, one of them with his daughter. We supped at Massay, and
had excellent beds.

May 29

[J] We set off at 2 in the morning, and breakfasted at Chateauroux on
coffee and toast: those who pleased had chocolate. We dined at a little
place called Beaumondai. The country has nothing remarkable in these
parts; it is said to be among the most unpleasant in France. We
travelled all night.

[N] Set off at two in the morning, and arrived about eight at
Châteauroux, chef lieu of the Indre, and situate on the river of that
name. The population is 8,000 inhabitants. The town did not appear to me
very pretty; I saw it however to little advantage, the morning being
rainy. We breakfasted here more à l’Anglaise than à la Française, as we
had nothing but very good coffee, and very bad toast. Passed through an
uninteresting country, full of woods and ponds, to Argenton on the
Creuse. We dined at a place called Beaumondai, but I cannot find this
place in the Itineraire.41 Argenton is prettier than Châteauroux; it is
a considerable town. We passed the Creuse, and travelled all night,
crossing the river Gartempe at Bessines.

May 30

[J] I breakfasted at Limoges with a good natured gentleman from the
interior of the carriage: the marchand de boeuf having left us; although
but two places were vacant, these were speedily filled by a lady, with a
boy, a dog, and a very dirty fille, having an eruption in her face,
which you may suppose did not smell the most agreeably in the world—Some
time after I walked 2½ leagues before the diligence. We supped at
Uzerches, and travelled all night.

[N] Arrived in the morning at Limoges, chef lieu of the Haute Vienne,
and situate on the river Vienne from which the department takes its
name. Limoges is a very dirty town, and by no means pretty; it is very
large, and contains no fewer than 21,000 inhabitants. I breakfasted here
with a very good-natured gentleman from the interior of the diligence.
The marchand de boeuf descended here for good and all, but the two
places did not remain long vacant, being filled immediately by a lady,
with a dirty fille, a boy, and a dog; the fille had an eruption on her
face, which made my place none of the pleasantest, particularly on
account of the smell. Passed through a country extremely mountainous,
producing scarcely any thing except chestnuts. On account of the
hilliness, the road takes many windings, so much so that the length is
at least tripled, and I am firmly of opinion that Richard Doane was
right when he said that the distance from Paris to Toulouse is 600
miles. This part of France is not very populous. I walked once during
the day two leagues and a half before the diligence. Late in the evening
we arrived at Uzerche, a town situate on a rock close to the Edition:
current; Page: [17] river Vezere, which we crossed. Here we supped; and
after supper we mounted an extremely steep hill. We travelled all night.

May 31

[J] I breakfasted with the same gentleman as before at Brives la
Gaillard. The country here is very pleasant. At Cresansac, a young
attorney leaving the diligence, I took my place in the interior, as it
was my right, because I had the first place in the cabriolet. But I
found this lady claimed the place, and the conducteur, who took her
part, wanted to force me to quit my seat in the inside, but without
effect, as I maintained my right and was supported by the gentlemen in
the coach. They at last referred the business to the maire, who decided
it in my favour, the young avocat pleading my cause. The company in the
diligence was very pleasant, particularly M. Longayrou, an agreeable
young man, who speaks English by no means badly. The country from
Limoges to Cahors produces scarcely any thing but chestnuts; it is so
mountainous that the road is forced to turn and wind so much to avoid
the hills, that its length, I think, is at least tripled. After passing
Souillac, the diligence was ferried over the river Dordogne and
proceeded to Peyrac, where we slept.

[N] In the morning, found ourselves in an extremely beautiful country,
not so mountainous as before: walked on with M. Longayrou and another
gentleman to some distance; arrived at Brives, a pretty little town, on
the Corrèze, population 5,900 inhabitants, the country round it very
fertile. I breakfasted here with the same gentleman with whom I had
breakfasted at Limoges: walked on to a considerable distance through a
very mountainous and picturesque country. We went on to the beautiful
village of Noailles, where I got out again, and walked to
Reigeade-de-Nepouls, situate on a hill. We arrived soon after at
Cressansac, a little village on another hill. Here a young avocat left
the diligence, upon which, having the first place in the cabriolet, I
availed myself of my right to take the vacant place in the interior.
This, however, I soon perceived to be disputed by the lady in the
cabriolet, whose part was taken by the conducteur of the diligence. He
endeavoured to force me to descend but ineffectually, as I maintained my
right, and was supported by all the gentlemen in the coach; at last the
case was referred to the maire, who decided the question in my favour,
the avocat pleading my cause. Accordingly I remained in the coach. I
afterwards found that the lady wanted the place for the fille, on
account of her eruption; had I known this I should have yielded. We
arrived soon after, having made a very steep descent, at Souillac, near
the banks of the great river Dordogne. This town is extremely pretty; it
is situate in the valley of the Dordogne between two great mountains. On
leaving Souillac, we were ferried over the river in a large ferryboat,
there being no bridge, though they are now building one. We then mounted
the longest hill I have ever yet known, we were three quarters of an
hour in mounting; after passing through as mountainous a country as
before we arrived at Peyrac, where we dined and slept.

June 1

[J] Having set off at 2 o’clock, we arrived at Cahors to a dejeuner à la
fourchette at 11. Cahors is a very pretty place. We crossed the river
Lot; the country here becomes very fertile and pleasant: tobacco is
grown near Cahors. We passed Edition: current; Page: [18] through
Caussade, crossed the river Aveiron, and arrived at Montauban about 8
o’clock. I went immediately to Mme Buron’s, where I supped. She gave me
a packet for Sir S.B. I arrived at Pompignan about 2 in the morning
w[here M.] George and the servants were waiting [for me.]

N.B. Do not write till you hear from me again, because we leave
Pompignan in a few day[s]. I have no room to write more. I remain

Your affectionate Son

John Mill

[N] Rose at two in the morning and set off by the diligence, passed
through very mountainous country, making as before continual circuits
round hills. The morning was very fine. We arrived at Cahors, chef lieu
of the Lot, celebrated for its wines; it is a very large town,
containing 11,000 inhabitants; it has a pretty promenade, and is on the
whole a very pretty town. Near it are many Roman antiquities. In the
neighbourhood tobacco is grown with considerable success, though very
liable to be destroyed by the frequent hail-storms of this
neighbourhood. Tobacco is not permitted to be grown everywhere, and the
police-generale have made but an indifferent choice of ground for
permitting it, since, if they had chosen the Haut-Languedoc instead of
Quercy, the crops would not have been so frequently destroyed by hail.
It is not permitted for an unauthorized individual to have in his garden
more than three tobacco plants of each species.—We breakfasted at
Cahors, and in leaving that town, we passed the Lot by a very pretty
bridge. The country becomes here much less mountainous, and extremely
fertile. Vines are cultivated with very good success, and it is fertile
also in corn. About two in the afternoon we arrived at Caussade, a
pretty little town; soon after we crossed the Avéiron at Roussels; and
about 8 o’clock arrived at Montauban, chef lieu of the Tarn et Garonne,
a handsome town and very large, much better paved than the greater part
of the towns I have seen since leaving Paris; it has a great commerce by
vessels which, sailing down the Tarn, descend the Garonne to the
Atlantic, or ascend it as far as Toulouse, and then proceed by the Canal
of Languedoc to the Mediterranean, or vice-versâ. The river Tarn, on
which it is situate, has its waters sometimes almost as red as blood,
from the red clay which constitutes the banks, and the bottom. The
population of Montauban is 23,436 inhabitants. I supped with Mme Buron,
to whom I delivered the packet. On leaving the town we crossed the river
and turning to the left we passed through the Faubourg Villebourbon and
skirted the river to some distance. Here we entered the spacious and
beautiful plain of the Garonne, for its fertility and the variety of
cultivation, said to be one of the finest in Europe. We passed through
Canals, a pretty village, and Grizolles, but as it was late at night I
could see very little. Found Mr. George and the servants waiting at
Pompignan. Took leave of M. Longayrou, who promised to write to me;
found all the family at the Château; went to bed immediately on my
arrival.

John Mill

Mill, John

June 16, 1820

Pompignan

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2
Pompignan

,
June 16, 1820

My dear Father,

As I thought it best to write to you as soon as I knew where we were
going, I have filled up half the sheet with my observations, and a few
lines to Richard. We go to Rue St. Anne, Numero deux, à Toulouse: where
we shall remain until terms are Edition: current; Page: [19] agreed upon
with regard to some estate in the South, and till Madame de Chesnel is
in a condition to be removed to such a distance.1 Sir Samuel and Lady
Bentham, Madame de Chesnel, and Miss Clara, leave Pompignan next Monday:
the rest of us remain for a few days longer. I hope my mother, James and
my sisters are very well, as well as my grandmother, etc. and that the
scholars all make good progress.2 You will see the journal I have kept,
which is a continuation of that of my journey.

June 2

[J] Breakfasted with the family—delivered the things I had for them—Took
a pleasant walk with Sir S. and Lady Bentham. After dinner wrote to my
father—Drank tea with Mr. George and the young ladies—Finished letter.

June 3

[J] Before breakfast went with Mr. George to Toulouse in a sort of
sledge to see the procession of the Fête Dieu which is
tomorrow—Breakfasted with Dr. Russell, an English gentleman living at
Toulouse3—Walked a great deal about the town with Mr. G. who had a great
many bills to pay—Called on Mr. Du Camp,4 professor of Rhetoric (I
believe) or some such thing, in an Ecole—Called on a very good dancing
master, but he was not at home—Dined at Dr. Russell’s house. Went to the
theatre5—I understood a good deal—Slept at the Hotel des Princes.

June 4

[J] Went to the Cathedral and saw it, but were too early for the Messe
Militaire. Breakfasted with Gen. Partineaux, general of the division.6
Saw the procession pass three times—It consists of the military bands,
many little children dressed as angels, a great many Abbés with about
300 boys and very young men who were Edition: current; Page: [20]
intended for priests—The hoste as usual carried in procession under a
canopy, and all the civil and military authorities of the town. It was
very amusing. The crowd was immense. The bands were very pretty. We
dined with Dr. Russell where we continued till it was time to return to
our Hotel for the night.

June 5

[J] Returned to Pompignan and breakfasted with the family. Completed
with Mr. George the catalogue of books. Began, by his advice, to read
Millot.7 After dinner saw the Marquis and Madame de Pompignan8—Walked
out with Sir S.B. Lady B. Mr. G. and the young ladies in the park.

June 6

[J] Got up early, went into the library, read some of Lucian,9 of
Millot, which Mr. George advised me to read—learnt a French fable by
rote10—Packed up the books, with Mr. G.

June 7

[J] Learnt a very long fable—Wrote over again with many improvements, my
Dialogue, part 1. Mr. G. and Sir S.B. went to Toulouse, and did not
return till 8 o’clock.

June 8

[J] Arranged with Mr. G. the books of M. de Pompignan. Wrote some of
Dialogue—learnt a very long Fable by heart—Resolved some problems of
West11—did French exercises.

June 9

[J] Breakfasted early and went with Sir S.B. and Mr. G. in the carriage
to Montauban, took a volume of Racine in my pocket, and read two
plays12—Called on a gentleman called M. Rousse, (I believe)—Paid a visit
to M. Cambronaro, an Edition: current; Page: [21] emigrant Spaniard,13
with whom I conversed a great deal—Returned home, and read a comedy of
Voltaire.14

June 10

[J] Before breakfast, learnt another Fable and read some of
Virgil15—After breakfast, wrote some of my dialogue, and some French
exercises—Wrote some of the Differential Calculus—Read a tragedy of
Corneille.16 Called on Mme de Pompignan.

June 11

[J] Learnt another Fable—Finished my Dialogue. If good for nothing
beside, it is good as an exercise to my reasoning powers as well as to
my invention: both which it has tried extremely. Wrote some French
exercises. Began to learn an extremely long Fable. Read a comedy of
Molière, and after dinner a tragedy of Voltaire—Took a short walk by
myself out of the pleasure grounds.

June 12

[J] Rose very early: Sir S.B. and Mr. G. went in the carriage to
Toulouse. Before breakfast, I wrote some French exercises; read some of
Lucian’s “Hermotimus”17—Revised part of my dialogue—After breakfast went
with the domestique Piertot to see his Metairie and his little piece of
land and help him to gather cherries—He expresses great fondness for
Richard, as indeed there is no one in the house who does not. He
insisted on my eating something, which I was compelled at last to do,
and I assure you it pleased him greatly. After returning, I finished
learning the long Fable. (You have, I dare say, observed that I have not
applied myself much to Mathematics as yet: in this you will say I am
right when I tell you that the greater part of Sir S.B.’s books, indeed
all except two or three, are packed up, not to be unpacked till we
arrive at the house near Montpellier, if any such be taken: and as this
may not be, perhaps, for two or three months, I thought it better to
apply myself more to French reading for the short time we shall be here,
while I have the use of M. de Pompignan’s books.) Read another tragedy
of Racine. Took a walk by myself after dinner.

Edition: current; Page: [22]
June 13

[J] Before breakfast, packed up with Mr. George the maps of the
departments; after breakfast, wrote French exercises. Read Voltaire and
Molière. I read plays chiefly by the advice of Mr. George and of Lady
Bentham, who say that dialogues are better to be read, on account of
their giving the 1st and 2nd person of the verbs, and for many other
reasons. After dinner, I took a very long walk by myself in the hills
behind Pompignan and Grizolles, towards Fronton. After my return I fell
in with the Garde Champêtre, who is very talkative: he soon gave me the
whole account of himself and his office: he pretended that his district
extended for 40 leagues, while it extends for no more than 2 or 3. The
weather is now becoming rather warmer; hitherto it has been very cold
for this climate and season.

June 14

[J] Could not get into the library, before breakfast, the door being
locked—Walked about in the pleasure grounds. After breakfast went with
Mr. G. and Miss Sarah to the kitchen-garden, and thence, we walked about
the pleasure grounds—Came in and wrote French exercises; began to learn
the departments of France, read Lucian.

June 15

[J] Got up early, wrote a great many French exercises, began to write my
Livre Statistique, consisting of the Departments of France with their
chefs lieux, the rivers with the departments through which they flow,
and the population of each department, etc. etc. Learnt by heart the
departments with their capital towns. In consequence of a conversation
with Lady B. she recommended to me to read such parts as she should
point out of the Code Napoleon.18 Accordingly I read some part, taking
notes carefully. Compared the arrangement of M. de Pompignan’s books
with the catalogue. Dr. Russell, Mrs. Russell, and one of their sons,
(about Clara’s age, or between her’s and Willie’s) came to dinner. I
walked about the grounds with young Russell, before and after dinner.
Wrote a note to M. Say in French, as a parcel was going.

June 16

[J] Rose early, walked out, read a tragedy of Voltaire. There has been a
mad dog in the neighbourhood, who bit a great number of persons: This
morning a poor old man, of the age of 97 years, came for a remedy for
the bite: Dr. R. cautorized well the wound. This day Mr. G. was absent
at Toulouse. After breakfast, took a little walk with young Mr. Russell:
who left Pompignan with his father and mother at 12 o’clock. Went to the
library: read something more of the Code Napoleon: wrote the Edition:
current; Page: [23] first page and the concluding part of this letter.
Read some of Virgil; wrote French exercises:19

politics

I suppose you know as much about the present state of French politics.
The chief political question which has been lately considered is that of
the Law of Elections.20 Formerly there was but one single election at
the chef lieu of each department, and all were allowed to vote who paid
300 francs of direct taxes. Now after many continued and most furious
discussions, a new law has been carried by the ministry which makes the
elections to take place at the chefs lieux of the separate
arrondissemens of each department, and which gives persons of a much
greater estimated income, I do not know the exact number of francs, a
vote, I believe, still at the chef lieu of the department in some manner
so that they are insured of having the choice of one fourth of the
chamber of deputies. This law has passed, I fancy, by a compromise of
some sort, for when a preliminary question was put to the vote, all the
members except four being present, the numbers were exactly equal, when
as the sentence of the assembly was about to be decided by the casting
vote of the president,21 M. Chauvelin,22 (who was sick) was carried into
the house, and turned the balance on the side of the Liberaux. From this
result every one expected that, not only the law would be rejected, but
there would be a partial change of ministry: the law was nevertheless
passed by a majority of more than 150, as I believe. M. Chauvelin is
since dead.

This discussion has been probably of use to the people, as, on account
of the severe censure on the daily press, the speeches of the deputies
are the only mediums by which the people can get a glimpse of the truth.

The event of this affair has produced great riots at Paris,23 and the
gendarmerie was called out. One life has certainly been lost: and more,
as I have been told. On account of some symptoms of the same design at
Toulouse, horse patroles were placed in the streets at night. All this
was magnified by a courier who passed through Pompignan on the 13th, who
said that a dozen deputies had been asassinated and that the people were
all in alarm at Toulouse, the gates were shut, and two regiments of
infantry with one of horse artillery were placed under arms in the Place
du Capitol, the grand square of the town. All this we found on Dr.
Russell’s arrival to be perfectly false.

Election, as well as vote in the chambre des deputés, is by ballot.24

I suppose you know that Louvel is condemned to death.25 From all that
appears on the trial the act seems to be what it has appeared from the
beginning, an insulated act of political Edition: current; Page: [24]
fanaticism, no other persons having the slightest connexion with the
affair. Perhaps you are not acquainted with an anecdote which serves to
shew the bigotry of the priests.26 When the duc de Berri was stabbed,
the curé was sent for to give him extreme unction: but he refused to do
so, thinking it irreligious to go to so unhallowed a place as a theatre
for such a sacred purpose. Another curé had the same scruples of
conscience: upon which the king sent himself to the archbishop begging
him to authorise the curé to perform this function in the theatre. This
he for a long time refused to do, but at last consented on condition
that there should never be again performance in that theatre: which
accordingly there has not been since that time.

You are, I dare say, aware of the circumstances which attended the
execution of Sand, the assassin of Kotzebue.27 He was, it seems,
compelled to promise that he would not address the people: and when
about to do so, he was put in mind of his promise, and desisted. This
was, I daresay, in the English papers.

The local authorities in a provincial town, as in Toulouse, are very
numerous. The civil ones are chiefly the maire, who superintends the
local affairs of the town, and the préfet, who superintends those of the
department. The maire also determines all petty disputes between the
inhabitants. Besides these there are the courts of justice. At Toulouse,
the military authorities are, the general of the division with his
aid-de-camp, the general of the department, with his aid-de-camp, the
colonels of five regiments (among whom the Marquis de Chesnel is one)28
and several others whom I know nothing of.

education

Much on this subject I have not yet been able to learn: what I know is
only that all, or almost all, the institutions for education, are under
the controul of government: for even in the individual establishments
nothing can be taught which displeases government.

population statistics

France seems upon the whole much less populous than England. Near
Toulouse the population is greater than I have seen it elsewhere: the
number of villages is much greater than is common in some parts of
France. On account of the law of inheritance in France,29 which compels
every one to divide his land, with the exception of a certain portion,
among his children, is the cause why the division of landed property is
carried very far here: each peasant has his piece of land: Pierrotou the
domestique has his piece, as well as his neighbours: he has likewise a
metairie belonging to M. de Pompignan. The peasants have Edition:
current; Page: [25] neither knowledge; nor capital sufficient to
introduce any good system of cultivation. Notwithstanding the number of
small proprietors, there is a gentleman in Languedoc near Montpellier
who has 35,000 francs per annum by apples alone: besides what he may
have by anything else.

Every departement is divided into arrondissements, and every
arrondissement into communes. We are here in the Departement de Tarn et
Garonne, arrondissement de Castel-Sarrazin, and commune de Pompignan.
For each commune there is a sort of police officer, called the Garde
Champêtre.

As yet, this is all I have learnt.30

John Mill

Mill, John

June 24th, 1820

Pompignan

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3
Pompignan

,
June 24th, 1820

My dear Father,

You see we are still here, but you will see from the journal that we
shall not now be here long. All the observations I have made since my
last letter you will find interspersed in the journal. In my last letter
I told you where to direct your letters; I shall be expecting one almost
as soon as I arrive, since it is now more than a month since I left
England, and I dare say something must have happened worthy of notice.
We hear a great deal here of the Queen of England;1 I suppose if she is
tried Edition: current; Page: [26] there will be as much disturbance as
we have had about the Election law. Give my love to my mother, James, my
sisters, my grandmother, aunts, uncles etc. when you see them.2

June 17

[J] Lay in bed late, not knowing the hour. After breakfast went into the
library, wrote French exercises. Mr. George as usual was occupied in
packing. Madame de Chesnel had shewn me last night Legendre’s Geometry:3
I began this morning to read a portion with the intention of learning
the French mathematical terms. Read some of Lucian. Performed an
investigation of the Differential Calculus. Took a short walk out of the
grounds. After returning dined. Then read a tragedy of Corneille.

June 18

[J] Rose early: wrote French exercises, read part of a tragedy of
Voltaire, walked out in the pleasure grounds. Today being the last
Sunday we remain here, it was a fête for the peasants, who danced in the
pleasure grounds before the house. After breakfast, finished exercises:
walked out in the grounds with Mr. G. and Miss Sarah, as Sir S. and Lady
B. with Miss Clara, had gone to Castelnau, a little village on the road
to Toulouse. Received from Mr. George a lesson of botany. Wrote out
fairly my accounts, which I may as well send you at present. Mr. Ensor
is a sufficient witness as to the mode of disbursing the money until we
arrived at Paris: I have therefore only kept account of what succeeded
my arrival there. You will see the amazing cheapness of provisions in
the South of France by reading my accounts, especially when I tell you
the suppers, being at the table d’hôte, were most sumptuous.

_francs_
_centimes_
Advance of money for place in the diligence,
35
00
Cabriolet to and from Arcueil,
4
75
Cabriolet from the Rue de Voltaire to the Porte St. Martin,
2
00
To fille de chambre at M. Say’s house,
3
50
Extraordinary at Paris,
0
20
Remaining for place to Grizolles,
34
60
Paid for baggage,
32
60
Fiacre to the Messageries Royales,
1
80
To two porters,
1
70
Supper at Etampes,
3
50
Dinner at Noan,
2
15
Postillions to Massay,
1
25
Supper and bed at Massay,
3
70
Breakfast at Chateauroux,
1
20
Postillions to Beaumondai.
0
75
128
70
Dinner at Beaumondai,
3
20
Breakfast at Limoges,
2
20
Supper at Uzerches,
3
10
Breakfast at Brives la Gaillard,
0
75
Ferry over the river Dordogne,
0
10
Supper and bed at Peyrac,
3
65
Postillions to Peyrac,
0
50
Breakfast at Cahors,
2
50
Conducteur.
5
75
19
75
128
70
148
45
Recd of Mr. Ensor
166
90
Remain
18
45

After dinner, saw the peasants’ dance, which was nothing except each man
and each woman dancing backwards and forwards, with steps of their own
composing. Madame de Pompignan, with her son4 and the curé, came in the
evening and remained some time. Her husband the Marquis we have not
seen, as he is at Paris, very indisposed.

June 19

[J] Rose early: Mr. George went to Toulouse, with an intention however
of returning in the evening. Before breakfast finished the “Hermotimus”
of Lucian; also finished the tragedy I had yesterday begun; wrote French
exercises. After breakfast, assisted Miss Sarah and Sir S.B. in moving
their things and putting them in the vehicles. Sir S.B. Lady B. Madame
de Chesnel and Miss Clara set off for good and all to Toulouse, leaving
the house without any inhabitants except myself, Miss Sarah and Mr.
George, who did not return till the evening; together with some of the
servants. I went, by the desire of Lady Bentham, in the carriage with
Miss Clara for a small portion of the way, until the other passengers
mounted. I then walked home and found the doors locked, which put me at
my shifts to get in: at last, however, I found the means of opening a
window of the dining room, which, though fastened on the inside, had
been left a little ajar. Went to the library; Edition: current; Page:
[28] read another Tragedy of Voltaire. Dined with Miss Sarah; after
dinner Mdme de Pompignan and her son came, and took Miss Sarah home with
them. I was thus wholly alone: it rained and I could not go out: I read
part of an article in the Annales de Chimie.

June 20

[J] Breakfasted early, packed up my trunk, assisted as much as I could
Mr. George and Miss Sarah, read a comedy of Voltaire. Mme de Pompignan
came in the morning, and looked over the windows of the house with Mr.
George. After dinner Mr. G. and Miss Sarah went to call on Mdme de
Pompignan and did not return till late. I learnt that instead of
departing on the 21st we could not go till the 23rd, on which I resolved
to unpack some of my books.

June 21

[J] Learnt this morning that my trunk must go today, and that therefore
I must take out my sac de nuit, which happened to be at the very bottom
of my trunk; so that I was obliged to unpack every thing and to pack
over again. Took out however the French dictionary. The confusion at
present in the house is very great, the pieces of furniture piled over
each other; nothing is going forward except packing and sending off.
There can be no regularity at present in any thing.—Read a comedy by
Regnard,5 and several other things—indeed I was reading French almost
all day, as it was raining most of the time, and my books were all
packed up. After all my trunk did not go today as Mr. George thought it
best to send first all those packages which were not to be opened at
Toulouse, and which therefore are not to go to the Apartement, Rue St.
Anne, but to a Magazin. I understand however that it would certainly be
sent tomorrow. In the evening I removed every thing of mine out of the
library, as I was told it was to be locked up. Miss Sarah was employed
in the evening about rubbing the library floor with a sort of mixture
consisting of ochre and wax dissolved in some kind of liquid consisting
of ashes and some ingredients which I know not: Mr. George was employed
in packing and sending off the packages: as for me I was always either
assisting him or walking out.

June 22

[J] Slept till after nine o’clock,—I do not know for what reason, for I
usually wake very early: Breakfasted, walked a little, learnt that my
trunk was not to go till tomorrow morning early; no one can tell when we
ourselves shall go; the stay here begins now to be very tiresome to me,
on account of the confusion of my being obliged to pack up my books so
early, thinking we were to set off the very next day, etc. especially
now, when I am excluded from the library. Madame de Pompignan Edition:
current; Page: [29] is there at this instant looking over the books with
Mr. George. Upon learning that my trunk is not to set off as yet, I have
taken out my exercise book and written a considerable portion of French
exercises.—We have received several notes from Lady Bentham and Miss
Clara at Toulouse, and I understand they are very well satisfied with
the Apartement though they would have liked it better in the
country.—Made some additions to my Livre statistique et geographique de
France. I am already much improved in the geography of France by
learning the departments with their chefs lieux by heart so as to be
able to repeat them without hesitation, and in an order which designates
at the same time their geographical situation, so that there is no
considerable town of which I do not know the position or at least in
what part of France it is situated: I am now applying myself more to the
course of the rivers and to the number, names, and situation, of all
considerable streams which the great ones receive. All these are things
of which I have great occasion, for before I had only a general
knowledge of the geography of France; I knew little of the particular
situation of the greater part of the larger towns or the particular
course of the rivers. This, however, is only my occupation when I have
nothing else to do. Walked about a little. Read several dialogues of
Lucian. Began the Βιον πρασις.6 After dinner Miss Sarah went to Madame
de Pompignan’s. Mr. G. was wholly employed in packing up things. Drank
tea and went early to bed, leaving no one up except some of the servants
and Miss Sarah who was colouring some of the floors: Pierrotou the
domestique fell asleep in my bedroom, and waked at about 1 o’clock in
the morning.

June 23

[J] Rose at 3 o’clock in the morning as did Mr. George: finished
packing, locked my trunk; at 5 o’clock went for a walk; walked towards
Fronton, a considerable town to the east of Pompignan: skirted a large
forest, and nearly reached it, but had not time to go quite up to it.
Saw very high mountains to the east; turned to one side, skirted another
very great wood, (the Bois de Fronton) and returned home by Grizolles.
The walk was extremely pleasant, extremely long, and very sultry
notwithstanding the earliness of the hour. The diversity of the
cultivation is amazing: wheat is very much cultivated, in particular the
bearded sort: barley and rye are also in great plenty, and oats are
grown. Peas, and beans of every sort, thrive very well, though the
greater part of the early peas were destroyed by the severe winter of
last year, as they are here sown as early as September and October.
Maize, by the natives called millet, grows in great perfection; as it is
a plant which you have possibly never seen, I tell you at present that
it grows very much like a rush, and indeed appears to be of that genus.
I have eaten maize bread: it is very solid and cloying. The vineyards
look very beautiful although about here the vines are never suffered to
grow above two or three feet in height. Several other Edition: current;
Page: [30] sorts of plants are here cultivated as food for horses and
for poultry: but I do not think I have seen a single grass field (though
I have seen commons) notwithstanding which the horses eat hay. Sir
Samuel Bentham buys his hay at Castelnau (in the Patois language
corresponding to Chateauneuf or Neufchatel) a little village on the road
to Toulouse, where (though I do not recollect having observed it) there
is, I am told, a very pretty meadow. The Spanish broom grows wild here
on the commons to much greater height, strength and beauty, than I have
ever seen it. The scabious is very fine here. Nothing is more common in
the corn fields than Venus’ looking glass, and I have seen larkspurs and
lupins growing in the same manner.—From the top of the high hills behind
the Chateau we have a very fine view of the plain of the Garronne, which
Arthur Young thought, in point of cultivation, the finest in the world.7
We see the mountains of Gascony in the distance, and the Garronne
running through the middle of the plain, wherever there is an opening in
the trees which cover its banks. We likewise see the beautiful town of
Grenade standing on the opposite bank.—I perceive I shall have walking
enough to-day; for at breakfast Miss Sarah has invited me to go this
evening to the banks of the Garronne which she says are remarkably
beautiful. I understand that my trunk is not to go till evening. As all
my books are locked up in the trunk, all Sir Samuel’s also packed up,
and all M. de Pompignan’s locked up in the library, I am afraid I shall
be a little troubled with ennui to-day but I must do my best to avoid
it.—The weather has altogether changed: from one of the dullest summers
ever known here it is changing into fine clear hot weather. This makes
me very glad that we shall most likely go to Toulouse in the evening,
rather than the morning of tomorrow.—Wrote another small portion of
Livre Stat. et Geog. Had a conversation with two workmen, who seem to be
very intelligent; it appears from what I have heard them say that they
are well acquainted with modern history, and they tell me that they are
able to read an English book though they cannot speak English; they
speak Spanish. This is an instance of the evil effects of the law which
compels every father to divide far the greater part of his property
equally among his children. There are four of these workmen who are
brothers; their father, it appears from their own account, had given
them as good an education as it was in his power: but for this law two,
or one at least, might have been placed in a situation to gain his
living without cultivating the ground.—After dinner, I took a walk to
the village of [Sades?] on the Garronne and walked on the banks. This is
very far up the course of the river; it has neither received the Tarn
nor the Gers, though it has the Arriège. It is nevertheless a large
river, but of very unequal breadth. In some places it is, I think, wider
than the Thames at Richmond: in other places, it is not much more than
half that breadth; in these last spots it flows with extreme rapidity.
The opposite bank is covered with woods.—This river runs very deep in
its banks, Edition: current; Page: [31] so that in most places I think
it is not very deep unless after unusual rains. I can however readily
suppose that near the mouth it must be extremely wide and deep. As its
course is very winding, it must be about 300 miles from Grenade to the
sea. In this interval it receives the rivers Tarn, Gers, Lot and
Dordogne, besides many smaller rivers. The Tarn at Montauban is as wide,
though not so deep, as the Thames at Richmond. After passing Montauban
it receives the Aveiron, which is at least as wide, I believe much wider
than the Thames at Staines. The Lot is a very large river at Cahors, 70
or 80 miles before it joins the Garronne; and in particular, I have seen
at Souillac the great river Dordogne, at least 200 miles before it joins
the Garronne, and when it has not yet received the Corrèze; even there
it is as wide as the Thames at Staines. Indeed when this river joins the
Garronne it becomes an arm of the sea, and is called the Gironde.—I
wished to have reached Grenade, but could not find a ferry. After my
return, Miss Sarah called on Madme de Pompignan, who returned to tea
with her; as did the Comte de Pompignan, son of the Marquis. This
evening being the veille de St. Jean, the fires lighted up in the
neighbourhood made a very pretty appearance.

June 24

[J] Lay in bed purposely late, having nothing to do. At breakfast M. le
Comte de Pompignan came in; he very politely offered me the key of the
library, which I accepted thankfully; he looked over with me a book of
prints of all the pretty views in the prettiest gardens and parks in
France. I afterwards read a tragedy of Voltaire. As we shall certainly
set off for Toulouse tonight and as my sheet is finished, I think it
best to send you this letter from Grizolles, and so save you the extra
postage.8

P.S. I have learnt since finishing this letter that we shall not go to
Toulouse till tomorrow morning, as there will not be time t[onigh]t to
set off sufficiently early.

4ème Juillet, 1820

à Toulouse

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4
à Toulouse

/
4ème Juillet, 1820

Mon cher Père,

Je vous aurais écrit, comme auparavant, en Anglais, si M. George ne
m’avait pas dit qu’il vaut mieux écrire toujours Français. J’ai pourtant
écrit le journal en Edition: current; Page: [32] Anglais, et vous le
verrez ci-après. Peut être vous n’avez pas reçu ma lettre du vingt
quatrième de Juin si tôt que vous aurez pu l’attendre: c’est parceque le
courier ne part pas tous les jours et la lettre a du attendre quelque
tems à Toulouse. Dans cette lettre-ci, vous trouverez quelques nouvelles
sur mes occupations prèsentes.—J’ai attendu une lettre depuis quelque
tems, mais je n’en ai point reçu. J’èspere que ma mère, mes soeurs, et
mon frère se portent bien: et ma grand’mère aussi, et tous nos amis.
Tout le monde ici se porte tout-à-fait bien.

June 24

[J] After having learnt as I have told you in my last letter that we
should not set off till to-morrow morning, we dined: after dinner the
young Comte de Pompignan came in, and finished looking over the house.
After dinner the Marquise came also, and we all walked together in the
grounds; they staid to tea. This being St. John’s day, we saw again
fires lighted up, but not so many as last night.

June 25

[J] Rose at about half after 2 o’clock, dressed, packed up sac de nuit,
the Comte came at 4 o’clock, to see Miss Sarah safe off: I walked along
with them, a little way on the high road, till the charaban overtook us.
This vehicle is rather a strange one; open, very light, and going upon
four wheels; the company in it consisted of Miss Sarah, Mademoiselle
Julie her maid, and myself: besides Mr. George who rode on horseback. We
set off at about half after 5 o’clock: Miss Sarah drove as far as
Castelnau, not quite a quarter of the way: she drives very well, and, by
her own account, is very fond of driving. At a little beyond Castelnau,
I commenced being initiated in the art of driving; and I drove the rest
of the way. We are now at Rue St. Anne, Numero deux, in a very good
Apartement, though rather small compared with the Chateau de Pompignan;
this you will believe when I tell you that my bedroom is about two
thirds of the size of the dressing room at Queen Square1 and the bed
occupies about half of this roomy apartment, so that with my enormous
trunk and a set of portable shelves which Madame de Chesnel has lent me,
I have not, you may suppose, much space for myself and my poor chair,
though I cannot say there is not room for me to turn round. As the room
will not hold a table, I am now writing in Mr. G.’s room (about half as
large again as mine) not on his table, for that is occupied, but on a
little box which I have placed on his bed for that purpose. After having
breakfasted, I went into my spacious little hole, and finished Lucian’s
Βιον πρασις, I likewise arranged my books on this little set of shelves;
read some of Thomson’s Chemistry.2

Edition: current; Page: [33]
June 26

[J] Rose early, read a portion of a collection of select passages of
French authors which belongs to Mr. George; read a treatise on the use
of the Subjunctive Mood, in a very elaborate grammar;3 after breakfast
wrote French exercises; read two Eclogues of Virgil;4 and the
“Alectryon” of Lucian.5 I found, that, studying as much French as was
thought necessary I had not time to read Latin and Greek and study
Mathematics every day, I therefore resolved to set apart a day for
Mathematics and a day for Latin and Greek. This day I likewise learned
another French fable.

June 27

[J] Rose early, went with Mr. George in the charaban to Dr. Russell’s,
and with him and three of his sons6 we went to bathe in the Garronne a
little above the town. The current however was too strong for a learner:
I could hardly stand up in it. I believe it is intended that we should
go every morning. Returned, wrote French exercises. Mr. George contrived
to place a table in my little room, to enable me to write there. Read a
portion of Legendre’s Geometry. This book, as far as I have read,
appears to me to contain the best system of Geometry I have ever known
of: the Axioms are but five,7 and all follow so perfectly and so
immediately from the definitions that nothing can more plainly confirm
the proposition of Hobbes that definitions are the sole principles;8 the
definition of a straight line in particular much excels that of Euclid,9
being simply that a straight line is the shortest which can be drawn
between two points; this is not only a much more intelligible definition
than that of a line which lies evenly between its extreme points; but it
reduces to nothing the demonstration that two sides of a triangle are
greater than the third side; for this is an immediate conclusion from
the definition. Most of the elementary theorems, which I have read, of
Legendre, are founded by him in a very simple and easy manner upon the
last mentioned theorem; assisted sometimes by two or three others; but
this theorem is the foundation of them. Learnt a very long fable by
heart; tried two propositions in West’s App’x. Solved one of them, which
I have tried over for several years and have never been able to solve:
found Edition: current; Page: [34] the other too difficult, but hope to
solve it to-morrow. Had not time to read to day any of Lacroix.10 Mr.
George engaged for me the best dancing master in Toulouse,11 who gives
20 lessons for 12 francs (dear for this country), which, when the
exchange is at par, is exactly sixpence a lesson; after dinner, went to
his house and took the first lesson.

June 28

[J] Went again to the river with Mr. George, Dr. Russell and his sons.
After my return, read two Eclogues of Virgil; and also part of a
Treatise on indefinite Pronouns in the Grammar I have told you of.12
Read some more of Legendre: I perceive that almost all his
demonstrations are more simple than those of Euclid, and often even than
those of West—studied Mr. Bentham’s Chrestomatic Tables, including the
great Table of the divisions of Human knowledge, or of Eudaemonics:13
began the “Vocalium Judicium” of Lucian.14 Took the second dancing
lesson.

June 29

[J] Went again to the river, walked a considerable way up the course to
find a better place, but found none—In coming back, went to the Post
Office, but found no letters. Were much later than usual in our return.
Read an Eclogue of Virgil, finished the “Vocalium Judicium,” wrote a
great quantity of French exercises, read some of Boileau’s little
pieces.15 I have not at present any regular French book to read, but
this defect will be soon remedied as Dr. Russell has promised to lend me
any part I please of Voltaire’s works,—Consulted Mr. George on the
possibility of procuring a Praxis on the higher branches of the
Mathematics, as I have performed over and over all the problems in
Lacroix’s Differential Calculus.—Tried some more problems and theorems
in West’s Appx, and resolved three, including that which I could not
resolve on the 27th. The Comte de Pompignan came in the forenoon, but
returned before dinner.—After dinner, Edition: current; Page: [35] began
to read Lucian’s “Cataplus.”16 M. Tonin Partouneaux,17 son to General
Partouneaux (whom I have told you of in a former letter, the General of
the Division) called after dinner.—Went to take my dancing lesson; found
that as it was the Fête de St. Pierre one of the patrons of the town,
the master did not give any lessons; but he bid his son give me a
lesson; which he accordingly did.—Mr. G. went out in the evening, and
endeavoured to procure for me various masters; he has not as yet had
much success. Some time after M. Tonin had left the house, Madame
Partouneaux herself called and sat some time.

June 30

[J] Went to General Partouneaux’s house with Mr. George, in order to
take with us M. Tonin to the river; but after waiting about half an hour
at the door we received his excuse, and accordingly went to the river
without him. Breakfasted on our return; after breakfast, read 2 Eclogues
of Virgil, finished the “Cataplus,” read more of Legendre: found a
demonstration of his incomplete; wrote French exercises; read some of
Sanderson’s Logic;18 read Thomson’s Chemistry; a gentleman came in who,
I understand, is a lecturer on Astronomy;19 he recommended to me
Cagnioli’s Trigonometry,20 which is therefore to be procured for me, by
Lady Bentham’s directions. After dinner, read again Thomson; took my
dancing lesson as usual.

July 1

[J] Did not go to the river, as Mr. George was obliged to set out at
half after 3 in the morning to go to Pompignan, for the purpose of
sending off some things which remained there. Before breakfast, read the
remainder of the treatise on Indefinite Pronouns; read also some of
Sanderson. After breakfast, began to read Lucian’s “Necyomantia”;21
wrote French exercises; finished the first book of Legendre; read
Thomson’s Chemistry. The young ladies had a singing master to-day: on
the 3rd he is to come again, and to give me lessons in singing and in
the Principles of Music. After dinner, read again Thomson; took my
dancing lesson.—Expect a letter every day.—The weather has been since we
came to Toulouse very hot even for this climate, whereas before it was
the coldest summer almost ever known. For two or three days, now, it has
been a little less hot.

Edition: current; Page: [36]
July 2

[J] Rose early: Mr. George was so tired after his yesterday’s fatigue
that we could not go to bathe. Read 99 lines of the Georgics of
Virgil;22 read also another portion of the “Necyomantia” of Lucian.
After breakfast, read Thomson’s Chemistry. Was at a great loss for
linen; for the washing of the dirty linen is not very frequent, mine
being now gone for the second time since I have been in France: at last,
Mr. George lent me a pair of his pantaloons, which were shortened a
little in the legs, and fitted me very well. Even the peasants here have
a great quantity of linen; the poorest have two or three dozen shirts.
Mr. G. intends ordering me new waistcoats and trowzers; the more so as
my waistcoats are much too long, and my trowzers too short, for the
French fashion. Wrote Livre geographique et statistique. Dined; went
after dinner in the carriage with Sir S.B. Mr. George and the young
ladies to a temporary amphitheatre erected here for the exhibition of
horsemanship by a company of which the leader is M. Franconi.23 Here we
saw very extraordinary horsemanship, though inferior to some that I have
seen at Astley’s.24 The sagacity, however, of some of the horses, is the
greatest I have ever seen, though not greater than that of some of Mr.
Astley’s élèves; in particular, a horse was exhibited, who, among his
other exploits, fired off a pistol; walked to a considerable distance on
two legs; and having mounted on a table, beat time, with all his feet,
to music. Some of the most extraordinary horsemanship was by young
ladies; one of them apparently not older than Willie. A youth of less
than my age performed various movements of fencing with great dexterity;
and another, habillé en Chinois, showed the greatest agility I have ever
yet seen. A grand Equestrian Ballet was also introduced:—On our return
found Dr. and Mrs. Russell in the house waiting for us; conversed with
them for some time; it seems that affairs are in great confusion in
England about the Queen; it appears to be the general topic of
conversation here.—Dr. Russell told us of a very strange measure of
government, if it is true, which Lady Bentham thinks it is not: that the
gens d’armes have paid domiciliary visits through the department of the
Sarthe for the purpose of seizing all letters written from the deputies
to their constituents; this, if true, is a proceeding very
extraordinary, and very arbitrary. Learnt also to night that by the
purport of the election law, each arrondissement is to send a deputy,
and besides this, a number of deputies equal to one fourth of the whole
is chosen by the superior college of electors but that the members of
this superior college have also a vote for the deputies of the several
arrondissemens.25—M. de Campe came in; Edition: current; Page: [37] and
Mr. George requested of him to give me a few lessons in French, but he
is too much occupied. Nevertheless he will endeavour to find me a French
master.

July 3

[J] Went to the river, found the water very turbid; in returning the
charaban lost a wheel, but Mr. G. contrived to put it on again.—Went out
with Mr. G, bought a stiffner à la Française, was measured for a short
waistcoat and a long pair of trowzers also à la Française. Returned,
breakfasted, read Sanderson, wrote livre: Geographique, etc. wrote
French exercises, began to learn a very long fable. As there had been
some talk of my going, with some part of the family (what part I know
not) to some sort of a Serenade, to which the young ladies had been
invited; I was again put to my shifts for linen; I had expected my clean
linen home today, but as it did not come, sent some down stairs to be
washed out—Took my first lesson in Solfeges et Principes de Musique:
hurried over dinner, dressed, went in the carriage again to Franconi’s,
understanding that it was to be the last day—The performances were still
more extraordinary than yesterday: besides the horse Phénix whom I told
you of, who performed his various exercises, those of firing a pistol,
walking on two legs, dancing, picking up a piece of silver, beating time
to music, etc. we had the horse called le Régent, a beautiful black
horse from the king of England’s stables, whom no one could break in
before Franconi; at present he is perfectly tame and seems to understand
every word which his master speaks. The horsemanship was also superior;
a young man jumped through a hoop of about 3 feet in diameter lifted up
to a great height, and alighted with one foot on the horse’s back: he
also performed a variety of astonishing exercises with a little hoop in
his hand, which he jumped through three times in the air previous to
alighting on the horse’s back. It is not to be closed until after one
more night’s exhibition, to which we are going.—Lady Bentham had given
leave to the domestique Pierretou and his mother, with two of the maids
to go to night; it has astonished them a good deal, and we have been
much amused by the remarks of Pierretou’s mother. In returning called on
Gen. Partouneaux but none of the family were at home. On our return, the
Serenade project was given up; we drank tea, and are now preparing to go
to bed. This letter will be dated tomorrow morning.26

Edition: current; Page: [38]
11me Juillet 1820

A Toulouse

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5
A Toulouse

/
11me Juillet 1820

Mon cher père,

Je n’ai reçu votre lettre qu’aujourd’hui: par consequence, ma lettre
etant presque pleine, je n’ai pas pu répondre à present à tout ce que
vous m’avez écrit. Vous trouverez dans ma lettre prochaine la
continuation de ce que j’ai dit ci-dedans. C’èst pourquoi je ne dirai
rien de plus sur ce sujet. Je me trouve ici dans un état fort agréable:
et je ne puis être assez obligé à toute la famille pour leurs faveurs
continuelles. J’espère que ma chère mère et mes soeurs avec Jacques se
portent bien. Vous ne m’avez rien dit dans votre lettre sur le progrès
de Jacques et de Henriette dans leurs études, mais je crois bien qu’ils
se comportent comme il faut, puisque vous m’avez dit que les leçons vont
bien. Rendez mon amitié etc. à tous et dites si vous plaît, à
Guillaumine et Clarisse de m’écrire un peu par votre lettre prochaine.

July 4

[J] Rose at 5 o’clock, went to the river at half after five: found the
water much clearer than yesterday. Borrowed Voltaire’s Essai sur les
Moeurs etc.1 of Dr. Russell; returned home at ½ after 7. Finished my
letter dated this day; sent it off: at 8 o’clock M. Layrieu the dancing
master came as usual to give a lesson to the young ladies but as Miss
Clara had not yet risen, I took a lesson in her stead. Breakfasted at ¼
before 9: at half past nine, began to read Voltaire from the place where
I had left off in England. Read six chapters, which occupied me two
hours. Read 47 lines of Virgil’s Georgics: at a quarter after twelve
began to read a treatise on the Use of various Adverbs, in the French
grammar I have already mentioned.2 At half after one, began the second
book of Legendre; read the definitions and five propositions.
Miscellaneous employments till 3 o’clock; then took my second lesson of
Principes de Musique.—Dined; Sir S.B. Mr. George, and the young ladies
went again to see Franconi, but I did not, on account of my dancing
lesson. Wrote French exercises, etc. practised Music; went to M.
Layrieu’s but he was gone to Franconi’s, and as, after I had waited
about an hour, I was told he would not return before half an hour more
was elapsed, I came away.—Found two of the Messr’s Courtois, great
bankers of Toulouse, at the house, they did not stay long.3—PS. to this
day’s journal.—My new waistcoat came home last night.

Edition: current; Page: [39]
July 5

[J] Rose at 5 o’clock, it rained very hard and we could not, therefore,
go to the river. Read 5 chapters of Voltaire; at half after seven, Mr.
G. began to correct my exercises for some time back; this occupied us
till half after 8, when my Solfeges master4 came, and gave me a lesson.
At a quarter after nine began to write my exercises; continued them till
half after 10, with the interval of breakfast, and of making myself
black lines to write by. At half after 10 the washerwoman brought back
my clean linen, I put my room in order, etc. At a quarter after eleven
took out Lucian, and finished the “Necyomantia”; then read five
propositions of Legendre. I have never read a book of geometry which I
like so well as Legendre; I find it extremely superior to Euclid, not
only in the additional matter, but in the arrangement so as to deduce
the demonstration of a theorem from the most proper sources for the
purpose of rendering the proof simple, short and distinct. All the
propositions of the 2 first books are Theorems. Practised my lesson of
Principes de Musique—Looked out my dirty linen and gave it to the
washerwoman. At a quarter past one, began to read Thomson; made out
various chemical tables etc. continued till a quarter after three.—Was
then occupied about half an hour in trying to resolve several
propositions in West’s Appendix No. III, of which I resolved two that I
have never been able before to resolve, though I have frequently tried
them. Began then to make out a table of 58 rivers, the principal in
France, classified and arranged; with the whole of their course, that is
to say, what departments each passes through and what are the chief
towns on their banks. At four o’clock, dined; afterwards, finished my
table, and went to my dancing lesson; returned and supped. My new pair
of trowzers have come home this afternoon. N.B. I have neglected to
insert in its proper place that Lady Bentham has engaged me a music
mistress,5 at whose house I am to practise as there is music here almost
all day; the young ladies having every day a harp and a guitar master as
well as a maître de solfeges; and Mr. George having also a violin
master.

July 6

[J] Rose at 6 o’clock, rained in the morning; could not go to the river.
Read five chapters of Voltaire;—at a quarter after 9, tried for a
quarter of an hour some problems in West’s App’x. Till nine took my
lesson of Principes de Musique; tried again some problems, breakfasted,
tried again problems till a quarter after 10; wrote French exercises
till 11; began to correct my Dialogue, was occupied till 12¼ about; was
called in a hurry to dress for going out with Mr. G. and Sir S.B.
Dressed; went with them to call on M. Daubuisson the astronomer I have
spoken of in my last letter; he was not at home; called on M. Decampe,
who has found me a Edition: current; Page: [40] French master,6 and Mr.
G. is going to settle tomorrow morning with this master;—returned at
about 1¼; copied and corrected Dialogue till 3¼; read Thomson till four;
dined; read again Thomson till six; Mr. G. then corrected my exercises
of yesterday, and part of to day’s; went to M. Larrieu’s, but he did not
give lessons, as Sunday and Thursday are the days when masters do not
generally give them in this country. Returned; read Thomson till 8;
repeated several fables to Mr. G; miscellaneous affairs; supped. N.B. I
always write my journal just before going to bed.

July 7

[J] Rose at 5¾; till 7, read five chapters of Voltaire; till 7½, 46
lines of Virgil; till 8, commenced Lucian’s “Jupiter Confutatus.”7 Went
then to M. Larrieu’s to tell him not to come this morning to give
lessons to the young ladies, for fear of disturbing Madame de Chesnel,
who is very unwell; found him already set out; returned home; and till
nine o’clock took my lesson of Principes de Musique. Till half after
nine, continued Lucian; breakfasted; finished “Jupiter Confutatus” at
10¼. A short time after, M. Daubuisson the astronomer whom I have told
you of, came in, which obliged me to dress, but I was not called into
the drawing room. Till 11½, read Thomson, made Chemical Tables; from 11¾
to a quarter after twelve read seven propositions of Legendre. This
author has put very confusedly in his second book, propositions relating
to ratio, without having ever defined ratio; he even takes for granted
one of the most important propositions of the whole theory, namely the
doctrine of ex aequali proportion, which he makes use of without
attempting to prove it—this takes away a good deal of my opinion of the
merit of the book as an elementary work. Till 1½ wrote exercises, and
various miscellanies: till 2¼, read another portion of the treatise on
the Use of Adverbs in the Grammaire des Grammaires: till 3¼, read again
Thomson. Wrote my Livre Geographique etc.—miscellanies till 5 o’clock,
when, by Mr. G’s advice, I took something to eat, not knowing when we
should dine, on account of Mme de Chesnel’s indisposition:—at half after
five went to receive a music lesson, from Mme Boulet, a lady who has
once been in very good circumstances, but was deprived of almost all she
had during the Revolution, and has since lived by her musical
talents—She is employed by the first people in Toulouse, and it was a
great favour to obtain her consent to teach me—She settled with me that
I was to practise every day from 11 till 12 o’clock at her house, and
take a lesson every evening; dined on my return. During my absence the
accouchement of Madme de Chesnel took place: she is doing well; I have
not yet seen Mademoiselle de Chesnel,8 but I suppose I shall see her bye
and bye.—Went immediately after dinner to M. Edition: current; Page:
[41] Larrieu’s, and took my dancing lesson; returned home and drank tea.
I do not know if Mr. G. has yet seen M. Sauvage, the French master
proposed for me by M. Decampe: as soon as he shall have seen him, I
shall go every day to study at his house. Lady B. wishes besides to find
me various other kinds of masters, so that, with my Latin, Greek,
Mathematics, etc. you see I shall not lead an idle life here. You will
see by and bye how my time will be divided.

July 89

[J] Rose at five o’clock; read five chapters of Voltaire; at 6¾, began
to read another portion of the Treatise on the Use of the Adverbs; Mr.
G. went to call on M. Sauvage, and engaged him to give me lessons in
French. At 7¾ commenced reading the “Prometheus”10 of Lucian: from 8½
till 9, took my first lesson of solfeges, with the principes de musique;
continued the “Prometheus” till 9½, when we breakfasted. From 10½ to 10¾
was employed miscellaneously; went then to Madame Boulet’s to practise
my music; she has bought me some pieces of music. Returned at 12½, read
10 propositions of Legendre. It must be allowed that if any thing could
palliate the fault I have noticed of introducing the ratios and the
measures of angles before the right place, it is the facility which this
method gives to the demonstration of the subsequent propositions. This
however cannot excuse so palpable a logical error as that of making use
of an unproved and scarcely explained proposition as the foundation of
others, when there are demonstrations in Euclid of the same
propositions, following with the greatest exactness all the rules of
correct reasoning.—For the rest, Legendre’s Problems are resolved much
more simply than those of Euclid, in as much as he had a choice of
almost all the theorems contained in the first and third books of
Euclid, together with several others for the formation of his
demonstrations! This convinces me of the advantage of placing the
theorems first in an elementary book.—Mr. G. intends to procure for me
Cagnioli’s Trigonometry, the book recommended by M. Daubuisson: He does
not know what can be done with regard to the Praxis on the Higher
Branches of the Mathematics; the next time I see M. Daubuisson, I intend
to ask him if there is any good work of that kind. Wrote Livre
Geographique etc. dressed, went with Sir S.B. and Mr. G. to dine with
Dr. Russell. While there heard that M. Berard the great chemist from
Montpellier11 was come as expected to call on Sir Samuel; this called
away Sir S.B. and Mr. G. but I remained till some time after; Sir S.
came back, and staid a short time, after which we both returned home
together. M. Berard has written a short time ago to Sir S. telling him
that the estates at Restinclières which Sir S. had thoughts of buying
would not be procurable, in all Edition: current; Page: [42]
probability, at any moderate price, the proprietor12 having gained a law
suit in which he was engaged, and being no longer in want of money. I
know not whether he has now confirmed this intelligence. I wait till
tomorrow to inform you. I have seen the little Mademoiselle de Chesnel;
her name is Marie-Therese-Louise-Adelaide, a fine name enough, but that
is no wonder, as there are scarce any even of the female servants who do
not call themselves by the name of Julie, Victoire, Louise, or some such
name.

July 9

[J] Set off about 4 o’clock to Dr. Russell’s and with him before 5 to
the forest of Bouconne, about 3 leagues from Toulouse, on the Bayonne
road for the purpose of collecting plants and insects—Mr. G. and I went
in the charaban and Dr. Russell with 3 of his sons went in their
cabriolet. The road is not much worn, because it is hilly as far as
Tarbes, and almost all the carriages go by another road.—The cultivation
is of the same kind as in the other parts of the Haut Languedoc which I
have seen. The rye harvest is chiefly over; the oats are [almost?] ready
for reaping; We passed over the little river Touch, and through a little
village, near the banks, called St. Martin du Touch: we passed through
Coulomnières and Leguevin, and a little after this last village we
turned off through a very little, and extremely bad, road, to the house
of the Garde Generale, who is guardian of all the Forests in the
Arrondissement of Toulouse and that of Villefranche. He was very civil
to us, allowed us to put up our horses, and asked us to breakfast at his
house, but we chose rather to eat what we had brought in the forest.
After hunting insects for a considerable time, we ate our breakfast
under a large oak, near a ruisseau as the Garde called it, but it was
dry—Water was the only thing we wanted to make our breakfast very
agreeable. The Garde accompanied us—After hunting insects for a long
time with very good success, Mr. George collecting also plants with very
little success, we were invited to the Garde’s house, where we arrived
about 2 o’clock. Mr. G. and the Russell’s had caught a great number of
insects, chiefly butterflies; I had made my coup d’essai by no more than
about 10 worth keeping. The garde gave us a good luncheon at his house,
and wanted to give us a dinner; but indeed we only ate because without
eating it was very unsafe to drink water in such a hot condition as that
in which we were. After dinner, caught a few more insects, and returned
home, the Russells leaving by mistake a great number of their finest
insects at the Garde’s House. At our return after 6 o’clock found M.
Berard at the house. He has confirmed the intelligence that the
proprietor of Restinclières has gained his lawsuit, but says that as he
does not gain any money by it, he will be obliged to sell his house in a
few months. Before dinner, I was sent to Dr. Russell’s to tell him that
Sir S.B. would be glad to speak to him in the evening; returned,
dressed, dined, read a little of Thomson, saw M. Berard, who did not
stay long; Edition: current; Page: [43] Madame Partouneaux called; some
time after saw again M. Berard, who had returned; Dr. and Mrs. Russell
came also in the evening; after they went away we drank tea, along with
M. Berard, and then I went to bed. I write this the next morning, having
been too tired the same night.

July 10

[J] Rose less early than usual, on account of yesterday’s fatigue. Did
not go to the river; read one chapter of Voltaire; at half-past seven,
went with Mr. George to the house of the French master, M. Sauvage. He
did very little this morning except to make me read French aloud to him
for the pronunciation, and set me lessons to learn to-day, which,
though, as you will soon see, they have occupied all my spare time
to-day, have notwithstanding been not a little useful to me in many
ways, besides the language. Returned; breakfasted, translated the first
ode of Horace into French;13 M. Daubuisson came, took with him Sir S.B.
M. Berard, Mr. G. and myself to his house, and showed us many
astronomical instruments, in particular a lunette paralectique for
observing the stars in the day time, and a very elegant portable
barometer for observation on the tops of mountains, with an English
sextant made by Troughton,14 by which he explained the way of finding
the latitude at sea. Thence we went to the house of his brother, a great
mineralogist,15 and staid there some time. At our return, it was almost
2 o’clock. I finished in the following order the lessons given me by M.
Sauvage: 1. Wrote a French critique on a passage of Mascaron’s Oraison
Funèbre de Turenne.16 2. Learnt half that passage by heart. 3. Studied
some passages which he had marked out for me in a French Grammar. 4.
Began to learn by heart part of Boileau Despréaux’s epistle to Lamoignon
but had not time to finish it.17

Took my lesson of solfeges and principes de musique; dined; M. Berard
was with us; went to Mme Boulet’s and took my music lesson; returned
home; was sent to Dr. Russell’s to ask him and Mrs. Russell to come this
evening; found him from home; after staying some time with the young
gentlemen, went to M. Larrieu’s, took my dancing lesson; returned to Dr.
Russell’s, he was not returned; staid some Edition: current; Page: [44]
time, and returned home: drank tea, M. Berard not being there. Dr.
Russell did not come, though I left word—If for no other reason, my
situation is better than the generality of situations because the whole
family, without ill humour, constantly, if I do anything amiss, tell me
of it immediately, and explain to me in all respects how I ought to act.
I have received from them many cautions and directions, without which I
should stand some chance of meeting with a reception not very good in
France; for this, as well as for all their other kindnesses you will
agree that I ought to be very thankful.

July 11

[J] Went early to bathe, found the water very pleasant, went to M.
Sauvage, received my lesson, that is, he corrected my Critique and my
translation, and gave me new things to do: besides laying down a plan
for every morning’s work. Returned, breakfasted, received your letter of
July 4th, to which I cannot reply at any better time than the present. I
am rather surprised at your having received only two letters, as this is
the 6th18 I have written since arriving at Pompignan. I am very glad
that Lady B. has written a good account of me, as from the very first
day of my arrival it has been my most earnest endeavour to please not
only her, but the whole family; and nothing can give me pleasure more
sincere than to learn that I have in part succeeded. That you are all in
good health I need not say I am glad. That Willie and Clara make
progress in History I am very much pleased to hear, as, with Geography
and Arithmetic, it is the most necessary of all studies for young people
of both sexes. In Geography, at least modern, and in Arithmetic they had
made considerable progress when I left London: and I hope, when I
return, to see them mistresses of Historical knowledge also. The thing
most necessary is to interrogate both, but Clara in particular, on what
they have some time finished, as they are extremely apt to forget: and
this I have found the chief difficulty in teaching them Arithmetic. If
Dr. Thomson19 is still with you, I wish you would have the goodness to
present my compliments by his means to Miss Colquhoun,20 and to make my
apology for not having written.—But in telling me of Dr. Thomson you
have told me nothing of Mr. John Wallace,21 who has doubtless been at
your house during part of the vacation—I wish he would write to me. He
was I dare say a little surprised to see your family consisting of one
less than usual. I shall write at the first opportunity to Mr. Ensor,
and to Mrs. Austin,22 who I hope is well. I should Edition: current;
Page: [45] be much obliged to you to tell her that I am very grateful to
her for the instructions she has given me in French. I should also be
very glad if the next time you write to Mr. Ensor you would thank him in
my name for his kindness, and tell him to expect a letter. His address I
believe is Ardriss, Loughgall, Ireland. I am glad that Mrs. Hume is
better;23 in your next letter I wish you would give me an account of
Mrs. Stoker’s health.24 I shall be glad to see your work at my return,
in an octavo form, and I have no doubt it will soon be sold off.25 Your
Article on Government is no doubt very instructive, and I shall read it
on my return with great attention.26 As to the Dialogue I have tried, I
shall certainly take the first opportunity of sending it. I have taken
great pains with the expression as well as with the reasoning, and I
hope you will be pleased with it. As to Greek, Latin, and Mathematics;
when you receive my last letter and the present you will see that I have
applied myself much more than before to the two former, and to the
Geometrical branch, at least, of the latter. For the Algebraical branch
I have only waited for the possibility of obtaining a book of problems
to resolve, but as I have not yet obtained any such book, I do not
intend to forget what I have learned of Lacroix, though the different
lessons I receive, with my French exercises, are likely, as long as I
remain at Toulouse, to occupy almost my whole time. In this letter, I
have divided my day according to the number of hours employed on each
particular study, to shew you that I do not throw away my time. As to
books of amusement, if I wanted them I could not get them here, as all
Sir Samuel’s books of that kind are packed up, not to be unpacked till
we arrive at our final destination. I have learned fables by Lady
Bentham’s advice, for besides that the pronunciation is much improved by
repeating them aloud, the fables of Lafontaine and some others are
expressed in language so remarkably pure and appropriate that nothing
can more contribute to fix in my memory the rules of construction, as
[well as] the French words in their proper acceptation.

Juillet, le 19me 1820

à Toulouse

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6
Juillet, le 19me 1820

/
à Toulouse

Mon cher père,

Je vous envoie la continuation du journal, depuis l’onze de ce mois
jusques à aujourd’hui. Peut-être que vous n’y trouviez pas beaucoup de
nouvelles, puisque Edition: current; Page: [46] Mme Bentham écrit
presque toutes les semaines à M. son beau-frère. Cependant ma mère et
mes soeurs trouveront dans ce journal-ci de quoi s’amuser. Ayez la bonté
d’observer que cette lettre-ci porte le numero sept,1 c’èst-à-dire
qu’elle èst la septième que je vous ai envoyé depuis mon arrival en
France. La lettre numero six èst celle qui èst datée du quatrième de
Juillet. J’espère que vous m’écrirez bientôt une seconde lettre; et que
vous vous portez bien, ainsi que tous nos amis. Adieu.

July 11

[J] Continuation.2 I have shewn to Lady Bentham that part of your letter
in which you speak of the questions asked about me by Lady B:
accordingly she has informed me that a fencing master shall be sought
out for me as soon as possible. It will probably be more difficult for
me to obtain riding lessons here than lessons in fencing, but of this I
shall be better able to tell you hereafter. With regard to Political
Economy and Logic I shall certainly follow your directions. The best
exercise in both these branches of knowledge would perhaps be to write
treatises on particular subjects appertaining to both. This I have not
yet commenced doing, but I shall certainly do so.—You tell me you have
had a week of very hot weather; we had at first very cold weather for
the climate, but ever since three days before we left Pompignan, we have
had weather intensely hot every day except two or three, there is great
danger in exposing ourselves to the heat of the sun; two or three people
have been lately killed by coups de soleil. I am obliged, and shall be
still more so, on account of my different lessons, to go out a good deal
in the middle of the day, but this is only dangerous to those who are
bareheaded.

I now continue my journal. After having breakfasted and read your
letter, I wrote the remainder of the letter No. 6. And then went to Mme
Boulet to practise. Afterwards I returned home, and performed two of my
French lessons, viz, retranslated the first Ode of Horace, and wrote
observations in French on the same. Took my solfeges lesson; dined;
finished my French lesson by learning by heart the remainder of
Mascaron’s “Mort de Turenne,” and of Laharpe’s Parallel of Corneille and
Racine.3 Went to take my lesson at Madame Boulet’s; called at Dr.
Russell’s, and took my dancing lesson. Returned home.

July 12

[J] Went to the river, found the water extremely pleasant—Went to M.
Sauvage who examined what I had done and gave me a lesson on the various
pronunciations Edition: current; Page: [47] of the letter a. Returned to
breakfast, took Solfèges lesson, performed my French exercises, namely
turned the Monologue of Juno in the First Book of the Eneid into
French,4 wrote a commentary in French on Laharpe’s parallel of Corneille
and Racine, learnt by heart half Labruyère’s parallel of the same
authors5 and turned part of Laharpe’s parallel into Latin. Found myself
so relaxed by the heat as to be obliged to lie down and sleep—Slept till
past the time for going to Madame Boulet’s; lost thus my music lesson.
Began to read Lucian’s “Icaromenippus.”6 Read two propositions of
Legendre. Took another solfèges lesson in lieu of Miss Clara. Dined;
after dinner, read six more problems of Legendre and finished the second
book. Observed another fault, that of referring to Arithmetic for
Geometrical demonstrations. Studied a synoptic table (made by Mr. G.) of
the classes of insects. Went with Mr. G. to take my first fencing
lesson; he took also a lesson: went then to M. Larrieu’s and took my
dancing lesson. In returning narrowly escaped being caught in the most
violent storm I have ever seen; the rain was like a continued sheet of
water, and the lightning was incessant; we could scarcely perceive an
interval between the flashes. This will cool the air and make it very
pleasant to morrow.

July 13

[J] Every one told us the water would be extremely high and cold this
morning on account of the rain; but we found it very agreeable—Went to
M. Sauvage but a gentleman who was coming out sent me away, telling me
that M. Sauvage did not teach on Thursdays; this surprised me a little
as he had promised Mr. G. to give me lessons on Thursdays. Returned to
breakfast; wrote a small portion of a Treatise on Value in French; Sir
S. says that M. Say’s book shall be borrowed for me if possible.7 Learnt
by heart the remainder of Labruyère’s parallel—read more of Lucian’s
“Icaromenippus”—resolved a proposition of West—practised music at Madame
Boulet’s. We are not likely to stay long here; as soon as Mme de Chesnel
is sufficiently recovered, we shall probably set out on our tour to the
Pyrenees, perhaps not to return to Toulouse—I must therefore pay
particular attention to the lessons I take from masters—Latin, Greek,
Mathematics, etc. will be better done hereafter. After dinner, Mr. G.
resolved several propositions in West’s App’x and I resolved one that I
have never been able to resolve before though I have often tried it—Went
to a fencing lesson with Mr. G. Read part of a review of a work called
Programme du Cours du Droit public à la faculté de droit à Paris; in a
Edition: current; Page: [48] periodical publication entitled Revue
Encyclopédique.8 Of this article, when I have finished it I will render
you an account. M. Decampe came in the evening, as did Mr. Fitzsimmons a
teacher of English here:9 I saw them both for a short time.—N.B. I add
here what I heard yesterday, as a proof of the progress of manufactures
in France of late years. Lady B. bought the other day stockings at 50
sous the pair such as a year or two ago cost her 4 francs the pair at a
much cheaper warehouse.

July 14

[J] Went again to the river, found the water colder than yesterday; went
to M. Sauvage, read with him some pages of a treatise on the French
pronunciation,10 a small portion of a treatise on construction;11 he
examined what I had done of French exercises, and gave me new
ones—returned and took a short lesson of solfèges; breakfasted, Mr. G.
found out a riding school and engaged for me, and for himself, to take
lessons—performed my French exercises, that is, to make an Analyse, as
M. Sauvage called it, of Juno’s soliloquy—and to learn by heart
perfectly the whole of Labruyère’s parallel. Wrote Livre Geographique,
tried problems of West; went to Madme Boulet’s, received lesson,
practised, returned to dinner, went to riding lesson, with Mr. G. then
to fencing lesson, then to be measured for a pair of leather pantaloons,
which the riding master says are necessary, and for which Mr. G. is also
measured. Went to dancing lesson, returned, supped. My time is now
divided as follows. I rise at 5, to the river till 8, French lesson till
9½, breakfast till 10, solfèges till 10½, from 10½ till 2 my French
exercises, Greek, Latin, mathematics, logic and political economy, i.e.
as many of the latter as possible, from 2 till 4 music lesson and
practise at Mme Boulet’s, from 4 till 5 dinner, riding till 6, fencing
till 7, dancing till 8½, tea till 9. In the time I have set down for
each of these occupations, I include the time spent in going to the
respective schools, and, if necessary, that spent also in returning.
N.B. I have forgotten to mention having resolved today 3 theorems in
West’s Appx.

July 15

[J] To the river in the morning, found the water cold; to M. Sauvage,
who examined my yesterday’s exercises, etc. Home to a short lesson of
solfèges, breakfasted very late, performed French exercises, 1. the
commencement of a translation into French of the speech of Catiline to
his accomplices, in Sallust;12 Edition: current; Page: [49] 2. began to
learn by heart Henault’s parallel of the reign of Augustus and that of
Louis XIV.13 To Mme Boulet, returned to dinner, riding, fencing,
dancing; home to supper. I have received directions from M. Sauvage to
go in future to his house at noon, by which arrangement I shall be
occupied with masters from noon till 9 at night, exclusive of about 20
minutes for dinner.

July 16

[J] Set off very early with Mr. George, Dr. Russell and his sons for
another entomotheric expedition to the forest of Ramette south of
Toulouse and in a different direction from that of Bouconne. It is not
so far from Toulouse as Bouconne. We passed through a pretty enough
straggling village and then proceeded to another village called
Tournefeuille where we left the horses and carriages at a little public
house, and walked to the forest at a small distance. We forded the
Touch, almost dryshod, and entering the forest chased insects with very
good success. This forest is not so large as that of Bouconne; it is
however much prettier: and as last night’s storm has cooled the air, we
found our journey very pleasant, as well as our gipsey breakfast, tho,
as at Bouconne, we were without water. After some time William Russell,
the eldest son of Dr. Russell, and myself, were separated from the rest
having staid too long behind sitting on the grass. After walking about
sometime, we went out of the forest, to the river Touch, and having
drank considerably of very indifferent water, we bathed ourselves there,
which we found very agreeable; the water felt warmer than the air. We
then returned into the wood, and formed a plan of co-operation for the
purpose of discovering where our companions had gone; having pursued
this plan for some time ineffectually, we asked a man who was passing if
he had seen them; he told us that they were by the river side at some
distance. On pursuing this road, we at last descried them on the
opposite side of the river at some distance; having gone up opposite to
the spot, we found the river much deeper there than where we had
formerly crossed it; however, there was only one alternative; that of
stripping and fording it, carrying over our clothes, nets etc. in our
hands, which we did, and we found that our companions also had pursued
that plan. After leaving our clothes on the other side, we returned into
the middle of the water, and bathed very agreeably, being only annoyed
by the gnats, who bit every part of our bodies which was out of the
water.—The Touch is a little wider than the New River; at the place
where we bathed it was at least twice as wide, but for more than half
the breadth its depth is so inconsiderable as not to merit the name of
river. On one side, the slope is very gradual; on the other it is
Edition: current; Page: [50] extremely abrupt. Thus the deep part of the
river is very near one side. Every where except in the deep part, (which
is so thick with mud at the bottom that I sank in it up to the ancle),
the bottom is large stones like that of the Garonne at our daily bathing
place. One of the circumstances which the most surprised me, is that in
the same spot the water is extremely warm on the one side and cold on
the other, so that I lay several times with my feet in warm water and my
head in cold, or vice versa. After remaining for a considerable time in
the water we dressed and walked back to Tournefeuille, where we finished
our provisions (not forgetting about fifty glasses of water that we
drank among us at the inn) and set off to return to Toulouse, which
journey we accomplished in about ¾ of an hour, and made our triumphal
entry into Toulouse, this Sunday evening, in a car, I assure you, not
such as carried Julius Caesar in his triumph over the Gauls.14 My
butterflies etc. being chiefly in the boxes of the young Russells, I
left them there for the present. Returned home, dressed, dined; began to
write a letter to Mr. Ensor, studied classification of Insects, arranged
the small number that I had left of my insects, etc. etc. drank tea,
etc.—

—I may as well now tell you of a circumstance which it is highly
probable you are unacquainted with. I have only been told of it lately
or I would have let you know it at the time it occurred. While at
Pompignan, immediately after the passing of the Election Law, we heard
that all the artillery of the town of Toulouse, with two regiments of
soldiers, had been called out to quell the riots which the people had
raised. We knew that such reports, though seldom strictly true, yet were
rarely without some foundation; accordingly we did not know what to
believe. This however was cleared up in the following manner. Two
officers of a regiment newly arrived in town brought word in a great
hurry to the Capitole that they had seen 50 or 60 armed men enter into a
house. (N.B. This was at midnight.) Upon hearing this, the troops were
called out for the purpose of surrounding the house, and (I believe) two
other officers were sent with the first two to reconnoitre, and confirm
the intelligence. But when conducted to the place mentioned, they were
surprised to see that these poor officers had mistaken another cross
street for the entry into a house, and as there happened to be some
soldiers among the passengers who were entering into that street, the
officers’ imagination soon set itself to work, and out of a few quiet
passengers passing through the street, they soon made 50 or 60 armed men
dropping one by one into a house.

July 17

[J] Did not go to the river; before breakfast, finished the translation
of Catiline’s Edition: current; Page: [51] speech into French, learnt by
heart more of Henault’s comparison, took lesson of solfeges. After
breakfast, finished letter to Mr. Ensor, read the “Jupiter Tragoedus” of
Lucian;15 to M. Sauvage, then to Mme Boulet’s, returned to dinner; after
dinner, riding, fencing, dancing, returned to supper. People are heavy
and relaxed by the Vent d’Autan which is a milder species of Sirocco.

July 18

[J] Bathed in the morning. Near the place where we bathe is the place
where the vidanges of the necessaries are dried for sale as manure; this
stuff called poudrette, which is as aromatic as you may well suppose, is
exported, I hear, to America. The undertaker of this agreeable trade is
a lady, who probably thinks the money sweetens the smell. She pays
30,000 francs a year to government for the privilege; but I believe she
is undertaker for several other towns besides Toulouse. After bathing,
returned home, took Solfèges lesson, translated into French the ode of
Horace which commences Sic te diva potens Cypri,16 to M. Sauvage, then
to Mme Boulet, took music lesson and practised; home to dinner, then
riding, fencing, dancing lessons. I may as well add here, for your
satisfaction, the prices of all the lessons I receive, reduced to
English money at par.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
  M. Larrieu, the best dancing master as well as the dearest in Toulouse, per lesson                                                                                               6_d_
  French master, M. Sauvage remarkably good teacher.                                                                                                                               2_s._
  Fencing lessons, each                                                                                                                                                            4_d_
  Riding lessons,                                                                                                                                                                  1_s._3_d_
  Mme Boulet, the best music mistress in Toulouse, for whom there is such competition that never till now the Misses Bentham have been able to obtain her, to give them lessons,   1_s._3_d_
  Solfèges,                                                                                                                                                                        1_s._
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------

making in all, 6s.4d per day for all the lessons I take, exclusive of
Sunday when I have no masters, and Thursdays, where I have only the
worth of 2s.4d for M. Sauvage and my fencing master, M. Daure. I tell
you this by Lady Bentham’s advice, for fear lest that you should be
frightened at hearing that I take so many lessons.

July 19

[J] To the river in the morning; in passing out of the town gates the
charaban broke down, containing in it myself, Mr. G. and William
Russell. We were not however turned out, nor anywise hurt, as when we
were overset in the charaban; though I cannot say we were much the worse
for our fall even that time. The only inconvenience we suffered today
was that W.R. and myself were obliged to walk on to the bathing place,
carrying botanical books, butterfly nets, insect box etc. Edition:
current; Page: [52] and Mr. G. was obliged to ride the horse (a large
clumsy coach horse, by the way) without either saddle or stirrup (to the
no small detriment at least in respect to colour and to cleanness of his
white pantaloons,) and using a little leather strap for a whip. In this
elegant condition he rode on to the bathing place. After bathing, we
(the three above mentioned) botanized a little; and for our return,
William and myself mounted behind the cabriolet of Dr. Russell, and Mr.
G. rode as before, till we arrived at the gate of the town, where Mr. G.
descended from his generous steed, as did William and myself from our
place de laquais, and leaving the horse and the broken charaban to the
care of the people at the customhouse or bureau de l’octroi, we walked
home, Mr. G. with about a quarter of the surface of his pantaloons
tolerably clean. When arrived home, I became, by Lady Bentham’s desire,
a spectator of the dancing lesson which the young ladies took, as she
considers it of great use that I should see dancing; breakfasted, took
solfèges lesson, made an Analyse of Horace’s Ode “Sic te diva” etc. To
M. Sauvage an hour sooner than usual, as my two last lessons had been
rather short; to Mme Boulet, practised music, took lesson, returned
home, tried ineffectually some problems and theorems in West’s Appx.
Finished the “Icaromenippus” of Luci[an. I have read many] of his
dialogues with great attention, and with extreme admiration: in
particular the “Hermotimus,” which is a masterpiece of ingenious
reasoning, and two or three exquisitely witty dialogues, in the “Vitarum
Auctio,” the “Cataplus,” “Jupiter Tragoedus,” three which can scarcely
be equalled, and, though in a less degree, the “Necyomantia,” the
“Vocalium Judicium,” and some others. The four first mentioned, it is
impossible not to admire.—Dined; to riding, fencing, and dancing
lessons.17

Edition: current; Page: [53]
John Mill

Mill, John

August 2nd 1820

Toulouse

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7
Toulouse

,
August 2nd 1820

My Dear Father,

We are still in Toulouse, but we are not likely to remain here much
longer as next Saturday is fixed for our departure. You will see the
particulars of all which has occurred, so that I have no occasion to say
more. I therefore only beg you to write me soon another letter, as I
have received only one since my arrival in France, which is now almost
three months. I hope my mother and sisters are very well. All the family
of Sir Samuel Bentham is so. You will next hear from me from Pau or
Bagnères de Bigorre.

July 20

[J] Went to bathe in the morning with Dr. R. and his sons; Mr. George
was gone with Sir S.B. in the charaban to Montauban, so that I was
obliged to walk to the town gate with William Russell and then we
mounted behind the cabriolet and proceeded in rather a jolting manner,
to the bathing place. The water was extremely agreeable. William forded
the river, though the current is extremely strong in the middle. There
is here a large island which divides the Garronne into two branches.
This island is covered with trees, and presents a very pretty appearance
from the opposite bank. We returned home by the same vehicle as before,
descending at the gate of the town, at which time I may remark that each
of us experienced a good tumble in getting down from behind the
cabriolet. We went to the post office where I sent off my letter dated
July 19th, no. 7,1 and franked it as far as Calais, a thing we are
always obliged to do, or we should receive the letters back from Paris,
as no unpaid letters go off to England. Returned home after calling at
Dr. Russell’s to receive the insects I caught at La Ramette. Arranged
these insects; breakfasted. This being Thursday, I take fewer lessons
than usual. Performed French exercises, namely, learnt by heart another
part of Henault’s parallel, and rewrote the translation of the first
part of Catiline’s speech in Sallust, according to M. Sauvage’s remarks
on my former translation. To my lesson at M. Sauvage’s, I was obliged to
wait about an hour before he came; to fencing lesson; read some of
Lucian’s short dialogues; dined; to Dr. Russell’s; walked with him and
his sons up the right bank of the Garonne beyond the island on an
entomotheric expedition but had very indifferent success; returned home,
read again the “Cataplus” of Lucian, one of my favourite dialogues;
drank tea, had a conversation on miscellaneous subjects with Lady
Bentham and Miss Clara. I have not told you that I went this morning to
the principal church in the town to see the ceremony of the premier
communion, but could not see much.

Edition: current; Page: [54]
July 21

[J] Mr. G. not being returned from Montauban, I was obliged to go to the
bathing place in the same manner as yesterday morning. The water,
though, I think, warmer than the air, felt cold on first going in, but
extremely pleasant afterwards. Returned home, took lesson of solfèges,
breakfasted, translated into French a piece of Latin which M. Sauvage
had given me, wrote part of the rough sketch of a dialogue on a subject
proposed to me by Lady Bentham, namely, the question whether great
landed estates and great establishments in commerce and manufactures, or
small ones, are the most conducive to the general happiness? To M.
Sauvage, then to Madame Boulet; came home, found Mr. George returned.
Pierrotou the servant is discovered, contrary to expectation, to be a
thief; he is sent away to his metairie at Pompignan.—Read part of
Lucian’s “Deorum Concilium.”2 Dined; riding, fencing, dancing lessons.
Went to bed supperless.

July 22

[J] To the river in the morning, home, breakfasted, took solfèges
lesson, rewrote the translation of Latin into French,3 learnt by heart
the remainder of Henault’s parallel, went to M. Sauvage, but he was not
at home, and had left a note informing me that he was too fatigued to
give me a lesson today, and begging me to come in the morning to receive
the deficient lesson; took lesson and practised at Mme Boulet’s; after
dinner to riding lesson; riding master settled that we should go in
future at 8 in the morning. Fencing and dancing lessons.—Occupied almost
all the intervals of time during the day, with chemical classification
tables after a new and improved plan.4 Very much fatigued tonight.

July 23

[J] A complete change of weather, much rain in the morning, no bathing,
lay in bed late, being fatigued; rose, made chemical classification
tables, to M. Sauvage, read with him—more of the treatise on
pronunciation; he examined my exercises; returned to breakfast, after
breakfast translated another piece of Latin into French; began, by Lady
Bentham’s advice, to write a treatise on the definition of political
economy.—Dressed—Some talk about my attending the three remaining
lectures of a course on the Greek language, as well for the benefit of
the French as to know how the subject is treated—Continued chemical
classification tables; the son of M. Rous of Montauban came to dinner;
after dinner went with him and Mr. George to Olivier’s
spectacle.5—Olivier conducts a theatre at Paris known by the name of
Edition: current; Page: [55] Theâtre de la Nouveauté, and is famous for
ingenious feats of legerdemain, and for all sorts of pieces of
mechanism; his exhibition was very amusing, as he performed several very
ingenious tricks; in particular he passed a handkerchief from an
apparently close vase into another, he seemed to join together a lady’s
sash after it had been cut into a dozen pieces, etc. etc. After some
very comic scenes of ventriloquy, the whole concluded with a very fine
Phantasmagoria, representing, among other things, a furious
thunderstorm, with various spectres, all seeming first to approach and
then to recede. Returned to supper. This evening there was a procession
in the street, on account I suppose of some Fête—we fell into the middle
of it in going to Olivier’s.

July 24

[J] Went to bathe, but the water was very cold; staid in a very short
time; went very late to the manége because the servant had not called us
early, thinking we should certainly not go to the river such a cold
morning.—Took riding lesson, home to solfèges lesson, breakfasted alone,
all the family having breakfasted, learnt by heart part of Thomas’s
literary character of Bossuet6—to M. Sauvage, thence to Mme Boulet; home
to dinner, wrote chemical classification tables; fencing and dancing
lessons.

July 25

[J] Did not go to the river, Mr. George having a headach—to the manège
without him; having suffered very much during the night from the
toothach he went to have a tooth drawn, and I took my riding lesson
without him. Returned to breakfast; took solfèges lesson—continued
chemical tables; to M. Sauvage, who looked over my exercises; read with
him more of the Treatise on French Pronunciation in the Grammaire des
Grammaires*—to Mme Boulet, home to dinner, wrote a translation of Latin
into French; went to fencing and to dancing lessons; at my dancing
master’s house, hurt the back of my head by a fall which made me a
little sick at stomach and prevented me from writing this day’s journal
till the following day.

July 26

[J] To the river; found the water very low and very pleasant, but did
not remain long in it, having still the remains of last night’s
indisposition; it rained very hard Edition: current; Page: [56] before
we returned home, so that we were not a little wet; the unfortunate
charaban lost a fore wheel, but Mr. G. with some difficulty, restored it
to its place. The number of accidents which we are doomed to encounter
in our poor vehicle seems to be unlimited; we can already count I
overturn, I breaking down, and twice the loss of a wheel. To the manège;
took lesson of solfèges, breakfasted, learnt by heart another portion of
the character of Bossuet but better; continued chemical classification
tables; to M. Sauvage, who read with me another portion of the treatise
on pronunciation as also of the treatise on construction in the
Dictionaire des Difficultés; he corrected my Analyse of the Ode “Sic te
diva potens Cypri”; he gave me also other exercises to perform. To Mme
Boulet’s; home to dinner, continued chemical tables, to fencing and
dancing lessons; home to tea—I had the happiness of eating to night some
pain béni.

July 27

[J] To the river; very low and very pleasant; Dr. R. his sons, and Mr.
G. forded the river to the island. While there, Dr. R. slipped down in
mounting his horse, in consequence of a sudden start, and hurt his arm;
the horse ran away, forded the river, and after two ineffectual attempts
of Dr. R’s sons to lead him over again, he got finally loose, and
escaped into the high road, where after galloping a considerable time,
he was caught and brought back. This retarded our return home;
breakfasted, wrote chemical classification tables, translated a piece of
Latin into French; to Mr. Ellison’s at eleven o’clock, went with him to
the college to see the public library; it contains many fine editions of
the Greek and Latin classics, many of Stephens’s and some Glasgow;7—we
saw a copy of Aeschylus which had belonged to Racine;8 it came
afterwards to this library through the medium of the Marquis de
Pompignan who bought Racine’s library. To M. Sauvage—but being occupied,
he gave me no lesson; back to the college to the lecture on Greek.—Met
there a young man, apparently an Abbé, who talked to me a great deal
about Richard Doane, and said Richard had studied French at his house;
he promised to give me a letter, which I might give to Richard on my
return.—The lecture to-day was (besides Homer) a brief view of the state
of the modern Greek literature. Those, says the professor, wrong the
modern Greek language who call it barbarous; it comes much nearer to the
ancient Greek than the Italian to the Latin. He gave some account of the
modern pronunciation; he says that the θ is pronounced like the English
th (though he pronounced it more like si) it appears Edition: current;
Page: [57] that the υ is sometimes a vowel, sometimes a consonant, and
αυλος is pronounced as αϕλος. The vowels and diphthongs ι, υ, η, οι, αι,
ει, are pronounced all in the same way; like the English broad e. In
regard to the literature, he mentioned many books in all branches of
knowledge, of which there are translations into modern Greek; I
recollect in particular the Aeneid translated into verse,9 Lalande’s
Astronomy,10 Fontenelle’s Plurality of Worlds,11 and Fourcroy’s
Chemistry.12 Besides these he mentioned original works, in particular on
Mathematics and on Natural History: After leaving the lecture room;
returned; made chemical tables; took music lesson, dined, dressed, as
there was to be a concert; (the company wholly of English, or of French
able to speak English) Mr. Rous of Montauban and his son came, but went
away almost as soon as the company came. The only persons present whom I
knew previously were Dr. and Mrs. Russell and Mr. Fitzsimmons. The
singing, by some English young ladies resident at Toulouse, was
excellent; and the music of Mr. George, Miss Sarah, and Miss Clara,
sustained extremely well its reputation.†

Something said today of its being desirable for various reasons that I
should stay here longer than was expected, but of this, more hereafter.

July 28

[J] Did not go to the river on account of Dr. Russell’s hurt, lay in bed
late, riding, solfèges, breakfasted, began to translate into French some
Latin poetry of Lebeau;13 to M. Sauvage, who looked at my exercises,
etc.; to Mme Boulet; home to dinner at 3 o’clock, as Sir S.B. Mr. G.
Miss Clara and Lady B. were going out after dinner to pay a visit in the
country—Began copying my journal from July 20, as it will be useful for
reference. I hope you have kept the letters I have sent you as they will
be of use on my return. Dancing and fencing lessons.—The plague is
raging in the island of Majorca: precautionary measures have been taken
to prevent its coming into France, but as in many parts of the coast of
Roussillon a fishing Edition: current; Page: [58] boat can land from
Majorca, there is reasonable ground of fear, and Lady Bentham is
resolved that in our tour we shall not pass by the Perpignan
Pyrenées.—We have received most excellent news of the revolutions in
Italy; a constitution is establishing in the kingdom of Naples, and all
Italy, Rome inclusive, is revolutionized—the Pope’s temporal power is
done away with: (a most fortunate circumstance;) and all Europe seems to
be following the example so successfully set by Spain.14

July 29

[J] To the river, forded the left branch to the island and had a
pleasant bathe in the other branch: Forded it almost up to my neck.
Returned in the same way. To the manège, returned, breakfasted, took
solfèges lesson, rewrote my Latin and French exercise; to M. Sauvage; to
the Greek lecture, which was translating the parable of the Prodigal
Son15 and comparing it with the modern Greek. The roots of the ancient
Greek language seem to be almost all preserved in the modern; as also
great part of the inflexions and forms of construction. N.B. There is no
dative case; nor is there an infinitive mood, its place being supplied
by the particle γα that, corresponding to ἱνα θελω γα ειπω for θελω
ειπειν. The preposition απο governs the accusative. These are the
principal differences I have observed between the ancient and modern
language, excepting that many of the irregular inflexions are
regularized, thus τρεχω takes τρεξω in the future of the indicative.
Some words are also substituted for others formerly in more common use,
as εκειρω in general for all verbs signifying to go. Took piano lesson;
home to dinner; finished Lucian’s “Deorum Concilium”; to fencing and
dancing lessons.

July 30

[J] At four o’clock with Dr. Russell and his sons, and Mr. George, to
the forest of Buzet on the Alby road, on an entomological expedition.
The road is very beautiful; after crossing the canal, we passed through
a very fine long avenue of trees, and through the village of La croix
Daurade, after which we crossed the river Ers, and passing several hills
and pretty vallies, we passed through the villages of Castel-Moron,
Garidec, and Gemil.—On this road, in order to obtain a fine lake and
island, a round hole has been dug in a garden and heaped up in the
middle; a bridge has been thrown across, but the poor people seem never
to have thought of Edition: current; Page: [59] finding water for their
ditch, and accordingly it remains dry, except in rainy weather, when it
is a little puddle. However it is still an elegant lake. We left the
horses at Gemil and walked on to the forest of Buzet where we had a
chase of insects for some hours. The wood is very pretty. The heat of
the day brought out many butterflies, and my collection is neither small
nor trivial, as it contains some very rare kinds. We breakfasted as at
Bouconne and La Ramette with this exception that as there is a little
stream through this forest, we found a little water, though for its
clearness, it is true, much cannot be said. There is a little broken
bridge over the rivulet.—Sometime after breakfast, myself, William and
Francis Russell lost the trace of the rest of the party. We walked on
for a long time in the direction which we imagined they had taken, till
at last we found ourselves at the bridge; where, after holding a
consultation, the result was a determination to search for them in
various directions, establishing among ourselves a system of
communication by halloos. After searching thus for a considerable time,
being led astray more than once by the voices of two boys which we
mistook for the voice of Richard Russell, we united ourselves once more
and returned to the bridge, where (after resting ourselves) a second
consultation was held in due form, the result of which was to find our
way as soon as possible out of the forest which we accomplished without
difficulty, and returned immediately to the inn at Gemil. Here we
remained for some time, and at last, finding no one appear, Francis and
myself, leaving William at the inn, walked back into the wood, forming
all the way projects for insect-boxes. After no small number, I assure
you, of dissertations on the state of the wind, on the likelihood of
being heard, of hearing, etcetera, it was agreed to call out, as loud as
possible; by which means after a few halloos, we had the satisfaction of
hearing an answer, and we rencountered our companions at the entry of
the thick part of the forest. We returned to the inn, and setting out,
returned home and made our entry into Toulouse at the time when the
greater number of people were out, in no very good condition, I assure
you, not to speak of our triumphal car. On returning, dressed; saw M.
Caumbette Comon,16 the gentleman to whose country house Sir S. and Lady
Bentham went a few nights ago, dined and supped. Letter from Mr. Lowe17
to Sir S.B. begging him to take care of my health, as four years ago two
children died at Bordeaux and two at Turin, informing him also very
kindly of the price of corn and several other particulars at Caen, to
the no small amusement of us all.

July 31

[J] To our new bathing place; forded as before; my shirt got a soaking,
and I was obliged to return without one; riding lesson, breakfast,
solfèges, translated the Edition: current; Page: [60] remainder of
Lebeau’s piece; to M. Sauvage, to Mme Boulet, dined, began to write out
the division of France etc. into a Cahier bought for the purpose;
understood that we are to set off for our tour in a day or two; Mr.
George very much occupied with the necessary preparations, he could not
take fencing lesson; I took fencing and dancing lessons; called at Dr.
Russell’s for my insects of Buzet, some of the butterflies are extremely
rare, as well as beautiful.

August 1

[J] Mr. George was so occupied in packing that he could not go to bathe
nor to riding lesson; I wrote still more of the division of France and
began the Statistical part of my Cahier. To the manège; solfèges, did
not breakfast; informed that we were to set off on our tour the 3rd of
August; received my clean linen, and gave the dirty to be cleaned; began
to write out the account of my journey from London; rewrote the
translation of Lebeau, learnt by heart part of a French fable; to M.
Sauvage; read with him part of the Treatises on Construction and on
Pronunciation; music lesson, dined, continued account of journey,
fencing and dancing lessons. I understand we shall not be able to set
off before the 4th.

August 2

[J] Mr. George being obliged to have another tooth drawn, we did not go
to bathe. Took my riding lesson; breakfasted, solfèges, finished
learning fable, continued account of journey; to M. Sauvage, read with
him part of the treatise on Pronunciation; fencing and music lessons,
ordered a new pair of shoes; dined, finished account of journey with
descriptions of the towns I passed through, etc. If I had taken the
precaution of keeping copies of the letters I have written to you, since
the first (for of that I had already an abstract) my journal would be
complete from my arrival in France. In your next letter I would be much
obliged to you to let me know if you have all the letters safe, since if
you have them not I will endeavour to recollect as well as I can what
took place from June 2 to July 20. The things of importance I certainly
recollect; the only thing which will not be easy will be to make out a
precise journal of each day. This will be a good deal by guess, for it
can be no otherwise.—To fencing and dancing lessons; returned home. We
shall not be able to set off before the 5th of the month.

This letter is number 8.18

Edition: current; Page: [61]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8
10 Août1

[N] Nous quittâmes Toulouse à six heures du matin, et suivîmes d’abord
la route que nous avions pris pour aller à la forêt de Bouconne. Nous
passâmes par les villages de St. Martin sur Touch, de Colomières, et de
Leguevin. Ce dernier ést ville de poste, mais le seul hôtel, celui de
l’Ancienne Poste, n’aurait pas pu nous loger la nuit. Ce pays n’ést pas
fort agréable. Le blé ést tout moissonné, et comme on coupe le chaume
presqu’aussitôt qu’on ait rentré le blé, les champs ont toute
l’apparence d’être en jachère. Le chemin n’ést pas aussi bon que celui
de Paris.—Après avoir quitté Leguevin, nous montâmes une longue colline,
et passâmes par le village de Paujaudran. Ici le pays change de face; on
entre dans une vallée fort agréable (de la Save); elle ést variée par
des collines isolées entre les deux chaînes. Pour eviter ces collines,
la route fait beaucoup de jolis détours. Nous passâmes par une belle
avenue et arrivâmes à la ville de l’Ille-en-Jourdain, où nous trouvâmes
à l’hôtel du Lion d’Or, M. Bentham et le reste de sa famille à
dejeûner.—Après diner nous fûmes nous promener dans la ville, qui ést
assez jolie; on la renouvelle dans le style moderne; la Halle ést fort
grande, l’Eglise ést moderne, mais fort mal proportionnée: le bâtiment
ést grand et lourd, le clocher n’ést que une petite tour ronde.
L’interieur ést splendide, pour une si petite ville.2

Edition: current; Page: [62]
11 Août

[N] Nous partîmes de bon matin, traversâmes la Save, qui n’ést ici
qu’une très petite rivière, et puis passâmes par un pays agréable, plein
de collines. On voit, de quelques endroits de la route, les Pyrenées
couvertes de neige. Les rangs d’arbres qu’on voit souvent du côté de la
route lui donnent beaucoup d’agrément. Ce sont ordinairement des
mûriers; quelquefois des ormes et des peupliers. Il y avait aussi
quelques prairies; bref, le maïs (le seul grain qui n’ést pas encore
coupé) et les mûriers étaient les seules choses qui nous fesaient voir
que nous n’étions pas en Angleterre. A 9 ou 10 heures nous arrivâmes à
Gimont, ville considerable, consistante en une seule rue fort longue;
les maisons sont bâties en brique melée de pierre; la Halle ést au
milieu de la rue, et nous y passâmes dessous en voiture. Nous dejeûnâmes
de bon appetit à l’Auberge de la Truffe, et partîmes à quatre heures du
soir.—Le pays ést plein de collines pendant quatre lieues après Gimont,
il doit être Edition: current; Page: [63] joli au printemps, mais dans
cette saison-ci, l’apparence du pays ne seraient point agréable, sans
les prairies et les petits bois. D’ailleurs, l’eau manque à ce paysage.
La verdure des prairies, dont on commence à voir beaucoup, fait bien
voir qu’on les arrose par irrigation; cependant il manque la vue de
l’eau. Après avoir traversé une longue colline, nous montâmes une autre;
au sommet se trouve le village d’Aubiet, relai de poste, mais fort mal
bâtî, ayant des restes de fortification. Nous traversâmes le ruisseau
appellé les Rats, et après deux ou trois montées et descentes, la route
descend sans interruption pendant deux lieues. Notre route s’unit à
celle de Montauban à trois lieues d’Aubiet. Après avoir passé par une
longue avenue de jolis arbres, nous traversâmes le Gers, et arrivâmes à
Auch, chef lieu du département qui porte ce nom, et auparavant capitale
de la Gascogne; ést bâtie sur le côteau du Gers, les maisons sont fort
propres et fort jolies, elles sont bâties en pierre. Nous nous arrêtâmes
chez Alexandre, le seul bon hôtel dans la ville.

[lf0223-26_figure_002.jpg]

12 Août

[N] Après dejeûner nous fûmes voir la Cathedrale, remarquable surtout
des vitraux, qu’on cite comme les plus beaux de la France. Au reste,
l’église ést assez jolie. On dit que l’orgue ést fort belle, mais nous
ne restâmes pas assez longtems pour l’entendre. Auch, cheflieu etc vide
supra—Nous sortîmes d’Auch à cinq heures du soir et suivîmes d’abord le
cours du Gers. Le chemin passe entre la rivière et le côteau, qui ést
couvert d’arbres, et fort joli. Au bout de quelque tems, nous laissâmes
le Gers à gauche ainsi que le chemin de Bagnères de Bigorre; et Edition:
current; Page: [64] suivîmes le Soulom, petite rivière qui se jète dans
le Gers. Les arbres et les prairies qui enrichissent les bords de ces
deux rivières rendent la route pendant deux ou trois lieues beaucoup
plus agréable qu’auparavant, et en passant par la vallée du Soulom nous
evitâmes les grandes collines. Enfin nous quittâmes le Soulom et
commençames à monter par un chemin serpentin une colline fort longue. Au
sommet se trouve le hameau de Vignau qui ne consiste qu’en une auberge,
un rélai de poste, et deux ou trois petites maisons. La pente de la
colline ést fort rapide du côté où nous descendîmes. Un peu plus loin,
nous traversâmes la rivière appellée la Baise de devant. Ici nous
remarquâmes tous les signes de l’approche d’un orage; des nuages, le
vent qui commençait à souffler; des éclairs, quoiqu’ils ne fussent point
accompagnés de tonnerre. Il commençait aussi à faire nuit, car nous
étions partis d’Auch trop tard pour arriver de jour à notre couchée.
Nous montâmes ensuite une longue colline, et descendîmes par une pente
très rapide: après avoir passé par une longue avenue, nous traversâmes
la Baise par un beau pont et arrivâmes à Mirande. Nous nous arrêtâmes à
la première maison de la ville, savoir l’hôtel du Grand Soleil, où nous
soupâmes.—Un orage pendant la nuit.

13 Août

[N] Nous partîmes de bonne heure; notre chemin fut d’abord à travers la
ville, qui ést assez bien bâtie sur une colline. Le pays devient ici
plus divisé par des haies, et, dans plusieurs endroits, resemble
beaucoup aux champs de l’Angleterre. Nous montâmes une côte fort longue
dont la descente fut très rapide, et nous nous arrêtâmes à Mielan pour y
dejeûner et y rester jusqu’au soir. Notre voyage de ce matin fut très
agréable, en ce que les nuages empêchaient qu’il ne fît aussi chaud que
ces derniers jours.—Après être resté à Mielan jusqu’à 4 heures du soir,
nous partîmes pour continuer notre voyage. En sortant de Mielan, nous
descendîmes une colline très escarpée, traversâmes une petite rivière,
puis montâmes une autre colline fort haute. La vue du sommet de cette
colline fut des plus agréables et des plus étendues dont j’ai joui de ma
vie, et, en descendant, nous entrâmes tout d’un coup dans un pays fort
pittoresque. Les bois qui couvraient les vallons, la verdure des
prairies, les détours que fait le chemin, et dont la plupart étaient
cachés par les bocages de la colline, la vue des Pyrenées dans le
lointain à gauche, tout était uni pour nous faire jouir de cette belle
vue. Nous descendîmes par un chemin serpentin très escarpé dans quelques
endroits, et traversâmes le charmant petit village de Villecontal,
joliment situé dans la vallée du Larros, et le melange des arbres et des
jardins parmi les maisons produisait un effet fort agréable. Nous
traversâmes ensuite une autre colline, et arrivâmes à Rabastens, petite
ville à l’entrée de la plaîne de Tarbes: Elle ne consiste guère qu’en
une grande place. L’air y ést fort frais et agréable. Hôtel l’Ancienne
Poste: Nous y fûmes fort bien.

14 Août

[N] Nous partîmes de Rabastens de bon matin et nous tournâmes à gauche
pour Edition: current; Page: [65] suivre le chemin de Tarbes, qui ést
parfaitement droit.3 Notre route traversait la plaîne; cependant il
n’ést pas désagréable à cause d’une longue rangée de collines à gauche,
et des Pyrenées, nous voyions les Pyrenées devant nous, plus
distinctement à chaque moment. Près de Tarbes on distingue facilement
les montagnes qui s’élèvent, l’une au dessus de l’autre; et l’on voit
toute la chaîne des Hautes Pyrenées, avec une grande partie de celle des
Basses Pyrenées à droite, et de la Haute-Garonne à gauche. Les ruisseaux
d’eau pure qui arrosent les prairies, le bétail qu’on y voit paître,
donnent de la vie à cette campagne, variée en même tems par des bois, et
par des vignes soutenus sur de longs piquets, ou mariés aux cerisiers.
Nous arrivâmes enfin à Tarbes, ville considerable, chef lieu des
Hautes-Pyrenées, autrefois capitale de la Bigorre, bâtie sur la rive
gauche de l’Adour. Cette rivière a un lit fort large, mais dans cette
saison-ci, il n’y a que fort peu d’eau. La ville ést fort longue, et
assez bien bâtie; elle a deux places immenses. Chaque rue ést arrosée
par le moyen de ruisseaux qui coulent des deux côtés; ces ruisseaux,
sans doute, tirent leur eau de l’Adour; ils donnent aux rues une
apparence fort propre. Après avoir passé la matinée à Tarbes, nous en
sortîmes à trois heures, et entrâmes, peu après, dans la première vallée
des Pyrenées. Ici le pays devient très agréable. La route ést comprise
entre deux grandes chaînes de collines; la rivière d’Adour coule à peu
de distance à gauche; les prairies qui la bordent sont arrosées par de
nombreux ruisseaux. Dans les champs on voit croître le maïs, le petit
millet, et le seigle vert. Nous traversâmes sept villages, dont
quelques-uns sont très considerables; nous longeâmes deux autres. Toutes
les maisons de ces villages ont l’air fort propre, étant bâties en
pierres rondes, très regulièrement arrangées dans le mortier. Le devant
de presque toutes ést tourné de côté. Nous arrivâmes enfin à
Bagnères-de-Bigorre, où sont situées les eaux de la France les plus
frequentées par les malades. C’ést une ville assez considerable, située
à l’entée d’une vallée des Pyrenées. Elle n’ést pas immediatement
entourée de hautes montagnes, mais elle n’en ést pas loin. Aucun des
hôtels de la ville n’ayant pu nous loger pour la nuit, M. George nous
laissa à l’hôtel d’Espagne, et fut chercher, par toute la ville, un
apartement où nous logerions tout le tems que nous resterions à
Bagnères. Au bout de quelque tems, il en trouva un, et nous y fumes
tous; nous y soupâmes, et Mme Bentham nous annonça le plan qu’on avait
fait pour notre séjour dans les Hautes-Pyrenées:—Bagnères dut être notre
quartier general, et nous dûmes faire beaucoup de petits voyages pour
voir tout ce qu’il y a de remarquable dans les Hautes-Pyrenées. Je dus
être quelquefois de la partie, quelquefois non.

15 Août

[N] Après dejeûner je fus me promener avec M. George. Nous prîmes un
Edition: current; Page: [66] chemin fort agréable, qui nous conduisit un
peu hors de la ville, près des montagnes. Alors nous montâmes une petite
montagne toute couverte de bruyère et de fougère, entremelées de gros
quartiers de rocher. Après que M. George eût ramassé des plantes et des
insectes pour ses collections nous traversâmes un vallon, et commençâmes
à monter une autre montagne beaucoup plus haute, appellée le Mont-Né.
Elle consiste presqu’entièrement en un rocher dur. Comme je me séparai
ici de mes compagnons, je ne puis plus parler que de moi. Quelquefois je
fus obligé de grimper sur des rochers perpendiculaires, en m’appuyant
sur les buissons qui croissent en grand nombre dans les trous;
quelquefois je marchai parmi de gros quartiers répandus partout. Je
n’eus pas le tems de parvenir au sommet; mais la vue dont je jouis doit
être magnifique sous un ciel clair. S’il n’y avait point eu de
brouillard, je ne doute pas qu’on n’eût pu appercevoir, du sommet de la
montagne, tous les environs de Tarbes, jusqu’à Pau, ou même au delà;
mais je ne pus voir qu’une partie de la plaîne de Tarbes. Je descendis,
quelquefois par des sentiers, soit naturels, soit artificiels, que je
trouvai dans la montagne, quelquefois le mieux que je pouvais, en
m’aidant, aux endroits escarpés, des plantes qui s’offraient à mes
mains. J’arrivai enfin à la ville; après diner M. George eut la bonté de
me donner une leçon de botanique.

16 Août

[N] Je m’occupai, pendant la journée, à écrire mes notes sur la première
leçon de Botanique, à continuer la partie Statistique de mon Cahier sur
la division de la France, à résoudre des problèmes de Géometrie. Après
diner je fus me promener dans la ville, qui ést fort jolie. Les rues,
comme à Tarbes, sont arrosées par des canaux qui tirent leur eau de
l’Adour, et qui parcourent la plus grande partie de la ville. Les toits
sont en ardoise, ce qui fait que la ville semble fort jolie du sommet
d’une montagne. Dans le centre de la ville sont la place et la promenade
des Coustous, où l’on vend une sorte d’étoffes de laine, qu’on ne fait
que dans ce pays-ci. Bagnères ést très-frequenté pendant la saison des
eaux, mais ce doit être un désert tout l’hiver et le printemps. Le tems
y ést souvent mauvais.—A mon rétour, M. George me donna une autre leçon
de Botanique.

17 Août

[N] M. George fut de bon matin au Pic de Lhieris pour y herboriser. Pour
moi, je fus avec Melle Sarah aux bains de Salut, mais je m’y baignai
pas, parcequ’il n’y avait point de place. L’avenue qui y conduit ést
très belle, et l’on y jouit d’une belle vue dans la vallée. Après
dejeûner je reçus une lettre de mon père, j’écrivis mes notes sur la
leçon de Botanique, et je continuai ma Statistique. Alors je me promenai
avec M. et Mme Bentham dans les environs de la ville. Mme me conseilla
de sècher les plantes qui ne sont pas communes en Angleterre, et que je
trouvai ici; j’en cherchai, j’en trouvai quelques-unes, et les rapportai
à la maison. Après diner M. George, qui était revenu, arrangea ses
plantes, et m’en donna Edition: current; Page: [67] quelques-unes.—Les
bains de Salut sont remplis de l’eau chaude qui sort d’un rocher à cet
endroit; la situation en ést bien jolie; mais les bains ne répondent pas
à la beauté du lieu. La maison a l’air fort mal-propre, et même la
promenade de devant ést si sale qu’on ne peut guère y marcher sans
incommodité. Les chardons et les orties en remplissent les
environs.—L’agriculture des environs de Bagnères n’ést que médiocre. On
ne coupe le blé que quand il ést si mûr qu’on perd quelquefois plus de
la moitié de ce qu’on aurait pu recueillir. Cette faute ést bien commune
dans tous ces environs. L’irrigation des prairies ést fort soignée. Il
n’y a guère de autre grain que le maïs. Il y a pourtant eu du blé, mais
fort peu.

18 Août

[N] Je pris une leçon de Botanique, j’en écrivis mes notes, je mis
dessècher mes plantes, et me fis un filet pour attraper des insectes. Le
tems etait mauvais.

19 Août

[N] Je pris des leçons de Botanique, j’arrangeai mes plantes, je me fis
une table du prix des denrées aux endroits où j’ai passé, je continuai
ma Statistique. Le tems etait fort mauvais.

20 Août

[N] Après avoir dejeûné de bonne heure, je fis une excursion à pied pour
ramasser des plantes et des insectes. Je pris le chemin de Campan, et
longeai d’abord l’Adour. Cette rivière est remarquable par la largeur de
son lit. Au bout d’un quart de lieue, le chemin s’écarte un peu de la
rivière, en laissant une intervalle de quelques prairies. Je laissai à
gauche les villages de Gerde et d’Asté, de l’autre côté de la rivière;
un peu plus loin je passai par le village de Beaudéan. Les rues de ce
village comme celles de Bagnères, sont arrosées par des ruisseaux mais
cela n’empêche pas qu’elles ne soient fort mal propres au moins après
une pluie comme celle d’hier et d’avant hier. Ce chemin ést bordé par
des haies, les champs le sont aussi. Chaque cabane a son morceau de
terrain, environné par une haie, et l’on cultive le maïs, et le blé ou
le seigle dans une partie de chaque morceau; dans l’autre aon fait
paître le bétaila. Je rencontrai plus d’une fois des moutons, des
chevaux, et des ânes, allant au marché de Bagnères. Ayant passé le
torrent appellé l’Adour de Baudéan, je m’écartai un peu de la route pour
gravir une montagne à droite, mais je n’eus pas ble tems de monter bien
hautb. Ici pour la première fois je vis des moutons en pâturage. Je
descendai et, poursuivant mon cours, arrivai à Campan, petite ville,
ayant, comme Bagnères, son ruisseau et ses toits d’ardoise; elle ést
assez jolie, quoique les maisons n’y aient pas l’air aussi propre qu’à
Bagnères. Ici, selon l’arrangement qu’on avait fait, je rencontrai M. et
Edition: current; Page: [68] Mme Bentham, les demoiselles, et M. George,
qui allaient à Grip, sur la route de Barèges, pour voir les cascades de
l’Adour. Ils poursuivirent leur cours; et moi le mien, par la même
route, mais non avec eux, car ils étaient ctousc à cheval, ou dans le
charaban.—Après Campan, dj’avais à ma droite des montagnesd, toutes
couvertes de verdure jusqu’au sommet; j’appris d’un paysan avec qui je
m’entretins, qu’on arrose par irrigation les prairies qui donnent à ces
montagnes tant de beauté. eLes vallons qui s’y trouvaient laissaient
voir par derrièree de hautes montagnes noires. fL’Adour coulaitf à gmag
gauche, et plus loin, hs’elevaienth d’immenses rochers blancs.—La vallée
de Campan, jusqu’à Sainte-Marie, n’ést qu’un village continuel. Chaque
cabane a son morceau de terrain, et des ruisseaux d’eau claire coulent à
côté de la route. Le blé n’ést pas tout coupé, quoique près de Toulouse
il le soit depuis plus d’un mois. Le chemin ést mauvais.—Je poursuivis
mon cours jusqu’à Sainte-Marie, village peu considerable, à deux ou
trois lieues de distance de Bagnères; alors je me retournai parceque les
nuages qui s’approchaient de l’endroit où j’étais isemblaient annoncer
l’approche d’iun orage.—jAyant attrapéj un fort beau papillon devant la
maison d’un paysan, il sortit avec ses enfans, et m’ayant demandé quel
était l’usage de mon filet, pourquoi je ramassais des plantes, etc. Il
me pria d’entrer et de regarder les paysans qui s’amusaient à danser
sous un joli arbre; j’acceptai l’invitation, et les regardai. Ils
dansaient beaucoup mieux que les paysans près de Pompignan; ils avaient
quelqu’ kidéek des figures, et même des pas. Ce ne fut pas la seule fois
que pendant la journée je m’entretins avec les paysans. On me demanda
très souvent si mon père était apothicaire; car on ne put comprendre
qu’une plante pût être utile pour autre chose que pour remède. Mon filet
aussi causa lde l’létonnement màm ces bonnes gens; et comme je
m’écartais quelquefois de la route pour suivre la rivière, on me demanda
plus d’une fois si j’avais attrapé beaucoup de truites. (L’Adour ést
remarquable par ses truites.) Quand je nfus revenu jusqu’nau pont, je me
détournai du chemin pour suivre le cours de l’Adour de Baudéan; ce que
je fis jusqu’à osa jonction aveco l’Adour proprement dit. pIci lesp deux
torrents présentaient une vue fort pittoresque. J’étais sur un
promontoire couvert d’arbres Edition: current; Page: [69] et de
buissons; à droite qetaitq l’Adour, à gauche le torrent de Baudéan,
devant moi la confluence des deux, et derrière elle de hautes montagnes
blanches. Le cours des rivières ést marqué rpar desr arbres. Ce qui ne
rendait pas la vue moins pittoresque, c’était un homme qui s’occupait à
faire je ne sais quoi dans la rivière. Ayant assez joui de cette vue, je
retournai au pont, et suivis l’autre bord de l’Adour de Baudéan jusqu’à
la confluence, et même au delà. Enfin l’humidité des prairies arrosées
par la rivière m’obligea à retrouver la route, et je retournai tout
droit à Bagnères. J’avais ramassé pendant la journée beaucoup d’insectes
et de plantes; à mon retour je les arrangeai, ainsi que les plantes de
M. George, qui n’était pas revenu avec M. son père, smais qui etaits
allé plus loin, pour voir Barèges, Saint-Sauveur, et la chute du Gave à
Gavarnié, cascade de mille deux cent soixante pieds de hauteur.

21 Août

[N] Je sortis avec M. et Mme Bentham et Mademoiselle Sarah; nous
commençâmes à gravir le Mont-Olivet, mais la pluie survint, et nous
empêcha de parvenir au sommet. En bas de cette montagne il y a un Ecole
modèle d’enseignement mutuel. J’en ai vu un autre à Rabastens: J’achevai
de lire un livre appelé Guide des Voyageurs à Bagnères;4 et je commençai
à lire une Description des Hautes Pyrenées.5

22 Août

[N] Je partis dans le charaban avec Mademoiselle Clarisse pour aller
voir les cascades de Grip; celles que M. et Mme Bentham ont été voir
avant-hier. Nous passâmes par Sainte-Marie. J’ai déjà décrit la vallée
jusqu’à ce dernier village, et je n’ai plus rien à dire sur ce sujet. A
Sainte Marie la vallée se divise en deux branches; dont chacune a une
route; celle du côté gauche conduit à Arreau et celle de droite à
Barèges-les-Bains; nous suivîmes cette dernière. Peu de tems après les
montagnes des deux côtés commencent à tse rapprocher les unes dest
autres, et celles du côté gauche sont couvertes de sapins. Nous
arrivâmes enfin (par un chemin fort mauvais) à Grip, hameau consistant
en trois ou quatre maisons; nous nous arrêtâmes à une assez bonne
auberge, et laissant là la voiture et le cheval, nous suivîmes à pied la
route de Barèges (inondée dans quelques endroits par des ruisseaux) et
commençâmes à monter le Mont qui porte le nom du Tourmalet. A Edition:
current; Page: [70] peu de distance après, cette route se divise en deux
sentiers, où l’on ne peut aller qu’à cheval ou à pied. Le sentier du
côté droit conduit à Barèges; nous prîmes celui du gauche, qui nous
conduisit, toujours en montant, aux cabanes d’Artiguès, situées sur une
sorte de plâteau usur la penteu de la montagne. Ces cabanes font la
demeure de quelques bergers pendant l’été, mais elles sont couvertes de
neige tout l’hiver. Ici deux torrents s’unissent pour vformer celuiv de
l’Adour. Nous les traversâmes wsurw des ponts de planches, et puis
montâmes xjusqu’à ce que nous arrivâmes à une cascade d’yenvirony 60
pieds de hauteur, faite par la branche gauche de l’Adour, qui tombe, à
cet endroit, du haut d’un rocher. Cette cascade ést fort belle, quoique
la rivière n’y soit pas bien largex. Nous y mangeâmes ce que nous avions
porté avec nous, et puis je montai zsurz un plâteau beaucoup plus
aelevéa que la cascade, betb immediatement au-dessous des sapins. Sur
cette partie de la montagne je trouvai deux ou trois cplantes raresc. Du
plâteau j’eus une belle vue du Pic du Midi, la plus haute de toutes les
montagnes qui se trouvent en avant de la chaîne, et longtems regardée
comme la plus haute des Pyrenées. Ce pic dparaissaitd être tout près de
nous, cependant il y eavaite un intervalle de deux ou trois lieues. En
retournant, nous passâmes à une autre cascade d’environ dix pieds de
hauteur, fau dessous def la jonction des rivières, j’y descendai par un
sentier escarpé, jusqu’à un rocher qui s’étend presque de l’un à l’autre
bord de la rivière, et qui gformeg la cascade. Je fis cela dans
hl’espoirh d’y trouver des plantes, mais je n’en trouvai pas. Il y a une
troisième cascade dans l’autre branche de la rivière, mais elle ne vaut
pas, à ce qu’on dit, la peine d’y aller. iNous dînames à l’auberge sur
d’excellentes truites de l’Adouri, et nous retournâmes jensuitej à
Bagnères.—Dans cette excursion je ramassai un assez grand nombre
d’insectes et de plantes.

23 Août

[N] J’écrivis des observations sur ce pays-ci; j’achevai de lire la
description des Hautes-Pyrenées. M. Bérard, le chimiste celèbre de
Montpellier, dina avec nous.

Edition: current; Page: [71]
24 Août

[N] Je commençai à me faire des tables Logiques. M. Bérard vint après
diner. Le tems était mauvais.

25 Août

[N] M. George revint à midi, et nous dit qu’il s’était beaucoup amusé
pendant son excursion; qu’il avait trouvé la chute du Gave fort belle;
qu’il avait gravi plusieurs montagnes; il rapporta avec lui beaucoup de
plantes rares, dont il eut la bonté de me donner quelques
échantillons.—Aujourdui fête de Saint-Louis, la ville donna un kbeauk
bal, et les rues lfurentl illuminées; je fus voir l’illumination, mais
melle ne consistait que de quelquesm chandelles, ou tout au plus,
nquelques lampionsn remplis d’huile et d’eau.

10 Septembre 1820

Pau (Basses Pyrenées)

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9
10 Septembre 1820

/
Pau (Basses Pyrenées)

Mon cher père,

Des circonstances inévitables ont empêché que je ne vous aie envoyé
cette lettre aussitôt que j’aurais voulu. Par conséquent vous voyez que
le journal ne va pas plus loin que le 2 du mois, pendant que la date de
cette lettre ést du 10. Vour aurez donc probablement une autre lettre
avant qu’il soit longtems.—J’ai fait sans doute plusieurs fautes dans le
Français de cette lettre, l’ayant presque toute corrigée moi-même sans
assistance.—J’espère que ma mère se porte bien ainsi que mes soeurs et
mes frères.1 Je vous prie de vouloir bien demander à Guillaumine et à
Clarisse si elles m’ont oublié, car je n’ai rien reçu de leur part
depuis ces deux ou trois mots qu’elles m’ont écrits il y a deux mois.
N’ayant plus rien à vous dire, je remplirai le peu d’espace qui me reste
par un mot à Richard Doane.2

26 Août

[J] A Bagnères de Bigorre. J’arrangeai mes plantes et mes insectes; je
finis la lettre à mon père. Je fus me promener dans la ville avec M.
George; c’était un jour Edition: current; Page: [72] de foire. Il y eut
beaucoup de laine dans le marché, et surtout des faux. Nous vîmes aussi
des étoffes de laine, de la manufacture de ce pays-ci, de l’avoine, du
fruit, du fromage, etc. J’écrivis, avec l’aide de M. George, les noms
des plantes de mon herbier, pendant le reste de la journée. Après diner,
je fus au spectacle avec M. George; les pièces qu’on joua furent
principalement des operas; on chanta extrêmement bien, et l’on joua
passablement. Il y eut un Concerto de Cor, joué par un musicien
celèbre;3 et, tout était beaucoup mieux que nous n’attendions dans une
ville si petite. La salle de spectacle ést fort petite; elle était
presque pleine.

Usages des Béarnais et des Bigorrais

Les femmes portent un capuchon, ordinairement rouge; les veuves pourtant
le portent blanc pendant trois années après la mort de leurs maris.

Chaque année, le 13 Juin, les jurats des sept communautés Espagnoles de
Boncal, et sept jurats de Barretons avec un notaire, se rendent, chacun
de leur côté, sur le sommet des Pyrénées, au lieu nommé Arna; lieu qui
sépare le Béarn de l’Espagne. Tous sont armés de piques, et les députés
s’arrêtent, chacun sur leur territoire; les Espagnols proposent aux
Béarnais de renouveler la paix; les Béarnais y consentent, et posent
leurs piques sur la ligne de démarcation. Les Espagnols placent leurs
piques en croix sur celles des Béarnais, et le fer ést tourné vers le
Béarn. Ensuite, Boncalais et Béarnais tous mettent la main sur la croix
formée par les piques. Le notaire lit une formule de serment, et les
députés de part et d’autre répètent cinq fois Pats à bant, Paix à
l’avenir. Après ce serment, les députés se mêlent ensemble, et se
parlent comme amis. Cependant on voit sortir des bois trente hommes de
Barretons, partagés en trois bandes, conduisant trois vaches exactement
pareilles; ils se placent tour à tour sur les limites, la moitié du
corps en Espagne, et l’autre en Béarn; les députés de Boncal les
examinent et les reçoivent. Trente habitans de Boncal viennent les
prendre. S’ils les laissent échapper, elles sont perdues pour eux, et
les Béarnais ne sont pas tenus de les rendre. Après cette ceremonie, les
Espagnols traitent les Béarnais en pain, vin, et jambon; et la fête ést
terminée par un marché de bétail qui se tient dans le territoire de
Béarn.

(Essais Historiques sur le Béarn.)4

L’origine de cet usage singulier n’était autre chose qu’une querelle
entre les bergers Français et Espagnols pour une fontaine ou pour un
pâturage, je ne sais lequel des deux.

Les jurats étaient des magistrats perpetuels que les Béarnais créèrent
en 1220. Représentans de la nation, ils jugeaient, sans appel, toutes
les affaires en matière civile qui survenaient entre les habitans du
pays, ou entre le prince et ses sujets.

(Itineraire Topographique et Descriptive des Hautes-Pyrenées.)5

La diversité des langues dont on se sert dans les Pyrenées ést fort
grande. Dans la plaîne de Tarbes on parle une espèce de patois; en Béarn
on parle Béarnais, en Edition: current; Page: [73] Roussillon une sorte
de Catalan, et dans le pays des Basques, ainsi que dans la partie
montagneuse de la Bigorre, on ne s’entend guère d’un village à un autre.

Les paysans de la vallée de Campan et surtout les femmes sont les plus
malhonnêtes que j’aie jamais vus, même envers les dames.—Aussi sont-ils
les plus laids. Non seulement ont-ils l’apparence generale du visage la
moins belle peut-être de tous les paysans que j’aie jamais vus, mais un
grand nombre en ont le goître si commune dans quelques endroits des
Alpes.

[N] Je me promenai dans la ville avec M. George; c’était un jour de
foire; il y oavaito beaucoup de laine crue, et psurtout des fauxp; nous
vîmes aussi des étoffes de laine de ce pays-ci; de l’avoine, du fruit,
du fromage, etc. Après diner je fus qau spectacle avec M. Georgeq; on
joua le Dépit Amoureux,6 et deux operas, L’Irato et Le Bouffe et le
Tailleur:7 on joua passablement, et ronr chanta très bien.

27 Août

[J] J’arrangeai mes plantes, j’achevai de les nommer; j’écrivis des
notes sur ce pays-ci, j’essayai deux problèmes de Géometrie, je vous
envoyai deux lettres, datées le 24 et le 26 Août. M. Bérard dîna avec
nous.

[N] J’essayai deux problèmes de Géométrie, j’envoyai deux lettres à mon
père. M. Bérard dina avec nous.

28 Août

[J] Je partis à 7 heures du matin, pour faire une autre excursion à
pied. Je suivis la route de Campan jusqu’au pont de l’Adour de Baudéan;
alors je me tournai à droite, pour suivre la vallée de cette rivière,
appellée la vallée de Lesponne, ou quelquefois même la vallée de
Bagnères, quoique celle proprement de Bagnères finit au pont. La route
ést fort mauvaise.—Toute la vallée ne semble être qu’un seul village,
sous les trois noms diverses de Viellette, de Lesponne, et de
Traouessarou. Le plus grand, appellé Lesponne ést situé entre les deux
autres. Au délà du village de Traouessarou, le chemin n’ést plus assez
large pour que les voitures puissent y passer. Il se tourne, toujours en
montant, au côté d’une montagne; alors on parvient à quelques cabanes;
au délà des dernières cabanes, ce n’ést plus qu’un sentier où l’on ne
peut passer qu’à pied. La vallée ést terminée par de hautes montagnes
couvertes de sapins. Un vallon, où coule l’Adour de Baudéan, se tourne à
droite; j’y montai pendant quelque tems, dans l’espoir d’y Edition:
current; Page: [74] trouver quelque communication avec la vallée de
Loussouet, qui commence dans ces montagnes, et débouche dans la plaîne
de Tarbes, près de la debouchure de la vallée de Bagnères. Mais, n’y
trouvant aucune telle communication, je pris le conseil de retourner à
Bagnères par la même route que j’avais pris pour en sortir. Près du
pont, en retournant, je trouvai un sentier qui me conduisit à l’église
de Baudéan, et derrière ce village, ce sentier se joignit, un peu plus
loin, à la grande route.—Pendant cette journée je ramassai des papillons
rares, et deux ou trois plantes.

[N] Je partis à sept heures du matin, spour faires une autre excursion à
pied. Je suivis la route de Campan jusqu’au pont de l’Adour de Baudéan;
puis me tournai à droite, pour suivre la vallée de cette rivière,
appellée la vallée de Lesponne, et quelquefois même la vallée de
Bagnères. La route ést fort mauvaise. Toute la vallée ne semble être
qu’un seul village, qui porte les trois noms tdet Viellette, de Lesponne
et de Traouessarou. Après ce dernier village le chemin n’ést plus assez
large pour aucune voiture: Il userpenteu en montant, vtoujours sur lev
coté d’une montagne; puis on parvient à quelques cabanes; au delà des
dernières cabanes ce n’ést plus qu’un sentier où l’on ne peut passer
qu’à pied. La vallée ést terminée par de hautes montagnes couvertes de
sapins. Un vallon, où coule l’Adour de Baudéan, se trouve à droite; j’y
montai pendant quelque tems, mais ne trouvant aucune communication avec
la vallée de Loussouet, je pris le wpartiw de retourner par le même
chemin que xj’avais pris en venantx. Près du pont, en retournant, je
trouvai un sentier qui me conduisit près de l’Eglise de Baudéan, et
derrière le village; il se joignit plus loin à la grande route.—Je
ramassai, ypendant cette journéey des papillons rares, et deux ou trois
plantes.

29 Août

[J] Je partis à midi, avec M. George et Mlle Sarah, pour faire une autre
excursion dans le charaban. Nous prîmes d’abord la route de Lesponne,
mais avant d’être arrivé à ce village nous renvoyâmes le charaban à
Bagnères, et gravîmes une haute montagne à droite. La première région de
cette montagne était couverte de fougère, la seconde d’un bois de
chaumes, qui dans la troisième étaient entremelees de sapins, et vers le
sommet étaient presque remplacées par ces derniers. Dans un endroit près
du plus haut point, on avait coupé une très grande quantité d’arbres;
nous y trouvâmes beaucoup de fraises sauvages. Quand nous étions au
sommet, nous attendîmes à jouir d’une très belle vue; mais des nuages
qui couvraient toute la plaîne avaient monté dans les vallées, et nous
ne vîmes rien. Quelquefois cependant les nuages, en laissant entr’elles
un peu de distance, nous permîrent à concevoir de quelle vue nous
aurions pu jouir si le tems n’avait pas été si mauvais. Nous descendîmes
à travers beaucoup de bruyère, les pieds glissant à chaque moment. Le
ciel devint alors plus clair, et avant que nous fûssions en bas,
Edition: current; Page: [75] le tems fût devenu le plus beau possible.
L’endroit où nous descendîmes dans la vallée fut bien au dessus de celui
où nous avions monté. Nous passâmes par les villages de Lesponne, de
Viellette, et de Baudéan. Aussitôt que nous fûmes hors de ce dernier,
nous vîmes des éclairs, tout à fait inattendus; car l’apparence du ciel
ne les eut point promis. Nous commençâmes sur le champ à marcher le plus
vite que nous pouvions, mais sans effet. Longtems avant que nous
pûssions arriver à Bagnères, une nuage épaisse était au dessus de nous.
Bientôt le vent commença à souffler, présage inévitable d’une très
grande pluie et dans deux ou trois minutes il souffla si fort que nous
fumes presque renversés; M. George perdit sa casquette, et je pus à
peine conserver la mienne. Si nous avions été dans le charaban, nous
aurions assurément été renversés et probablement nous serions tombé dans
l’Adour. Avec beaucoup de difficulté nous parvînmes à Bagnères et
trouvâmes un grand nombre de peupliers abattus par l’orage. Nous avions
trouvé, pendant la journée, beaucoup de plantes, surtout des fougères.

[N] Je partis à midi zpour fairez une excursion dans le charaban, avec
M. George et Mlle Sarah. Nous prîmes d’abord la route de Lesponne; mais
avant d’être arrivé à ce village nous renvoyâmes le charaban à Bagnères,
et gravîmes une haute montagne à droite appellée Pic de Montaigu. La
première region de cette montagne était couverte de fougère; et la
seconde de bois; principalement de acharmesa, qui dans la troisième
bregionb etaient entremelées de sapins, et vers le sommet, étaient
presque remplacées par ces derniers. Dans un endroit près du plus haut
point, on avait coupé un très grand nombre d’arbres; nous y trouvâmes
beaucoup de fraises sauvages. Quand nous étions au sommet, nous cnousc
attendîmes à jouir d’une très belle vue; mais des nuages qui couvraient
dd’abordd la plaîne, eetaiente montés dans les vallées, et nous ne vîmes
rien. Quelquefois, il ést vrai, fils separaient assez pour nous donner
une idée de ce que nous aurions vu s’il avait fait beauf. Cette montagne
a un autre pic plus élévé que celui où nous étions parvenu.—Nous
descendîmes à travers des bruyères, en glissant à chaque gpasg. Avant
d’être harrivésh en bas, ile ciel s’eclaircit de nouveau, nous nous
trouvâmes bientôti dans la vallée bien au-delà de l’endroit jd’joù nous
ketionsk monté, et nous prîmes le chemin de Bagnères. Mais avant d’y
arriver, un orage nous surprit; le vent souffla si fort que nous fumes
presque renversés, M. George perdit sa casquette, et nous arrivâmes, non
sans difficulté, à Bagnères.—lPendant la journée nous avions trouvél
beaucoup de plantes, surtout des fougères.

Edition: current; Page: [76]
30 Août

[J] Nous partîmes de Bagnères à une heure du soir, laissant là seulement
Mme de Chesnel, l’enfant, et la femme de chambre. Nous prîmes le chemin
de Tarbes: j’ai déjà décrit cette route. Beaucoup de maïs eut été abattu
par l’orage. Nous arrivâmes à Tarbes vers trois heures, et nous y
soupâmes. Ma principale occupation pendant ces deux ou trois dernières
journées fut celle de copier mon journal.

[N] Nous partîmes de Bagnères à une heure mde l’après-midi n’y laissant
quem Madme de Chesnel, l’enfant, et la femme de chambre. Nous prîmes le
chemin de Tarbes: j’ai dejà décrit cette route. Beaucoup de maïs navaitn
été abattu par l’orage. Nous arrivâmes à Tarbes vers trois heures, et
nous y soupâmes.—Ma plus grande occupation pendant ces deux ou trois
dernières journées fut celle de copier mon journal.

31 Août

[J] Nous quittâmes Tarbes de bon matin, et traversâmes la plaîne: les
Pyrenées étaient à notre gauche; j’en trouvai la vue beaucoup plus
magnifique de loin que de près. La plaîne de Tarbes ést fort bien
cultivée. Ensuite nous montâmes une longue colline, et entrâmes dans une
lande inculte, couverte seulement de bruyère et de fougère. Au bout de
cette lande, nous entrâmes dans un pays plus cultivé. Il n’y a guère
d’autres arbres dans ce pays-ci que des chênes et des châtaniers,
quelquefois en bois ou en bosquets, quelquefois en longs rangs aux côtés
de la route. Les chênes étaient couvertes de la plus grande quantité de
glands que j’aie jamais vus ailleurs. Nous descendîmes par une jolie
avenue, et arrivâmes à Bordes, petit village, immediatement entouré d’un
pays assez agréable. On était malade à la meilleure auberge, et l’on
nous renvoya à une autre, où tout était si sale que Madme Bentham aima
mieux manger sous un arbre. Pour nous, M. Bentham et les autres, nous y
dejeûnâmes de bon appetit, nonobstant la malpropreté de tout, hors le
linge, qui était fort propre et fort fin. Nous partîmes aussitôt que les
chevaux s’étaient assez reposés, et traversâmes un pays consistant
presque seûlement en landes incultes et en bois, ou en rangs de chênes
et de châtaniers, dont les tiges étaient coupés au milieu. M. Bentham
rémarqua qu’il n’avait jamais vu croître tant de glands sur les chênes
que dans ce pays-ci. Les landes étaient souvent divisées par des haies
et l’on avait commencé à couper la fougère, probablement pour la
brûler.—Nous avons appris que la cause pourquoi la grande lande de
l’autre côté de Bordes ést laissée inculte, ést que les bergers des
montagnes ont le droit d’y faire paître leurs troupeaux pendant l’hiver;
ils ont ce droit parcequ’ils en ont joui du tems immemorial, et par les
loix de la France celui qui a joui d’un droit sans interruption pendant
soixante ans en jouit pour jamais.8—Enfin nous arrivâmes à Edition:
current; Page: [77] Pau, chef lieu des Basses-Pyrenées, et autrefois
capitale du Béarn, ville grande, dont les rues étaient fort larges et
fort airées. Nous nous arrêtâmes à l’Hôtel du Grand Cerf, autrement
appellé l’Hôtel de la Poste. Avant de dîner, je me promenai avec M.
George dans la ville, qui n’ést pas fort peuplée; on peut bien le voir,
car l’herbe croît dans presque toutes les rues. Un vallon profond
traverse la ville; il y a plus d’un pont sur ce vallon, et des maîsons
sont bâties en bas, ainsi qu’en haut. Le Gave (rivière) de Pau coule à
côté de la ville; au délà ést le côteau de Jurançon, celèbre par ses
vins. Le château ou Henri quatre passa son enfance ést situé à Pau,
presque hors de la ville.

[N] Nous quittâmes Tarbes de bon matin, et traversâmes la plaîne; les
Pyrenées etaient à notre gauche, oet se trouvant un peu eloignées, la
vue n’en était que plus belleo. La plaîne de Tarbes ést fort bien
cultivée. Ensuite nous montâmes une longue colline, et entrâmes dans une
lande inculte, couverte de bruyère et de fougère. Au bout de cette
lande, nous entrâmes dans un pays plus cultivé. Il n’y a guère d’autres
arbres que des chênes et des pchâtaignersp, ni, dans cette saison-ci,
d’autre grain que le maïs. Nous descendîmes une jolie avenue, et
arrivâmes à Borde, petit village, immediatement entouré d’un pays assez
agréable. On était malade à la meilleure auberge, et l’on nous renvoya à
une autre, où tout était si sale que Mme Bentham aima mieux manger sous
un arbre. Pour nous, M. Bentham et les autres, nous y dejeunâmes de bon
appetit, nonobstant la malpropreté de tout, qexceptéq le linge, qui
était rblanc etr fin. Nous partîmes aussitôt que les chevaux sse
fussents assez reposés, et traversâmes un pays consistant presque
tentierementt en landes et en bois, ou en rangs de uchâtaignersu et de
chênes, dont les tiges étaient coupées au milieu. Sur les chênes
croîssaient le plus grand nombre de glands que j’aie vus de ma vie. Les
landes étaient bien souvent divisées par des haies, et l’on avait
commencé à couper la fougère, probablement pour la brûler. Enfin nous
arrivâmes à Pau, chef lieu des Basses Pyrenées, et autrefois capitale du
Béarnv. Cette ville est grande, les rues sontv fort larges et fort
airées. Nous nous arrêtâmes à l’hôtel du Grand Cerf, autrement appellé
Hôtel de la Poste.—Avant dîner, je me promenai dans la ville avec M.
George.—On peut très bien voir que cette ville n’ést pas bien peuplée
puisque l’herbe croit dans presque toutes les rues. Un vallon profond
traverse la ville; des maisons sont bâties wdans lew bas, aussi bien
qu’en haut. Le Gave (rivière) de Pau coule au dessous de la ville;
au-délà se trouve le côteau de Jurançon. celèbre par ses vins. Le
château où Henri quatre passa son enfance ést situé à Pau presque hors
de la ville.

1 Septembre

[J] Nous fûmes tous voir le château d’Henri IV, un bâtiment très fort,
d’une forme irregulière, dans une fort belle situation; il domine le
côteau de Jurançon, le Gave de Pau et ses nombreux îlets, et beaucoup de
champs très cultivés. On se sert d’une des tours pour prison. Ce château
se racommode pour loger un Gouverneur. Edition: current; Page: [78] Nous
y vîmes le berceau d’Henri IV, qui n’ést autre chose qu’une écaille de
tortue. Pendant la révolution, on eut le dessein de la brûler; mais un
habitant de Pau s’entendit avec le Garde du Château pour y substituer
une autre écaille fort semblable, qu’il avait dans son cabinet; et cette
écaille fut brûlée, au lieu de l’autre, dans le marché public.9—Nous
vîmes aussi les fourchettes solides, autrefois dorées, dont Henri se
servit. De là nous fûmes au Parc qui appartient au château, et qui, en
côtoyant le Gave, domine une très belle vue. Je m’occupai pendant le
reste de la journée à écrire cette lettre. Après diner je fus chercher
un encrier de poche, mais je ne pus pas en trouver un tel que je
voulais.

[N] Nous fûmes tous voir le Château d’Henri quatre bâtiment très fort,
xdex forme irregulière, dans une très belle situation; il domine le
côteau de Jurançon, le Gave de Pau et ses nombreux îlets, et beaucoup de
champs ybieny cultivés. On se sert d’une des tours pour prison. zOn
repare ce châteauz pour loger un Gouverneur. Nous y vîmes le berceau
d’Henri IV, qui n’ést autre chose qu’une écaille de tortue: pendant la
révolution, on avoulaita la bruler; mais un habitant de Pau s’entendit
avec le Garde du Château pour y substituer une bpareille écailleb qu’il
avait dans son cabinet, et ccelle-cic fut brûlée au lieu de l’autre.
Nous vîmes aussi les fourchettes solides, detd autrefois dorées, dont
Henri se servit. Nous fûmes eensuitee au Parc fqui appartient au chateau
et d’ou l’on jouit d’f une belle vue gsur la vallée du Gaveg. Je
m’occupai pendant le reste de la journée à écrire à mon père. Après
diner je fus acheter un encrier de poche, mais je ne pus pas en trouver
un tel que je voulais.

2 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes de Pau à 7 heures du matin, et traversâmes par un beau
pont le Gave de Pau, rivière grande, divisée en canaux par de nombreux
îlets. Alors nous entrâmes dans un vallon du côteau de Jurançon, et
traversâmes un pays charmant, bien boisé, fort semblable dans quelques
endroits à l’Angleterre. Les arbres étaient principalement des chênes et
des peupliers: les côteaux couverts de prairies et de cultivation
donnèrent au pays une apparence fort jolie. Nous traversâmes la petite
ville de Gan; quelques-unes des maisons furent très propres, mais toutes
Edition: current; Page: [79] dépourvues de vitre, n’ayant que des trous
carrés dans le muraille, et des contrevents qu’on ferme en cas de
besoin. Il en ést de même presque par tous ces environs. A Gan la route
se divise en deux fourches, celle du côté gauche conduit aux Eaux bonnes
et aux Eaux chaudes, établissemens thermaux ainsi appellés. Nous prîmes
celle de droite. De Gan à Belair nous n’eûmes guère que de hautes
collines à traverser; le pays était fort pittoresque; nous jouîmes de la
vue des Pyrenées, dont nous nous approchâmes de plus en plus. La chaîne
des Basses Pyrenées me semble beaucoup moins élévée que celle des
Hautes-Pyrenées. A Belair, petit hameau dans une fort belle situation,
nous nous arrêtâmes pour y dejeûner. L’auberge fut infiniment meilleure
qu’à Bordes, quoiqu’en effet elle ne pût pas se vanter de grande chose.
Ce qui nous amusa fort, c’était un assez grand morceau d’un miroir
cassé, inséré fort soigneusement dans le muraille, afin de remplir la
place d’un second miroir, car la chambre en eut un autre, mais il y eut
deux lits, et c’était juste que chacun eût son miroir. Il n’y eut ni
fruit ni lait, ensorte que M. Bentham, qui ne mange pas de la viande à
dejeûner, n’aurait pas fait un répas très agréable, si par hasard on
n’eut pas vu passer un troupeau de chèvres, et que le chèvrier n’eut pas
été assez obligeant pour nous vendre un peu de lait.—Ayant resté pendant
trois heures à Belair, nous continuâmes notre voyage par un pays à peu
près comme celui que j’ai tantôt décrit. La verdure des prairies,
quoique dans une situation où l’irrigation est impossible, fait assez
bien voir que le climat de ce pays ést fort humide. Nous arrivâmes à
Oléron vers trois heures du soir. Après diner M. le sous-préfet de cette
ville10 vînt nous voir; il eut la bonté de nous conduire par la ville,
qui ést bâtie dans un endroit fort inégal. Sous les deux noms d’Oléron
et de Sainte-Marie, elle s’étend sur beaucoup plus d’espace que la ville
de Pau. Elle ést pourtant très peu peuplée; M. le sous-prefet nous fit
voir des maisons fort grandes habitées seulement par deux personnes,—par
trois tout au plus: La ville ést bâtie à la jonction des deux Gaves
d’Ossau et d’Aspe, qui prennent alors le nom de Gave d’Oléron. Nous
vîmes une très grande fabrique de drap, où l’on fait subir à la laine
toutes les opérations nécessaires pour la tourner en drap, par le moyen
de machines tournées par de l’eau. Après notre rétour, M. le sous-préfet
s’entretint beaucoup avec nous. Comme un grand nombre des choses qu’il
nous raconta sur les usages et les habitudes de ce pays-ci sont fort
curieuses, et qu’elles ne se trouvent dans aucun livre que Mme B. a vu,
je ne vous importunerai peut-être pas si j’en raconte ici le sommaire.

L’intérieur des maisonnettes habitées par les paysans ést fort propre,
quoique les fenêtres ne soient pas vitrées. Les lits sont composés d’une
paîllasse et de deux lits de plume: on couche pendant l’hiver entre les
deux lits de plume, dans l’été on les met l’un sur l’autre, avec une
couverture par dessus, et l’on couche sous la couverture.—Depuis la
révolution ils jouissent d’un luxe dont ils n’auraient jamais auparavant
eu l’idée. Une fille qui porte un dot de 4 ou 5000 francs Edition:
current; Page: [80] trouverait fort mauvais que son mari ne lui achetât
pas un collier du prix de 300 francs: elle ne se contenterait pas d’un
simple anneau de mariage, il lui faut une pierre précieuse. Son
trousseau se composerait au moins de 4 douzaines de chemises, 12 douz.
de serviettes, 15 ou 20 paires de bas, etc. (N.B. Je ne vous ai pas dit
que c’ést l’usage en France que le père ou les parens d’une fille qui va
se marier lui donnent tout le linge qui lui ést nécessaire, et que son
mari lui fournisse tout le reste. Ce que lui donne son père s’appelle
son trousseau.)

Les paysans de ce côté-ci sont très insolens; mais c’ést l’insolence de
la fierté, au lieu qu’à Campan c’ést celle de l’effronterie. Traitez les
Béarnais comme égaux, ils vous feront avec empressement toute service;
mais si vous laissez échapper le moindre mot, le moindre régard, qui
paraît indiquer la supériorité, ils vous feront voir, par mille
insolences, qu’ils se croient au moins aussi hauts que vous.—Ils sont
très hospitaliers. Si vous entrez dans leurs maisons, ils s’empressent
autour de vous, pour vous servir; si vous demandez une tasse de café,
ils vous la donneront.

On danse fort bien ici, même les contredanses; quoiqu’ils n’aient eu
d’autres leçons qu’en voyant danser les femmes de chambre, qui à leur
tour imitent leurs maîtresses.

Lorsqu’un paysan meurt, c’ést l’usage que les plus proches parens du
défunt donnent un grand répas à tous ceux qui ont assisté aux
funerailles, et qu’ils en fassent eux mêmes les honneurs. Un autre usage
assez singulier ést celui de louer des femmes pour pleurer, pour
s’arracher les cheveux, et pour faire paraître tous les signes de la
plus grande douleur: à les voir et à les entendre on croirait qu’elles
plaignaient leur père ou leurs enfans, ou quelqu’un de très regretté:
mais aussitôt qu’elles ont joué leur rôle, vous les verrez, aussi gais
que jamais, venir demander “mon argent” “mes dix sous.”—

C’ést aussi l’usage que quand une fille se marie, ses amies pleurent
beaucoup lorsqu’ils voient venir le cortège qui doit enlever l’épouse de
la maison paternelle. Une fois que M. le sous-préfet était à une noce de
village, il fut étonné de voir que les filles, qui venaient de danser et
de rire, se mirent à pleurer aussitôt qu’on devait enlever leur amie; il
demanda à une de ces filles pourquoi elle pleurait: alors elle s’essuya
les yeux, et dit en souriant, “Monsieur, c’ést l’usage;” puis se remit à
pleurer de toute sa force.

Dans la vallée d’Ossau, comme dans plusieurs nations de l’Orient, les
hommes s’occupent seulement à tricoter et à faire paître les moutons,
pendant que les femmes ont tout le travail de cultiver la terre, et de
porter au marché, quelquefois à la distance de cinq ou six lieues, les
produits du sol et des troupeaux.

La différence que fait la localité ést quelquefois fort marquée. Les
deux vallées d’Ossau et d’Aspe s’étendent d’Oléron jusqu’aux frontiers
d’Espagne; elles ne sont separées l’une de l’autre que par une seule
rangée de montagnes; cependant les caractères des habitans de l’un et de
l’autre diffèrent beaucoup plus que ne diffèrent quelquefois ceux des
grandes nations. Les habitans de la vallée d’Ossau sont bons comme de
bons moutons: ils sont hospitaliers, très respectueux, mais ils Edition:
current; Page: [81] ont dans leur caractère un peu de bettise; ceux de
la vallée d’Aspe, tout au contraire, sont très bien instruits, ils
parlent très bien Français, ils ont plus d’esprit qu’on ne pourrait
croire dans les hommes de leur classe; quand M. le sous préfet était à
Osse, village dans cette vallée, on le harangua de manière qu’il se
trouvait presqu’embarassé pour y répondre, de peur qu’il ne fît usage de
quelqu’expression qu’on pût trouver mauvaise: l’orateur se servit des
mots et des expressions les plus appropriées: et quand il demanda qui
put être cet orateur; c’était le charpentier de la commune! Et ce
n’était rien de singulier, car la plupart des habitans de ce village
aurait pu faire autant.—Avec cela, les Aspais ont dans leur caractère
beaucoup de finesse et de duplicité. On peut observer que presque tous
les habitans de la commune d’Osse sont des Protestans, et c’ést le seul
endroit de ce pays ci où ont resté beaucoup de Protestans depuis les
guerres de réligion.11

[N] Nous partîmes de Pau à 7 heures du matin, et traversâmes hle Gave de
Pau sur un beau pont. Cette rivière est grande et se diviseh en
plusieurs canaux par de nombreux îlets. Nous entrâmes iensuitei dans un
vallon jduj côteau de Jurançon, et traversâmes un pays charmant bien
boisé, et fort semblable dans quelques endroits kàk l’Angleterre. Les
arbres étaient principalement des chênes et des peupliers: les côteaux
couverts de prairies et de lchamps cultivés donnaientl au pays une
apparence bien jolie. Nous traversâmes la petite ville de Gan;
quelques-unes des maisons metaientm très propres, mais toutes dépourvues
de ncroiséesn n’ayant guère que des trous carrés dans le muraille, et
des contrevents qu’on ferme en cas de besoin. Il en ést de même odans
presqueo tous ces environs. A Gan la route se divise en deux fourches;
celle pdep gauche conduit aux qetablissemens thermaux nommés lesq Eaux
bonnes et rlesr Eaux chaudes. Nous prîmes celle de droite. De Gan à
Belair nous n’eûmes guère que de hautes collines à monter et à
descendre; le pays était toujours pittoresque; nous sjouissionss de la
vue des Pyrenées, dont nous nous tapprochionst enfin udeu bien près. La
chaîne des Basses Pyrenées ést beaucoup moins élévée que celle des
Hautes Pyrénées. A Belair, petit hameau vfort bien situév, nous nous
arrêtâmes pour dejeûner. wL’auberge etait infiniment meilleure qu’à
Bordes, quoiqu’en effet elle ne pûtw pas se vanter de grand’ chose. Ce
qui nous amusait fort, était un assez grand morceau Edition: current;
Page: [82] xdex miroir cassé, inséré fort soigneusement dans la
muraille, afin de yremplacery un second miroir, ce zn’ést pasz que la
chambre an’en eut un autrea, mais comme il y avait deux lits, c’était
fort juste bque chacunb eût cson miroirc.—Il n’y avait ni fruit ni lait;
par conséquent M. Bentham, qui ne mange dpoint ded viande à dejeûner,
aurait fait un répas assez desagréable, si enous n’avions vu passer par
hasarde un troupeau de chèvres, et que par un autre hasard, le chèvrier
n’eut été assez obligeant pour nous vendre un peu de lait.—Ayant resté
ici pendant quelque tems nous continuâmes notre voyage à travers un pays
à peu près comme celui que j’ai tantôt décrit. La verdure des prairies,
fdans les endroits où elles ne sont pas susceptibles d’firrigation, fait
voir que le climat de ce pays-ci ést fort humide. Nous arrivâmes vers
trois heures à Oléron, où nous dinâmes. M. le sous-préfet de
l’arrondissement vint nous voir, et eut la bonté de nous gaccompagner
pour nous faire voir la ville. Elle estg bâtie dans un endroit fort
inégal, à la jonction des deux Gaves d’Ossau et d’Aspe, qui prennent
alors le nom de Gave d’Oléron. Sous les deux noms d’Oléron et de
Sainte-Marie, cette ville hcouvreh beaucoup plus ide terraini que ne
fait celle de Pau: elle ést pourtant mal peuplée; chaque ménage a
toujours sa maison; et quelques-unes des plus grandes maisons jne sont
habitées quej par une ou deux personnes.—Après notre rétour, M. le
sous-préfet s’entretint avec M. et Mme B. et j’eus l’occasion d’acquérir
beaucoup kde renseignemensk sur les habitudes de ce pays-ci. En voici le
sommaire.

L’intérieur des maisonnettes habitées par les paysans ést fort propre,
quoique les fenêtres lne soient pas vitréesl. Les lits sont composés
d’une paillasse, et de deux lits de plumes; on couche pendant l’hiver
entre les mdeux litsm; dans l’été, on nlesn met l’un sur l’autre, avec
une couverture oparo dessus, et pl’pon couche sous la couverture.—Les
paysans de ce côté-ci sont très insolens, mais c’ést l’insolence de la
fierté, au lieu qu’à Campan c’ést celle de la grossièreté et de
l’ignorance. Traitez les Béarnais comme égaux et ils vous feront avec
empressement toute sorte de services, mais si vous laissez échapper le
moindre signe de qles regarder comme inférieursq, ils vous feront voir
par mille insolences qu’ils se croient au moins aussi hauts que
vous.—Ils sont très hospitaliers. Si vous entrez dans leurs maisons ils
s’empressent autour de vous pour vous servir; si vous demandez une tasse
de café, ils vous la donneront; car depuis la révolution, ils jouissent
rd’un luxe dont ils n’auraient jamais eu l’idée auparavantr. Une fille
qui porte un dot de 4 ou 5000 francs sprendra fort mals que son Edition:
current; Page: [83] mari ne lui achetât pas un collier tdu prix de 300
francst; elle ne se contenterait pas ud’un simpleu anneau de mariage;
vil lui fautv une pierre précieuse. Elle wapportew pour son xtrousseau
au moinsx quatre douzaines de chemises, 12 douzaines de serviettes, 15
ou 20 paires de bas, etc. Les Français ont l’usage que le père ou les
parens d’une fille qui va se marier lui donnent tout le linge yqui lui
ést necessairey, et que son mari lui zfournissez tout le reste. Le linge
que lui donne son père s’appelle trousseau. Les habitans de ce pays-ci
sont vifs et dégourdis; ceux de la vallée de Campan sont au contraire
lourds et alentsa.

On danse fort bien bicib, même les contredanses; quoiqu’ils n’aient eu
d’autres leçons cqu’en voyantc danser les femmes de chambre, dqui à leur
tour imitentd leurs maîtresses.

eLorsq’un paysan meurte, c’ést l’usage que fles plus proches parens
donnent un grand répas, a tous ceux qui ont assisté aux funerailles et
qu’ils en fassent eux mêmes les honneursf. On loue gaussig des femmes
pour pleurer, pour s’arracher les cheveux, et pour faire paraître tous
les signes de la plus grande douleur: à les voir ou à les entendre on
croirait qu’elles plaignaient leur père ou leurs enfans ou quelqu’un
hqu’ils tenaient fort cherh; imaisi aussitôt qu’elles jontj joué leur
rôle, vous les verrez aussi gais kqu’auparavantk, lvenirl demander “mon
argent,” “mes dix sous.”—C’ést encore l’usage que quand une fille se
marie, ses amies pleurent beaucoup aussitôt qu’mellesm voient arriver le
cortège qui doit enlever l’épouse de la maison paternelle. Une fois que
M. le sous-préfet était à une noce de village, il fut étonné de voir
npleurer si fort les filles, qui venaient de danser et de riren; il
demanda à une d’elles la cause de sa lamentation: là-dessus elle
s’essuya les yeux, et dit en souriant, “Monsieur c’ést l’usage”; puis se
remit à pleurer de plus belle.

Dans la vallée d’Ossau, comme dans plusieurs nations de l’Orient, les
hommes s’occupent à faire paître les moutons et à tricoter pendant que
les femmes ofonto tous les travaux ples plus laborieux: ce sont elles
qui cultiventp la terre, et qqui portentq au marché, quelquefois à la
distance de 5 ou 6 lieues, les produits du sol et des troupeaux.

La difference que fait la localité ést quelquefois très marquée. Les
deux vallées d’Ossau et d’Aspe se joignent à Oleron; la distance des
parties les plus éloignées de l’une et de l’autre Edition: current;
Page: [84] ést fort petite; cependant la différence qu’il y a dans le
caractère des habitans est rpresqu’incroyabler. Les habitans de la
vallée d’Ossau sont bons comme de bons moutons; ils sont hospitaliers,
et très respectueux, mais ils ont un peu de bêtise dans leur caractère:
ceux de la vallée d’Aspe ont plus d’esprit que stous less autres paysans
tdes environst; ils sont très instruits, ils parlent fort bien uleu
Français. Quand M. le sous-préfet était à Osse, village dans cette
vallée, von le harangua wde manière a le surprendrew; l’orateur se
servit des expressions les plus appropriées; M. le sous-préfet ne sut
pas y répondre, de peur qu’on ne trouvât que ce qu’il dirait était des
sottises:v il demanda qui était cet orateur; c’était le charpentier de
la commune! Avec cela, les habitans de la vallée d’Aspe ont dans leur
caractère beaucoup de finesse et de duplicité.—N.B. Les habitans de la
commune d’Osse sont presque tous Protestans; et c’ést le seul endroit de
ce pays-ci où xil en est resté beaucoupx depuis les guerres de réligion.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10
3 Septembre1

[J] A Oléron. Je fus avec M. et Mme Bentham voir la mâture de la marine,
c.à.d. un grand depôt de mâts qu’on apporte des montagnes; on les y
examine, et ceux qui sont jugés propres pour la marine sont flottés dans
la rivière jusqu’à Bayonne. Nous en vîmes de bien grands: M. Bentham en
mesura un de sa canne, et le trouva de 80 à 90 pieds de longueur. Delà
nous retournâmes à l’hôtel; nous y dejeûnâmes, et partîmes. Nous
montâmes une rue très escarpée; puis nous passâmes par un fort joli
pays, semblable à quelques parties de Somersetshire. Nous nous
détournâmes du chemin, à une lieue de distance d’Oléron, pour faire
visite à M. Lamotte,2 une connaissance de M. Bentham. Nous passâmes au
village de Moumour, dont les habitans sont presque tous cardeurs de
laine: cependant chacun a sa maisonnette et son jardin. M. Lamotte nous
reçut avec beaucoup de politesse; il nous fit voir son jardin, qui ést
fort joli. Nous poursuivîmes ensuite notre cours, par un pays fort bien
cultivé: on y soutient les vignes sur des treilles, comme on fait
ordinairement dans les pays humides, pour empêcher que les raisins ne se
gâtent avant de mûrir. Les villages sont très nombreux. Nous passâmes
aujourd’hui à travers où tout près de 24 villages. Les Pyrenées, que
nous laissâmes Edition: current; Page: [85] derrière nous, présentaient
une apparence fort belle, quoiqu’elles ne fussent pas aussi élevées que
dans le voisinage de Bagnères. Nous arrivâmes enfin à Navarreins, petite
ville fortifiée; nous fûmes obligés, pour y parvenir, de quitter la
grande route, et de traverser le Gave d’Oléron sur un pont de brique.
Après diner je me promenai sur le rempart. Cette ville a une garnison:
elle ést fort petite, n’ayant que 600 habitans.

[N] Je fus avec M. et Mme Bentham voir la mâture de la marine, c.à.d. le
grand depôt des ymâtsy qu’on apporte des montagnes; on les y examine, et
ceux qui sont jugés propres pour la marine sont flottés dans la rivière
jusqu’à Bayonne. Nous zenz vîmes de bien grands; M. Bentham en mesura un
de sa canne, et le trouva de 80 à 90 pieds de longueur. De là nous
retournâmes à l’hôtel; nous y dejeûnâmes et partîmes. Nous montâmes une
rue très escarpée; puis nous passâmes par un fort joli pays, semblable à
quelques parties de Somersetshire. Nous nous détournâmes du chemin à une
lieue de distance d’Oléron, pour faire visite à M. Lamotte connaissance
de M. Bentham. Nous passâmes au village de Moumour, dont les habitans
sont presque tous cardeurs de laine: cependant chacun a sa maisonnette
et son jardin. M. Lamotte nous reçut avec beaucoup de politesse; il nous
fit voir son jardin, qui ést fort joli. Nous poursuîvîmes notre cours,
par un pays fort cultivé; on y soutient les vignes sur des atreillesa
comme on fait ordinairement dans les pays humides, pour empêcher que les
raisins ne se gâtent avant que de mûrir. Les villages sont très
nombreux. Nous passâmes aujourd’hui, ou à travers ou tout près de 24
villages. Les Pyrenées, que nous laissâmes derrière nous, presentaient
une apparence fort noble, quoiqu’elles ne fussent pas aussi élevées que
dans le voisinage de Bagnères. Nous arrivâmes enfin à Navarreins, petite
ville fortifiée: nous fûmes obligés, pour y parvenir, de quitter la
grande route et de traverser le Gave d’Oléron bsurb un pont de
briques.—En entrant, les soldats nous demandèrent nos noms et où nous
allions: ayant été informé sur ces deux sujets, un d’eux (un officier,
ce me semble) dit d’un air d’importance “Apportez l’encrier:” la réponse
fut un peu mortifiante “Il n’y en a pas.”—Mais en continuant notre route
nous vîmes une feuille de papier qu’on apportait pour y écrire le nom et
domicile etc. de M. Bentham: il semblait que ce fût le seul
régistre.—Après diner je me promenai sur le rempart. Cette ville a une
garnison: elle ést fort petite, n’ayant que 600 habitans.

4 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes de Navarreins de bon matin. On nous avait dit beaucoup
de choses contradictoires sur les routes. En suivant celle que nous
conseilla un officier demeurant à Navarreins, et de la connaissance de
M. Bentham, nous quittâmes la ville par la même porte où nous y étions
entrés, et continuâmes à suivre la grande route départementale que nous
avions suivi depuis Pau. Nous entrâmes dans une espèce de plaîne
étroite, toujours en longeant le Gave d’Oléron. La grêle, qui tombe
quelquefois plus grande que les oeufs de pigeon, empêche qu’il n’y
croisse beaucoup de blé: on cultive principalement le maïs, qui fait la
principale nourriture des habitans. Quoique le pays ne fût pas aussi
pittoresque qu’entre Pau et Oléron, cependant la vue de la rivière à
droite, et des collines de Edition: current; Page: [86] chaque côte,
jointe aux nombreux villages dont on compte 34 entre Navarreins et
Escos, sur la route ou à peu de distance, rendirent le voyage très
agréable. Le chemin ést bon. Nous laissâmes à droite la ville de
Sauveterre, au delà du Gave d’Oléron; et passâmes peu après en bacq la
rivière de Soison, autrement appellée Gave de Mauléon, rivière
considérable, qui se joint, un peu au dessous, au Gave d’Oléron.
Ensuite, ayant passé par le hameau de Haute Vieille, nous continuâmes
notre route jusqu’à Escos, village assez grand, où il y avait une
auberge passable. Après dejeûner je me promenai dans le jardin, puis
m’occupai à écrire. En quittant Escos, nous laissâmes la grande route,
qui conduit à Labastide et à Came: nous y fûmes obligés de prendre un
guide, pour nous montrer le chemin qu’il fallait suivre. C’était une
petite traverse, fort mauvaise, qui s’embranchait de tems en tems.
Quelquefois la voiture put à peine y passer: c’était comme les petites
traverses de Somersetshire. Cependant cette route nous donna plus
d’amusement que la grande route ne l’eut fait. Au bout de quelque tems
nous arrivâmes à Hauterive, où nous traversâmes en bacq le Gave
d’Oléron. Ici le chemin devient un peu meilleur. Nous quittâmes la route
que nous suîvions (celle de Saliès) et toujours en longeant le Gave, qui
ést ici une grande rivière, traversâmes les villages de Caresse et de
Cassabé. Un peu au délà de ce dernier, un orage nous surprit, et nous
empêcha de beaucoup voir. Quelques-uns des éclairs tombèrent tout près
de nous: je ne les vis pas, mais les coups de tonnerre qui les suîvirent
firent bien savoir qu’ils n’étaient pas loin de nous. Près du village de
Cassabé nous retrouvâmes des rochers blancs. Nous traversâmes une lande,
et arrivâmes à la petite ville de Sordes, appellée ainsi avec raison:3
car dans les faubourgs des deux côtés, comme (au dire de Mme Bentham)
dans les villages de Provence, les rues servent de bassecour à toutes
les maisons: on peut donc concevoir la malpropreté des rues: mais ce
n’était pas tout: le pavé était, non seulement mauvais, mais aussi
couvert de bruyère et de paille qu’on y laissait pourrir, pour servir de
fumier. La ville était autrefois fortifiée, et conserve encore deux de
ses portes. Ayant quitté Sordes, nous traversâmes un pays bien cultivé,
et arrivâmes à un autre bacq, où nous traversâmes le Gave de Pau. Ici
cette rivière ést fort grande. A un quart de lieue plus loin, nous
arrivâmes à la ville de Peyrehorade, dominée par les ruines d’un vieux
bâtiment au sommet d’une colline. Nous nous arrêtâmes pour rester la
nuit à une bonne auberge, chez Labastie. Ayant fait aujourd’hui beaucoup
de chemin, nous arrivâmes un peu tard à notre couchée.—Pendant la nuit
il y eut un autre orage, accompagné de grêle.

[N] Nous partîmes de Navarreins de bon matin. On nous cavaitc dit
beaucoup de choses dcontradictoiresd sur les routes; en suivant celle
que nous conseilla un officier de la connaissance de M. Bentham,
demeurant à Navarreins, nous quittâmes la ville par la même Edition:
current; Page: [87] porte ou nous y étions entrés, et econtinuames à
suivree la grande route départementale que nous avions suîvi depuis Pau.
Nous entrâmes dans une sorte de plaîne étroite, en longeant toujours le
Gave d’Oléron. La grêle, qui tombe quelquefois plus grande que les oeufs
de pigeon, empêche qu’il n’y ait beaucoup de blé; c’ést principalement
le maïs, qui fait la plus grande nourriture des habitans. Quoique le
pays ne fût pas faussif pittoresque gqueg celui d’entre Pau et Oléron,
cependant la vue de la rivière à droite, et les nombreux villages, dont
on compte 34 entre Navarreins et Escos, ou hsurh la route ou à peu de
distance, irendirent le voyagei très agréable. Le chemin ést bon. Nous
laissâmes à droite la ville de Sauveterre, au delà du Gave d’Oléron; et
peu après, nous passâmes en bacq la rivière de Soison, autrement
appellée Gave de Mauléon, rivière considérable qui se joint, un peu
au-dessous, au Gave d’Oléron. Ensuite ayant passé par le hameau de Haute
Vielle nous continuâmes notre route jusqu’à Escos, village assez grand,
où il y javaitj une auberge passable.—Après dejeûner je me promenai dans
la campagne, puis m’occupai à écrire.—En quittant Escos nous laissâmes
la grande route, qui conduit à Labastide et à Came; nous y fûmes obligés
de prendre un guide, pour nous montrer le chemin qu’il fallait suivre.
C’était une petite traverse, fort mauvaise, qui ks’embranchaitk de tems
en tems. Quelquefois la voiture put à peine y passer: c’était comme les
petites traverses de Somersetshire. Cependant cette route nous donna
plus d’amusement que la grande route lne l’eutl fait. Au bout de quelque
tems nous arrivâmes à Hauterive, où nous traversâmes en bacq le Gave
d’Oléron. Ici le chemin devient un peu meilleur. Nous quittâmes la route
que nous suîvions (celle de Saliès) et en longeant toujours le Gave, qui
ést ici une grande rivière, nous traversâmes les villages de Caresse et
de Cassabé. Un peu au délà de ce dernier, un orage nous surprit, et nous
empêcha de mbeaucoup voirm. Quelques-uns des éclairs tombèrent tout près
de nous; je ne les vis pas, mais les coups de tonnerre qui les suivîrent
me firent bien savoir qu’ils n’étaient pas loin. Près du village de
Cassabé il y navaitn des rochers blancs. Nous traversâmes une lande, et
arrivâmes à la petite ville de Sordes, appellée ainsi avec raison; car
dans les faubourgs des deux côtés, comme dans les villages de Provence,
les rues servent de bassecour à toutes les maisons, oon peut donc
concevoiro la malpropreté des rues: mais ce n’était pas tout; le pavé
était non seulement mauvais, mais aussi couvert de bruyère et de paille
qu’on y laissait pourrir, pour servir de fumier. La ville était
autrefois fortifiée, et conserve encore deux pde ses portesp. Ayant
quitté Sordes nous traversâmes un pays bien cultivé, et arrivâmes à un
autre bacq où nous traversâmes le Gave de Pau. Ici cette rivière ést
fort grande. A un quart de lieue plus loin, nous arrivâmes à la ville de
Peyrehorade, dominée par qles ruinesq d’un vieux bâtiment au sommet
d’une colline. Nous nous arrêtâmes pour rester la nuit à un bon hôtel,
chez Labastie.—Ayant fait aujourd’hui beaucoup de chemin, nous arrivâmes
un peu tard à notre couchée. Pendant la nuit il y eut un autre orage,
accompagné de grèle.

Edition: current; Page: [88]
5 Septembre

[J] Nous dejeûnâmes à Peyrehorade; à cause d’un troisième orage qui nous
empêcha de partir. Aussitôt que le tems se fût un peu rétabli, nous
continuâmes notre voyage. Peyrehorade consiste presqu’entièrement en une
seule longue rue: le pavé n’ést pas fort bon: les maisons sont plus
hautes qu’elles ne sont ordinairement dans cette partie du midi de la
France. Peyrehorade était autrefois une ville fortifiée: il ne reste des
fortifications qu’une porte et une petite partie des murs. En quittant
Peyrehorade, nous traversâmes un pays fort cultivé et plein de collines,
quoique dans le département des Landes. Ce département, le plus étendu
de tous, excepté peut être celui de l’Aveiron, ést pourtant des moins
peuplés. La cause de cette circonstance ést qu’il consiste
presqu’entièrement en fôrêts, et en plaînes sablonneuses, couvertes de
bruyère. Dans la partie du Nord-Ouest il n’y a presque point de
villages, encore moins de villes. Quoiqu’un grand nombre de départemens,
d’une étendue beaucoup plus petite, aient cinq ou six sous-préfectures,
celle-ci n’en a que trois, et toutes se trouvent dans la partie
méridionale. Entre Mont de Marsan et Dax, telle ést la profondeur des
sables, qu’il faut deux ou trois paires de boeufs pour en tirer les
voitures publiques. Un monsieur de la connaissance de M. Bentham
traversa une fois les landes dans un petit cabriolet fort léger, tiré
par trois chevaux: cependant ils ne purent aller qu’au petit pas. Ce
n’était pas comme cela dans la route que nous prîmes: cependant elle
était mauvaise; tantôt cahotante, tantôt assez sablonneuse pour la
rendre fatiguant aux chevaux. Les landes que nous traversâmes n’étaient
ni en plaîne ni marcageuses, comme dans la partie septentrionale du
département: elles étaient, au contraire, ordinairement sur les
hauteurs, et l’on en voit beaucoup de semblables dans quelques endroits
de l’Angleterre. Nous retrouvâmes, au Pont de Lanne, notre ancien ami
l’Adour, qui, d’un petit torrent, était devenu une grande rivière. Il se
joint, un peu au dessous du bacq, au Gave de Pau, qui a reçu, peu
auparavant, les eaux du Gave d’Oléron. Nous traversâmes l’Adour, et, au
bout de quelque tems, nous arrêtâmes au hameau de Biaudos, pour faire
réposer les chevaux. Puis nous montâmes une colline un peu haute. On dit
que du sommet la mer ést visible; mais le mauvais tems nous empêcha de
la voir. Un orage nous surprit peu après, et nous ne pumes voir que ce
qui nous entoura immédiatement. Nous arrivâmes enfin à Bayonne, où nous
soupâmes, et y restâmes la nuit.

[N] Nous dejeûnâmes à Peyrehorade, à cause d’un troisième orage, qui
nous empêcha de partir. Aussitôt rque le tems se fût un peu retablir,
nous continuâmes notre voyage. Peyrehorade consiste presqu’entièrement
en une seule longue rue; le pavé n’ést pas fort bon; les maisons sont
hautes. Peyrehorade setaits autrefois fortifiée, il ne reste des
fortifications qu’tune portet et une petite partie des murs. En quittant
Peyrehorade nous traversâmes un pays fort cultivé et plein de collines,
quoique dans le département des Landes. Ce Edition: current; Page: [89]
département, le plus étendu de tous, excepté peut-être celui de
l’Aveiron, ést pourtant des moins peuplés. uCar il n’y en au presque
vpasv d’une étendue seulement mediocre qui ne wpuissew se vanter d’une
population plus nombreuse que xceluix des Landes. La cause de cette
circonstance ést yqu’ily consiste presqu’entièrement en fôréts, et en
plaînes sablonneuses, couvertes de bruyère. Dans la partie du Nord-Ouest
il n’y a guère de villages, encore moins de villes; quoiqu’un grand
nombre de départemens d’une étendue beaucoup plus petite aient cinq ou
six sous préfectures, celle-ci n’en a que trois et toutes trois se
trouvent dans la partie méridionale. Entre Mont de Marsan et Dax, telle
ést la profondeur des sables, qu’il faut deux ou trois paires de boeufs
pour en tirer les voitures publiques. Un monsieur de la connaissance de
M. Bentham traversa une fois les landes dans un petit cabriolet fort
legèr, tiré par trois chevaux; ils ne purent pourtant aller qu’au petit
pas. Ce ne fut pas comme cela dans la route que nous prîmes; cependant
elle était mauvaise, tantôt cahotante ztantôt assez sablonneuse pour la
rendre fatiguant auxz chevaux. Les landes que nous atraversâmesa
n’étaient bpoint enb plaîne; cni marecageusesc comme dans la partie
septentrionale du Département; c’était seulement du terrain dinégald
inculte, couvert de bruyère, comme eon lee voit très souvent dans
quelques endroits de l’Angleterre. Nous traversâmes en bacq, au Pont de
Lanne notre ancien ami l’Adour, qui ést ici une grande rivière, s’étant
beaucoup accru en traversant les deux départemens du Gers et des Landes.
Il se joint, un peu au dessous du bacq, au Gave de Pau, qui a reçu, un
peu auparavant les eaux du Gave d’Oléron. Nous nous arrêtâmes au hameau
de Biaudos, pour faire réposer flesf chevaux. On dit que du sommet d’une
colline au delà de Biaudos la mer ést visible; mais nous ne la vîmes
point, à cause du mauvais tems. Un orage nous surprit peu après, et nous
empêcha de rien voir excepté ce qui nous entourait immediatement. Nous
arrivâmes enfin à Bayonne, où nous soupâmes.

6 Septembre

[J] Un cinquième orage avait eu lieu pendant la nuit, et le tems ne
s’était pas encore assez rétabli pour que nous pussions faire une longue
excursion. Nous vîmes M. Blaquière, Anglais, je crois, de votre
connaissance:4 il vient d’Espagne, et doit rester quelques jours encore
à Bayonne. Nous fûmes voir la ville avec lui. Elle ést bâtie à la
jonction de l’Adour avec la Nive: l’eau de la mer vient jusqu’à Bayonne,
et l’on compte ordinairement cette ville comme un port de mer. Les rues
sont pavées de pierres plates; et le pavé ést beaucoup meilleur que ne
le sont Edition: current; Page: [90] ordinairement ceux du midi de la
France. La ville ést grande; elle a beaucoup de commerce mais il y a
fort peu de société. Les denrées s’y vendent ordinairement à haut prix.
Les ponts sur les deux rivières ne sont qu’en bois. Une partie de celui
sur l’Adour ést faite comme un pont-levis, pour y laisser passer les
grands vaisseaux. Les maisons sont hautes. Le plus grand nombre des rues
sont étroites. Il y a un Cathédrale, où se trouvent quelques virtaux
assez jolis.—Selon M. Blaquière, le peuple Espagnol ést fort léthargique
dans cette saison de danger: ils croient tout assuré, et ne se mêlent
plus des affaires publiques. Aussi les Cortes travaillent-ils très
lentement: ils laissent passer les semaines entières, sans tourner leur
attention à une seule affaire d’importance. Ils agissent en toute chose
comme si la Constitution était assurée, et les amis de la liberté
craignent beaucoup pour l’Espagne.—On a répandu la nouvelle d’une
révolution en Portugal. Celle qui a été répandue d’une révolution à
Rome, et par toute l’Italie, ést depuis longtems trouvée fausse.

[N] Nous vîmes M. Blaquière, un Anglais de la connaissance de M. Bentham
à Londres: il vient d’Espagne. Nous fûmes voir la ville avec lui. Elle
ést bâtie à la jonction de l’Adour et de la Nive: l’eau de la mer vient
jusqu’à Bayonne, et l’on compte ordinairement cette ville comme un port
de mer. Le pavé ést en pierres plates; il ést beaucoup meilleur que ne
gleg sont ordinairement ceux du Midi de la France. La ville ést grande
et a beaucoup de commerce; mais il y a fort peu de société. Les denrées
s’y vendent ordinairement très cher. Les ponts sur la rivière ne sont
hqu’enh bois; une partie de celui sur l’Adour ést fait comme un
pont-levis, pour y laisser passer les grands vaisseaux. Les maisons sont
hautes; le plus grand nombre des rues sont étroites. Il y a un
Cathédrale, où se itrouvent quelquesi vitraux assez jolis.

7 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes tous après dejeûner pour faire une excursion à pied.
Le tems était fort favorable. Après avoir longé l’Adour pendant quelque
tems, nous traversâmes des marais, et parvînmes aux sables. Ici nous
traversâmes une longue chaîne de collines sablonneuses, couvertes de
pins. Puis nous arrivâmes au phare de l’embouchure. Delà nous fûmes
bientôt aux bords de la baye de Biscaye, où nous nous amusâmes en
ramassant des coquilles et des plantes marines, et en laissant passer
les flots sur nos pieds. A l’embouchure de l’Adour il y a un longue
rangée de rochers, qui produisent beaucoup de flots fort grands. Je me
baignai très agréablement dans un petit lac d’eau salée. Nous observâmes
les progrès de l’éclipse qui devait arriver aujourd’hui: à peu près
trois quarts de la face du soleil furent obscurcis. (Je vous prie de me
faire savoir, par votre prochaine lettre, si vous avez eu un tems
favorable pour voir l’éclipse.) La diminution de la lumière était fort
apparente, quoiqu’il y eût beaucoup de sables blanches qui fesaient
Edition: current; Page: [91] rejaillir les rayons du soleil. Nous fîmes
un petit répas fort agréable, et puis retournâmes à Bayonne par un autre
sentier sur les collines sablonneuses.—Cette journée nous procura un
assez grand nombre de plantes.

[N] Nous partîmes tous après dejeûner pour faire une excursion à pied.
Après avoir longé l’Adour pendant quelque tems, nous traversâmes
quelques marais; et parvînmes aux sables. Ici nous passâmes à travers
une longue chaîne de collines, toutes composées de sable, et couvertes
de pins. Puis nous arrivâmes au phare de l’embouchure. Delà nous fûmes
bientôt aux bords de la baye de Biscaye, où nous nous amusâmes en
ramassant des coquilles et des plantes marines, et en laissant passer
les flots sur nos pieds. Je me baignai très agréablement dans jun petit
lac d’jeau salée. Nous observâmes les progrès de l’éclipse qui devait
arriver aujourd’hui; à peu près trois quarts de la face du ksoleilk
furent obscurcis. Nous retournâmes à Bayonne en suivant un autre sentier
sur les collines sablonneuses.—Cette journée nous procura un assez grand
nombre de plantes.

8 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes de Bayonne à midi, et suivîmes la route de
Peyrehorade. Je n’ai plus rien à dire sur cette route, l’ayant déjà
décrite. Nous nous arrêtâmes un peu pour faire réposer les chevaux au
hameau de Biaudos; et nous arrivâmes à Peyrehorade avant la nuit. Nous y
couchâmes.

[N] Nous partîmes de Bayonne à midi, et suivîmes la route de
Peyrehorade. Je n’ai plus lrienl à dire sur cette route, l’ayant déjà
décrite. Nous nous arrêtâmes un peu pour faire réposer les chevaux au
hameau de Biaudos, et nous arrivâmes à Peyrehorade avant qu’il fît nuit.
Nous y couchâmes.

9 Septembre

[J] N’ayant pas un long voyage à faire aujourd’hui, nous dejeûnâmes à
Peyrehorade; puis partîmes et traversâmes un pays fort semblable à celui
de l’autre côté de cette ville, excepté qu’il n’y avait point de landes,
et que la route était beaucoup meilleure. On n’y cultive guère que le
maïs. Après avoir traversé beaucoup de collines, nous arrivâmes à
Orthès, ville considérable, chef lieu d’arrondissement. Je m’y promenai
avec M. et Mme Bentham. Les environs de la ville sont très jolis. Le
château ést un vieux bâtiment en ruines, situé au sommet d’une colline;
il a dû être très fort avant l’invention de la poudre à canon. Dans son
enceinte il y a un puits fort profond.—L’auberge à Orthès ést très
bonne.

[N] N’ayant pas un long voyage à faire aujourd’hui, nous dejeûnâmes à
Peyrehorade; puis partîmes et traversâmes un pays fort semblable à celui
de l’autre côté de Peyrehorade, mexceptém qu’il n’y avait point de
landes, et que la route était beaucoup meilleure. On n’y cultive guère
que du maïs. Ayant traversé beaucoup de collines nous arrivâmes à
Orthès, Edition: current; Page: [92] ville considérable, chef lieu
d’arrondissement. Je m’y promenai avec M. et Madme Bentham. nLes
environs den la ville osonto fort pjolisp. Nous fûmes voir le château,
vieux bâtiment en ruines, qsituéq au sommet d’une colline, ril a dû être
très fortr avant l’invention de slas poudre à canon; il y a tdans son
enceinte un puits fort profondt. L’auberge à Orthès ést très bonne.

10 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes de bon matin, et, après avoir traversé une petite
colline, entrâmes dans la plaîne de Pau. Les Pyrenées, qui avaient été
cachées depuis quelque tems par des collines, commencèrent à se montrer
de nouveau. L’agriculture n’ést pas fort soignée: le maïs ést plein de
mauvaises herbes. Nous dejeûnâmes au village d’Artix. Il n’y a pas
beaucoup de hameaux ni de villages sur cette route; mais il ne manque
pas de maisons isolées. Nous laissâmes à gauche la ville de Lescar, et
entrâmes Pau, du côté du château. Nous restâmes la nuit à cette ville.

[N] Nous partîmes de bon matin et uaprès avoiru traversé une petite
colline, nous entrâmes dans la plaîne de Pau. Les Pyrenées vcommencèrent
à se montrer encore; elles avaient auparavant été cachées par des
collinesv. wL’agriculturew n’ést pas fort soignée: le maïs ést plein de
mauvaises herbes. Nous dejeûnâmes au village d’Artix. Il n’y a pas
beaucoup de villages sur cette route, mais il ne manque pas de maisons
isolées. Nous laissâmes à gauche la ville de Lescar, et entrâmes a Pau
xdu côté dux château. Nous restâmes la nuit à cette ville.

11 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes après dejeûner, et suivîmes une vallée du côteau de
Jurançon, toujours en longeant le Gave de Pau. A quelque distance de la
ville, les côteaux commencent à s’écarter l’un de l’autre de manière que
cette vallée devient plaîne. Les Pyrénées, dont nous nous approchions
directement, se présentaient à nos yeux dans un point de vue tout autre
que celui où nous les avions vues en nous approchant de Bagnères. Le Pic
du Midi d’Ossau, moins haut, il ést vrai, que celui de Bigorre, domine
pourtant toutes les montagnes du voisinage. Après avoir traversé neuf
villages, nous laissâmes à droite la ville de Naï, fort joliment située
sur la rive gauche du Gave, et arrivâmes à Coarraze, grand village sur
l’autre rive. Ici nous traversâmes le Gave sur un pont en pierre. Cette
rivière quoique Edition: current; Page: [93] considérable dans cet
endroit-ci, ést bien loin d’y être aussi grande qu’à l’endroit où nous
l’avons traversée en bacq. La vue derrière nous, sur le village de
Coarraze, le pont, et le château, ést fort jolie. Nous arrivâmes peu
après à Lestelle, grand village où nous arrêtâmes pour faire réposer les
chevaux. Un peu plus loin, et dans une situation fort pittoresque aux
pieds des montagnes, se trouve l’église celèbre de Notre Dame de
Bétharram, où les pélerinages sont très fréquentes. Une colline
immédiatement au dessus de l’église ést toute couverte de petites
chapelles. On vend à la porte de l’église une assez grande quantité de
chapelettes et de cantiques en patois. Il y a aussi un séminaire, où une
centaine d’abbés étudient tous les ans. La route fait ici un détour
charmant; elle traverse le Gave, et entre ensuite dans la vallée de
Lourdes, qui n’ést pas, comme celle de Campan, faite par deux chaînes de
hautes montagnes: celle-ci avait de l’un côté la chaîne immense des
Pyrenées, et de l’autre une rangée de collines, qui, ainsi que la
vallée, étaient couvertes de pâturage: le Gave coulait au fond de la
vallée, le rocher blanc qui constituait les montagnes se laissait voir
de tems en tems à travers la verdure, et tout conspirait à rendre cette
vallée des plus charmantes que j’aie jamais vues. Nous traversâmes
ensuite la ville de Saint Pé, et vîmes, peu après, le château de
Lourdes, qui sert de prison d’état, il se trouve sur un rocher qui
paraît inaccessible. C’ést ici la débouchure de la vallée de Luz et
d’Argelez, qui s’étend jusqu’aux frontiers d’Espagne. Nous fîmes ensuite
une descente très escarpée et entrâmes dans la ville de Lourdes qui ne
répond point à la beauté de ses alentours; les rues sont étroites, les
maisons mal bâties. Nous montâmes par une rue escarpée, et nous
arrêtâmes à l’hôtel de la poste, le meilleur de la ville. Nous n’y fûmes
pourtant pas très bien accomodés.

[N] Nous partîmes après dejeûner et suivîmes une vallée du côteau de
Jurançon, en longeant, comme auparavant, le Gave de Pau. A quelque
distance de Pau, les côteaux se séparent de plus en plus, l’un de
l’autre, et cette vallée devient plaîne. Les Pyrénées, dont nous nous
approchions directement, se présentèrent dans un point de vue tout autre
qu’en s’approchant de Bagnères. Le Pic du Midi d’Ossau, moins haut, il
ést vrai, que celui de Bigorre domine pourtant toutes les montagnes du
voisinage. Nous traversâmes neuf villages; puis laissâmes à droite la
ville de Naï, fort joliment située sur la rive gauche du Gave, et
arrivâmes à Coarraze, grand village sur l’autre rive. Nous traversâmes
le Gave sur un pont de pierre. Il s’en faut de beaucoup que cette
rivière ne soit aussi grande à Coarraze qu’à l’endroit où nous l’avions
traversé en bacq. Après avoir passé par un pays des plus jolis, nous
arrivâmes à Lestelle, grand village où nous nous arrêtâmes pour fair
réposer les chevaux. Cependant, je gravis une colline avec M. George,
mais nous n’y trouvâmes point de plantes. Un peu plus loin, au pied des
montagnes, se trouve l’église de Notre Dame de Betharram, et un
séminaire où une centaine d’abbés étudient tous les ans. La colline ést
couverte de petites chapelles. A la porte de l’église, on vend des
chapelets et des cantiques en patois. Nous nous tournâmes à gauche,
repassâmes le Gave, et entrâmes dans une vallée fort pittoresque, entre
les Pyrenées à droite, et une rangée de côteaux à gauche. Le Gave qui
coulait à notre droite, ses bords couverts de verdure, les montagnes
toutes composées d’un rocher blanc, et couvertes d’abord de pâturage
puis nues, conspiraient à rendre cette vallée le plus bel endroit
peut-être que nous avons vu dans ce voyage. Nous traversâmes ensuite la
ville de Saint-Pé, et vîmes, peu après, le château de Lourdes, situé sur
un rocher: ce château Edition: current; Page: [94] sert de prison
d’état. C’ést ici l’ouverture de la vallée de Luz et d’Argelez, qui
s’étend jusqu’aux frontiers même d’Espagne. Nous fîmes ensuite une
descente fort rapide et entrâmes Lourdes, ville considérable, qui paraît
plus jolie de loin que de près. Etant monté par une rue fort escarpée
nous nous arrêtâmes à l’hôtel de la poste, le meilleur de la ville, mais
nous n’y fûmes pas trop bien.

12 Septembre

[J] Nous quittâmes Lourdes de bon matin et traversâmes une vallée
couverte de verdure. On y cultive le lin, le maïs, le petit millet, et
le blé; ce dernier ést tout coupé. Le magnifique spectacle des Pyrenées
à notre droite, firent que ce chemin fût très agréable. Nous montâmes
deux longues collines: la route serpente beaucoup en descendant la
dernière. Près du village de Montgaillard elle se joignait à la route de
Tarbes. Nous traversâmes les villages de Trébons et de Pouzac, et
arrivâmes ensuite à Bagnères, où nous trouvâmes Mme de Chesnel en bonne
santé.

[N] Nous quittâmes Lourdes de bon matin, et traversâmes une vallée
couverte de verdure, où l’on cultive le lin, le maïs, et le petit
millet. On y avait aussi cultivé du blé, mais on l’avait tout coupé. Les
Pyrenées étaient à notre droite. Nous montâmes une colline fort longue;
la route serpente beaucoup en descendant. Tout près du village de
Montgaillard, cette route se joint à celle qui conduit de Tarbes à
Bagnères. Nous traversâmes les villages de Trébons et de Pouzac, et
arrivâmes ensuite à Bagnères, où nous retrouvâmes Mme de Chesnel en
bonne santé.—Je m’occupai pendant le reste de la journée à écrire mon
journal, à sècher les plantes que j’apportais avec moi, et arranger
celles que j’avais laissées.

5 Octobre 1820

Toulouse

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Toulouse

5 Octobre 1820

Mon cher père,

Vous voyez que j’ai longtems retardé cette lettre dans l’espérance que
M. George eût le tems de la corriger. A présent je vous l’envoie sans
que le journal des deux derniers jours soit corrigé. J’ai reçu votre
troisième lettre, qui m’a donné beaucoup de plaisir. Vous aurez bientôt
une autre lettre de ma part.—Nous partirons bientôt de Toulouse pour
aller à Montpellier.—Je vous donnerai dans ma prochaine lettre tous les
détails de mon voyage depuis Bagnères jusqu’ici.5

Edition: current; Page: [95]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11
13 Septembre1

[J] Je m’occupai à faire un itineraire des routes que nous devrons
suivre en quittant Bagnères, et à faire catalogue des plantes qui
croissent sur le Pic du Midi, etc. A trois heures du soir je partis avec
M. George et les demoiselles pour faire une excursion à ladite montagne.
Nous arrivâmes à Grip avant la nuit, nous y soupâmes, et nous couchâmes
aussitôt, afin de pouvoir partir de meilleure heure le lendemain matin.

[N] Je m’occupai à faire catalogue des plantes qui croissent sur le Pic
du Midi, à me faire un itineraire des routes que nous devrons suivre en
quittant Bagnères, etc. A trois heures du soir je partis avec M. George
et les demoiselles pour faire une excursion au Pic du Midi de Bigorre.
Nous arrivâmes à Grip avant qu’il fît nuit; nous y soupâmes, et nous
couchâmes aussitôt, afin de pouvoir partir de meilleure heure le
lendemain matin.

14 Septembre

[J] Nous quittâmes Grip à cheval à 4½ heures, avant le jour. Nous
suivîmes d’abord la route de Barèges, en montant le Tourmalet. Nous
laissâmes à gauche les cabanes d’Artigues, et les deux premières
cascades de Grip; et toujours en montant, par un sentier où les chevaux
peuvent à peine aller, arrivâmes à la troisième cascade, qui n’admet
point de comparaison avec les autres. Nous suivîmes la branche
principale de l’Adour jusqu’aux cabanes de Tramesaigues, à peu près
semblables à celles d’Artigues. Ici nous quittâmes la route, ou plutôt
le sentier de Barèges, qui traverse l’Adour, et serpente en montant le
Tourmalet proprement dit. Nous nous tournâmes à droite, montâmes par un
sentier très escarpé, puis entrâmes dans un petit vallon entre deux
hautes montagnes, appellé le Goulet de Campan. Au bout de ce vallon,
nous descendîmes un peu, jusqu’à un petit plâteau où sont situées les
cabanes appellées du Pied du Pic. Ces cabanes qui font la demeure de
quelques bergers pendant l’été (en hiver ils descendent à Bagnères) sont
de petits trous, à moitié remplis par une espèce de lit en paille où
couchent pêle mêle sept ou huit personnes. Ce qui reste d’espace ést
remplie par une sorte de banc pour s’asseoir dessus. Les cabanes sont
bâties en pierres entassées sans mortier, et sans la moindre symmetrie,
de manière qu’elles ressemblent beaucoup à une masse de ruines. La terre
nue, qui ést la seule planchée, leur sert aussi de foyer, et le même
trou leur tient lieu de cheminée, de fenêtre, et de porte. Mais tout
cela n’ést rien par rapport à ce que M. George dit avoir vu sur le Mont
Marboré. Un creux, dit-il, dans le rocher, y sert de demeure à deux
Espagnols. Ils y couchent ensemble avec leur troupeau de moutons, dont
le Edition: current; Page: [96] fumier, couvert de branches d’arbres,
leur sert de lit. Le reste de leur meuble se compose d’un pot en cuivre
et d’une culière en bois. Voilà les charmes de la vie pastorale!—La
nourriture des bergers qui habitent les Cabanes de Pied du Pic consiste
principalement en lait, dont ils portent tous les matins une grande
quantité à Bagnères. Leurs vaches paissent sur le plâteau et dans les
vallons des montagnes: ils en ont un fort grand nombre, ainsi que des
moutons: ces derniers trouvent leur nourriture sur les montagnes mêmes.
Nous en avons vu sur une très elevée, qui était toute couverte de
“sheep-walks”. J’ai vu aussi un troupeau de chèvres sur les bas
pâturages. Les bergers gardent leur lait dans une espèce de cabinets
bâties de la même manière que les cabanes: des ruisseaux d’eau très
fraîche, qui coulent sur ces cabinets empêche que le lait ne se gâte.
Près des cabanes se trouve un grand pieu garni de chevils; chacun de ces
derniers ést couronné d’un pot en cuivre.—Les bergers étaient très
honnêtes; un d’eux nous fit entrer dans sa cabane, et alluma du feu pour
nous échauffer; car le soleil ne s’était encore levé que sur les sommets
des montagnes et l’air était très froid. Le Pic du Midi de Bigorre lève
sa tête gigantesque au bout du plâteau.—Nous laissâmes paître nos
chevaux, et commençâmes, environ 7 heures, à gravir le Pic. Les
demoiselles avaient chacune leur guide, (pris à Grip) pour les aider en
montant. Après un quart d’heure de marche, nous arrivâmes à une
fontaine, où nous fîmes un petit répas fort agréable. Après avoir suîvi
un sentier serpentin sur le côteau pendant quelque tems, nous entrâmes
dans une vallée alpine, très escarpée entre le Pic du Midi proprement
dit, et une vaste rangée de rochers perpendiculaires, haute au moins de
deux à trois cents pieds. Ce vallon était tout couvert de gros quartiers
de rocher, dont quelques-uns firent voir par leur couleur qu’ils étaient
ferrugineux: ils étaient principalement composés de granit et de
schiste, le dernier souvent micacé. (Mme B. m’a expliqué la
signification de ces mots.) A l’entrée de cette vallée nous attendîmes
pendant une heure M. George, qui avait grimpé sur un rocher pour
chercher une plante; et cependant je cherchais aussi des plantes sur les
rochers à gauche. Nous continuâmes à monter et enfin, au bout du vallon,
nous arrivâmes à un plâteau très élevé. Ici nous vîmes au dessous de
nous, dans un vallon de la montagne, le lac d’Oncet, dont, au dire des
guides, on n’a jamais pu trouver le fond: dans la saison où la neige se
fond, un torrent appellé couret d’Oncet* se précipite de ce lac,
probablement dans la vallée de Barèges. Au dessus du lac, sur le côte
opposé, était un très grand glacier, d’une pente presque
perpendiculaire: au dessous, le chemin pour monter au Pic du côté de
Barèges. La hauteur de la position de cette ville fait que la montée
soit beaucoup plus courte de ce côté-là, et l’on peut monter à cheval
jusqu’au plâteau où nous étions. Nous y vîmes, en effet, les chevaux de
quelques dames, qui étaient montées au Pic. Nous nous tournâmes Edition:
current; Page: [97] ici à droite, et montâmes pendant une heure, par un
sentier couvert d’herbe, et très escarpé. A dire vrai, l’on ne peut
point l’appeler un sentier: c’était plutôt un escalier. Enfin nous
arrivâmes à un glacier qui se fondait: nous prîmes l’occasion pour faire
un petit répas; l’eau était fort bonne. Puis nous continuâmes notre
route à travers une quantité immense de cailloux (shingle) qui marque
sans doute le cours printanier de quelque torrent, et qui fît que la
marche fût très fatiguante, car nous glissâmes par ces cailloux de
manière de ne faire qu’un demi-pas avec toute l’exertion de faire un pas
tout complet. Après une autre heure de marche, nous arrivâmes au Pic
environ 1½ heures du soir. Le sommet où nous étions ést d’environ 10
pieds carrés, et de tous les côtés excepté celui où nous y fûmes montés,
il ést entouré de rochers presque perpendiculaires. Sa hauteur au dessus
du niveau de la mer ést d’un peu plus de 1500 toises, à peu près 9000
pieds. Delà nous jouîmes d’une vue la plus belle qu’on peut imaginer. Au
nord, la vallée de Lesponne, le Pic de Montaigu, et deux ou trois autres
montagnes qui paraissaient incomparablement petites: au delà, les deux
plaînes immenses de Tarbes et de Pau, qui ne semblaient faire qu’une
seule plaîne, car les collines qui les séparaient étaient à peine
visibles de la hauteur immense où nous étions. Quand le soleil se lève,
on voit, disent les guides, jusqu’à Toulouse même. Il y avait un peu de
brouillard sur l’horizon: cependant nous vîmes fort clairement la ville
de Tarbes et deux ou trois autres: Pau était probablement de ce nombre:
plus loin, les guides nous firent voir la position de la ville de Vic
Bigorre, sur la plaîne de Tarbes, mais je ne pus pas la distinguer. Les
chemins de Tarbes et de Saint-Gaudens paraissaient comme deux petits
sentiers, visibles à peine, à travers la plaîne. En tournant nos regards
vers l’orient, nous apperçumes au dessous de nous la vallée de Campan,
couverte de verdure; au delà, le Pic de Lhieris, qui, nonobstant sa
grande hauteur, ne semblait guère qu’une petite colline par rapport aux
montagnes que nous appercevions de presque tous les côtés; les villages
de Gerde et d’Asté à ses pieds, et une partie de la ville de Bagnères,
l’autre étant cachée par la montagne de Baudéan. La vue de ce côté là se
trouvait bornée par les vastes chaînes qui font les vallées de la
Garonne et de la Pique. A l’ouest, la plaîne de Pau presqu’à Bayonne;
les montagnes et le lac de Lourdes, que nous voyions très distinctement;
la vallée riante de Luz et d’Argelez. Mais jamais je n’oublierai la vue
du côté meridional. D’abord, les montagnes de la vallée de Barrèges, qui
nous empêchaient de voir cette vallée: plus loin, toute la chaîne
centrale des Pyrennées, de la vallée de Luchon, jusques au delà de la
vallée d’Aspe. Pour décrire particulièrement ce spectacle magnifique, il
n’y aurait pas assez d’une volume. Je me bornerai à vous nommer, les
plus hautes montagnes de l’est à l’ouest, dont les guides nous ont dit
les noms. La Maladetta en Aragon, citée comme le Mont Blanc† des
Pyrenées, mais dont le droit ést Edition: current; Page: [98] disputé
par deux ou trois autres; le Port d’Oo, passage en Espagne sur le sommet
d’une montagne comptée parmi les plus hautes; ensuite le Port de
Vieille; plus à l’ouest, deux hautes montagnes appelées les Montagnes
Noires, que cette couleur soit due au rocher qui les compose, ou bien
aux fôrêts qui les couvrent. Plus loin à l’occident, le Mont Pimené: du
sommet de cette montagne, dit-on, les deux plaînes de Tarbes et de
Saragossa sont visibles: le Pimené a la même hauteur à peu près que le
Pic de Midi. Derrière lui on voit la vaste montagne du Marboré, celèbre
par ses rochers perpendiculaires disposés en forme d’amphithéâtre, que
les paysans appellent la Houle (marmite) du Marboré; par l’immense
cascade de Gavarnié qui tombe de ces rochers, par ses sommets appellés
le Cylindre et les Tours du Marboré. Derrière lui encore le Mont Perdu
compté ordinairement comme la plus haute des Pyrenées: mais on commence
à croire que la Maladetta lui ést supérieure. La forme de son pic,
couvert de neige, a quelque resemblance à un pain de sucre. Je parle de
cette montagne seulement sur la foi des guides et des déscriptions, car
je n’ai pas pu la distinguer des hautes montagnes qui l’entouraient. A
l’ouest de ces monts majestueux nous apperçumes la fameuse brèche de
Roland, une montagne très haute, dont le sommet ressemble parfaitement à
une muraille, où il y a une porte aussi juste et aussi bien marquée que
si elle avait était faite par la main des hommes: selon les romans,
cette brèche fut faite par l’épée de Roland, quand il traversa les
Pyrenées en sautant.2 M. George y a été dessus quand il était à
Gavarnié, mais malheureusement les nuages l’ont empêché de rien voir. En
suivant la chaîne de l’est à l’ouest, nous vîmes la Fausse Brèche,
ouverture dans le rocher un peu semblable à la vraie brèche; le Pic du
Daillon, et le Vignemale, sans dispute la plus haute des Pyrenées
Françaises, et inférieure seulement de 40 toises au Mont Perdu. Sur
cette montagne il y avait alors une parfaite couronne de neige. La
dernière haute montagne de la chaîne ést le Pic du Midi d’Ossau,
montagne au fond de la vallée d’Ossau, peu inférieur en hauteur au Pic
du Midi de Bigorre. Plus loin nous apperçumes les montagnes, beaucoup
moins élevées, dans la direction des vallées d’Aspe et de
Baretons.—Après être resté au Pic pendant une demi-heure, nous baisâmes
le rocher avec beaucoup de dévotion, et fîmes ensuite la descente, qui
nous occupa pendant trois heures. Nous bûmes de fort bon lait aux
cabanes, et retournâmes à Grip par la même route que nous avions pris en
venant. Les guides menaient les chevaux.

[N] Nous quittâmes Grip à cheval à 4½ heures du matin, avant le
commencement du jour. Nous suivîmes d’abord la route de Barèges, en
montant le Tourmalet. Nous laissâmes à gauche les cabanes d’Artigues, et
les deux premières cascades de Grip, et toujours en montant, arrivâmes à
la troisième cascade, qui n’admet point de comparaison avec les autres.
Nous suivîmes le cours de la branche principale de l’Adour jusqu’aux
cabanes de Tramesaigues, à peu près semblables à celles d’Artigues. Ici
nous quittâmes la route de Barèges qui traverse l’Adour, et serpente
beaucoup, en montant le Tourmalet proprement Edition: current; Page:
[99] dit. Nous nous tournâmes à droite, et après être montés par un
sentier très escarpé, entrâmes dans un petit vallon appellé le Goulet de
Campan. Au bout de ce vallon, nous descendîmes à un petit plâteau où se
trouvent les cabanes appellées de Pied du Pic. Ces cabanes, qui font la
demeure de quelques bergers pendant l’été (en hiver ils descendent à
Bagnères) sont de petits trous, à moitié remplis par une sorte de lit en
paille où couchent pêlemêle sept ou huit personnes. Ce qui reste
d’espace ést remplie par une sorte de banc pour s’asseoir dessus. Les
cabanes sont bâties en pierres entassées sans mortier; la terre nue, qui
ést la seule planchée, leur sert aussi de foyer, et le même trou tient
lieu de cheminée, de fenêtre, et de porte.—La nourriture de ces bergers
consiste principalement en lait, dont ils portent tous les matins une
grande quantité à Bagnères. Leurs vaches paissent dans le plâteau et
dans les vallons; ils en ont un fort grand nombre, ainsi que des
moutons; ces derniers trouvent leur nourriture dans les pâturages des
montagnes. Nous en avons vu sur une montagne très elevée, toute couverte
des sentiers que font les moutons. J’ai vu aussi un troupeau de chèvres
tout près des cabanes. Les bergers gardent leur lait dans une sorte de
cabinet bâti en pierres rondes; des ruisseaux d’eau très fraîche, qui
coulent sous ces cabinets, empêche que le lait ne se gâte. Près des
cabanes se trouve un grand pieu garni de chevils; chacun de ces derniers
porte, au lieu de couronne, un pot en cuivre.—Les bergers étaient très
honnêtes, un d’eux nous fit entrer dans sa cabane, et alluma du feu pour
nous échauffer; car le soleil ne s’était encore levé que sur les sommets
des montagnes, et l’air était très froid. Le Pic du Midi de Bigorre lève
sa tête gigantesque au bout de ce plâteau. Nous laissâmes paître nos
chevaux et commençâmes environ 7 heures à gravir le Pic. Les demoiselles
avaient chacune leur guide pour les aider en montant. Après un quart
d’heure de marche nous parvînmes à une fontaine, où nous fîmes un petit
répas fort agréable. Un peu plus loin M. George grimpa sur un rocher
pour cueillir une plante: nous poursuivîmes, comme toujours, notre
cours, croyant qu’il put facilement nous retrouver. Nous entrâmes, peu
après, dans un vallon fort escarpé, couvert de gros quartiers de rocher,
dont quelques-uns firent voir par leur couleur qu’ils étaient
ferrugineux; d’ailleurs ils consistaient principalement en granit et en
schiste, la dernière quelquefois micacée. Le vallon séparait le Pic du
Midi d’un rocher perpendiculaire haut d’environ 200 pieds. Ici nous
attendîmes M. George pendant plus d’une heure; et dans l’intervalle je
grimpais parmi les rochers pour chercher des plantes. Enfin, ne voyant
nulle part M. George, et croyant le trouver au sommet, nous continuâmes
à monter jusqu’à un plâteau très élevé. Nous vîmes au dessous de nous,
dans un vallon de la montagne, le lac d’Oncet, dont, au dire des guides,
on n’a jamais pu trouver le fond: dans la saison humide, un torrent se
précipite de ce lac probablement dans la vallée de Barèges. Au dessus du
lac était une fort grande glacière: au dessous, le chemin, pour monter
au Pic, du côté de Barèges. La hauteur de la position de cette ville
fait que la montée soit beaucoup plus courte de ce côté-là, et l’on peut
monter à cheval jusqu’au plâteau où nous étions. Nous y vîmes les
chevaux de quelques dames qui étaient montées au Pic. Nous nous
tournâmes ici à droite et montâmes pendant une heure par un sentier
couvert d’herbe, et très escarpé. Ce chemin aurait été très dangéreux,
s’il n’avait été fait comme un escalier. Enfin nous parvînmes à une
glacière qui se fondait: nous prîmes l’occasion pour faire un petit
répas: l’eau était fort bonne. Puis nous continuâmes notre route à
travers une quantité immense de cailloux (shingle) qui marque sans doute
le cours printanier de quelque torrent, et qui fit que la route fût très
fatigant. Nous arrivâmes au Pic environ 1½ heures du soir. Le sommet où
nous étions ést d’environ dix pieds carrés, et de tous les côtés excepté
celui où nous y fûmes montés, il ést environné de rochers presque
perpendiculaires. La hauteur du Pic au dessus du niveau de la mer ést de
1500 toises, à peu près 9000 pieds. De là nous jouîmes d’une vue la plus
belle qu’on peut concevoir. Au nord, la vallée de Lesponne, le Pic du
Mont Aigu, et deux ou trois montagnes qui paraissaient incomparablement
petites; au delà les deux plaînes immenses de Tarbes et de Pau, qui ne
semblaient faire qu’une seule plaîne, car les collines qui les Edition:
current; Page: [100] séparaient n’étaient guère visibles de la hauteur
immense où nous étions. Quand le soleil se lève, on voit, jusqu’à
Toulouse même (si l’on peut croire aux guides). Il y avait un peu de
brouillard sur la plaîne: cependant nous vîmes fort clairement la ville
de Tarbes et deux ou trois autres; Pau était probablement de ce nombre:
plus loin le guide nous fit voir la position de la ville de Vic Bigorre,
mais je ne pouvais pas la distinguer. Les chemins de Tarbes et de
Saint-Gaudens semblaient être deux petits sentiers à travers les
plaînes. En tournant nos régards vers l’est, nous apperçumes l’immense
chaîne de montagnes qui fait les vallées de la Garonne et de la Neste de
Luchon; la vallée de Campan couverte de verdure; le Pic de Lhieris, qui,
nonobstant sa hauteur, ne semblait guère qu’une petite colline par
rapport aux montagnes que nous voyions de tous les côtés; les villages
de Gerde et d’Asté à ses pieds, et une partie de la ville de Bagnères,
l’autre étant cachée par la montagne de Baudéan. A l’ouest, la plaîne de
Pau presqu’à Bayonne; la vallée riante de Luz et d’Argelez; les
montagnes et le lac de Lourdes, que nous voyions très distinctement.
Mais la vue du côté du sud était la plus belle de toutes. D’abord les
montagnes de la vallée d’Aure qui nous empêchaient de voir cette vallée;
plus loin toute la chaîne centrale et occidentale des Pyrénées. Le guide
nous nomma les plus hautes montagnes, de l’orient à l’occident. La
Maladetta en Aragon, citée comme le Mont Blanc des Pyrénées, mais dont
le droit ést disputé par deux ou trois autres; le Port d’Oo, passage en
Espagne sur le sommet d’une montagne comptée parmi les plus hautes;
ensuite le Port de Vieille, plus à l’ouest, deux hautes montagnes
appellées les Montagnes Noires, que cette couleur soit due au rocher qui
les compose, ou bien aux forêts qui les couvrent. Plus loin à
l’occident, le Mont Pimené; du sommet de cette montagne on peut voir les
deux plaînes de Tarbes et de Saragossa; derrière lui, la vaste montagne
du Marboré, celèbre par ses rochers perpendiculaires disposées en forme
d’amphithéatre par l’immense cascade de Gavarnie qui tombe de ces
rochers, par son Cylindre et par ses tours, couronnés d’une neige
éternelle. Derrière, le Mont Perdu en Aragon, compté genéralement comme
la plus haute montagne de la chaîne: la forme de son pic, couvert de
neige, ést fort semblable à un pain de sucre: le sommet en ést si
escarpé que personne n’y ést jamais parvenu. Je parle de cette montagne
sur la foi des guides, car je n’ai pas pu la distinguer des hautes
montagnes qui l’entouraient. A l’ouest de ces monts majestueux se trouve
la fameuse brèche de Roland, consistant en deux grandes masses de
rocher, parfaitement semblables à une muraille, et séparées l’une de
l’autre par une intervalle aussi bien marqué que s’il avait été fait par
les mains des hommes; selon les romans cette brèche fut faite par l’épée
de Roland, quand il traversa les Pyrenées en sautant. M. George y a été
dessus quand il était à Gavarnie, mais malheureusement les nuages ont
empêché qu’il n’ait rien vu. En suivant la chaîne de l’est à l’ouest
nous apperçûmes la Fausse Brèche, une ouverture dans le rocher un peu
semblable à la vraie brèche; le Pic du Daillon; et le Vignemale, sans
dispute la plus haute des Pyrenées Françaises, inférieur seulement de 40
toises au Mont Perdu. Sur cette montagne il y avait une parfaite
couronne de neige. La dernière haute montagne de la chaîne ést le Pic du
Midi d’Ossau, autrement appellé Pic de Midi de Pau, situé au fond de la
vallée d’Ossau, peu inférieur, je crois, au Pic du Midi de Bigorre. Au
delà, nous apperçumes les montagnes, beaucoup moins élevées, du Béarn et
de la Basse Navarre.— Après avoir resté plus d’une demi-heure sur le
Pic, nous baisâmes le rocher avec beaucoup de dévotion, et fîmes ensuite
la descente qui nous occupait trois heures. Nous trouvâmes M. George en
bas. Il avait perdu le chemin, et n’avait pas pu parvenir au sommet.
Nous bûmes de fort bon lait aux cabanes, et retournâmes à Grip par la
même route où nous fûmes venu. Les guides menaient les chevaux.

15 Septembre

[J] En retournant à Bagnères, nous nous arrêtâmes à la Capucinière de
Medous, vieux bâtîment à l’entrée de la vallée de Campan. Dans le jardin
nous vîmes un Edition: current; Page: [101] châtaignier remarquable par
la hauteur de sa tige perpendiculaire; et un autre arbre dont les
branches, en s’écartant l’une de l’autre, laissent un intervalle assez
grand pour qu’une douzaine de personnes puissent y dîner. On a pavé cet
endroit, et l’on y a mis des bancs. On y monte par une échelle. Une très
grande source d’eau froide sort du rocher dans ce jardin: à peu de
distance, elle se mêle à l’Adour, dont on croit qu’elle derive. Dans ce
même rocher il y a une ventouse.—Après notre arrivée à Bagnères, je fus
me baigner aux bains appellées de Théas, dont la source chaude ést très
grande. Je me promenai dans le jardin appartenant à ces bains; il ést
très soigné.

[N] En retournant à Bagnères, nous nous arrêtâmes à la Capucinière de
Medous, où nous vîmes un châtaignier remarquable par la hauteur de sa
tige perpendiculaire; et un autre dont les branches, en s’écartant l’une
de l’autre, laissent un intervalle assez grand pour qu’une douzaine de
personnes y dinent. On a pavé cet endroit, et l’on y a mis des bancs.
Une fort grande source d’eau froide sort du rocher dans le jardin de
cette capucinière; et à peu de distance elle se mêle à l’Adour, dont on
croit qu’elle derive. Il y a aussi une ventouse dans ce même
rocher.—Après notre rétour, je fus me baigner aux bains appellées de
Théas, dont la source ést fort grande et fort chaude. Je me promenai
dans le jardin appartenant à ces bains; il ést très soigné.

16 Septembre

[J] Je m’occupai à écrire mon journal, à arranger mes plantes, et à
aider M. George, qui arrangeait tout pour partir.

[N] Je m’occupai la plupart de la journée à écrire mon journal, à
arranger mes plantes, à aider M. George, qui arrangeait tout pour partir
de Bagnères.

17 Septembre

[J] Nous quittâmes Bagnères à 7 ou 7½ heures du matin, et traversâmes
l’Adour par un pont en bois. Il nous fallut ensuite monter une colline,
pendant 20 minutes. Notre cours était maintenant de l’ouest à l’est, par
conséquent nous étions obligés (comme Mme B. rémarqua) de traverser les
chaînes latérales qui s’embranchent des Pyrenées. Nous mîmes 20 minutes
pour arriver au sommet de la chaîne commençante de la vallée de Campan.
Delà nous jouîmes d’une belle vue sur la ville de Bagnères et les
montagnes derrière elle. Nous laissâmes à gauche la route de Tournay, et
descendîmes peu à peu dans une vallée fort profonde, par un chemin le
plus serpentin que personne de nous n’avait vu auparavant. La route
traverse un bois très étendu, et hanté par des voleurs. Un paysan avec
qui je m’entretins dit qu’il y a quelquefois des asassinats sur cette
route, et qu’il ést dangéreux d’y passer dans la nuit. Au fond de la
vallée se trouve l’ancien couvent de l’Escaladieu, qui a l’apparence
d’un château nouvellement réfait. Je ne sais s’il ést habité. La rivière
de Larros coule par cette vallée. Il prend sa source dans les fôrêts du
Pic de Lhieris, et se joint à l’Adour dans le département du Gers. Nous
l’avions traversé dans la prieure partie de notre voyage, à Villecontal,
entre Mielan et Rabastens. Voyez ma lettre du 14 Août. Nous montâmes
ensuite l’autre côteau Edition: current; Page: [102] du Larros, ce qui
nous occupa au moins pendant une heure et demie. Au sommet se trouve le
village et le vieux château ruiné de Mauvesin. Un peu plus loin, nous
traversâmes le grand village de Capvern. Près d’ici sont situées des
eaux minerales, qui attirent tous les ans (dit une description)‡ sept à
huit cents étrangers. Delà nous descendîmes dans un petit vallon,§ où
nous traversâmes la Baise, la rivière de Mirande qui prend sa source
près d’ici, maintenant il n’y a guère de l’eau. (Voy. Août 14) Nous
montâmes ensuite, et traversâmes une grande lande. La route passe ici
entre deux rangées d’arbres. Au bout de cette lande, nous arrivâmes à la
petite ville de Lannemezan, où nous dejeûnâmes à une auberge très
propre, le dejeûner était bon, il y a trois ou quatre auberges dans la
ville.—Nous partîmes de Lanemezan à 3 heures du soir: la route passait
presque toujours par de belles avenues. Nous jouîmes d’une belle vue sur
les Pyrenées. Nous arrivâmes vers le coucher du soleil à Montréjau sur
la Garonne. Cette ville ést considérable. L’auberge où nous nous
arrêtâmes n’était pas égale à celle de Lanemezan: il n’y en a pas de
meilleure dans la ville.

[N] Nous quittâmes Bagnères à 7 ou 7½ heures du matin, et traversâmes
l’Adour par un pont de bois. Il nous fallut ensuite monter une colline
pendant 20 minutes. Du sommet de cette colline nous jouîmes d’une belle
vue de la ville de Bagnères et des montagnes derrière elle. Nous
laissâmes à gauche la route de Tournay, et descendîmes dans une vallée
fort profonde, par un chemin des plus serpentins que Mme B. avait jamais
vus. La route traverse un bois très grand, hanté par des voleurs; un
paysan avec qui je m’entretins dit qu’il y a quelquefois des asassinats
sur cette route, et qu’il ést dangereux d’y passer pendant la nuit. Au
fond de la vallée se trouve l’ancien couvent de l’Escaladieu, qui
présente l’apparence d’un château nouvellement refait. La rivière de
Larros coule par cette vallée: Il prend sa source dans les forêts du Pic
de Lhieris, et se joint à l’Adour dans le département du Gers. Nous
l’avions traversé à Villecontal entre Mielan et Rabastens, en venant de
Toulouse. Nous montâmes ensuite l’autre côteau du Larros, ce qui nous
occupa pendant une heure et demie au moins. Le château de Mauvesin,
autrefois fortifié, à présent en ruines, ést situé au plus haut point.
Le village de Mauvesin, que nous traversâmes peu après, se trouve sur le
plâteau du sommet. Nous arrivâmes ensuite à Capvern, village
considérable, où sont situées des eaux minerales. L’itinéraire des
Hautes Pyrenées dit que ces eaux attirent tous les ans sept à huit cents
étrangers: cependant l’apparence du village ne fait pas voir qu’il ést
frequenté; nous n’avons point vu de maisons faites pour recevoir les
étrangers, et ce village ne paraît pas autre chose que tous les villages
du voisinage. Probablement que cet Itinéraire a autant exageré sur le
village de Capvern que sur la plupart des choses dont elle parle.—Nous
poursuivîmes notre cours, et descendîmes dans un petit vallon, où notre
route se joignit à la route de Tarbes à Toulouse par Saint-Gaudens. Nous
traversâmes la rivière de Baise, que nous avions passé à Mirande: elle
n’ést ici qu’un petit ruisseau, puisqu’elle prend sa source tout près
d’où nous étions. Nous traversâmes ensuite une grande lande, et
arrivâmes à la petite ville de Lannemezan, où nous dejeûnâmes à une très
bonne Edition: current; Page: [103] auberge.—Ayant resté à Lannemezan
jusqu’à trois heures du soir, nous partîmes et traversâmes un fort joli
pays. Nous retrouvâmes ici des avenues, dont nous n’avions point vu
depuis longtems. Nous arrivâmes vers le coucher du soleil à Montréjau
sur la Garonne, ville fort considérable; avant diner je sortis avec M.
Bentham pour voir la ville; il n’y a rien de rémarquable: la vue sur la
Garonne et sur les Pyrenées ést fort belle.

18 Octobre 1820

Montpellier

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Montpellier

18 Octobre 1820

Mon cher père,

Je n’ai pas la place de rien ajouter à ce que j’ai dit dans le journal.
Je remplirai ce peu d’espace par deux ou trois notes sur le journal.
Voyez les réferences3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12
18 Septembre1

[J] En sortant de Monréjau nous descendîmes le côteau et traversâmes la
Garonne sur un pont de bois. Cette rivière n’ést pas ici un simple
torrent: son lit ést large et profond. Notre chemin nous conduisait
droit aux Pyrenées. Nous passâmes par le village de Polignan, à peu de
distance de Monréjau, traversant une petite plaîne, mais plus loin, les
côteaux commencèrent à s’élever, et la plaîne se retrecit en vallée.
Après quelques petites montées et descentes jusqu’au village de
Labroquère, nous descendîmes une pente rapide jusqu’à la Garonne, que
nous repassâmes sur un pont en pierre, beaucoup plus joli celui de
Monréjau, qui n’ést qu’en bois. Ici nous laissâmes à droite la ville de
Saint-Bertrand-de-Cominges, sans pourtant la voir. Les côteaux peu après
s’écartent l’un de l’autre, et laissent entr’eux une petite plaîne, que
nous traversâmes, et entrâmes ensuite dans la vallée de la Garonne.
Cette vallée, comme celle de Campan, ést une plaîne étroite. Nous
traversâmes cinq villages, dont Bertren était le seul qui eut quelque
chose de rémarquable: le dehors de l’auberge de ce village a plutôt
l’apparence des hôtels d’une grande ville que d’un petit village. Cette
circonstance doit s’attribuer au grand nombre de voyageurs qui s’y
arrêtent en allant ou en revenant de Bagnères-de-Luchon. Nous déjeûnâmes
à Cierp, grand village situé près de la jonction de la Garonne avec la
Pique, et à l’entrée de la vallée de Luchon. Il y a deux hôtels, celui
de France et de la Clef d’Or. Le dehors de tous deux, et surtout de
celui de France (où nous trouvâmes un bon déjeûner) était plus soigné et
avait plus d’apparence qu’on n’aurait cru dans un village. Delà nous
suivîmes la vallée de la Pique, ou de Luchon, qui n’ést point, comme
celle de Campan et de la Edition: current; Page: [104] Garonne, une
petite plaîne: ici les montagnes d’un côté commencent à s’élever des
pieds mêmes de celles du côté opposé, ne laissant entr’elles
d’intervalle que ce qui ést occupé par le lit de la rivière. Le chemin
suit par conséquent le côté de la montagne. Cette vallée ést dite être
plus pittoresque que celle de Campan, et je ne puis nier que cette
opinion ne me semble fort bien fondée. On rencontre ici à chaque pas des
rochers hardis et perpendiculaires, dont on ne voit presque point dans
la vallée de Campan. J’en ai remarquée un de très élevé, immédiatement
au dessus de la rivière: il fesait le principal ornament de la scène. On
fait sans cesse, de petites montées et descentes. Après Cierp nous
passâmes par cinq villages. Peu après, la vallée s’ouvre, et forme une
petite plaîne, entourée de tous côtes de hautes montagnes, et n’ayant
que trois ouvertures, celle de la vallée de Luchon au nord et au
midi,—et d’Oo à l’ouest. Dans un coin de cette plaîne, à l’entrée de la
vallée d’Oo, et aux pieds d’une montagne très élevée, ést la ville de
Bagnères-de-Luchon. Nous y arrivâmes vers le soir. Nous dînâmes à
l’hôtel de France: delà nous fûmes coucher à un Apartement qu’on avait
trouvé: c’était un très bon logement, chez Mme Ferras.

[N] En sortant de Monréjau nous descendîmes le côteau et traversâmes la
Garonne sur un pont de bois. Cette rivière ést ici plus qu’un torrent
des montagnes. Notre chemin nous conduisait tout droit vers les
Pyrenées. Nous passâmes par le village de Polignan, à peu de distance de
Monréjau. De là notre route était pendant quelque tems à travers une
petite plaîne, mais bientôt les côteaux commencèrent à s’élever et la
plaîne devenait vallée. Nous fîmes deux ou trois petites montées et
descentes jusqu’au village de Labroquère, sur une colline. Nous
descendîmes ensuite par une pente rapide jusqu’à la Garonne que nous
traversâmes sur un pont en pierre, beaucoup plus joli que le pont de
Monréjau. Ici nous laissâmes à gâuche le chemin de Saint Bertrand de
Cominges, les côteaux s’écartent l’un de l’autre et laissent une petite
plaîne au milieu. Nous traversâmes cette plaîne puis entrâmes dans la
vallée de la Garonne, entre deux rangées de montagnes. Les Pyrenées ne
s’élevent pas de la plaîne aussi directement de ce côté-ci que de celui
de Bagnères. Là, presqu’avant que on ne sent qu’on ést dans les
montagnes, on se trouve entouré du Pic de Midi, du Montaigu, du Pic de
Lhieris. Ici on longe pendant quelques heures deux chaînes qui s’élevent
peu à peu, de manière que quand enfin on arrive aux hautes montagnes,
elles ne frappent pas autant. La vallée de la Garonne ést d’abord, comme
celle de Campan une plaîne étroite; mais plus loin, les côteaux se
rapprochent les uns des autres et le chemin suit nécessairement le côté
de la montagne. Nous traversâmes 5 villages dont Bertren était le seul
qui avait quelque chose de rémarquable. Le dehors de l’auberge de ce
village avait plutôt l’apparence des hôtels d’une grande ville que de
celles d’un si petit village. Près de Cierp, la vallée se divise en deux
fourches, la vallée de la Pique et celle de la Garonne. Nous nous
arrêtâmes pour dejeûner à Cierp, village plus grand que Bertren, et dont
les auberges avaient la même apparence. Nous nous arrêtâmes à l’hôtel de
France, où nous étions très bien. De là nous suivîmes la vallée de la
Pique ou de Luchon. Cette vallée ést comptée comme plus pittoresque que
celle de Campan: je ne puis pas nier que cette opinion ne me semble bien
fondée. Les rochers perpendiculaires dont on ne voit presque point dans
la vallée de Campan se trouvent ici en abondance. J’en ai remarquée, une
de grande hauteur qui s’élevait audessus de la rivière et fesait le
principal ornament de la scène. On fait sans cesse de petites montées et
descentes. A la débouchure de la vallée d’Oo celle de Luchon s’ouvrit et
fait une petite plaîne. Ici, immédiatement au dessous d’une montagne
très haute, ést la ville de Bagnères de Luchon. Ici nous dinâmes à un
très bon hôtel, de France, et y Edition: current; Page: [105] restâmes
jusqu’à ce qu’on eut trouvé un apartement—chez Mme Ferras, il était fort
agréable—Nous y fûmes tous et y couchâmes.2

19 Septembre

[J] Le mauvais tems nous empêcha de sortir. Je m’occupai à copier mon
journal et à prendre une leçon de Botanique.

[N] Le mauvais tems nous empêcha de sortir. Je m’occupai à copier mon
journal et à prendre yuney leçon de Botanique.

20 Septembre

[J] Je sortis après déjeûner pour ramasser des plantes, avec M. George
et un guide qui ést un peu botaniste.—Il y a deux routes de
Bagnères-de-Luchon à Bagnères-de-Bigorre: celle pour les voitures, par
où nous sommes venus, passe par Monréjau: l’autre, où l’on ne peut aller
qu’à cheval, prend la direction de la vallée d’Oo, et passe par la ville
d’Arreau dans la vallée d’Aure, par Sainte-Marie et Campan. (Voyez plus
haut.) Nous prîmes celle-ci pour la direction de notre excursion, et
longeâmes la rivière d’Oo, qui se précipite à travers les pierres au
fond de la vallée, souvent à la base d’immenses rochers
perpendiculaires. Nous la passâmes et repassâmes deux ou trois fois: le
premier pont était en bois, les autres en pierre. Nous arrivâmes enfin
au dessous du village de Trébons, sur le penchant de la montagne à
droite. Nous quittâmes alors la route, et grimpâmes la montagne
jusqu’aux ruines d’une ancienne tour, située sur le sommet d’une rangée
de Edition: current; Page: [106] rochers inclinés. Ce vieux bâtiment,
entouré d’un bouquet d’arbres, fait un fort joli effet. Nous descendîmes
ensuite par un sentier tortueux, traversant le village de Cazaril de las
Pennes, (Cazaril des Rochers) qui fut brulé il y a quelque tems, et
qu’on rebâtit maintenant. Nous descendîmes dans la vallée de Luchon près
du petit village de Barcugnas, et delà retournâmes à Bagnères.—Cette
petite excursion nous procura trois ou quatre nouvelles espèces de
plantes, dont deux étaient fort rares.—M. George fut voir M. Paul
Boileau, Maire de la ville, et savant Botaniste, qui a fait une belle
collection des plantes du voisinage.3

[N] Je sortis après dejeûner avec M. George: nous prîmes la route
d’Arreau, celle qu’on prend ordinairement pour aller de
Bagnères-de-Luchon à Bagnères-de-Bigorre. Ce chemin longe la rivière
d’Oo, zse precipite à travers les pierres au fond d’une vallée, etz
souvent à la base d’immenses rochers perpendiculaires. Nous nous
detournâmes du chemin tout près du village de Trébons situé asur le
penchanta d’une montagne. Nous grimpâmes cette montagne jusqu’aux ruines
d’un vieux bâtiment au sommet d’un rocher: puis descendîmes par un
sentier btortueuxb, en traversant le village de Cazaril de las Pennes,
ce village qui fut brulé il y a quelque tems. Cette excursion nous
procura trois ou quatre nouvelles espèces de plantes; dont deux etaient
très rares.

21 Septembre

[J] Après avoir déjeûné de bonne heure, M. Bentham, M. George, et les
demoiselles partirent pour faire une excursion dans les montagnes, et me
permirent de les accompagner. M. George et le guide étaient à pied; les
autres à cheval. Nous traversâmes le village de Saint Mamet sur la
plaîne, puis suivîmes la vallée de Luchon, qui devient peu à peu moins
large, jusqu’à l’ancienne tour de Castelviel, au sommet d’un petit
rocher isolé dans la vallée. Ici nous laissâmes à droite le sentier qui
conduit à la vallée de Lys, et nous tournâmes à gauche pour monter la
Gorge de Burbe. Près d’ici nous rencontrâmes deux soldats fesant partie
du cordon établi pour empêcher la communication entre la France et
l’Espagne, à cause de la peste dans l’île de Majorque. Ils nous dirent
que la maladie était parvenu à Barcelonne en Catalogne (ce qu’on a
trouvé depuis être faux) et que si nous suîvions notre projet de
descendre à la vallée d’Aran, on ne nous permettrait pas de revenir sans
faire quarantaine. Nous montâmes cependant la gorge qui ést couverte de
bois, excepté sur un plâteau à moitié chemin du sommet. Ce plâteau ést
un beau pâturage, couvert d’une immense quantité de bétail. Au haut de
cette gorge ést le Portillon, passage de la vallée de Luchon dans celle
d’Aran. On a pris pour le limite de la France et de l’Espagne, la cime
de la chaîne principale, et l’on a donné le nom de Port à tous les
passages d’un versant à l’autre. Mais la vallée d’Aran (où la Garonne
prend sa source) fait une exception à la règle, étant en Espagne,
Edition: current; Page: [107] quoique sur le versant septentrional de la
chaîne: on appelle donc la communication de cette vallée dans la vallée
de Luchon, le Portillon, c.à.d. le Petit Port. On pourrait aller à la
vallée d’Aran du côté de France sans traverser de montagnes, en longeant
la Garonne jusqu’à sa source.—Après avoir resté quelque tems au
Portillon, nous retournâmes à Bagnères.

[N] Après avoir dejeûné de bonne heure, M. Bentham, M. George, et les
demoiselles partirent pour faire une excursion dans les montagnes: ils
me permirent de les accompagner, M. George et le guide étaient à pied:
les autres à cheval. Nous traversâmes le village de [Saint Mamet]4 et
suivîmes la vallée de Luchon, qui devient peu à peu moins large, jusqu’à
l’ancienne tour de Castelviel. Près de cet endroit nous trouvâmes deux
soldats fesant partie du détachement pour empêcher la communication
entre la France et l’Espagne, à cause de la peste qui, est parvenue (à
ce que l’on dit) de l’île de Majorque à Barcelonne en Catalogne. On en a
mis de pareils dans tout le frontier. Ces soldats nous prévinrent que si
nous csuivions notre projet de descendrec dans la vallée d’Aran (qui
fait partie de l’Espagne,) on ne nous permettrait pas de revenir sans
faire quarantaine. Nous dne montâmes donc que jusqu’à la gorge de Burb,
etd au Portillon, c.à.d. au Petit Port, passage de la vallée de Luchon
dans celle d’Aran. (On a donné le nom de Port à tous les passages equi
communiquent d’un versant à l’autre des montagnese.) Puis nous
retournâmes à Bagnères-de-Luchon.5

22 Septembre

[J] Le mauvais tems nous empêcha de faire des excursions. Je m’occupai à
écrire mon journal, à faire catalogue des plantes qui croissent dans ces
environs, etc. Je n’avais presque point de livres pour continuer mes
études, ni même des livres Français que je n’avais déjà lus deux ou
trois fois.6

23 Septembre

[J] J’accompagnai M. George et le guide dans une excursion botanique à
la montagne d’Esquierry, une des plus riches de la chaîne en plantes
rares. Nous suivîmes, comme nous avions fait dans notre première
excursion, la route d’Arreau et de Bagnères-de-Bigorre, le long de la
vallée d’Oo, qui se divise, près Edition: current; Page: [108] de
Trébons, en deux fourches; la route d’Arreau prend la fourche de droite,
appellée la vallée de Larboust; l’autre ést la vallée d’Oueil. Nous
suivîmes la première, dont les côteaux, au moins ceux de droite, sont
d’une pente plus douce que nous n’avons ordinairement vus dans les
Pryenées: ce qui fait que la vallée paraîsse fort large. Après une
courte montée, la route suit les côteaux de droite, et nous y jouîmes
d’une vue, non des plus frappantes, mais des plus agréables de ces
environs: surtout comme la vallée ést presqu’ouverte à l’est, de manière
que le soleil s’y lève au moins une heure plutôt qu’à Bagnères de
Luchon, ville entourée de hautes montagnes. Nous jouîmes donc de cette
vue après le lever du soleil, quoique probablement il ne se fût encore
levé à Bagnères. Nous traversâmes les deux villages de Saint-Aventin et
de Castillon, l’un presqu’à l’entrée de la vallée, et l’autre plus loin.
Peu après nous quittâmes la route d’Arreau. Elle va traverser les
montagnes qui séparent la vallée de Larboust de celle de Louron, qui
débouche dans la vallée d’Aure. Nous descendîmes un peu à Cazaux, puis
traversâmes quelques champs toujours en descendant par une pente douce
jusqu’au village d’Oo, sur la rivière, au fond de la vallée. Nous
laissâmes à droite le village de Gouaux, et les ruines d’une ancienne
tour sur la montagne qui termine la vallée; et nous tournâmes à gauche
pour suivre l’Astos d’Oo, gorge laterale qui s’étend jusques à la cime
de la chaîne, n’étant bornée que par le Pic Quairat et par le Port d’Oo,
dont les sommets étaient couverts de neige recente. Le soleil ne s’était
encore levé sur cette gorge. Nous longeâmes le torrent d’Oo, dont le
cours était marqué par de belles prairies. Même ici nous rencontrâmes
des boeufs allant à la foire de Bagnères de Luchon, qui se tient
aujourd’hui. Nous laissâmes nos chevaux à une cabane, et commençâmes à
monter une gorge entre deux pics très hauts, fesant la montagne
d’Esquierry. Une source jaillit du penchant de la montagne et fait dans
son cours de nombreuses cascades en mignature, dont une avait trois ou
quatre pieds de hauteur. Nous montâmes jusqu’à un petit lac dans un
bassin naturel aux pieds d’une rangée de rochers escarpés où croissent
un grand nombre de plantes rares. Presque tout y était en graîne, très
peu en fleur: nous rapportâmes pourtant deux aconits, quelques
saxifrages, et deux ou trois autres plantes.

[N] Je partis de bon matin à cheval avec M. George et le guide pour une
autre excursion botanique. Nous suivîmes la route qui conduit par Arreau
à Bagnères-de-Bigorre—fle long de la vallée d’Oo quif se divise peu
après en deux fourches, l’une appellée la vallée de Larboust, et l’autre
celle d’Oueil. Chacune de ces vallées a sa rivière. Nous suivîmes
gcelleg de Larboust, dont les côteaux sont cultivés à une hauteur
considérableh, ceh n’ést pas, comme à Campan, une plaîne étroite: iicii
les montagnes jd’unj côte commencent à Edition: current; Page: [109]
s’élever presque des pieds de celles kdu côté opposék, lne laissant
entr’elles d’intervalle que ce qui est occupé parl le lit de la rivière.
Nous traversâmes les villages de Saint-Aventin et de [Castillon]7 puis
laissâmes à droite le chemin d’Arreau et suivîmes un autre sentier où
les voitures ne peuvent pas passer. Nous passâmes par le village d’Oo,
puis nous tournâmes à gauche, et suivîmes une gorge appellée Astos d’Oo.
Peu après, nous laissâmes nos chevaux à une cabane, et gravîmes la
montagne d’Esquierry, à droite de la gorge. Nous y trouvâmes beaucoup de
plantes en graîne, très peu en fleur, excepté les aconits, et deux ou
trois saxifrages. Nous retournâmes à Bagnères, en suivant, jusqu’au
village d’Oo, un sentier msurm l’autre bord de la rivière.

24 Septembre

[J] J’accompagnai M. Bentham, les demoiselles, M. George, et le guide,
dans une autre excursion à cheval, pour voir les lacs et la cascade
d’Oo. Notre route était la même que celle d’hier: mais, au lieu de
monter l’Esquierry, nous continuâmes à suivre la gorge jusqu’aux pieds
de la montagne qui la termine. Ici nous commençâmes à monter par un
sentier mauvais et tortueux à travers un bois, et au bout d’une
demi-heure nous arrivâmes à une espèce de plâteau où nous vîmes devant
nous, dans un bassin enorme, le premier lac, appellé Lac de Séculéjo.
Les rochers qui fesaient les trois côtés de ce bassin formaient un
amphithéâtre immense de plus de mille pieds de hauteur: dans une partie
du cirque la rivière d’Oo, qui a pris sa source dans un autre lac plus
élevé, se précipite d’un rocher fesant une cascade de huit cents pieds
de hauteur; elle se jète dans le lac, et se précipite delà dans la
gorge, à travers les rochers couverts de hardis sapins. Cet amphithéâtre
fait partie de la montagne des Crabioules et du Port d’Oo. Le Pic
Quairat, une des plus hautes sommités des Crabioules, paraîssait
derrière les rochers, et ajoutait beaucoup à la grandeur de la scène. La
cascade ést appelé Bond de Séculéjo: le second lac (que nous n’avions
pas le tems d’aller voir) ést le lac d’Espingon. Nous retournâmes à
Bagnères, après avoir assez joui de cette vue.

[N] Je partis avec M. Bentham, les demoiselles, M. George, et le guide,
pour une autre excursion. Nous suivîmes jusqu’à Esquierry la même route
qu’hier: puis montâmes par le chemin qui conduit au Port d’Oo, jusqu’à
un grand Lac, fait par l’Oo, qui ayant pris sa source à un autre lac
plus haut, tombe ensuite en cascade d’huit cents pieds, dans un lac fort
grand, d’ou il se précipite par la gorge d’Astos d’Oo et par la vallée
de Larboust jusqu’à sa jonction avec la rivière de Pique, appellée
autrement Neste de Luchon. Nous fûmes trop éloignés de la cascade pour
la voir dans toute sa grandeur. Nous retournâmes ensuite à Bagnères,
n’ayant trouvé qu’une seule plante qui valait la peine de sècher.

25 Septembre

[J] On avait le dessein d’aller avec M. Paul Boileau au Port de
Bénasque, mais il était obligé d’aller à Toulouse: d’ailleurs le tems se
gâta. Je m’occupai à arranger Edition: current; Page: [110] mes plantes,
et à lire une déscription du labyrinthe d’Egypte dans les Annales des
Voyages.8 L’auteur semble avoir découvert le véritable plan de ce
bâtîment.

[N] On avait eu le dessein d’aller au Port de Bénasque avec le Maire de
la ville, mais comme il était obligé d’aller à Toulouse, il ne put pas y
aller comme il nl’navait voulu. D’ailleurs, le tems se gâta. Je
m’occupai à arranger mes plantes; à étudier la Botanique, et à lire une
déscription du labyrinthe d’Egypte dans les Annales des voyages. Cet
auteur semble avoir découvert le véritable plan de ce bâtiment.

26 Septembre

[J] On avait l’intention de partir aujourd’hui, mais le mauvais tems ne
permettait pas que ce projet eût lieu. Je m’occupai comme le jour
précédent.

[N] Le mauvais tems nous empêcha de sortir.

27 Septembre

[J] Nous quittâmes Bagnères aussitôt que le tems nous permît. Il était
tombé, la nuit précédente, une grande quantité de neige sur les sommets
des montagnes; il en était tombé, même dans la ville, mais elle n’y
avait point resté. Nous dejeûnâmes à Bertren; et quittâmes la route de
Monréjau aux pieds des dernières montagnes. Nous traversâmes un grand
plâteau entre la Garonne et les Pyrenées, jusqu’à la petite ville de
Valentine, où nous traversâmes la rivière sur un pont, ou plutôt sur
deux ponts de bois; puis montâmes le côteau opposé, et arrivâmes à
Saint-Gaudens, ville considérable, chef lieu d’arrondissement, et bien
bâti. L’hôtel (de France) ést nouvellement réfait: c’était un des
meilleurs que nous avons encore rencontré.

[N] Nous quittâmes Bagnères aussitôt que le tems nous le permît. Nous
suivîmes d’abord la même route que nous avions pris pour y arriver. Nous
dejeûnâmes à Bertren, et quittâmes la route de Monréjau aux pieds des
dernières montagnes. Nous arrivâmes bientôt à Valentine, où nous
traversâmes la Garonne sur un pont, ou plutôt sur deux ponts de bois:
puis nous montâmes une colline et arrivâmes à Saint Gaudens, chef lieu
d’arrondissement, où il y a un hôtel (à ce que l’on m’a dit) des plus
grands du midi de la France. Nous y fûmes très bien accomodés.

28 Septembre

[J] Nous quittâmes Saint-Gaudens et suivîmes pendant quelque tems les
côteaux de la Garonne; il n’y a rien de rémarquable sur cette route:
elle n’ést point agréable dans la saison actuelle: mais la vue de la
chaîne des Pyrenées, couverte de neige nouvellement tombée, fait bien
compensation de ce manque d’agrément dans tout le reste de la vue. Vers
Saint-Martory nous rencontrâmes une chaîne Edition: current; Page: [111]
latérale de montagnes assez considérables qui s’embranchent des
Pyrenées. La ville de Saint-Martory ést petite, située sur la Garonne,
au pied des rochers: Il n’y a pas d’auberge passable. Nous traversâmes
la chaîne en suivant une petite vallée; au sortir des montagnes nous
entrâmes dans la grande plaîne de Muret. Il n’y a pas besoin de decrire
exactement cette route, nous longeâmes la Garonne à quelque distance: le
côteau opposé de cette rivière ôtait un peu de l’uniformité de la plaîne
couverte de chaume et de terre labourée. Nous dejeûnâmes à la petite
ville de Martres, l’auberge n’ést pas bonne. Plus loin, nous laissâmes à
gauche le village et le château de St. Elix, et à droite les chemins de
Cazères et de Carbonne. Un peu au delà du village de Saint-Elix il y a
une autre auberge nouvellement bâtie: leur dehors était fort propre:
mais il n’y avait pas assez de lits pour nous loger. Nous suivîmes la
même route, et après quelque tems, arrivâmes à Noé par une petite allée
d’arbres. L’auberge y ést assez bonne. Nous y couchâmes.

[N] Après avoir quitté Saint-Gaudens, nous traversâmes une plaîne qui
n’a que fort peu d’agrément dans cette saison-ci et doit aux vignes le
peu qu’elle a. Nous jouîmes d’une fort belle vue sur les Pyrenées
couvertes de neige. Vers Saint-Martory, nous rencontrâmes une chaîne de
petites montagnes qui s’embranchent des Pyrenées. La ville de Saint
Martory ést petite, située sur la Garonne, au pied des rochers. La
rivière y ést considérable. Il n’y a pas d’auberge passable. Nous
traversâmes la chaîne par une vallée entre deux petites montagnes, et
poursuivîmes notre cours à travers la plaîne jusqu’à la petite ville de
Martres, où nous dejeûnâmes. L’auberge n’y ést pas fort bonne. Nous
partîmes aussitôt que les chevaux se fussent assez reposés, et suivîmes
la Garonne, dont le côteau de la rive opposée ôtait un peu à
l’uniformité de la route, qui était ordinairement droite et parfaitement
plate. Nous laissâmes à gauche le village et le château de Saint-Elix.
Un peu plus loin se trouve une nouvelle auberge dont le dehors ést bien
propre et fort joli. Il n’y avait pas assez de lits pour nous loger.
Nous continuâmes notre cours jusqu’à Noé, petite ville ayant une avenue.
L’auberge y était assez bonne.

29 Septembre

[J] Nous partîmes de Noé de bon matin, et arrivâmes en moins de deux
heures à Muret, ville considérable, chef lieu d’arrondissement.
L’auberge y était moins bonne que celle de Noé, quoique la ville fût
beaucoup plus grande. On avait pourtant le dessein d’y rester jusqu’à ce
qu’on pût aller à Montpellier. Après déjeûner M. George fut à Toulouse
(à cinq lieues et demie de Muret) pour y faire ses affaires. Je me
promenai dans la campagne près de la ville pour voir les vindanges qui
se fesaient partout.—La rivière ést très considérable à Muret.

[N]9 Nous partîmes de Noé de bon matin et arrivâmes en moins de deux
heures à Muret, ville considérable, chef lieu d’arrondissement, où l’on
avait le dessein de rester jusqu’à ce qu’on pût partir pour aller à
Montpellier. L’auberge était passable. Après dejeûner M George fut à
Toulouse pour y faire ses affaires. Je me promenai dans la campagne près
de la ville pour voir les vindanges qui se fesaient partout.

Edition: current; Page: [112]
30 Septembre

[J] M. George revint de bon matin, et je partis avec lui pour aller à
Toulouse. Le chemin ést presque droit, fesant un seul détour à
l’embranchement de la route de Pamiers et de Foix. C’ést tout près de
cette endroit que l’Ariège se joint à la Garonne, et les côteaux des
deux rivières se réunissent, pour ainsi dire, dans une seule chaîne, qui
va, toujours en baissant jusques à Toulouse.10

28 Octobre 1820

Montpellier

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Montpellier

28 Octobre 1820

Mon cher père,

Je n’ai pas la place de vous dire beaucoup. Je n’aurai pas des maîtres
pour deux ou trois jours, car ils sont à la campagne pendant la vacance.
Cependant, j’étudie le latin, le français, les mathématiques et la
logique. Je vous dirai ci-après tous les détails.

Novembre 21, 1820

Montpellier

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13
Montpellier

Novembre 21, 1820

Mon cher père,

Vous voyez que je suis en arrière, mais je vous écrirai, si j’aurai le
tems, par la prochaine poste, ou du moins avant qu’il soit longtems,
pour vous donner le journal jusqu’à ce jour-ci. Je n’ai pas la place de
plus dire.

Suite de la journée du 30 Septembre. Arrivés à Toulouse, nous fûmes
d’abord à l’hôtel; puis je pris une leçon d’escrime chez mon ancien
maître, et nous fûmes dîner chez M. Russell.

[N] M. George revint de bon matin, et je partis à cheval avec lui après
déjeûner pour aller à Toulouse: car M. Decampe, dont j’ai déjà parlé,
avait bien voulu me prendre en pension pour le tems que je resterais à
Toulouse. Le chemin ést presque droit, fesant un seul détour à
l’embranchement de la route de Pamiers et Foix. C’ést tout près de cet
endroit que l’Ariège se joint à la Garonne, et les côteaux des deux
rivières se réunissent, pour ainsi dire, dans une seule chaîne, qui va,
toujours en baissant, jusques à Toulouse. Etant parvenus à Toulouse,
nous fûmes d’abord à l’hôtel, puis je pris leçon d’escrime chez mon
ancien maître, et fus ensuite voir les fils de M. Russell qui se portait
mal par les suites d’une chute. Nous dinâmes chez lui.1

1 Octobre

[J] M. Decampe, dont je vous ai souvent parlé, avait bien voulu me
prendre en Edition: current; Page: [113] pension pour le tems que nous
resterions à Toulouse, afin que ce tems ne fût pas perdu. M. George fut
le voir au matin, et trouva que malheureusement cet arrangement ne
pouvait pas avoir lieu. Je pris une leçon d’armes, je défis ma malle, je
m’occupai d’ailleurs à lire Lucien, et une ouvrage appellée Les Annales
de la Bigorre.2 M. et Mme B. arrivèrent de Muret. Aujourd’hui arriva la
nouvelle de la naissance du Duc de Bordeaux.3 Le soir je fus au
spectacle:4 la parterre demandèrent qu’on jouât les airs nationaux et
les reçûrent avec beaucoup d’applaudissemens.

[N] M. George vit M. Decampe, et trouva que malheureusement il ne
pouvait pas me prendre en pension, comme il avait bien voulu faire. Je
pris deux leçons d’escrime, et m’occupai ailleurs à lire une ouvrage
appellée Annales de la Bigorre, et d’autres livres surtout Lucien; à
ouvrir ma malle, à examiner mes plantes, et les y mettre, etc. M. et Mme
B. vinrent de Muret. Je fus au théatre avec M. George et compris la
plupart de ce qu’on y disait.5

2 Octobre

[J] La messe fut celebrée dans la grande allée de la promenade, à
l’occasion de la naissance du Duc de Bordeaux. Tous les soldats de la
garnison y étaient, ainsi que l’état major de la ville. Un Te Deum fut
chanté, et une oraison prononcée sur l’evènement qui était arrivé: on
tira ensuite 24 coups de canon. Après la cerémonie, les légions
défilèrent devant l’état major. Le soir, il y eut spectacle gratis. M.
et Mme B. furent à Montauban.

[N] Je m’occupai comme le jour précedent. M. et Mme B. furent à
Montauban.6

3 Octobre

[J] Je m’occupai comme les jours précedents: je pris une leçon de
Français.

Edition: current; Page: [114]
[N] Je fus chez M. Sauvage, qui n’avait pas le tems de me donner une
leçon. J’en pris d’un jeune homme qui était chez M. Sauvage.7

4 Octobre

[J] Je pris deux leçons d’escrime. M. et Mme B. revinrent de Montauban.

[N] Je pris deux leçons d’escrime. M. et Mme B. revinrent de Montauban.8

5 Octobre

[J] Je pris deux leçons d’escrime et une de Français. M. et Mme B.
furent à Muret.

[N] Je pris deux leçons d’escrime et une de Français. M. et Mme B.
retournèrent à Muret.9

6 Octobre

[J] Je pris trois leçons d’escrime, je fus chez M. Russell le soir.

[N] Je pris trois leçons d’escrime; dans le soir je fus chez M. Russell
pour examiner les plantes de M. Guillaume, et en trouver les noms.

7 Octobre

[J] Je pris deux leçons d’escrime, et fus chez M. Sauvage, mais il était
sorti. Je traduisis en français une partie de l’oraison Milonienne de
Ciceron:10 j’envoyai ma malle au magasin. M. Bentham arriva de
Muret.—Ces derniers jours nous avons diné (M. George et moi) au
restaurat. C’ést une manière très agréable de dîner: car on peut y avoir
tout ce qu’on veut, et l’on ne paye que pour ce qu’on a mangé.

[N] Je pris deux leçons d’escrime, j’examinai des plantes avec M.
Guillaume, je fus chez M. Sauvage, mais il était sorti, je traduisis en
Français une partie de l’oraison Milonienne de Ciceron: j’envoyai ma
malle au magazin. M. Bentham vint de Muret.—Ces derniers jours nous
dînâmes M. George et moi, au restaurat. C’ést une manière fort agréable
de dîner. On peut avoir tout ce qu’on veut, et ne paye que pour ce qu’on
a mangé.

8 Octobre

[J] Nous partîmes de Toulouse par le faubourg Guillemery et pont sur le
canal royal. Après deux ou trois petites montées, la route descend au
village des Bordes. Edition: current; Page: [115] Les arbres, soit
isolés, soit en bois, qui entourent ce petit endroit, fesaient un
contraste frappant avec les champs arides et couverts de chaume que nous
venions de traverser. En quittant les Bordes, on traverse une petite
plaîne, laissant à gauche le chemin de Caraman et de Revel. Enfin on
entre dans un pays très varié par des collines et par des vallées. Au
sommet de la première colline, se trouvent deux grands châteaux. En
montant la seconde, un orage nous attint, accompagné de grèle. L’auberge
où nous restâmes la nuit ést sur le sommet au petit hameau de Saussens:
son dehors ne promettait pas beaucoup de commodité, mais cependant les
lits étaient propres, le souper bon, et nous y trouvâmes beaucoup
d’honnêteté.

[N] Nous quittâmes la ville par le faubourg et pont de Guillemery. Après
deux ou trois petites montées, la route descend au village des Bordes.
Les arbres, soit isolés, soit en bois, qui entouraient ce petit endroit,
fesaient un contraste frappant avec les champs arides et couverts de
chaume que nous venions de traverser. En quittant les Bordes, on
traverse d’abord une petite plaîne, en laissant à droite la route de
Caraman et de Revel. Enfin on entre dans un pays très varié par des
collines et des vallées. Au sommet de la première haute colline se
trouvent deux grands châteaux. En montant la seconde, un orage nous
attint, accompagné de grêle. Le hameau de Saussens, où nous nous
arrêtâmes pour y rester la nuit, ést au sommet de cette colline. Le
dehors de l’auberge ne donnait pas à espérer beaucoup de commodité en
dedans: cependant les lits étaient propres, le souper bon, et nous y
trouvâmes beaucoup d’honnêteté.11

9 Octobre

[J] Le brouillard était trop épais pour que nous pûssions en partant
jouir de la vue sur le vallon. Après avoir traversé le plâteau du
sommet, nous commençâmes à descendre, en passant sur un grand nombre de
chaussées, dont quelques unes étaient fort élevées: faites sans doute à
grand frais, pour épargner aux voyageurs les petites montées et
descentes. Nous traversâmes ensuite une large vallée: la route y était
boueuse, et fatiguante pour les chevaux. Enfin le ciel s’éclaircit; nous
arrivions alors au pied d’un côteau: A la fin de la montée, (qui ést
variée par de petites descentes) ést la ville de Puy Laurens. La
meilleure auberge (du Lion d’Or) Edition: current; Page: [116] ést un
peu au dessous de la grande route: nous la trouvâmes meilleure que celle
de Saussens.

Le chemin pour descendre serpente sur le penchant de la montagne. On y
jouit d’une belle vue sur la plaîne au pied de la chaîne des Cevennes.
Cette chaîne commence à s’élever près de Sorèze, à peu de distance, et
prend ensuite le nom des Montagnes Noires—On entre dans la plaîne de
l’Agout, rivière considérable qui se joint au Tarn à la Pointe
Saint-Sulpice. Il y a deux beaux ponts pour traverser le Sor et l’Agout:
on longe cette dernière rivière, et l’on arrive à Castres. Cette ville,
jadis chef lieu du Tarn, n’ést plus qu’une simple sous-préfecture. Les
rues, quoique petites, sont propres: les maisons sont bâties en pierre:
l’Agout parcourt le milieu de la ville: il y a deux ponts pour le
traverser. L’auberge, chez Alaux, ést bonne: pour y arriver on traverse
la ville.

[N] Le brouillard était si êpais que nous ne pouvions pas, en partant,
jouir de la vue sur le vallon au dessous de Saussens. Après avoir
traversé le plâteau du sommet, nous commençâmes à descendre, en passant
sur un grand nombre de chaussées, dont quelques-unes étaient très
élevées; faites sans doute à grands frais, pour épargner aux voyageurs
les petites montées et descentes. Nous traversâmes ensuite une large
vallée: la route y était boueuse, et fatiguante pour les chevaux. Enfin
le ciel s’éclaircit: nous arrivions alors au pied d’un côteau: A la fin
de la montée (qui ést variée par de petites descentes) ést la ville de
Puy-Laurens. La meilleure auberge, (celle du Lion rouge) ést un peu au
dessous de la grande route. Nous la trouvâmes meilleure qu’à Saussens.

Le chemin pour descendre serpente sur le penchant de la montagne. On y
jouit d’une belle vue sur la plaîne au pied de la chaîne des Cevennes,
qui commence à s’élever près de Sorèze, à quelque distance sur la
plaîne, et prend, peu après, le nom des Montagnes Noires. On entre
ensuite dans la plaîne de l’Agout, rivière considerable qui se jète dans
le Tarn à la Pointe St Sulpice. Il y a deux beaux ponts sur cette route
pour traverser le Sor et l’Agout: on longe la dernière, et l’on arrive à
Castres. Cette ville, jadis chef-lieu du Tarn, n’ést plus qu’une simple
sous-préfecture. Les rues, quoique petites, sont propres: les maisons
sont bâties en pierre: l’Agout parcourt le milieu de la ville; il y a
deux ponts sur cette rivière. L’auberge, chez Alaux, ést bonne: pour y
parvenir on traverse la ville.12

10 Octobre

[J] En quittant la ville on longe la promenade et l’on entre dans une
petite vallée. Les côteaux sont couverts de vignes, qui commencent à
porter leur habit Edition: current; Page: [117] d’automne mais dans le
vallon on ne voit guère que du blé, et quelques petites prairies,
arrosées par la petite rivière de Resse. Les fleurs élegantes du safran
des prés se montrent en très grand nombre parmi le gazon. Un peu plus
loin, la gauche du chemin ést bornée pendant une demi-lieue par de beaux
arbres, surtout des peupliers: le côteau de droite ést couvert de bois:
la lavande y croît en abondance: dans le vallon on voit beaucoup de
prairies aussi vertes que celles des Pyrenées. Celles-ci ne servent
pourtant qu’à rendre plus frappante la laideur de la colline pierreuse
qu’on va bientôt monter. Le chemin ne paraît pas l’ouvrage de l’homme:
de loin il semble qu’il n’y en a pas: de près, on voit qu’il ést à peine
tracé sur un sol de cailloux, où l’on ne peut rien produire, et qu’on
laisse par cette raison comme chemin: ce qui fait que la route atteigne
dans quelques endroits une largeur extraordinaire. A peine, dans
quelques endroits plus favorisés, ce sol produit une pauvre récolte de
blé. Les montagnes qu’on voit tout autour portent le même aspect. Mais
on n’ést guère arrivé à la cime de la montagne, qu’on ne voie au dessous
de soi la vallée riante du Thoré, qui, hormise la différence de hauteur
des montagnes ést l’image des vallées des Pyrenées. Nous descendîmes
(par un chemin quelquefois coupé dans le rocher) dans cette première
vallée des Cevennes; et traversâmes ensuite le Thoré en bacq. Un si
grand nombre de petites rivières viennent de tous les côtés se joindre à
celle-ci, que sa grandeur reçoit une augmentation extraordinaire dans
fort peu d’espace, et j’étais étonné de voir, à Saint-Amand, reduite à
un torrent des montagnes, cette rivière que j’avais vue considérable
près de l’entrée de la vallée, et qui se résout, près de Rouairouze en
de petits ruisseaux.

C’ést à Labastide St. Amand que les montagnes de cette vallée, jusque là
très basses, commencent à s’élever. Nous déjeûnâmes à ce village, qui
ést situé sur la rive gauche du Thoré: St. Amand de Valhoret, autre
village considérable, ést sur le côté opposé. Le premier a un Octroi et
plusieurs auberges. Nous étions assez bien à la Croix Blanche: mais les
voyageurs qui tiennent à manger de bon beurre feront Edition: current;
Page: [118] bien d’en apporter avec eux de Castres. Je ne puis omettre
la notice d’un pont couvert de lierre, un peu au dessous de Saint-Amand,
qui ressemble beaucoup à Ivybridge en Devonshire.

Peu au delà de Saint-Amand, on fait une longue montée sur le penchant de
la montagne à la rive gauche du torrent. On descend ensuite par une
pente rapide jusqu’à un pas étroit, et très pittoresque le long du
Thoré; à notre droite il s’élevaient de hauts rochers. On ne trouve plus
ici la large vallée de St. Amand: on ne voit qu’un torrent qui se
précipite avec impetuosité à travers un lit rocailleux dans le fond
d’une gorge étroite et sauvage.—Le chemin, bon jusqu’ici, est détestable
dans ce seul endroit.—On arrive bientôt au village de la Cabarède: puis,
après quelques petites montées et descentes, on traverse la petite ville
de Labastide Rouairrouze, non loin des sources du Thoré: elle conserve
encore une grande et ancienné porte.

Ici, quittant le Thoré, on monte une longue colline, et l’on arrive à la
cime de la chaîne, d’où les eaux coulent de l’un côté pour se jeter dans
l’Atlantique, et de l’autre, dans la Mediterranée. Les rivières qui ont
leur source dans cette partie-ci des Cevennes n’ont, il ést vrai, rien
de comparable à celles de la partie haute, telle que la Dordogne, le
Tarn, l’Aveiron, etc. Cependant elles ne sont point indignes de la
notice du géographe. De celles qui prennent leur source sur le versant
septentrional, les principales sont le Thoré, le Larn, qui se jète dans
le Thoré, et l’Agout: le Jean, sur celui du midi.—Après une descente
longue et douce entre deux beaux rangs de châtaigniers, on monte une
colline très roide, et puis on descend à Saint-Pons de Thomière, ville
au fond d’une gorge, (chef lieu de sous-préfecture du département de
l’Hérault,) sur la rivière de Jean près de sa source. La ville
paraissait assez bien bâtie; mais il fesait trop obscur quand nous y
sommes arrivés pour que je puisse la décrire. Hôtel, la Croix Blanche,
mais il n’ést pas égal à celui de Castres.

[N] En partant de Castres on longe la promenade, et l’on entre dans une
petite vallée. Sur les côteaux, qui commencent ici à s’élever, on
cultive principalement les vignes, dont les feuilles commencent à porter
un habit d’automne: mais dans la vallée il n’y a guère que du blé, et
deux ou trois prairies, arrosées par la Resse, petite rivière qui se
jète dans l’Agout près de Castres. Les fleurs élegantes du Colchian
autumnale (safran des prairies) se montrent en abondance parmi le gazon.
Un peu plus loin, la gauche du chemin ést bornée pendant une demi-lieue
par de beaux arbres, surtout des peupliers: un bois ou la lavande croît
en grande quantité couvre le côteau de droite, et le reste de la scène
ést rempli par des prairies verdantes. Celles-ci ne servent pourtant
qu’à rendre plus frappante la laideur de la colline pierreuse qu’on
commence bientôt à monter; par un chemin qu’on peut écrire en peu de
mots; c’ést un sol de cailloux dont on ne se sert pour chemin que
parcequ’il ést impossible d’en faire autre chose: on ne voit guère aucun
signe de la main de l’homme; en effet, la nature paraît avoir tout fait.
Ce sol produit à peine, dans quelques endroits plus favorisés, une
pauvre récolte de blé. Les montagnes qu’on voit tout autour portent un
aspect aussi triste. Mais on n’ést guère arrivé à la cime de cette
montagne, qu’on ne voit au dessous de soi la vallée riante du Thoré, qui
réunit (c’ést tout dire) la beauté du vallon qu’on vient de parcourir,
au spectacle magnifique des montagnes qui l’entourent. Nous descendîmes,
par un chemin quelquefois coupé dans le rocher, dans cette première
vallée des Cevennes: et Edition: current; Page: [119] traversâmes
bientôt le Thoré en bacq. Un si grand nombre de petites rivières
viennent de tous côtés se jeter dans celle-ci que sa grandeur reçoit une
augmentation extraordinaire dans fort peu espace et j’étais étonné de
voir, à Saint-Amand, réduite à un torrent des montagnes, cette rivière
que j’avais vu considerable près de l’entrée de la même vallée, et qui
se résout près de Rouairrouze dans de petits ruisseaux.

C’ést à Labastide St Amand que les montagnes de cette vallée, jusque là
très basses, commencent à se rèlever. Nous déjeûnâmes à ce village, qui
ést situé sur une petite montée près de la rive gauche du Thoré: St
Amand de Valhoret, autre village considerable, ést sur le côté opposé.
Le premier a un Octroi, et plusieurs auberges. Nous étions assez bien à
la Croix Blanche: mais les voyageurs qui se tiennent à avoir de bon
beurre feraient fort bien d’en porter avec eux de Castres.—Je ne puis
omettre la notice d’un pont sur la rivière à quelque distance au dessous
de Saint-Amand, couvert de lierre en sorte qu’il ressemble beaucoup à
Ivybridge en Devonshire.

Peu au delà de Saint-Amand on commence à faire une longue montée sur le
penchant d’une montagne à la rive gauche du torrent. On descend ensuite
par une pente rapide jusqu’à un pas étroit, le long du Thoré, laissant
de hauts rochers à droite. On ne trouve plus la large vallée de
Saint-Amand: on ne voit qu’un torrent qui se précipite avec impetuosité
à travers un lit pierreux dans le fond d’une gorge étroite et sauvage.
Le chemin, bon jusqu’ici, ést détestable dans ce seul endroit.—On arrive
bientôt au village de la Cabarède: puis, après deux ou trois petites
montées et descentes, on traverse la petite ville de Labastide
Rou[airro]uze, qui conserve encore une grande et ancienne porte. Ici on
quitte le Thoré. Si l’on voulait monter un peu plus haut dans la même
direction, on arriverait bientôt à l’endroit où ce torrent fougeux, qui
doit sitôt se changer en rivière paisible et tranquille, prend sa
source.

Etant sorti de Labastide Rouairrouze, on monte une longue colline, et
l’on arrive à la cime de la chaîne, d’où les eaux coulent de l’un coté
pour se jeter dans l’Atlantique, et de l’autre dans la Mediterranée. Les
rivières qui ont leur source dans cette partie des Cevennes n’ont rien,
il ést vrai, de comparable à celles qui s’élèvent dans la partie haute,
telles que la Dordogne, l’Aveiron, le Tarn, etc: Cependant elles ne sont
point indignes de la notice du géographe. De celles qui ont leur source
sur le versant septentrional, les principales sont le Thoré, le Larn,
qui se jète dans le Thoré, et l’Agout: le Jean sur celui du midi.

Après une descente longue et douce entre deux beaux rangs de
châtaigniers, on monte une colline très roide, puis on descend jusqu’à
Saint Pons de Thomières, ville au fond d’une gorge, (chef lieu
d’arrondissement du département de l’Hérault,) située sur la rivière de
Jean, non loin de sa source. Il fesait trop obscur, quand nous y sommes
arrivés, pour que je puisse décrire particulièrement la ville: elle
paraîssait cependant assez bon bâtie. Nous étions bien à la Croix
Blanche, auberge qui cependant13

Edition: current; Page: [120]
11 Octobre

[J] En quittant St. Pons on traverse le Jean et on longe une petite
rivière qui s’y joint à peu de distance. Ce chemin ést fort pittoresque.
Les montagnes qui bornent ce vallon s’élevent à une hauteur bien plus
considérable que celle des montagnes du versant septentrional: La route
était quelquefois immédiatement au dessus de la rivière. De tems en tems
quelqu’immense rocher perpendiculaire semblait fermer la gorge: il
paraissait impossible d’aller plus loin: mais en nous approchant, nous
vîmes s’ouvrir, à droite ou à gauche, un nouveau vallon, renfermant de
nouveaux beautés. Si par hasard, isolé au milieu des rochers fertiles
seulement en buis, s’y trouvait le moindre petit morceau de terrain, la
main du laboureur ne le negligeait point. Même l’ancienne route, large
comme un sentier ordinaire, avait été cultivée. Quelques plantes,
cueillies dans les rochers, nous firent voir quelle Edition: current;
Page: [121] récolte nous aurions pu faire si nous avions passé l’été
dans ces montagnes. Quand on quitte le vallon, ce n’ést que pour
traverser plusieurs hautes collines, et pour descendre ensuite dans une
large vallée, entre deux rangées de montagnes moins hautes de beaucoup
que les précédentes. On en traversa bientôt l’une, en passant par le
milieu d’une nuage: on descend entre deux rangs de châtaigniers, jusques
au village de Pardailhan. Près d’ici se trouve un grand château et
jardin. On monte, peu après, une autre montagne: du sommet on jouit
d’une belle vue sur la plaîne de Béziers: la mer borne l’horizon, et
l’on distingue très facilement deux collines rondes, toutes deux sur la
côte; l’une à Cette, et l’autre à Agde. Cette montagne ést appelée la
Montagne des S, parcequ’en descendant, la route serpente dans la forme
de cette lettre. On descend dans une large vallée, au pied du versant
méridional de ces montagnes. Ici l’on revoit les vignes, qu’on n’a pas
vues depuis Castres: les oliviers qu’on y voit pour la première fois
font bien voir le changement de climat: une belle espèce de Daphne,
croît en abondance depuis le sommet de la dernière montagne, quoique
nous ne l’ayons point vu de l’autre côté. On suit la vallée et l’on
arrive à Saint-Chinian, petite ville assez sale et mal bâtie: hôtel, le
chat vert:—Après Saint-Chinian on monte le côteau de droite; vers le
sommet, le chemin ést coupé dans le rocher solide à une profondeur
considérable. On descend ensuite dans la plaîne, et on la traverse
pendant cinq ou six lieues: On commence à voir beaucoup d’oliviers, et
des amandiers en haie. Cette route s’unit enfin à celle de Toulouse à
Montpellier par Carcassonne et Narbonne. On traverse l’Orb par un pont
très long et très étroit, et l’on arrive à Béziers.

[N] En quittant Saint Pons on traverse le Jean et on longe une petite
rivière qui s’y jète. Ce chemin ést fort pittoresque. Les montagnes qui
bornent la vallée sont plus hautes de beaucoup que celles du versant
septentrional. La route était quelquefois immédiatement au dessus de la
rivière. De tems en tems quelqu’immense rocher perpendiculaire semblait
fermer la gorge, en sorte qu’il fût impossible d’aller plus loin: mais
en nous approchant nous vîmes s’ouvrir, à droite ou à gauche, un nouveau
vallon, renfermant de nouveaux beautés. On quitte enfin ce vallon, pour
traverser plusieurs hautes collines: enfin on descend dans une large
vallée: les montagnes qui la bornent sont plus basses que celles qu’on
vient de voir. Peu après la route se tourne à droite, et monte le
côteau: puis on descend entre deux rangs de châtaigniers jusqu’au
village de Pardailhan. Près d’ici se trouve un grand château et jardin.
Peu après on monte une autre colline: du sommet on jouit d’une belle vue
sur la plaîne de Beziers, la mer borne l’horizon: on distingue
facilement deux collines rondes, l’une à Cette et l’autre à Agde, toutes
deux sur la côte. Cette montagne ést appellée la M. des S, parcequ’en
descendant la route serpente dans la forme de cette lettre. On descend
dans une vallée très large, au pied du versant méridional de la chaîne.
Ici l’on revoit les vignes, que nous n’avions pas vues depuis Castres:
les oliviers qu’on y voit pour la première fois dans cette vallée,
firent voir un changement de climat: une belle espèce de Daphne était en
abondance depuis le sommet de la dernière montagne, que nous n’avions
pas vue sur l’autre versant. On suit la vallée, et l’on arrive à Saint
Chinian, petite ville assez sale et mal bâtie: nous déjeûnâmes au Chat
Vert. Après Saint Chinian on monte le côteau de droite: au sommet, le
chemin ést coupé à une grande profondeur dans le rocher. On descend
ensuite dans la plaîne; et la traverse pendant cinq ou six lieues: les
oliviers y sont très nombreux, ainsi que les amandiers en haie. Enfin
cette route se joint à celle de Toulouse à Montpellier Edition: current;
Page: [122] par Carcassonne et Narbonne. On traverse l’Orb par un pont
très long et très étroit, et l’on arrive à Beziers.14

12 Octobre

[J] Beziers, chef lieu de sous-préfecture du département de l’Hérault,
ést bâti sur une colline escarpée près de la rive gauche de l’Orb: dans
les environs on rémarque les neuf écluses sur le Canal du Midi. Le seul
bon hôtel ést celui du Nord, Edition: current; Page: [123] chez Alaux.
Nous partîmes tous de bon matin (exceptée Mme de Chesnel) pour faire une
excursion à Agde. La route longe le canal: on laisse à droite
Villeneuve, sur la rive opposée du canal, et la petite ville de Vias.
Comme on s’approche d’Agde, on voit beaucoup de chevaux, presque tous
blancs. La route ést un peu coupée par les débordemens de l’Hérault,
mais il y a une bonne route provisoire. Il y a un pont sur le canal, et
peu après un pont de bâteaux sur l’Hérault: on y paie 20 sous pour
traverser. Agde ést situé sur cette rivière, non loin de ses deux
embouchures, l’une dans la mer, et l’autre dans un de ces nombreux
étangs qui s’étendent sur la plus grande partie de la côte de Narbonne
jusqu’au delà de Montpellier. Le canal se débouche ici dans l’Hérault:
et c’ést l’endroit qu’on a choisi pour le payement des droits. Delà les
bâteaux descendent l’Hérault jusqu’à sa débouchure dans l’étang, qu’ils
traversent ensuite par un canal bâti au milieu des étangs d’Agde à
Montpellier et plus loin encore. La ville d’Agde ést très sale: il y a
deux auberges, le Petit Versailles ést le meilleur; on dit que le Cheval
Blanc ést fort sale.—Après déjeûner nous fûmes aux bords de la mer, en
traversant la colline ronde, qui consiste principalement en produits
volcaniques. Du sommet nous jouîmes d’une vue magnifique sur la mer, sur
le grand étang de Thau, et les villes et villages qui l’entourent:
Marseillan, Mèze, jusqu’à la montagne même de Cette. D’un autre côté
nous vîmes le Fort de Brescou sur un roc isolé au milieu de la mer. Au
sommet de cette colline il y a un trou de la forme d’un cercueil, qu’on
appelle le tombeau de Jesus-Christ: on dit qu’il n’y a personne dont la
taille peut lui convenir, qu’on ést toujours trop grand ou trop
petit.—Nous descendîmes ensuite aux bords de la mer: nous nous y
baignâmes, (M. George et moi) et nous y trouvâmes quelques plantes
maritimes. Nous vîmes des bâteaux pêcheurs qui voulaient entrer dans le
port, mais qui ne le pouvaient pas, à cause du vent, qui leur était
contraire; il y avait aussi beaucoup de vaisseaux, mais à une grande
distance.—Nous couchâmes à Agde.

[N] Beziers, chef lieu de sous-préfecture du département de l’Hérault,
ést bâti sur une colline escarpée près de la rive gauche de l’Orb; dans
les environs on remarque 9 écluses sur le Canal Royal du Midi. Le seul
bon hôtel ést celui du Nord, chez Alaux. Nous partîmes tous exceptée Mme
de Chesnel pour faire une excursion à Agde. La route longe le Canal: on
laisse à droite Villeneuve sur la rive opposée du Canal, et la petite
ville de Vias. Comme on s’approche d’Agde, on voit beaucoup de chevaux
blancs: le nombre de chevaux d’une autre couleur ést très petit par
rapport à celui de cette couleur là. Vers Agde la route ést un peu
coupée par les débordemens de l’Hérault; mais il y a une bonne route
provisoire. On traverse l’Hérault par un pont de bâteaux (à cause des
débordemens) on y paie vingt sous pour traverser. La ville d’Agde ést
très sale. Il y a deux auberges, le Petit Versailles ést le meilleur, on
dit que le Cheval Blanc ést très sale. Le canal royal se débouche ici
dans l’Hérault.—Après déjeûner nous fûmes aux bords de la mer. Pour y
arriver nous traversâmes la colline, à cause de la belle vue sur la mer
dont on jouit au sommet. Cette colline consiste presqu’entièrement en
produits volcaniques. Nous descendîmes ensuite aux bords de la mer, qui
sont très jolis: nous y trouvâmes quelques plantes maritimes. Il y a un
fort isolé dans la mer, appelé Fort de Brescou. Nous vîmes des bâteaux
pêcheurs qui tâchaient à entrer, mais que le vent étant contraire
empêcha d’executer leur dessein.

Edition: current; Page: [124]
13 Octobre

[J] La route d’Agde à Pezenas ést encore plus coupé par l’Hérault que
celle de Bêziers à Agde, et comme il n’y a point de route provisoire,
elle ést très mauvaise dans quelques endroits. On traverse d’abord le
canal et l’on passe par la plaîne de l’Hérault: ensuite on monte une
colline: la vue du sommet ést très belle. On descend, on traverse le
village de Nezignan, et à 5 lieues d’Agde, cette route se joint à celle
de Béziers à Pezenas. On arrive bientôt après à cette dernière ville,
qui ést très jolie quoique petite; le marché surtout a plus de propreté
qu’à l’ordinaire. Hôtel la Paix chez Alaux. Les frères sont tous maîtres
des premiers hôtels à Béziers, à Castres, et à Narbonne, à Carcassonne,
et à Limerix.15

[N] La route d’Agde à Pezenas ést aussi coupé par l’Hérault. On traverse
la plaîne de l’Hérault, puis l’on monte une colline, d’où la vue ést
bien belle. On descend ensuite, on traverse le village de Nezignan, et à
5 lieues d’Agde, cette route se joint au grand chemin de Beziers à
Pezenas, où l’on arrive bientôt. C’ést une jolie petite ville: le marché
surtout ést plus propre et plus agréable qu’à l’ordinaire. Mme de C.
n’arriva de Béziers qu’à l’après midi. Nous vîmes après déjeûner le
savant M. Rebouls; ensuite nous fûmes au Parc, la campagne près de
Pezenas qu’on avait proposé de vendre à M. Bentham. C’ést une assez
grande campagne; le château ést situé dans un vallon, mais la campagne
s’étend aussi sur les côteaux. La terre ést entourée du moins en partie,
d’un mur. Les côteaux sont couverts de bois, dont on coupe la neuvième
partie chaque année. Il y a un ruisseau dans le vallon, mais la quantité
d’eau n’ést pas grande dans cette saison-ci: il se perd dans les sables,
et reparaît peu après (si ce n’ést pas une nouvelle source). Il y a
aussi des étangs dans la partie haute de la campagne; ils servent à
retenir l’eau de la pluie, mais ils étaient secs quand nous y fûmes. On
amène des bestiaux dans cette partie-là pour les tuer, et nous y vîmes
par conséquent beaucoup d’os. Il y a un grand nombre d’oliviers: la
gêlée de l’hiver dernier, qui a tant fait de mal aux oliviers du midi de
la France, en a fait beaucoup moins ici qu’ailleurs. En effet, on m’a
dit que le climat de Pezenas ést des plus favorisés en France: assez
loin de la mer pour n’être pas affecté par les effets désagréables du
vent marin, assez loin des montagnes pour echapper au froid. N’ayant
encore vu d’autres campagnes dans ces environs, je n’ai pas pu sentir
avec autant de force la beauté du Parc: La vue cependant dont on jouit
d’un endroit de la partie haute m’a paru très belle.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14
14 Octobre

[N] La vindange, quoiqu’achevée depuis longtems dans les environs de
Toulouse, ne l’était pas ici. On exprimait avec beaucoup d’assiduité le
jus des raisins par un grand pressoir au milieu de la rue, quand nous
sommes parti. On se sert des restes du fruit pour faire l’acetat de
cuivre: on bat le métal en de lammes de peu d’épaisseur, et on les
alterne avec les restes.—Nous déjeûnâmes à Pezenas et partîmes ensuite.
Peu au delà de Pezenas on s’approche de l’Hérault: la route ést faite
comme une chaussée élevée sur des arcs pour libre passage quand la riv
se déborde, afin d’empêcher la destruction de la route. On traverse
ensuite l’Hérault, Edition: current; Page: [125] on monte une petite
colline, et l’on passe par le village de Montagnac. Plus loin on se
trouve au milieu des rochers arides et stériles qui caractérisent les
environs de Montpellier. La route ne présente plus de beauté. En la
poursuivant on arrive enfin à Mèze, petite ville sur les bords de
l’étant de Thau, à peu près vis-à-vis la montagne de Cette. On avait eu
le dessein d’aller voir deux campagnes entre Pezenas et Mèze, mais le
mauvais tems l’empêchâ. Nous restâmes à Meze toute la soirée.—Je fus
voir une grande distillerie qui a été établi à cette ville. En voici la
déscription, suivant les explications que Mme B. a eu la bonté de me
donner. D’abord le propriétaire s’ést servi d’une invention (que je
crois de M. Chaptal)1 c’ést celle d’économiser la chaleur par employant
la liquide à distiller comme un condenseur, en sorte que une partie de
la chaleur qui serait autrement perdu en échauffant l’eau dont on se
sert pour condenser la vapeur, ést employée pour faire entrer la liquide
dans le chaudron à une température déjà haute. Voilà une construction
ameliorée de l’appareil de distillation qui cependant n’ést pas
particulière à celui-ci. Mais l’invention du propriétaire de cette
fabrique ést celle de faire venir la liquide d’un réservoir élevé et de
quelques pieds au dessus du niveau de celui de la liquide condensante,
afin par la pression2

15 Octobre

[N] Nous déjeûnâmes à Mèze. De là à Montpellier il y a beaucoup de
garrigue. On cultive les vignes et le blé, mais il n’y a pas du maïs; il
n’a pas été introduit dans la culture de cette partie de la France, on
ne veut pas en produire, car on dit qu’il ést tout de suite volé. Il y a
un assez grand nombre de villages sur cette route. D’un endroit on jouit
d’une belle vue sur la mer.—Près de Montpellier la route se joint à
celle de Cette. Nous arrivâmes enfin à la ville. Nous couchâmes à
l’hôtel du Petit Paris.

16 Octobre

[N] Je m’occupai pendant toute la journée à écrire mon journal, à
arranger mes plantes, et à lire l’oraison Milonienne de Ciceron.

17 Octobre

[N] Nous changeâmes notre logement: du Petit Paris, dans une des petites
rues de la ville, au Palais Royal, hôtel garni avec élegance et avec
propreté, dans une des rues principales, qui sépare la ville même des
Faubourgs: on l’appelle le Boulevard, quoiqu’elle ne diffère des autres
rues qu’en ce qu’elle n’ést pas pavée au centre. La situation de cet
hôtel ést bien airée et agréable, et la vue dont on jouit au dessus du
toit ést assez jolie. Je m’occupai pendant la journée à arranger mes
Edition: current; Page: [126] plantes et à lire l’oraison de Ciceron. Le
soir, je reçus les lettres de ma mère et de mes soeurs; peu après je
reçus aussi celle de mon père datée 14 Août—30 Août—et 5 Sept. J’en
avais reçu à Toulouse datée plus tard. Les bons conseils que contient
cette lettre ne me seront pas perdus; je suis fort aise d’apprendre la
bonne conduite de mes soeurs et de Jacques, aussi bien que leur santé et
celle de ma mère et de mon petit frère.

18 Octobre

[N] Je m’occupai à écrire une lettre à mon père, que je lui envoyai de
suite, et à lire les Memoires de Hunt.3

19 Octobre

[N] Je commençai à écrire une autre lettre à mon père, et à M. Mills à
Dresde.4 Je n’achevai cette dernière que quelques jours après; et
l’envoyai à l’adresse que mon père m’avait donné. Le soir je fus au
Peyrou, promenade ainsi appelée, au bout de la rue où se trouve l’hôtel
du Palais Royal. La promenade ést tout près du grand et bel aqueduc qui
fournit l’eau à la ville: un grand bassin en pierre reçoit l’eau de
l’Aqueduc: et une belle colonnade s’éleve au dessus de ce bassin. De la
promenade les environs de Montpellier couverts de châteaux se présentent
à la vue: on voit la chaîne des Cevennes dans le lointain, et plus près
le Pic St. Loup, montagne presqu’isolée, entre Montpellier et cette
chaîne. Quand le ciel ést clair on voit aussi de l’un côté une partie de
la chaîne des Pyrenées Orientales, et, de l’autre, la première montagne
des Alpes.

20 Octobre

[N] J’arrangeai mes plantes, je fis une catalogue de celles qui
croissent dans les Pyrenées: C’était pris de l’ouvrage de Lapeyrouse sur
les plantes de ces montagnes.

21 Octobre

[N] Je lus une partie de l’oraison de Ciceron, je mis sècher les plantes
marines que j’avais trouvées à Agde; le soir je fus avec M. George chez
M. Bérard.

22 Octobre

[N] Après déjeûner je sortis pour faire une excursion botanique. Je fus
d’abord au Pont Juvenal sur la riv. de Lez, qui coule à peu de distance
de Montpellier. Ce n’ést point une grande rivière; mais je crois qu’elle
ést assez profonde. Je suivis Edition: current; Page: [127] autant que
possible le long de la rivière. Il y a deux écluses assez considérable
où les bâteaux qui remontent la rivière payent les droits. Je parvins
enfin aux bords de l’étang salé de Maguelonne. J’y trouvai quelques
plantes. Ici comme à Agde la plupart des chevaux sont blancs. On voit
une de ces petites chaînes latérales des montagnes qui s’embranchent de
la chaîne principale des Cevennes et qui ne s’abaissent que près de la
mer. Je retournai ensuite à l’hôtel.

23 Octobre

[N] Je mis sécher mes plantes, j’achevai lire l’Oraison de Ciceron, je
fis quelques exercices mathématiques.

24 Octobre

[N] Je commençai à écrire un court Traité de Logique,5 je fis des
exercices mathématiques, j’arrangeai mes plantes, je lus un article des
Annales des Voyages: le soir je fus au Peyrou.

25 Octobre

[N] Je continuai mes exercices dans la logique et dans les
Mathématiques, je lus encore des Annales des Voyages; le soir je fus au
Peyrou.

26 Octobre

[N] Le matin je fus chez M. Bérard: M. son fils6 eut la bonté de me
prêter des Cahiers sur les Sections Coniques et le Calcul Différentiel,
que je commençai ensuite à étudier. (Remarquez que nous n’avions pas
encore nos effets ni par conséquent nos livres.) Je lus aussi
aujourd’hui une partie d’un article dans les Annales des Voyages.

27 Octobre

[N] Nous fûmes tous avec M. Bérard fils voir une campagne près de
Montpellier, au village de Lavérune. Sur la route il n’y avait qu’une
mélange de garrigue et de cultivation, qui ne présentait rien de
remarquable. Les apartements, du Château, (ceux au moins que nous vîmes)
étaient garnis avec beaucoup d’élegance, les salles étaient grandes et
belles, il y en avait une, pavée en pierres plates, grande comme celle
de Ford Abbey, peut être plus grande. En rétournant nous fûmes chez M.
Cambon,7 propriétaire qui a defriché une grande quantité de Edition:
current; Page: [128] garrigue, qui produit maintenant des vignes d’une
valeur considérable. J’étudiai les Cahiers.

28 Octobre

[N] Je fus chez M. Bérard, Mrs. ses fils8 eurent la bonté de me faire
voir sa fabrique chimique; je continuai à écrire ma lettre, que je vous
envoyai peu de tems après.

29 Octobre

[N] Nous fûmes encore à Lavérune avec Messrs Bérard; nous vîmes le Parc:
il y a beaucoup de sources, et un bassin assez considérable d’eau: les
poissons qui habitent ce bassin aiment beaucoup le pain, et nous leur en
donnâmes à manger, ce qui leur fit accourir en foule pour le dévorer.
Dans le Parc il y a: deux ou trois grandes et belles Magnolia, un
tulipier, quelques Cypresses distiques, et une varieté d’autres arbres
rares. Il y a beaucoup aussi de petites Magnolia produits des graînes de
ces arbres. La parterre quoique petite contient un grand nombre de
jolies plantes. J’étudiai les Cahiers. Nous dînâmes chez M. Bérard.

30 Octobre

[N] J’étudiai les Cahiers, et lus un morceau des Annales des Voyages.

31 Octobre

[N] Je pris ma première leçon d’escrime; j’étudiai les Cahiers,
j’arrangeai mes plantes, et lus un autre morceau des Annales de Voyages:
je fus avec M. George au jardin botanique: il y a un grand nombre de
plantes rares et dans les serres au moins il y a beaucoup d’ordre: il
n’en ést pas de même pour les plantes hors de serre.

1 Novembre

[N] J’étudiai les Cahiers, et commençai à écrire une autre lettre à mon
père. Je ne pris pas de leçon, parcequ’il était fête.

2 Novembre

[N] Je pris ma leçon d’escrime, j’étudiai les Cahiers, je fus avec M.
Bérard et M. George à la foire du Pont Juvenal, on y débitait une grande
quantité de bétail, beaucoup de colifichets pour les enfans, et beaucoup
de châtaignes; il y avait aussi de la coutellerie, des ferblanteries,
des outils d’agriculture, etc. et l’on y dansait beaucoup: chaque
compagnie de danseurs et de danseuses eut un hautboi et un tambour, ou
quelquefois deux. Les bords du Lez étaient couverts de promeneurs.

Edition: current; Page: [129]
3 Novembre

[N] Je pris ma leçon d’escrime, j’étudiai les Cahiers, je fus encore au
Jardin Botanique.

4 Novembre

[N] Après ma leçon d’escrime je m’occupai de l’étude des Cahiers et de
la lecture des Annales de Voyages: la pluie fut très violente pendant
une partie de la journée.

5 Novembre. Dimanche

[N] Je m’occupai toute la journée des Cahiers de mathématiques. Ceux
d’entre eux qui traitent du Calcul Différentiel l’expliquent très
clairement par le moyen de la Théorie des Fonctions de Lagrange,9 et je
la crois la meilleure exposition de celles que j’ai encore etudiées. Il
plut très fortement toute la journée.

6 Novembre

[N] Escrime, mathématiques.

7 Novembre

[N] Je pris ma leçon d’armes, j’étudiai, comme toujours, les cahiers, et
continuai ma lettre, après quoi M. Bérard fils eut la bonté de me
conduire chez un professeur de Mathématiques qu’il avait prié à me
donner des leçons. Ce monsieur, nommé Lentheric,10 ést bien connu de M.
Bérard, qui dit qu’il ést très fort sur les Mathématiques. Nous dînâmes
chez M. Bérard.

8 Novembre

[N] Je pris ma leçon d’armes, je continuai ma lettre, et fus prendre ma
première leçon de mathématiques chez M. Lenthéric: je commençai
d’étudier avec lui la Géométrie Analytique, ou l’application de
l’Algèbre à la Géométrie. Il me prêta aussi l’ouvrage de Biot sur ce
sujet;11 je commençai, le soir, à l’étudier.

9 Novembre. Jeudi, vacance pour les leçons

[N] J’étudiai les Cahiers. N.B. Presque tous ces derniers jours je fus
chez M. Bérard, soit pour lui dire quelque chose de la part de M.
Bentham soit pour causer avec Messrs ses fils.

Edition: current; Page: [130]
10 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’escrime et de math, j’étudiai Biot et les
cahiers.

11 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons, j’étudiai Biot.

12 Novembre

[N] Je fus avec Mme B. et M. George à Restinclière, qui leur appartenait
déjà depuis quelque tems. On quitte la ville par le Faubourg Boutonné et
l’on monte peu à peu ensuite à une hauteur considérable, d’où en
descendant on voit devant soi le Pic St. Loup, le château et village de
Monferrier sur une colline à moitié chemin, et une vaste étendue de
garrigue presqu’au pied des Cevennes. On descend dans la vallée du Lez:
on laisse à droite un beau château appartenant au propriétaire du
château de Monferrier,12 et l’on passe entre Monferrier et la rivière.
Les prairies, les arbres encore verts, la verdure commençante des
champs, et le son de la rivière qui tombe en petite cascade à droite
font prendre à tout une autre apparence. On se tourne peu après à
droite, on traverse le Lez, et, toujours en montant, on entre dans un
beau bois de pins. Après ce bois on rentre au milieu des garrigues; on
passe par le village Prades où il y a deux auberges d’un dehors assez
propre. Delà on voit distinctement le château de Restinclières: on passe
entre la terre qui appartient à cette campagne, et une rangée de hardis
rochers, et l’on se détourne peu après de la route, pour approcher au
château par un chemin détestable. La route qu’on a suivi ést celle de
Montpellier à St. Hypolite; elle ést bonne jusqu’à Prades. Les voitures
sont obligés de s’approcher du château du côté du nord. Pour nous, Mme
B. et moi, nous quittâmes la voiture pour nous en approcher du côté du
sud. Cette approche ést beaucoup plus agréable que l’autre: on traverse
une jolie parterre; on remonte par un escalier à la terrasse devant le
château. Cette terrasse ést maintenant couverte d’herbe. Les salles sont
grandes et belles, quoiqu’elles aient besoin d’un peu de reparation.—Il
y a beaucoup plus d’arbres près de la maison que je ne m’étais attendu
avoir: surtout il y a des pins magnifiques et une chène verte d’un âge
et d’une grandeur extraordinaire. Tout le jardin ést sur le penchant
d’une colline: le château ést au sommet; le jardin potager ést arrosé
par un ruisseau. Au fond coule le Lez, ses bords sont couverts de
prairies, jusqu’au pied des côteaux. Ceux-ci, au contraire, ne sont que
des garrigues. Au pied des côteaux de l’est, il y a un sentier pour
traverser du château à Prades sans faire la tour que fait la route de
St. Hypolite. On n’y passe que lorsqu’on peut passer le Lirou à gué. M.
Bentham a le dessein de faire une nouvelle route de ce côté là; pour
raccourcir le chemin et pour que les voitures puissent s’approcher du
château du côté le plus agréable. Il y aura alors un pont sur le Lirou.
Au milieu du jardin il y a ce qu’on Edition: current; Page: [131]
appelle un jardin Anglais, c’ést-à-dire un sentier serpentant parmi le
gazon, entre deux rangées de maronniers: ce qui produit un effet qui
n’ést pas trop agréable. Au fond du jardin il y a aussi une allée de
mûriers, dont on coupe les feuilles, pour les vers à soie. Outre un
grand nombre de petites sources, il y a deux rivières dans cette
campagne, le Lez et le Lirou. Le Lez a sa source dans la domaine; je ne
l’ai pas encore vue; la rivière, même ici, ést considérable: le Lirou,
une autre rivière plus petite, se joint au Lez près de Prades. Le Lirou
a débordé il y a quelque tems: et a emporté ou couvert de cailloux une
portion considérable de terre labourable. Les deux fils plus jeûnes de
M. Bérard chassaient dans les environs: ils furent au château, et nous
les y vîmes.

13 Novembre13

[N] Je pris ma leçon d’escrime, et fus aussi chez M. Lentheric, mais je
ne l’y trouvai pas: un évènement était arrivé qui produisait une grande
sensation parmi les professeurs: Mme Blanquet, femme du Recteur de
l’Académie,14 s’était noyée dans un puits au Jardin des Plantes.—Les
cours publiques de la Faculté des Sciences étaient déjà affichées.
Malheureusement les principales sont en été, cependant il y en aura
trois cet hiver.

14 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’escrime et de mathématiques, j’étudiai Biot.
Nous quittâmes aujourd’hui notre logement à l’hôtel, et fûmes à un
apartement qu’on avait loué.

15 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je lus un morceau de l’Algèbre de Lacroix15 et
j’aidai M. George à arranger tout dans l’apartement.

16 Novembre. Jeudi, vacance aux leçons

[N] J’étudiai Biot; M. Bérard fils eut la complaisance de me conduire à
la Faculté des Sciences pour que je pusse connaître la localité.
Aujourd’hui M. Gergonne, professeur d’Astronomie et Doyen de l’Academie,
donna la première leçon de son cours sur la Logique, comme servant
d’introduction à la Philosophie des Sciences.16 Il traita aujourd’hui la
necessité de la Logique pour l’étude des Edition: current; Page: [132]
sciences, il l’expliqua avec beaucoup de claireté; sa manière de
prononcer ést fort agréable. Le Cabinet de Physique de la Faculté n’ést
pas très considérable; il ne manque pas cependant des instrumens
physiques et mécaniques.

17 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons. Ce n’était qu’aujourdui que nous recûmes nous
effets et je m’occupai pendant tout le tems qui me resta en aidant M.
George à déballer.

18 Novembre

[N] Je pris ma leçon d’escrime, et fus chez M. Lentheric, mais y étant
allé par hasard plus tard qu’à l’ordinaire, je le trouvai sorti:
J’attendai son retour, et quand il arriva, il me dit de venir le
lendemain (Dimanche) pour prendre ma leçon.—J’étudiai Biot, j’aidai M.
George à déballer.

19 Novembre

[N] Je pris ma leçon de mathématiques, M. Bérard fils eut la bonté de me
conduire chez M. Morand, le professeur de littérature française.17
J’étudiai Biot, je defis ma malle, j’examinai mes plantes.

20 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’escrime, de mathématiques, et de français;
j’écris une lettre à mon père; je relus et commençai à corriger le
dialogue que j’avais écrit à Pompignan; je fus au cours de Zoologie de
M. Provençal.18 Ce professeur ne parle pas aussi bien que M. Gergonne:
il commence toujours trop haut. Il traita aujourd’hui l’utilité de la
Zoologie et les différens moyens dont se sert le Zoologiste. En parlant
des usages de la Zoologie il s’adressa plus particulièrement aux
Etudians en Médecine, parceque la plupart de ces auditeurs étaient de ce
classe.

21 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, je redigeai mes notes de la leçon de
Zoologie, je fus au cours de Chimie de M. Anglada.19 Ce professeur parle
bien, mais avec un peu d’accent, ce qui n’ést pas étonnant, attendu
qu’il ést de Perpignan. Son cours de cet année n’ést que la suite de
celui de l’année dernière.—Je fus aussi au cours de Logique. M. Gergonne
traita dans cette séance des sensations et des idées. Ces
considérations, quoiqu’appartenant plutôt à la Métaphysique qu’à la
Logique, sont cependant utiles pour bien comprendre cette dernière
séance.

Le cours de Zoologie a lieu les lundi, mercredi, et vendredi à 3½
heures; celui de Edition: current; Page: [133] Chimie les mardi, jeudi,
et samedi à 11 h; celui de Logique les mardi et jeudi à 3½ h. Je prends
ma leçon d’escrime à 7 ou à 8 h du matin, celle de français à 5½ h le
soir, et celle de mathématiques à 11 h ou à 2½ selon les jours.

22 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, j’appris par coeur un morceau de
l’Art Poétique de Boileau:20 je redigeai mes notes du cours de logique,
j’écris mon journal, je fus à la 2me leçon de Zoologie. Le professeur
traita les distinctions des corps organisés et inorganisés.

23 Novembre. Jeudi

[N] Cependant je pris une leçon de mathématiques, ayant arrangé avec M.
Lenthéric d’en prendre les jeudis plutôt que les Samedis, comme nous
n’aurions pas pu arranger l’heure pour les samedis. Je commençai une
autre lettre à mon père, je fus à la 2de leçon de chimie. Le professeur
donna un court apperçu de ce qu’il avait traité dans son cours de
l’année dernière, savoir de l’affinité chimique, des fluides
imponderables, et des corps simples.—Je fus aussi à la 3me leçon de
Logique: M. Gergonne continua à traiter des sensations, mais il me
semble entrer trop dans les détails qui appartient plutôt à la
Physiologie qu’à la Métaphysique. M. Fabre,21 neveu de M. Bérard, suit
ce cours.

Le soir je redigeai mes notes de cette leçon.

24 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je redigeai mes notes de la seconde leçon de
Zoologie, et je fus à la 3me leçon sur les distinctions entre les
vegétaux et les animaux: Je fis aussi mes exercices sur les
mathématiques.

25 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de Français, je redigeai mes notes sur
la leçon de Zoologie, j’achevai ma lettre et j’étudiai les
mathématiques: Je fus à la 3me leçon de Chimie, sur la classification
des corps composés, et sur la Nomenclature chimique.

26 Novembre. Dimanche

[N] J’appris un peu de Boileau par coeur, je lus le “Cataplus” de
Lucien: Messrs Bérard dinèrent chez nous.

27 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, je commençai avec M. Lentheric à
l’étude de la Théorie de Fonctions. Je redigeai mes notes sur une des
leçons de Chimie, je fus Edition: current; Page: [134] à la 4me leçon de
Zoologie, on traita les différences d’organisation de l’homme et les
singes: M. Provençal ayant quelque mal au pied, était obligé de remettre
à Vendredi la prochaine leçon. Je redigeai mes notes sur cette leçon,
j’arrangeai mes plantes. J’envoyai une lettre. M. Bérard f. parti pour
Paris.

28 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires: je fais maintenant avec le maître de
Français, un cours de rhétorique, avant de faire la lecture des auteurs
Français, afin de mieux sentir leurs beautés et leurs défauts: j’appris
un morceau de Boileau par coeur. J’envoyai une lettre à mon père, je fus
à la 4me leçon de Chimie. Le professeur traita des divers composés
chimiques, notamment des sulfures de phosphore et de carbon. Il ne fait
pas beaucoup d’experiences; en effet le seul professeur qui en fait
beaucoup ici ou qui les fait bien ést M. Bérard fils, et son cours
n’aura lieu qu’au printems prochain. Je fus aussi à la 4me leçon de
Logique: M. Gergonne continua les détails du mécanisme des sensations.

29 Novembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, et redigeai mes notes de la leçon de
Logique.

30 Novembre. Jeudi

[N] Je pris ma leçon de mathématiques; je fus à la 5me leçon de Chimie:
on traita le gaz hydrogène sulfuré et le gaz ammoniaque. Je fus aussi à
la 5me leçon de Logique: M. Gergonne, après avoir continué ses détails
sur les sensations, classifia les idées, d’abord en distinctes et
confuses, ensuite en complettes et incomplettes, enfin en simples et
complexes.—Je redigeai mes notes d’une leçon de Chimie.

1 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je redigeai mes notes sur la leçon de Logique.
En allant à la faculté des sciences je rencontrai quelqu’un qui me
prevint qu’il n’y avait point de cours, M. Provençal étant trop malade.

2 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’escrime et de Français, je commençai d’écrire
une lettre à mon père, je fis des exercices de mathématiques. Je fus à
la 6me leçon de chimie; on traita l’hydrogène phosphuré et carburé.

3 Decembre. Dimanche

[N] Je partis avant le jour avec M. George et les fils de M. Bérard pour
aller à Restinclière: Nous parcourûmes une grande partie de cette
domaine, eux en chassant, et moi en cherchant des plantes dont je
trouvai quelques-uns, quoique la saison fût un peu avancée. Nous fûmes
d’abord aux prairies qu’arrose le Lez: nous remontâmes cette rivière à
une hauteur considérable: puis je montai le côteau de Edition: current;
Page: [135] garrigues à droite: du sommet il y a une vue très étendue
sur une espace immense de garrigues qui ne produisent que la lavande, le
romarin, et quelques autres herbes: le terrain ést très varié par des
collines et des vallées, le paysage serait charmant si tous ces
garrigues étaient cultivés: comme le seront bientôt ceux qui
appartiennent à M. Bentham. Je trouvai quelques plantes en fleur sur les
garrigues, et retournai au château d’où je me promenai dans le jardin.
Peu après, ces messieurs arrivèrent, et nous mangeâmes quelque chose au
château. Delà nous retournâmes au Lez, que nous traversâmes. De l’autre
côté se trouve la ferme appelée la Grange du Pin. Après avoir remonté la
rivière, presqu’à la source, nous repassâmes au Pont et delà au château.
Avant notre arrivée a la ville il fesait déjà obscur. Après dîner je mis
dessécher mes plantes et fus chez M. Bérard.

4 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, je commençai avec M. Lentheric
l’étude du Calcul Différentiel, j’arrangeai mes plantes, j’achevai et
j’envoyai une lettre à mon père.

5 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je fus à la 7me leçon de chimie; M. Anglada
traita les sulfures métalliques. Je fus aussi à la 6me leçon de Logique:
M. Gergonne traita l’art d’abstraire: ses idées étaient assez conformes
aux miennes, seulement il semble à croire que les idées peuvent être
générales, qu’on peut avoir une idée de genre, d’espèce, etc.

6 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de mathématiques, je lus Lucien, je
fis des exercices de mathématiques etc. M. Morand étant un peu
indisposé, remit la leçon à demain.

7 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons de mathématiques et de Français, je fus à la 8me
leçon de chimie: on traita les azotures, les phosphures, les carbures
métalliques. Je fus aussi à la 7me leçon de Logique: M. Gergonne traita
les idées abstraites: ses notions me semblent tout à fait correctes sur
ce sujet: il a dit qu’une essence universelle ést une absurdité, et que
le corps n’ést que la cause inconnue des diverses modifications de notre
âme.

M. Ballard, jeune homme bien connu de M. Bérard, et qui fait toutes les
préparations pour les cours publiques, de la Fac. des Sciences, a eu la
bonté de me donner quelques plantes de ces environs.22 M. Bérard m’a
beaucoup dit à ses louanges; il ést très instruit, surtout en chimie.

Edition: current; Page: [136]
8 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, j’appris un morceau de Boileau.

9 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de Français, je fus à la 9me leçon de
Chimie. M. Anglada traita les borures, les hydrures; et les alliages
métalliques. Je corrigeai et copiai mes notes sur la 1re leçon de
Logique.

10 Decembre

[N] Je corrigeai et copiai mes notes sur la 2me leçon de Logique.

11 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’escrime, de mathématiques, et de Français. Je
m’occupai comme à l’ordinaire. Je fus au cours de M. Virenque.23

12 Decembre

[N] Je fus à la 10me leçon de chimie. M. Anglada commença la partie de
son cours qui a rapport aux acides. Je fus aussi à la 8me leçon de
Logique, sur la Division. Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de
mathématiques.

13 Decembre . . . 18 Decembre

[N] Dans tout cet intervalle j’étais indisposé.

19 Decembre

[N] Je fus à la 13me leçon de chimie, sur l’acide sulfurique, à la 10me
leçon de logique, sur la definition. Je pourrai voir des notes sur les
leçons que j’ai perdues.

20 Decembre

[N] Je fus à l’Ecole de Médecine, mais le professeur était malade. Je
pris ma leçon de Mathématiques. Je lus une tragedie française.

21 Decembre

[N] Jeudi. Je pris ma leçon de Mathématiques, je fus à la 14me leçon de
chimie: M. Anglada traita fort bien les acides sulfureux, hyposulfureux,
et hyposulfurique: ces derniers nouvellement découverts.24 L’après midi,
M. Gergonne continua la Definition, dans son 11me leçon: Je suis encore
d’accord avec lui sur tout ce qu’il Edition: current; Page: [137] dit,
mais il entre tellement en détail que le tems de son cours sera fini
avant qu’il n’arrive aux principes du raisonnement.—J’arrangeai mon
herbier, avec les plantes que j’ai reçu. Je lus l’“Icaromenippus” de
Lucien, et une tragedie française.

22 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires d’armes et de mathématiques, je lus
une Satire d’Horace,25 je commençai l’étude de l’Economie Politique de
Say, je lus une tragédie française, je fis des exercices de
mathématiques, j’étudiai la musique.

23 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français, je fus à la 15me leçon de
chimie, sur les acides de phosphore. Je lus quelques unes des lettres
familières de Ciceron,26 je lus un morceau de Say, et une pièce de
théatre français.

24 Decembre. Dimanche

[N] Mme B. et M. George qui avaient été quinze jours à la campagne,
dirigeant les ouvriers, revinrent aujourd’hui. Je lus des pièces de
théâtre, etc. Il y eut comme à l’ordinaire la messe de minuit à la
cathédrale pour la fête de Noël; et le souper ou réveillon après la
messe parmi les gens Catholiques.

25 Decembre. La Noël

[N] Je fus chez le Col. Vaysey;27 Anglais qui a été longtems en Inde,
qui a emprunté de M. Bentham l’ouvrage de mon père, et qui s’occupe
maintenant à la lecture.—Messrs Bérard dinèrent avec nous.—Je lus des
pièces de théâtre français.

26 Decembre. Fête de St Etienne, point de leçons publiques

[N] Je pris mes leçons de français et de mathématiques. Je lus etc. M.
George retourna à la campagne.

27 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons de mathématiques de français et d’escrime. Je
continuai la lecture de Say, en fesant des notes de ce que je trouvai à
remarquer. Il me semble que M. Say confond la valeur avec les
richesses.28 Après avoir défini les richesses Edition: current; Page:
[138] comme étant la somme des valeurs, il donne des exemples de ce que
les agens naturels ajoutent à la richesse, et fait ensuite ses
conclusions comme s’ils ajoutaient à la valeur. Il me semble aussi
attacher trop d’importance aux agens naturels.29 Il ést vrai comme il le
dit que nous ne saurions nous passer des propriétés, par exemple, de la
matière, qui nous donnent les moyens d’en faire nos instrumens:30 mais
comme cet aide est gratuit, et n’a nul effet sur les valeurs, ni même
sur la quantité comparative des produits à des époques divers, pourquoi
parler d’une chose étrangère au sujet?—J’achevai le premier livre des
lettres familières de Ciceron.

28 Decembre. Jeudi

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de mathématiques. Je fus à la 16me
leçon de chimie, sur l’acide carbonique. Je fus aussi à la 12me leçon de
M. Gergonne: il acheva ce qu’il avait à dire sur la Définition. Je
commençai le 2me livre des lettres de Ciceron.

29 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, je lus un morceau de Say etc. Je lus
quelques lettres de Cicéron.

30 Decembre

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français, je fus à la 17me leçon de
chimie sur les acides borique et arsénique.

31 Decembre. Dimanche

[N] Je continuai la lecture de Say; je fus chez M. Ballard, jeune homme
à qui M. Bérard m’a recommandé, pour voir son herbier: J’en vis une
petite partie.

1 Janvier [1821]

[N] Point de leçons: je continuai la lecture de Say, etc.

2 Janvier

[N] Je commençai l’étude du Système du Monde de Laplace,31 je pris mes
leçons d’armes et de mathématiques, je fus à la 18me leçon de M.
Anglada, sur les acides arsénieux, antimonique, et antimonieux. Je fus
aussi à la 13me séance de Logique: M. Gergonne traita les noms et le
langage en général, tous ses usages, etc. Il me semble avoir commis une
faute d’arrangement en parlant de la Définition des noms avant de parler
des noms même.

Edition: current; Page: [139]
3 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons ordinaires, M. Provençal professeur de Zoologie
qui avait suspendu son cours à cause d’une indisposition la reprit
aujourd’hui: il traita l’organisation générale de l’homme et des
animaux, mais d’une manière si embrouillée et parlant si vite que je ne
pus comprendre ce qu’il disait, encore moins l’écrire. Ce n’ést pas que
je ne compris pas les phrases, mais il était impossible de me rapeler
d’une phrase quand il passa à la prochaine.—Je continuai la lecture du
Système du Monde.

4 Janvier

[N] Je fus à la 19me leçon de Chimie, sur les acides chromique,
molybdique, tongstique, selénique, et columbique. Je fus aussi à la 14me
leçon de Logique, on traita les langues hiéroglyphique et alphabétique,
les avantages et les désavantages de l’une et de l’autre espèce.

5 Janvier

[N] Je fus à la 5me leçon de M. Provençal; il traita plus en particulier
le cerveau des animaux. Je continuai la lecture du Système du Monde.

6 Janvier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Provençal. Il traita les différentes fonctions
du corps animal. Je fus etc. aussi au cours de M. Anglada sur l’air
atmosphérique.

7 Janvier

[N] Dimanche. J’étudiai Laplace et Biot. Je fis mes thèmes etc.

8 Janvier

[N] Je fis mes thèmes, je fus au cours de M. Provençal sur la
classification générale des Animaux.

9 Janvier

[N] Je fus à la 21me leçon de M. Anglada, sur les oxides d’azote et de
carbonne, à la 15me leçon de Logique sur les langues de la musique, des
mathématiques etc. Je fis mes thèmes etc.

10 Janvier

[N] Je fus au cours traînant de M. Virenque, à la 8me leçon de M.
Provençal sur les caractères généraux et la classification des
Mammifères. Je fis mes thèmes, etc. J’étudiai Laplace.

11 Janvier

[N] Je fus à la 22me leçon de M. Anglada sur l’eau: à la 16me leçon de
M. Edition: current; Page: [140] Gergonne, encore sur le langage, sur
les défauts des langues actuelles, même jusqu’aux détails de la
grammaire, et sur la manière de faire une langue philosophique. Je pris
mes leçons ordinaires. Je continuai le Système du Monde.

12 Janvier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque, qui traîne toujours: à la 9me leçon
de M. Provençal, sur l’histoire naturelle de l’homme. Je pris mes leçons
ordinaires. Je continuai le Système du Monde.

13 Janvier

[N] Je fus à la 23me leçon de M. Anglada, encore sur l’eau: à la 10me
leçon de M. Provençal, il continua l’histoire de l’homme. Je pris mes
leçons d’armes et de français, je continuai le Système de Monde, je lus
un morceau de Lucien, je fis des thèmes etc.

14 Janvier. Dimanche32

[N] Je fis une excursion à Restinclière à pied, n’y ayant pas été depuis
quelque tems. Je partis aussitôt qu’il fît jour; je n’arrivai à
Restinclière que vers onze heures: mais c’était que j’avais quitté
souvent la route pour chercher des plantes, dont je trouvai un assez
grand nombre, nonobstant la saison. Il y a eu si peu de gêlée dans cet
hiver que beaucoup de plantes printannières avaient déjà commencé à
s’épanouir: J’en trouvai quelques unes en fleur. Après avoir resté
quelque tems à Restinclière, je fus me promener à la source du Lez, à
une petite demi-lieue du château. Cette source, à ce que l’on dit, ést
dans le genre de Vaucluse. Il y a une espèce d’amphithéatre de rochers
perpendiculaires très hauts, du fond desquels sort un fleuve déjà fort
considérable qui tourne ensuite un moulin, et après avoir traversé
beaucoup de prairies trouve la route près de Monferrier: Il passe sous
le Pont Juvenal près Montpellier, et va se jeter dans l’Etang de
Maguelonne à 5 ou six lieues de sa source. Il ést navigable pour les
bâteaux, jusqu’au Pont Juvenal, et le serait pour ceux d’une certaine
grandeur presque jusqu’à la source, sans une quantité de moulins qu’il
sert à tourner en divers endroits.—Je fus de rétour à Montpellier près
de six heures, après une promenade de 17 ou 18 milles anglaises.

15 Janvier. Lundi

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque: à la 11me leçon de M. Provençal sur
l’homme. Je continuai l’étude de Laplace mais je m’occupai la plupart de
la journée à rediger les notes de M. Gergonne. Je pris mes leçons
d’armes et de math.

16 Janvier

[N] J’écrivis et j’envoyai une lettre à mon pere. Je redigeai les notes
de M. Edition: current; Page: [141] Gergonne. Je fus à la 24me leçon de
chimie sur les oxides métalliques, et à la 17me leçon de M. Gergonne où
il traita fort bien certaines questions telles que celle des idées
innées ou acquises, etc. Je pris mes leçons.

17 Janvier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque; à la 13me leçon de M. Provençal sur
l’histoire de l’homme. J’écrivis une autre lettre. Je pris mes leçons.

18 Janvier. Jeudi

[N] J’envoyai ma lettre, je fus à la 25me leçon de chimie sur les
alkales, à la 18me leçon de M. Gergonne, où il traita le jugement et la
proposition. Je continuai le Système de Monde. Je pris mes leçons
d’armes et de mathématiques.

19 Janvier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque, je fus aussi à la 14me leçon de M.
Provençal. Je fus voir le pavillon, bâti en pierre, qui reçoit les eaux
pour l’usage de la ville: Il y a un long double acqueduc entre ce
pavillon et la ville: je me promenai dans l’arcade: la perspective de
cette galerie, du bout le plus proche de la ville, présente un coup
d’oeil magnifique. Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français.

20 Janvier

[N] Point de cours: anniversaire de la mort de Louis XVI. Je continuai
la lecture de Laplace, je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français, etc.

21 Janvier. Dimanche

[N] Je fus faire une promenade sur les garrigues autour de la ville avec
M. Ballard, préparateur de chimie à la faculté des sciences, à qui M.
Bérard m’a recommandé. J’y trouvai qqs plantes, que j’étalai à mon
rétour: après diner je fus chez M. Ballard, pour voir une partie de son
herbier.

22 Janvier

[N] Je pris ma leçon de français je fus au cours de M. Virenque, à la
15me leçon de M. Provençal, je fis un thème.

23 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je fus à la 26me séance de chimie sur les
terres, à la 19me leçon de M. Gergonne sur la proposition: il a traité
son sujet d’une manière très agréable, et ses idées sont en général
assez conformes aux vôtres, à ceci près, qu’il ne me paraît pas assez
sentir que les idées ne peuvent pas être générales, ce qui changerait
beaucoup de ses raisonnemens.

24 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je redigeai la dernière leçon de M. Gergonne, je
fus au Edition: current; Page: [142] cours de M. Virenque, et à la 16me
leçon de M. Provençal. Le soir je fus voir une autre partie de l’herbier
de M. Balard.

25 Janvier. Jeudi

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de mathématiques, je fus à la 27me
séance de chimie, sur les sels: à la 20me leçon de Logique sur la
notation qui lui semblait la plus commode pour exprimer les
propositions; sur l’étendue diverse des termes dans une proposition de
quantité et de qualité donnée, et sur l’opposition des propositions.

26 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons, je fus au cours de M. Virenque et à la 17me
leçon de M. Provénçal. Je redigeai la dernière leçon de M. Gergonne. Le
soir je fus voir une autre partie de l’herbier de M. Balard.

27 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français, je fus au 28me leçon de
chimie, sur les sels en général et sur les nitrates en particulier. Je
fus aussi à la 18me leçon de M. Provençal. Je commençai à faire un autre
thème.

28 Janvier

[N] Je fus avec M. Balard et d’autres messieurs pour faire une excursion
à la mer. Un d’eux avait amené une voiture appelée berline, mais ne
ressemblant guère à une berline anglaise; les chevaux étaient assez
indifférens, et le chemin horrible en sorte qu’il nous fallait démonter
à chaque instant pour sortir la voiture de la boue. Arrivés aux cabanes
sur la rive gauche du Lez, presque vis-à-vis l’endroit où j’avais été
une fois auparavant, nous nous embarquâmes en bâteau pour aller à
l’embouchure du Lez. Là nous cherchâmes des plantes marines. Nous avions
eu le projet d’aller à Maguelonne. Mais nous n’avions pas assez de tems,
malgré que nous fûmes partis de Montpellier à cinq heures et demie du
matin. Nous étions de retour vers les 4 h.

29 Janvier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque, et à la 19me leçon de M. Provençal:
je lus un morceau du Système du Monde; je fus chez M. Lentheric, mais il
avait changé de logement: je pris ma leçon de français.

30 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français, je fus chez M. Lenthéric,
qui me dit qu’il était très occupé, et ne pouvait pas encore me donner
une heure fixe. Je fus à la 28me leçon de chimie, sur les nitrites, les
sulphates et les sulfites; à la 21me leçon de M. Gergonne sur la
conversion de propositions: je rédigeai cette leçon. J’étalai une partie
de mes plantes marines.

Edition: current; Page: [143]
31 Janvier

[N] Je pris mes leçons d’armes et de français; je fus au cours de M.
Virenque, à la 20me leçon de M. Provençal, je fus chez M. Pouzin,
professeur de botanique à l’Ecole de Pharmacie,33 qui eut la bonté de me
faire voir une petite partie de son herbier: Je redigeai les notes de
l’avant dernière leçon de M. Ang[lada], j’étalai le reste de mes
plantes.

1 Fevrier

[N] Je fus à la 29me leçon de chimie, sur les phosphates, les
carbonates, et les borates: à la 22me leçon de M. Gergonne sur les
propositions compliquées, je fus voir une autre petite partie de
l’herbier de M. Pouzin, je redigeai les notes de la leçon de logique. Je
pris mes leçons.

2 Fevrier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque, à la 21me leçon de M. Provençal. Je
pris mes leçons.

3 Fevrier

[N] Je fus à la 30me leçon de chimie sur l’acide hydrochlorique, à la
22me leçon de M. Provençal. Je pris mes leçons. Je redigeai deux leçons
de chimie.

4 Fevrier. Dimanche

[N] Je me promenai le matin pour trouver des plantes. Quoiqu’il gêle
toutes les nuits, cependant la chaleur dans la journée ést si grande que
la végétation des petites plantes est déjà assez avancée. Mme Be et M.
George revinrent de Restinclière.

5 Fevrier

[N] Je fus au cours de M. Virenque, je pris mes leçons, je fus à la 23me
leçon de M. Provençal. Je redigeai.

6 Fevrier

[N] Je fus à la 31me leçon de chimie sur l’acide hydrochlorique, M.
Gergonne était des jurés: je pris mes leçons.

Edition: current; Page: [144] Edition: current; Page: [145]


2.: Traité de Logique
 1820-21

MS, Pierpont Morgan Library. Titled: “Traité de Logique / redigé d’après
le Cours de Philosophie / de M. Gergonne / Doyen de la Faculté des
Sciences / de l’Academie de Montpellier / avec des Notes / par J. Mill.”
The date 1820 is added in another hand in square brackets. In the first
four chapters there are corrections in an unknown French hand, which
have been recorded in variant notes, where “CH” signifies the correcting
hand; all but 153d-d were accepted by Mill. As not published in Mill’s
lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.


CHAPITRE I: CONSIDÉRATIONS GÈNÉRALES

Importance de la Logique.celui qui voudrait exercer un art mécanique,
sans aaucunement connaîtrea la matière sur laquelle il devrait
agir,—sans avoir étudié la manière de se servir des machines propres au
métier,—ne pourrait pas, à bon droit, s’attendre à un résultat
favorable. Si donc dans un art mécanique, une pareille entreprise est
ridicule, combien l’ést-elle davantage dans une étude plus importante!
et combien ést imprudent celui qui s’occupe d’une branche quelconque de
la science, sans jamais avoir sérieusement refléchi sur les différentes
opérations par lesquelles l’esprit humain arrive à des connaissances
certaines!

Je ne bdisputeb point qu’on n’ait connu des individus, qui par les
efforts du génie extraordinaire dont ils étaient doués, ont fait de très
grands progrès dans la science, et qui en ont même reculé les bornes
d’une distance considérable: sans avoir songé à un examen sérieux de la
manière dont l’esprit s’élève à de pareilles hauteurs. Mais il ést très
probable que ces hommes extraordinaires ont inventé des méthodes
particulières qu’ils ne nous ont point transmises, que peutêtre ils
avaient trouvées, pour ainsi dire, à leur insu, et dont ils n’auraient
guère su donner une explication satisfesante. On ne doit pas d’ailleurs
cbâtirc une règle genérale sur ces exceptions, ni conclure qu’une
branche des connaissances humaines, si utile pour l’étude approfondie de
toutes les autres branches, n’est pas elle-même digne d’être étudiée,
parceque certains individus ont su s’en passer: tout comme on aurait
tort de dire qu’il ne Edition: current; Page: [146] faut point étudier
les règles de la versification, parcequ’il y a des personnes qui
naissent poètes.

On pourrait croire que puisque la faculté du raisonnement, comme celles
de marcher et de parler, est naturelle aux hommes, et que nous parlons
et marchons tous à peu près avec la même facilité, tous les hommes
devraient raisonner avec la même exactitude. Pour être convaincu dde
l’inconséquenced d’un pareil argument, il suffit de jeter les yeux sur
nos ouvrages de science et de littérature, ou sur nos gazettes
publiques. Quelle diversité d’opinions ne trouvons-nous pas dans nos
journaux, tant politiques que littéraires et scientifiques! Que de
sectes en philosophie et en religion! Que de partis en politique! Ce
n’ést pourtant pas à l’intérêt qu’on doit attribuer toute cette
différence: car outre qu’elle s’étend à des sujets où l’intérêt ne peut
point agir, il ést incontestable que le nombre d’hommes qui soutiennent
par des motifs intéressés une opinion que dans leur conscience ils ne
trouvent pas conforme à la vérité, ne peut être comparé à celui des
honnêtes hommes de parti, qui sont dans l’erreur, par un simple défaut
de jugement.

Il ne saurait se présenter des exemples plus frappans de cette
différence d’opinions, que ceux qu’on peut tirer du médecin, qui veille
sur la santé de nos corps, et du théologien qui s’occupe ede lae salut
futur de nos âmes. Plus les sujets sont importans, et moins il y a
d’accord entre ceux qui s’en occupent. Ces deux sujets, les plus
importans de tous, sont aussi ceux qui présentent la plus grande
diversité d’opinions. En médecine par exemple, que de systêmes
différens! L’un veut farrangerf en genres et en espèces, toutes les
maladies gdontg le corps humain ést hsusceptibleh, tandis que l’autre ne
voit partout que des maladies particulières, et n’y trouve aucun rapport
suffisant pour qu’on puisse iles rassembler en groupesi. Celui-ci a sa
propre manière de guérir toutes les maladies: celui-là en a une autre.
Dans ce labyrinthe de systèmes divers, quel parti peut prendre le jeune
homme qui commence l’étude de la médecine, sans avoir auparavant acquis
une connaissance profonde des principes qui apprennent à distinguer le
bon du mauvais raisonnement? Je ne vois que deux jalternatifsj,—l’une et
l’autre également kadversesk à une pratique utile de la médecine. Celui
qui suit la première de ces deux routes, ést celui qui ne voyant partout
que des diversités d’opinion, incapable lui-même de decider laquelle de
toutes les doctrines qu’il entend soutenir, mérite le plus d’attention,
commence à les regarder toutes d’un oeil Edition: current; Page: [147]
indifférent. Faute d’avoir étudié les principes du raisonnement, il n’a
d’autre moyen pour juger d’un raisonnement que d’après les sentimens
d’autrui, et, voyant que tous les médecins sont divisés entr’eux, et
qu’il n’y en a guère de celèbre qui n’ait son système propre à lui-même,
il tombe dans le doute; il croît que tant de disputes prouvent
nècessairement l’existence d’incertitudes, il hésite toujours à former
une opinion décidée, et devient Sceptique. L’autre, au contraire, séduit
par les charmes du système qui lui a été présenté sous la forme la plus
attrayante, l’embrasse, sans aucun examen des objections qu’on pourrait
y opposer: il cherche avec empressement tous les argumens qu’on peut
trouver pour appuyer ce système favori; et enfin, réussissant à se
tromper lui-même, il croît son système irréfutable, et devient ce qu’il
a fait tout pour être, un Dogmatiste entêté.

Objet de la Logique.Pour éviter l’un et l’autre de ces deux extrêmes, il
ést essentiel de trouver des principes tels qu’on puisse s’y rapporter
lorsqu’il s’élève des doutes sur la justesse d’un argument. Ces
principes font la science de la Logique, qui ést donc pour ainsi dire le
vestibule commun de toutes les autres Sciences.—Malgré l’étendue immense
du champ des connaissances humaines, il n’ést pourtant aucune science où
l’esprit ne compare, ne juge, ne raisonne, ne discute,—où il ne descende
du général au particulier, et ne remonte du particulier au général—où il
ne rapporte la cause à son effet, et l’effet à sa cause;La définition.
où, au défaut de connaissances certaines, il ne les remplace par la
conjecture, et ne pèse avec délicatesse les différens dégrés de
vraisemblance. Les principes qui dirigent l’esprit dans chacune de ces
operations, sont donc d’une application également importante dans toutes
les Sciences: et ce sont ces principes qui constituent la Logique.

Systèmes de Logique.Mais en entreprenant l’enseignement de cette science
si essentielle à l’etude de toutes les autres, j’avoue franchement
l’embarras où je me trouve. Ces principes mêmes, dont dépendent toutes
les autres branches de la science, sont peutêtre ceux sur lesquels on
compte le plus d’opinions diverses. Témoin toutes les sectes qui se sont
formées parmi les Logiciens: Pour ne pas entrer dans un détail inutile,
je ne citerai que ceux d’Artistote, de Platon, des Scholastiques, de
Descartes, de Leibnitz, de Condillac, et de Kant.1Cause de la diversité
d’opinion. Cette différence d’opinion provient le plus souvent de la
manie de raisonner sur des sujets au delà du pouvoir borné de l’esprit
humain. Laissons aux têtes Germaniques toutes ces obscurités, et rendons
grâce à notre aimable legèreté qui nous empêche de nous enthousiasmer
pour ce que nous ne pouvons pas comprendre.

Edition: current; Page: [148]
Pour moi, je n’ai jamais appartenu à aucune secte philosophique; je n’ai
jamais cherché à me signaler par des spéculations sur des sujets au delà
des bornes de l’esprit humain: je ln’entreprends qu’à vous soumettrel
des principes dont la démonstration peut être comprise par un esprit
ordinaire, et dont les applications pratiques sont dans les affaires
journalières de la vie, autant que dans les sciences elles-mêmes, de la
plus haute importance.

Avant pourtant de commencer l’enseignement de ces principes, je
m’arrêterai un instant pour lever une objection qu’on pourrait faire, et
qu’il ést très essential de réfuter avant d’aller plus loin.

Quelle que soit la partie des connaissances humaines dont on se propose
l’étude, il se présente dès le commencement un obstacle, qui, au premier
abord, paraît insurmontable. Il consiste dans une espèce de cercle
vicieux: on trouve souvent que pour apprendre une science, il faut en
quelque sorte la savoir déjà. La Grammaire, par exemple, a pour sujet
les parties du discours: elle explique les différences qui existent
entre ces parties, et le rôle que joue chacune d’elles dans le discours.
Mais pour expliquer à un élève ce que sont le Nom et le Verbe, il faut
se servir de Noms et de Verbes, ainsi que des autres parties du
discours. Si donc l’élève ne connaît pas la valeur de ces parties,
comprendra-t-il l’explication? Et s’il la connaît, à quoi bon lui
expliquer ce qu’il sait déjà?—De même, si je veux faire apprendre
l’Arithmétique à un élève, je commence par lui enseigner la manière
d’écrire les nombres, et non seulement de les écrire mécaniquement, mais
avec la connaissance de leur signification. Or un nombre quelconque
réprésente le premier chiffre à droite plus le second multiplié par la
première puissance de dix, plus le troisième chiffre multiplié par la
seconde puissance de dix, etc. Donc pour faire le premier pas dans
l’étude de l’Arithmétique, il faut nécessairement connaître les deux
opérations de l’Addition et de la Multiplication. On trouvera que la
même difficulté existe dans toutes les branches de la science.

Comment peut-on apprendre la Logique sans avoir appris à raisonner?Mais
il n’y a aucune branche où la difficulté dont je viens de parler soit
plus apparente que dans la Logique. Cette science apprend à se servir du
raisonnement pour mla découverte des vérités nouvellesm: mais pour
expliquer les principes du raisonnement à quelqu’un qui ne les connaît
point, il ést sans doute nécessaire de raisonner avec lui. Si donc il
sait raisonner, pourquoi le lui apprendre? Et s’il ne le sait pas,
comment comprendra-t-il vos argumens?

Cette question peut être comparée à celle du premier marteau. Puisqu’on
fait les marteaux, pourrait-on dire, par le moyen d’autres marteaux,
comment ést-on parvenu à faire le premier? La réponse n’ést pas
difficile. Il n’ést point vraisemblable qu’on se soit toujours servi
d’un marteau de la même perfection que celui qui s’emploie aujourd’hui:
Au contraire, il y a toute apparence que dans les premiers siècles on
s’ést servi d’une pierre dont la forme semblait Edition: current; Page:
[149] plus commode que celle des autres pierres: par ce moyen là on a
fait quelqu’instrument un peu plus maniable, et ainsi de suite, jusqu’à
ce qu’enfin on soit parvenu à faire des outils de la même excellence que
ceux dont on se sert aujourd’hui. Cette même explication est applicable
aux Sciences. L’Astronomie, l’une de celles dont la théorie ést
aujourd’hui la plus complette et la mieux établie, a commencé par des
hypothèses grossières qu’on perfectionnait ensuite: et c’est delà qu’on
ést parti, pour arriver à toutes les découvertes qui enrichissent
maintenant la science, et ne laissent plus à la postérité que le travail
de perfectionner les résultats. Pour revenir à l’exemple de la
Grammaire,—un enfant qui sait parler—bien qu’il n’ait jamais appris les
règles qui enseignent à parler correctement,—ne laisse pas que d’avoir
quelque notion genérale du rôle que jouent le Nom et le Verbe dans le
discours.Nous acquierrons en notre enfance beaucoup de notions
imparfaites, que le Logicien s’occupe de perfectionner. La Grammaire
fait valoir cette notion vague pour donner une connaissance plus exacte.
La même réponse convient à la Logique. Dans notre enfance nous
acquerrons sur une grande variété de sujets, des notions imparfaites,
que le Logicien s’occupe de corriger et de perfectionner.

Condillac a mis en avant ces notions primitives qu’acquierrent les
enfans, sans que, pour ainsi dire, nous nous y mêlions du
tout,—Condillac, dis-je, a mis en avant ces notions pour accuser nos
méthodes. Puisque, a-t-il dit, la Nature donne par elle-même tant de
connaissances, nos méthodes devraient continuer, comme la Nature a
commencé.2 Quelle ést cette manière d’enseigner qu’il appelle imiter la
Nature, c’ést ce que nous verrons dans la suite: il suffit maintenant de
remarquer que les enfans n’apprennent par eux-mêmes un si grand nombre
de choses que parcequ’ils en sentent vivement l’intérêt. Ils voient
quelqu’objet qui leur plaît; ils désirent l’avoir; pour y parvenir, ils
apprennent d’abord à se traîner, puis à marcher. Ils desirent posséder
quelqu’objet qui n’ést pas à la portée de leurs mains; ils s’aperçoivent
que les autres, dans une pareille occasion, prononcent certains sons;
ils écoutent ces sons; ils essaient de les imiter, et apprennent ainsi à
parler. Mais aussitôt qu’ils ont appris tout ce qui ést essentiel aux
besoins de la vie, c’ést à dire ce que le paysan le plus grossier sait
aussi bien que le philosophe le plus éclairé, ils ne voient plus rien
qui leur inspire le même intérêt: Dès lors, sans nos méthodes, ils
n’apprendraient plus rien.—Je ne nie pas qu’il n’y ait des gens qui
s’instruisent tout seuls, qui poussent même leurs études jusqu’à un
point très haut de la science: mais ces individus sont toujours bien peu
nombreux: et pourquoi n’attribuerait-on pas cette différence entre les
hommes à l’inégalité naturelle des esprits?*

Edition: current; Page: [150]


CHAPITRE II: DES IDÉES EN GÈNÉRAL

un corps peut agir sur un autre corps de deux manières. Si je frappe un
objet de ma main, celle-ci agit immédiatement sur l’objet. Si j’abats un
mur d’un coup de canon, j’agis médiatement sur le mur: ma main, en
allumant la poudre, produit une emission de gaz; le gaz, en se dilatant,
fait aller le boulet; celui-ci frappe contre le mur, et le fait tomber.
Un corps agit donc médiatement sur un autre corps, s’il ne le modifie
que par suite des modifications, qu’il fait éprouver immédiatement à
d’autres corps.

Les sensations sont communiquées au cerveau par les nerfs. Le cerveau
ést le siège de l’âme.Les phénomènes de la sensation offrent un exemple
d’action médiate. L’impression, reçue par l’un des cinq organes des
sens, est communiquée par les nerfs, de l’organe affecté jusqu’au
cerveau, qui paraît être le siège de l’âme, c.à.d. le centre du système
sensitif. La manière dont les impressions se communiquent au cerveau
peut être comparée à la manière dont quelques araignées font leur toîle:
Toute impression sur une partie quelconque de la toîle se reproduit à
une espèce de foyer commun, où l’araignée se place et attend que par la
secousse elle s’aperçoive de l’arrivée d’une mouche.

Perception.L’attention, pour ainsi dire, de l’âme aux sensations ést
appelée perception. Il ést clair que la sensation peut exister sans la
perception: comme dans le cas de celui qui travaille en hiver sans feu:
S’il prend beaucoup d’intérêt à son ouvrage, le froid peut se saisir de
ses pieds, sans qu’il s’en aperçoive: et ce n’ést qu’après qu’il a
achevé son ouvrage qu’il se trouve avoir les pieds gelés. On a connu des
militaires qui dans la chaleur d’une bataille ont reçu sans le savoir de
très graves blessures. Ces exemples prouvent qu’il y a non seulement une
action de l’organe affecté sur le cerveau, mais aussi une reaction du
cerveau sur l’organe, qui rend l’impression plus intense: et c’ést ce
qu’on appelle perception. Les modifications même de notre langue peuvent
nous faire sentir cette distinction entre la sensation et la perception.
Nous disons, par exemple, voir et regarder: toucher et tâter: entendre
et écouter. On entend beaucoup de monde qui parle: mais on ne sait pas
ce qu’ils ont dit, parcequ’on n’a pas écouté; la sensation n’est pas
aperçue.

Attention.L’acte par lequel l’âme s’applique à la sensation, et fait
réagir le cerveau sur l’organe affecté, ést appelé attention. L’âme ne
donne son attention que lorsqu’il y a quelque intérêt.

Définition des idées.La manière d’être d’une sensation dans l’esprit a
reçu le nom d’idée. Une idée n’ést donc autre chose que l’impression
reçue par les sens, et communiquée à l’âme; impression qui porte le nom
de sensation lorsqu’elle ést reçue par les sens, mais qui devient idée
lorsqu’elle est transférée à l’âme.

Théorie physique des Sensations.Les sensations sont reçues et
communiquées au cerveau par de petits vaisseaux d’une substance
moëlleuse, qui partent du cerveau, et aboutissent à la surface du corps.
Ces vaisseaux, appelés nerfs, sont si nombreux qu’il ést Edition:
current; Page: [151] impossible de piquer avec l’aiguille la plus fine,
une partie quelconque du corps, sans en rencontrer un ou plusieurs. Les
vaisseaux de certaines parties du corps, étant plus déliés que ceux des
autres parties, et d’une construction peut être un peu différente,
donnent lieu à adifférentesa variétés du tact, qu’on appelle goût,
odorat, etc.

Cette théorie ést confirmée par ce qui arrive aux paralytiques. Dans
leur corps, une partie du système nerveux ést devenue incapable
d’exécuter ses fonctions: c’ést pourquoi les parties affectées ne
jouissent plus de la sensation, quoiqu’elles puissent vivre, et même
croître, la circulation du sang n’étant pas interrompue.

J’ai tâché de prendre les mots, sensation, perception, attention, idée,
dans le sens que j’ai cru le plus usité: ne suivant pas, en cela,
l’exemple de quelques métaphysiciens, qui se font une langue à eux
seuls, donnant aux termes du langage ordinaire, un sens tout autre que
celui qu’on leur donne communément.

Théorie de l’attention.Si une impression ést peu forte, la volonté ést
une condition indispensable à l’attention: mais il ést fort difficile à
l’âme de se refuser aux impressions violentes. Si donc la sensation ést
agréable, l’âme s’y donne toute entière, afin d’en tirer le plus grand
parti possible: Si elle ést désagréable, sans être forte, l’âme peut
ordinairement trouver le moyen de s’en distraire: Mais si la sensation
ést forte et pénible, elle ést forcée de s’y prêter, malgré tous ses
efforts pour s’en détourner. L’absence involontaire de l’attention ést
appelée distraction. Il y a des personnes qui vivent en une distraction
continuelle: qui ne peuvent sans la plus grande peine, fixer leur
attention. Ce sont des individus qu’il ést toujours fort difficile
d’instruire: ils vous font une question, mais avant que votre réponse ne
soit achevée, vous voyez sur leur visage qu’ils ne vous écoutent plus.
Il y a encore des gens qui fixent volontiers leur attention sur
certaines impressions, quoique désagréables: ce sont les mélancoliques.

Souvent un objet nous affecte en certaines circonstances bquib ne nous
affecte pas en d’autres: cela dépend de l’état actuel de l’âme par
rapport aux impressions qu’elle reçoit. On voit très clairement les
étoiles dans la nuit: elles brillent du même lustre pendant le jour:
mais l’attention ést tellement dirigée vers la lumière, plus forte, du
soleil, qu’elle ést nécessairement distraite de celle des étoiles. Si on
allumait, le soir, un feu de joie au sommet du Pic St. Loup, tout
Montpellier sortirait pour le regarder: mais dans le jour, on n’y ferait
pas attention. Il faut donc, en étudiant un phénomène qui n’ést pas très
saîllant, prendre garde qu’il ne soit pas masqué par un autre phénomène
plus apparent. C’ést pourquoi l’on fait ordinairement les expériences
sur la lumière Edition: current; Page: [152] dans une chambre obscure.1
C’ést encore pour cela que les gens qui méditent beaucoup se mettent
quelquefois à l’obscurité, afin de n’être pas distraits par la vue des
objets extérieurs. Je leur conseillerais aussi de se mettre dans un
endroit où ils ne seraient distraits par aucun bruit.

Ce ne sont pas des gens fort cméditativesc qui louent des apartemens
garnis dans la Rue St. Honoré, par exemple, à Paris, ou dans la Grande
Rue de Montpellier. Ceux pourtant qui par leur situation se trouvent
exposés à entendre beaucoup de bruit, ceux, par exemple, qui travaillent
dans un moulin s’y accoutument enfin de manière à n’en être plus
incommodés.2 On raconte qu’Archimède, étant occupé de la solution d’un
problème, n’entendit pas le bruit de la prise de Syracuse.3

La sensation dure au moins quelques instans, après que sa cause a
disparu: c’ést ainsi qu’on explique un phénomène très connu, savoir
qu’un bâton dont le bout ést enflammé, et qu’on fait tourner très
rapidement dans l’air, donne l’idée d’un ruban de feu. C’ést dà la même
cause, qu’on doit attribuer,d que les sons répetés à de petits
intervalles, ese confondent àe un seul.


CHAPITRE III: SOURCES OÙ NOUS PUISONS NOS IDÉES

Sensation la source primitive de nos idées.la source primitive de toutes
nos idées ést dans les objets exterieurs. Si je me promène dans un
parterre, j’acquiers l’idée de la couleur des fleurs, de leur parfum, du
bruit que fait le feuillage des arbres, s’il y en a, et ainsi de suite.
La Mémoire ne donne point d’idées; mais elle en rappelle: il semble même
que l’âme peut produire à volonté sur le cerveau, une impression
pareille à celle que produirait l’objet lui-même dans lequel l’idée a
été puisée.De la Mémoire et ade ses idéesa. Cependant, que ce soit
parceque l’action ést moins efficace, ou parceque nous sommes distraits
par d’autres objets, l’impression reproduite, quoique de la même nature,
ést toujours moins forte que l’impression primitive. Je puis me figurer
le Soleil: l’image que j’en fais dans mon esprit n’a pas btoute la
brillanceb du Edition: current; Page: [153] Soleil lui-même, mais elle
ne ressemble pas à la Lune: C’ést toujours le soleil, quoiqu’avec moins
cd’éclatc. Quelques individus ont la faculté de retenir mieux que les
autres, les sensations qu’ils ont éprouvées: Il y en a même qui se
reproduisent si vivement l’idée d’un objet, qu’ils pourraient dire avec
raison qu’ils le voient. Delà viennent, je crois, la plupart des
dvisitationsd surnaturelles: Ceux qui ont perdu un parent ou un ami
qu’ils ont beaucoup aimé, croient parfois que cette personne leur ea
parue et ils l’ont vue en effet: car l’impression qu’ils reproduisent
sur le cerveau est presqu’aussi forte que celle qui serait produite par
l’objet lui-même.

De l’imagination et de ses idées.L’âme crée quelquefois des phantômes,
en revêtissant un objet imaginaire de certaines proprietés qu’il connaît
à des objets réels: c’ést ce qui s’appelle imaginer. Mais on ne peut
jamais se figurer un objet doué de qualités qu’on ne connaît pas. Un
aveugle né, par exemple, peut fort bien se figurer un chien, car il a pu
en connaître la forme par le toucher, mais n’ayant aucune idée des
couleurs, il ne peut pas se figurer un chien vert. Les songes me
semblent du même genre que les phantômes de l’imagination. Il ést aisé
de concevoir la manière dont on reçoit des sensations dans un songe,
malgré l’absence des objets qui produisent ordinairement ces
impressions: car la sensation ne dépend que de la disposition des
organes extérieurs, du système nerveux, et du cerveau. Si dans la nuit
je me frappe la tête d’une certaine manière contre un mur, j’éprouve la
sensation d’une vive lumière: Or il ést certain que tout y ést dans
l’obscurité: il faut donc que le coup ait produit sur la rétine et sur
le nerf optique la même impression que produirait sur eux un soudain
éclair: et l’on sent bien que la même sensation doit en resulter. Je
pourrais encore citer la lumière Galvanique.

Des idées intellectuelles.Nous n’avons encore traité que les idées qui
ont des prototypes, soit dans la nature, soit dans fl’imaginationf.
L’âme, en comptant et en comparant ses impressions, donne naissance à
une autre espèce d’idées, appelées intellectuelles, et qui ne sont que
des idées de rélation. Nos prépositions en sont des exemples: car il
n’ést aucun objet qui réponde aux noms dessus, dessous, dedans, dehors,
droite, gauche: ces mots ne représentent que les rélations des objets
entr’eux par rapport à leur situation dans l’espace.—Les idées morales
sont aussi des idées intellectuelles, car elles ne peuvent pas se
peindre, à moins que ce ne soit en allégorie. Toutes ont leur source
dans la sensation.Elles ont leur source dans la sensation. Quand l’âme a
reçu une impression agréable, elle désire la conserver; quand elle a
éprouvé une sensation pénible, elle craint de l’éprouver une seconde
fois. Delà viennent l’affection et la haine: car on aime les sensations
qu’on désire éprouver, ainsi que l’objet qui en ést la cause: mais ce
qu’on craint ést regardé avec détestation. Il ne serait pas difficile
d’expliquer ainsi les idées les Edition: current; Page: [154] plus
métaphysiques.Et nous viennent par tous les sens également. Il ést clair
qu’elles pourraient venir par un sens quelconque, à celui qui serait
privé de tous les autres sens: car il n’en ést aucun par lequel on ne
reçoive des impressions agréables, et d’autres qui ne le sont pas. Il y
avait en Ecosse un jeune homme, né sourd, et par conséquent muet:1 il
était aussi à peu près aveugle, car bien qu’il pût reconnaître s’il
fesait clair ou obscur, il ne pouvait aucunement distinguer les objets
par la vue: l’un de ses plus grands amusemens était de s’enfermer dans
une chambre, et de regarder la lumière par un trou dans le volet. Bien
que cet enfant n’eût que trois sens, le goût, l’odorat et le toucher,
cela n’empêcha pas qu’on ne tînt avec lui une sorte de conversation, par
des coups plus ou moins forts, qu’on lui donnait sur diverses parties du
corps. Par ce moyen on parvint à lui faire sentir s’il avait fait une
bonne ou une mauvaise action, et à lui donner d’autres idées morales.

Un être né sans sensation ne pourrait avoir aucune idée, même de
l’imagination, et serait incapable de penser. Celui qui aurait joui de
la sensation, et qui en aurait été privé, ne serait pas dans le même
cas. Rien n’empêcherait qu’il ne revêtît un objet imaginaire des
propriétés qu’il avait autrefois connues, mais qu’il ne serait plus dans
le cas d’observer.

Quelles idées nous viennent de chacun des cinq sens?Puisqu’il ést
maintenant établi que toutes nos idées viennent de nos sens, c’ést une
considération assez intéressante, quelles idées nous viennent de tel
sens, et quelles de tel autre?

Condillac, dans sa Théorie des Sensations, a supposé, pour résoudre
cette question, que l’on donne à une statue inanimée, une âme, sans
aucun organe; qu’on lui donne ensuite, un seul sens, l’odorat, par
exemple, et dans cette hypothèse, il cherche quelles idées la statue
pourrait avoir.2 Après lui avoir donné les cinq sens à leur tour, il lui
en donne deux à la fois, puis trois, et ainsi de suite. Nous ne pouvons
pas entrer dans tous les détails où nous entraînerait cette manière de
traiter le sujet: nous nous contenterons de donner quelqu’idée des
connaissances d’une personne qui n’aurait qu’un sens quelconque.

Idées reçues par le sens du toucher.Celui qui n’aurait que le sens du
toucher pourrait distinguer les objets hors de lui de ceux qui feraient
partie de lui-même, parceque en touchant à ceux-ci il éprouverait une
sensation double, dans la partie touchante et dans la partie touchée, au
lieu que les objets externes ne lui feraient éprouver qu’une seule
sensation.3 Il ést clair qu’il aurait les idées de dur et de mou, d’uni
et de rabatu, de chaud et de froid. Il pourrait étudier le Calcul, car
en comptant ses sensations, il acquierrait l’idée du nombre, et c’ést
tout ce qu’il faut pour Edition: current; Page: [155] apprendre à
calculer. Il pourrait même devenir Géomètre: mais pour sentir combien
gson progrès seroit lentg, il suffit de penser que pour savoir si une
ligne ést droite ou courbe, il lui faudrait passer la main d’un bout à
l’autre, en se souvenant toujours du dégré dont il aurait plié le bras
dès le commencement. Il serait susceptible de plaisir et de peine, et
conséquemment de crainte, de désir, etc.

Par le goût.Celui qui serait borné au sens du goût pourrait avoir l’idée
du nombre, et consequemment étudier le calcul; mais n’ayant pas l’idée
de l’extension, (qui ne peut s’acquérir que par le toucher) il ne
pourrait pas devenir Géomètre. Il ne saurait pas même qu’il existât des
objets hors de lui-même. Le sens du goût n’ést qu’un toucher plus
exquis. On peut supposer le cas où tout le système nerveux aurait la
même délicatesse que possèdent les nerfs qui communiquent avec les
organes du goût: alors toute impression sur une partie quelconque du
corps produirait le même effet que si l’on mettait dans la bouche la
substance qui en ést cause. De tels individus pourraient prendre un bain
de sauce.

Par l’odorat.Celui qui n’aurait que le sens de l’odorat pourrait
calculer, mais ne pourrait jamais devenir géomètre. Il serait capable
d’éprouver le désir, la crainte, etc. Celui qui aurait ce sens répandu
sur toute la surface du corps serait un digne objet de pitié: car si
l’on touchait à une partie quelconque de son corps, seulement d’une
barbe de plume, il éprouverait la même sensation desagréable que si l’on
introduisait la plume dans ses narines.

Par l’ouie.Un être privé de tous les sens, hors l’ouie, n’aurait que des
connaissances très bornées. Il ne pourrait pas même savoir qu’il y eût
des objets hors de lui. Il n’en ést pas moins vrai, que cet organe
lorsqu’il ést combiné avec les autres prend un dégré d’importance, que
celui qui ne le regarderait que comme isolé serait loin d’anticiper.
Même en courant les rues et les places, il nous donne le moyen de
beaucoup apprendre.—La particularité qui distingue ce sens de celui du
toucher, (bien qu’elle soit fondée sur une plus grande délicatesse
nerveuse) exige aussi, à ce qu’il me semble, une construction
particulière, qui ne saurait se communiquer à toute la surface du corps.
Quand même les nerfs de la main hdeviendraith aussi déliés que ceux de
l’oreille, je ne crois point pour cela qu’on pût entendre par la main.
Je ne nie point que les fortes vibrations de l’air ne puissent produire
des impressions sur l’organe du toucher; je crois, par exemple, que si
un sourd de naissance plaçait sa main près de la bouche d’un canon au
moment qu’on en tirerait un coup, il sentirait une forte secousse: mais
cela n’ést pas entendre.

Par la vue.Celui qui serait borné au sens de la vue, n’aurait jamais
d’autres idées que celles des différentes couleurs. Mais, dira-t-on, un
oeil exercé peut juger avec beaucoup d’exactitude de la forme et de la
distance des objets. Cela ést vrai: Edition: current; Page: [156] mais
cela ne le serait pas, sans une longue étude faite dans notre enfance,
et qui consiste à comparer les renseignemens fournis par la vue avec
ceux que nous donne le toucher. Il y a toute apparence que l’enfant qui
vient de naître, ne voit qu’une surface, colorée de diverses manières:
aussi croît-il d’abord que tous les objets qu’il voit sont à la même
distance de lui: mais le toucher corrige les méprises où nous mènerait
la vue, et nous parvenons enfin à juger de la distance des objets par
l’oeil seul. Pour se convaincre de cette vérité, il suffit de penser
quels sont les moyens par lesquels nous jugeons de la distance d’un
objet. Il y a d’abord sa grandeur apparente: mais cette circonstance ne
nous sert en rien, à moins que nous n’ayons reconnu par le toucher
quelle ést la grandeur réelle de l’objet. Le dégré de convergence qu’il
faut donner aux axes des deux yeux pour les fixer tous deux sur le même
point, ést un autre moyen pour juger de la distance de ce point: mais
pour cela il a fallu apprendre par le toucher que plus l’objet ést près,
et plus il faut donner de convergence aux axes des yeux. Une autre
ressource ést la vîtesse avec laquelle un objet paraît changer de place,
lorsque nous changeons de position par rapport à lui: mais sans avoir
constaté par le sens du toucher que l’objet reste en sa place, nous
pourrions croire que c’est en effet lui qui change de position. Il ést
donc clair que sans le toucher, nous ne pourrions avoir aucune idée de
distance.—Je crois impossible que le sens de la vue puisse être
communiqué à toute la surface du corps: car la vision dépend de la
concentration sur un même point de la rétine, de tous les rayons de
lumière qui partent d’un point: et si les rayons convergent de manière à
se concentrer tant soit peu devant ou derrière la rétine, la vision ne
saurait être distincte. Or si tous les points de la main recevaient les
rayons qui partaient de chaque point d’un objet, il n’y aurait qu’une
impression à peu près uniforme sur toute la surface de la main, et par
conséquent il n’y aurait point de vision. Je suis loin de nier qu’on ne
puisse concevoir que les nerfs de la main soient assez déliés pour
distinguer les couleurs au toucher: Mais reconnaître les couleurs, ce
n’ést pas voir. Je dis qu’on peut concevoir la possibilité de distinguer
les couleurs au toucher; je ne dis pas que cela soit jamais arrivé: car
je crois que tous les exemples qu’on en a cités n’étaient que des
impostures. On a cité une certaine Mlle Mitory, en Angleterre, mais pour
distinguer les couleurs, elle était obligée de passer la main sur un
plâteau de verre: or il ést constant qu’un simple plâteau de verre, qui
n’ést ni concave ni convexe, ne peut nullement faciliter la vision: Je
crois donc qu’il y a là dedans quelque fourberie. Sur le même principe,
je crois impossible que certains insectes, qui ont la crystalline noire,
et très dure, puissent jouir de la vision: Car la lumière ne peut point
penétrer dans l’intérieur de leurs yeux. On a affirmé que ces insectes
voyaient par la surface extérieure de l’oeil: Je n’ai pas besoin de
réfuter cette hypothèse, car la vision ést évidemment impossible, à
moins que la lumière ne tombe sur la rétine. On demande, A quoi donc
servent les yeux à ces insectes? Je répondrai, Pour l’ornement, comme
les mamelons à l’homme, qui n’ont point d’autre usage.

Edition: current; Page: [157]
Des impressions anormales.Certaines impressions, quoique physiques, ne
se rapportent à aucun des cinq sens: la faim, la soif, la colique, etc.
en sont des exemples. On a quelquefois voulu classer ensemble toutes ces
anomalies sous le nom de sens interne:4 mais il ést evident qu’on
pourrait tout aussi bien faire un grand nombre de sens internes, car ces
impressions ne sont pas toutes reçues par le même organe.

Dans toutes les impressions, les extrémités nerveuses sont touchées: et
il n’ést point douteux que les différences des sens entr’eux se
rapportent aux différens dégrés de délicatesse dont ces extrémités sont
douées. Il ést impossible de recevoir par l’un d’entr’eux, les
sensations qu’on reçoit habituellement par un autre: Un aveugle de
naissance ne peut jamais se former aucune idée de la couleur; non plus
qu’un sourd ne peut comprendre ce qu’ést le son. On parlait une fois
devant un aveugle, de l’écarlate comme d’une couleur éclatante:Tous les
hommes ne sont pas affectés de la même manière par les objets. “Oh,”
dit-il, “c’ést peut être comme le son d’une trompette.”5 Nous ne savons
pas même si tous les hommes sont affectés de la même manière par un
objet. Nous avons à la vérité des noms communs que chacun de nous
emploie dans la même circonstance; mais je ne puis savoir, si
l’impression que j’exprime par le mot blanc, ést pareille à celle qu’un
autre exprime par le même nom: peut être la neige imprime-t-elle, aux
yeux de mon voisin, une sensation différente. Il y a des exemples qui
mettent hors de doute l’existence d’irrégularités de ce genre. Il y a
des personnes qui ne peuvent point souffrir l’odeur d’une rose: il y en
a d’autres pour qui la musique ést à peu près ce qu’ést le bruit des
charrettes pour les autres. On a connu un jeune homme irenvoyé d’une
bonne situationi chez un marchand d’étoffes parcequ’il ne pouvait pas
distinguer les couleurs: toutes lui fesaient la même impression, excepté
la couleur de rose, qu’il reconnaissait parcequ’elle lui fesait couler
des larmes.6

Peut-il y avoir d’autres sens que ceux que nous possédons?On a souvent
agité la question, s’il peut y avoir d’autres sens que ceux que nous
possédons. Il nous ést tout à fait impossible de répondre à cette
question, car nous ne pouvons nous faire aucune idée d’une sensation que
nous n’avons jamais éprouvée, non plus que les aveugles ne peuvent se
former d’idée de la couleur. On a débité des histoires sur la
Catalepsie, qui, si elles étaient confirmées par les témoignages de
medecins, habiles et dignes de foi, pourraient faire soupçonner
l’existence d’un sixième sens chez des personnes Edition: current; Page:
[158] affligées de cette maladie. On a cité, par exemple, un individu
qui lisait à travers une muraille: S’il fallait en croire quelque chose,
je croirais plutôt un pareil prodige que beaucoup d’autres qu’on a
débité sur les Cataleptiques: qu’un homme par exemple ait restitué des
passages Grecs sans avoir appris un mot de cette langue, et qu’une fille
qui n’avait jamais entendu parler de médecine ni de physique se soit
ordonné l’électricité comme remède. J’ai été à même de me convaincre des
jongleries qui s’exercent en pareil cas: J’étais allé voir une fille,
qui prétendait deviner l’heure en posant une montre sur une certaine
partie du ventre. Mais on avait commencé par poser en principe que cette
personne n’entendait pas, et par conséquent on ne se gênait pas trop de
parler devant elle. Il ést vrai que pour changer les aiguilles de la
montre on se retira dans une autre chambre, mais comme il y avait
beaucoup de monde, et qu’on se demandait continuellement Sur quelle
heure, sur quelle heure, il n’ést pas étonnant que la prétendue malade
vînt à en savoir quelque chose. Une autre fois je la vis tomber en
convulsion: le médecin, me prenant par la main, me mena au fond du
jardin, et me dit que le cor que j’entendais était la cause de ces
convulsions. Je lui dis, Voilà une personne qui n’entend pas, et qui
fait pourtant attention au son d’un cor auquel personne ne pense.

Mais pour sentir la possibilité de pareils prodiges, supposons une île
d’aveugles: un voyant arrive dans l’île, et parle aux habitans des
sensations qu’il reçoit par la vue: les incrédules savans de ce pays-là
le traitent d’imposteur; ils disent, Pour l’éprouver il faut cacher
quelque chose dans une boîte, et lui faire deviner ce que c’ést: il la
devine, c’ést que la boîte ést de verre, qui pour un aveugle ést comme
une boîte de fer blanc. Pourquoi donc ne serait-il pas possible que pour
certaines personnes, tous les corps fussent comme le verre, ou plutôt
qu’il y eût un fluide assez subtil pour pénétrer les corps les plus
opaques? Je puis ajouter que s’il y a de tels individus, ils sont bien
malheureux, car il leur ést impossible de communiquer leurs impressions
aux autres, ni de faire croire à leurs voisins qu’ils ne sont pas des
imposteurs. Cela ést dû en partie à la mauvaise manière dont ils
s’expriment: ils ne devraient pas dire Je vois quelque chose que vous ne
voyez pas, mais J’aperçois quelque chose que vous n’apercevez pas: car
la vision ést particulière aux yeux, et ne se rapporte point à d’autres
organes.

Diderot a fait quelque part une supposition assez bizarre; il a supposé
une société de cinq individus, qui partageraient entr’eux les cinq sens:
Il leur donne toujours le langage: Ils s’entendraient parfaitement sur
le calcul; car ils pourraient tous compter leurs sensations: mais dès
que l’un d’entr’eux commencerait à parler des impressions particulières
qu’il jéprouvaitj, les autres s’écrieraient, Voilà sa folie qui le
prend.7

Edition: current; Page: [159]


CHAPITRE IV: CLASSIFICATION DES IDÉES

nous avons déjà divisé les idées en sensibles et en intellectuelles.
Nous avons dit que les idées sensibles viennent immédiatement des objets
extérieurs: nous y avons compris les idées que nous donne l’imagination,
parcequ’elles ne sont que de nouvelles combinaisons de celles qui sont
venues directement des sens. Mais les idées de la crainte, de
l’espérance, etc. qui ne peuvent pas se peindre, et qui ne sont pas
tirées immédiatement des objets extérieurs, sont appelées
intellectuelles.

Des idées distinctes et confuses.Les idées se divisent aussi en
distinctes et en confuses. On n’a jamais une idée distincte d’un objet,
à moins qu’on ne l’ait bien saisi dans tous les traits principaux. J’ai
une idée distincte, par exemple, d’un tableau historique, si je puis
l’esquisser sans l’avoir devant les yeux. L’une des causes qui empêchent
souvent de réussir dans l’étude qu’on entreprend, c’ést qu’on se
contente d’avoir une idée confuse du sujet. En mathématiques, par
exemple, on parcourt une proposition sans avoir une idée distincte de
l’enoncé: c’ést ce qui empêche aqu’on ne comprenne rien àa la
proposition.

Des idées complettes et incomplettes.On a une idée complette d’un objet
lorsqu’on en connaît en détail toutes les parties. Une idée complette
n’ést pas la même chose qu’une idée distincte. On peut avoir une idée
bien distincte d’une partie, sans avoir une idée complette de
l’ensemble. Ce n’ést guère qu’en mathématiques qu’on peut avoir des
idées complettes: pour en avoir d’un objet physique, il faudrait
connaître non seulement toutes les propriétés qu’on y a reconnues
jusqu’ici, mais celles aussi qui ne sont pas encore découvertes.

Des idées simples et complexes.La distinction la plus importante ést
celle bentre les idées simples etb complexes. Une idée ést simple
lorsqu’on ne peut pas en séparer d’autres idées étrangères les unes aux
autres. Pour en donner un exemple,—les idées du tems et de l’espace, de
quelque manière qu’on les tourne ou qu’on les retourne, ne peuvent
varier que du plus au moins et du moins au plus: elles ne se reduisent
point à d’autres idées qu’à elles-mêmes. Mais l’idée du mouvement se
résout en deux idées, celle d’un espace parcouru, et celle d’un tems
passé à le parcourir. Les idées de tous les objets physiques sont
infiniment plus compliquées que celle du mouvement. Celle, par exemple,
d’une orange, ést composée des idées d’un certain dégré de mollesse,
d’une certaine couleur, saveur, et pesanteur, d’un certain parfum, d’une
certain forme, etc. Il y a des idées très composées, mais dont on ne
connaît point la composition: telle ést celle du génie, et beaucoup
d’autres. Ce serait très utile à la science si l’on pouvait faire un
tableau de toutes les idées simples, comme Edition: current; Page: [160]
on en fait des corps simples en chimie. On n’aurait plus alors qu’à
examiner leurs différentes combinaisons entr’elles: ce qui raccourcirait
de beaucoup cette étude, et nous enseignerait d’ailleurs la composition
exacte de bien des idées qui se présentent tous les jours à notre
esprit, sans que jamais nous pensions à en chercher la composition.

Des idées absolues et relatives.Les idées se divisent encore en absolues
et en relatives. Une idée rélative ést celle qui ést susceptible de plus
ou de moins, c.à.d. de modification de degré. Les idées des différentes
couleurs sont absolues: car tous les objets qui sont blancs, rouges,
noirs, etc. le sont autant les uns que les autres. Parmi les idées
intellectuelles, celle de l’égalité ést absolue, ainsi que celle de la
justice, car tout ce qui n’ést pas tout à fait juste ne l’ést pas du
tout. L’idée du pouvoir ést au contraire rélative, car on peut être plus
ou moins puissant. Les idées de chaleur, de grandeur, etc. en sont de
même. Je m’arrêterai ici un moment pour relever une faute qui ést très
ordinaire, en parlant de Dieu. On dit qu’il ést infiniment puissant: ici
l’on ne fait point de faute, car l’idée de la puissance, étant
susceptible de plus et de moins, peut être portée à l’infini. Mais
lorsqu’on dit que Dieu ést infiniment juste, on fait une faute, car la
justice n’ést pas susceptible de dégré: à moins qu’on ne veuille dire
qu’il ést juste dans une infinité de circonstances, ou dans tous les cas
possibles: dans ce cas-là on ne fait point de faute.

Des idées positives et négatives.On a une idée positive d’un objet, si
on le connaît par les propriétés qu’il a: mais quand on sait seulement
ce qu’il n’ést pas, on en a une idée négative. Nos idées de tous les
objets physiques sont positives: mais l’idée du néant ést négative car
qu’ést-ce que le néant? Ce qui n’ést pas, ce qui n’a point de
propriétés. En mathématiques, l’idée d’un nombre cprimec ést négative,
car c’ést un nombre qui n’a point de facteurs.

L’idée de l’infinie ést négative.L’idée de l’infini ést-elle positive ou
négative? Il y a deux opinions à ce sujet: les uns font valoir
l’étymologie du nom, et disent que l’infini ést ce qui n’ést point fini.
Les autres répondent que le nom ne fait rien à la chose, que l’idée d’un
nombre impair, par exemple, ést positive, car c’ést un nombre qui divisé
par 2 laisse 1 de reste: cependant le mot impair ést négatif. Ceux-là
disent que pour avoir une idée de l’infini, il faut d’abord se faire une
idée du fini, et puis, faire abstraction des limites: tandis que ceux-ci
prétendent que c’ést dans l’infini qu’on puise l’idée du fini, en posant
de certaines bornes, et en rejetant tout ce qui ést dehors. Je serais
plutôt de l’avis des premiers. Je crois qu’un enfant peut beaucoup
apprendre sans se faire aucune idée de l’infini: quant à moi je sais que
je n’avais jamais pensé à la chose, tant que le mot n’avait pas frappé
mon oreille.

Edition: current; Page: [161]


CHAPITRE V: DES NOTIONS ABSTRAITES

Définition des notions abstraites.en comparant les objets entr’eux, nous
apercevons des qualités communes, qui les rapprochent les uns des
autres, et des qualités particulières qui les distinguent entr’eux. Si
les ressemblances sont un peu saîllantes, nous pouvons envisager les
objets sans avoir égard aux différences, nous pouvons même leur donner
un nom, qui sera partagé par tous les objets doués de ces propriétés
communes. L’idée générale, s’il ést permis de le dire, que nous formons
ainsi de l’ensemble de tous ces objets, ést appelée une idée, ou plus
souvent une notion, abstraite: et l’on nomme abstraction, l’opération de
l’esprit par laquelle on considère les ressemblances, sans avoir égard
aux différences. Pour prendre un exemple, à la portée de tout le
monde;—un maronnier, un pommier, un cerisier, etc. se ressemblent à bien
des égards: ils ont tous une racine, qui leur sert à pomper la
nourriture du sein de la terre; ils ont tous un tronc assez épais, qui
se divise en plusieurs branches, dont chacune porte un grand nombre de
feuilles; ils ont tous des fleurs, ces fleurs se changent en fruit, etc.
Nous fesons abstraction des petites différences dans la couleur des
fleurs, dans la forme et dans la qualité des fruits, etc. et ne
regardant ces objets que par rapport à leurs ressemblances, nous nous
fesons l’idée abstraite d’arbre.

Notions abstraites des différens dégrés.On peut encore comparer les
idées abstraites entr’elles, en rejetant leurs différences, et en ne
considerant que leurs points de ressemblance. On forme ainsi des idées
plus abstraites encore. On peut en user de même avec les idées
intellectuelles: et en comparant celles-ci aux idées sensibles, on
trouve qu’elles se ressemblent en une seule chose—en existence: delà on
tire l’idée d’être—c’ést le plus haut dégré d’abstraction.—Ce qui prouve
que nous tirons réellement les notions abstraites de la comparaison des
objets, c’ést que les enfans en bas âge n’ont pas de ces notions. Ils
comprennent très bien ce que veulent dire quatre pommes: mais si vous
leur parlez de quatre dans l’abstrait ils ne vous comprennent pas. Ce
n’ést que par l’habitude que nous parvenons à séparer l’idée du nombre
de l’idée des objets sensibles.

Une autre espèce d’abstraction ést cette operation de l’esprit par
laquelle nous séparons d’un objet quelqu’une de ses propriétés pour la
considérer à part.

Des termes généraux.Les termes qui expriment les idées abstraites sont
appelés termes généraux, pour les opposer aux noms propres, qui
désignent les objets particuliers. Ils sont de la plus grande utilité
dans la science: par leur moyen on se dispense d’étudier tous les
individus,—travail dont on ne se tirerait jamais: On les connaîtra tous
jusqu’à un certain point, lorsque on aura étudié, sur un certain nombre
d’individus, les qualités communes à toute une classe: Le botaniste,
Edition: current; Page: [162] par exemple, au lieu d’étudier tous les
chênes, étudiera sur un seul, les propriétés communes à tous. Mais l’art
d’abstraire, comme toutes les autres facultés de l’esprit, ést
susceptible d’abus. On s’en sert par paresse, pour s’épargner le travail
d’étudier le nombre nécessaire d’individus: à peine a-t-on observé un
petit nombre de cas particuliers, qu’on généralise ces cas, et qu’on
batisse un système sur un si petit fondement. Delà tant de sectes
philosophiques, tant de systèmes différens dans presque toutes les
sciences.—Les enfans en bas âge sont très portés à généraliser: souvent
ils généralisent trop, et s’apercevant qu’ils se sont trompés, ils
donnent, peu à peu, à leurs propositions, les modifications nécéssaires.
Je suppose, par exemple, qu’une nourrice étant à la fénêtre avec un
enfant, voie passer un cheval: elle prononce le mot cheval. Il en passe
un autre, d’une taîlle et d’une couleur différente, elle répète le nom,
et l’enfant, à la fin, apprend à le prononcer. Un âne passe: l’enfant
s’écrie cheval: c’ést alors qu’on lui fait entendre que ce ne sont pas
tous les animaux à quatre pieds, à queue longue, etc. qui soient des
chevaux. Ce que font les enfans dans les choses ordinaires de la vie,
nous le fesons quand nous voulons faire des découvertes nouvelles: et
c’ést par cette espèce de tâtonnement que s’avancent les sciences.

L’abstraction n’ést point particulière à l’homme.L’art d’abstraire
ést-il particulier à l’homme? Si l’on donne aux animaux la faculté de
penser (ce qu’on ne peut guère leur réfuser, à moins qu’on ne pense avec
Descartes que ce sont de pures machines,)1 je crois qu’on ne peut guère
nier qu’ils ne possèdent la faculté d’abstraire. Quiconque a jamais
observé les animaux avec attention, admettra qu’ils possèdent cette
faculté, quoiqu’à un moindre dégré que les hommes. Jetez pour la
première fois un morceau de merlane à un chat, il s’y approchera, le
regardera pendant quelque tems, le goûtera pour savoir s’il ést bon, et
enfin le mangera: maintenant donnez-lui en un autre, et il se jètera
dessus avec avidité. Il faut donc qu’il ait fait abstraction des petites
différences entre les deux morceaux, et qu’il ait formé une idée
abstraite de merlane. Les chats aiment ordinairement mieux le poisson
que la viande: il faut donc qu’ils aient une idée abstraite de poisson,
car si vous leur jetez un morceau d’un poisson dont ils n’ont jamais
gouté, ils le préfereront à la viande. Si vous jetez à un chien, un
morceau de viande qui ést trop chaud, il attendra pour le manger qu’il
soit refroidi. Il a donc séparé dans son esprit l’idée de la chaleur de
celle de l’objet.—Il parâit que les animaux ont non seulement des idées
abstraites d’objets sensibles, mais qu’ils ont aussi des idées
intellectuelles, et même morales. Tout le monde connaît l’histoire du
lion qui défendit son bienfaiteur.2 Un autre exemple non moins frappant
ést Edition: current; Page: [163] celui du chat d’une pension, qui était
accoutumé à venir dîner tous les jours au son d’une cloche: ce chat
devint sourd, et n’entendit plus la cloche: voici alors la manière dont
il s’y prit: lorsque sa faim le prevenait de l’approche de l’heure du
dîner, il se mettait dans la cour, et quand il voyait remuer la cloche,
il se rendait sur le champ au réfectoire.

Etendue et comprehension d’une idée abstraite.On peut envisager une
notion abstraite de deux manières: ou par rapport à son étendue, ou bien
à sa comprehension. Elle contient des objects: elle comprend les
qualités, qui étant communes à tous ces objets, sont exprimées par le
terme général. Une idée donc ést plus étendue qu’une autre, si elle
contient tous les objets contenus dans celle-ci, et quelque chose de
plus: elle a plus de comprehension, s’il faut qu’un objet ait plus de
propriétés pour y être contenu. Plus une idée a d’étendue, et moins elle
a de comprehension. L’idée d’arbre, par exemple, ést plus étendue que
celle de chêne, car non seulement tous les chênes sont arbres, mais
aussi les ormes, les peupliers, etc. Mais l’idée de chêne a plus de
comprehension que celle d’arbre, car pour être chêne, il ne suffit pas
d’être arbre, il faut encore quelque chose de plus.

Des idées de genre et d’espèce.Une idée qui contient d’autres idees
abstraites ést dite de genre:—ainsi l’idée d’arbre est de genre, car
elle contient les notions abstraites de chêne, de peuplier, de
maronnier, etc. Ces dernières sont des idées d’espèce, contenues dans le
genre. La plupart des notions abstraites peuvent être en même tems des
idées de genre, par rapport à d’autres idées d’une moindre étendue, et
d’espèce par rapport à celles d’une étendue plus grande. L’idée d’être
ést la seule qui ne puisse jamais devenir espèce, parcequ’il n’y a point
d’idée plus étendue que celle-là. Les anciens métaphysiciens
l’appelaient genus generalissimum.3 Les espèces qui n’ont au dessous
d’elles que des individus, comme le cercle, ne peuvent jamais devenir
idées de genre: Ce sont les species infimae ou specialissimae des
Scholastiques. Il ést aisé de voir que le nombre de celles-ci n’ést pas
susceptible de limitation.

Les termes généraux expriment-ils ou non des choses réelles?Nous venons
de voir que les termes généraux expriment un certain nombre d’objets.
Ils n’expriment aucun de ces objets en particulier, mais bien tous en
général. Ils ne sont que l’expression de notre manière d’envisager les
choses: cependant on les a souvent confondu avec les choses elles-mêmes.
Cette question, Les termes généraux expriment-ils ou n’expriment-ils pas
des choses reelles? a été le sujet de beaucoup de disputes, qui ont même
failli ensanglanter l’Europe. Les scholastiques était divisés entre les
réalistes et les nominaux: Dunscotus, plus connu par le nom de Scot,
était le chef des réalistes, Aquinas celui des nominaux.4 Dans ce
tems-là chaque métaphysicien Edition: current; Page: [164] se donnait
quelque titre expressif de la force de ses argumens: il y avait des
docteurs invincibles, inexpugnables, etc. Aquinas prit le titre de
Docteur irrefragable,5 Scot celui de subtil. Les nominaux affirmaient
que les termes généraux n’étaient que des mots, qui ne se rapportaient à
aucun objet réel. Les réalistes croyaient au contraire que les noms
généraux exprimaient des essences universelles: que le mot orange
exprimait par exemple non pas telle ou telle orange, mais bien une
orange universelle, qui était le modèle de toutes. Cette dispute
durerait peut être encore si Descartes n’avait fait justice à toutes ces
subtilités.6 Ce qui trompa les réalistes, c’ést que nous donnons un nom
à chaque chose, d’où ils ont tiré la conclusion que chaque nom exprime
une chose. Il ést très évident qu’il n’y a point de chose universelle:
les noms seuls peuvent l’être. Qu’expriment donc les termes généraux?
Tout bonnement une groupe d’objets qui se ressemblent tous à certains
égards.

De la substance et de ses modes.Les objets sensibles ne peuvent nous
être connus que par leurs propriétés. Il y a pourtant des objets qui
peuvent être privés de quelques-unes de leurs propriétés, sans cesser
d’être ce qu’ils sont, en autres mots, sans que nous leur réfusions le
nom que nous leur accordions auparavant. C’ést pourquoi les
Scholastiques ont imaginé un soutien ou support, revêtu de propriétés,
qu’ils appelaient substance, en donnant aux propriétés le nom de modes.
Ils disaient que si nous pouvions dépouiller une orange de toutes ses
propriétés, il y aurait encore une orange. On peut dire que dans le cas
même où il existerait une substance sans propriétés, nous ne pourrions
jamais la connaître: car nous ne connaissons les objets que par les
impressions qu’ils produisent sur nos sens, c’ést-à-dire par leurs
propriétés. Ce sujet, ce soutien, n’ést donc qu’un mot. Voici peut être
ce qui a trompé ces logiciens. Nous ne refuserions pas le nom d’orange à
un corps qui ne différerait de ce fruit qu’en une seule de ses
propriétés. Si par exemple je voyais un corps qui ressemblait en tout à
une orange, excepté qu’elle fût rouge au lieu de jaune, je dirais, Voilà
une orange rouge: nous dirions de même, une orange sans saveur, sans
odeur, et ainsi de suite: Cela fit croire aux Scholastiques, que si nous
séparions toutes les propriétés à la fois, il y aurait encore quelque
chose. Il ést pourtant très clair qu’une orange dépouillée de toutes ses
propriétés n’ést plus une orange,—n’ést rien, en un mot. Une preuve
convainquante de la futilité de cette distinction du sujet et des
attributs, c’ést que ce qui ést attribut peut devenir sujet, et vice
versâ; nous disons, par exemple, la neige ést blanche, la blancheur ést
éblouissante.

Des modes essentiels et accidentels.Les Scholastiques appelaient modes
essentiels d’un sujet, les propriétés dont il ne saurait être privé sans
changer de nature; ou en autres mots, sans Edition: current; Page: [165]
perdre son nom. Les modes accidentels, étaient au contraire ceux dont le
sujet pourrait être privé sans changer de nature. L’élasticité, par
exemple, ést un mode essentiel aux gaz, car nous ne regardons pas comme
des gaz, les fluides qui ne possèdent pas cette propriété. Mais telle ou
telle pesanteur spécifique, n’ést qu’un mode accidentel à un gaz: et il
n’en serait pas autrement, même dans le cas où tous ceux que nous
connaissions auraient la même pesanteur spécifique: parcequ’on pourrait
en découvrir d’autres qui en aurait une différente. L’étendue et
l’impénétrabilité sont les modes essentiels de la matière: quelques-uns
y ajoutent le poids: La couleur en ést un mode accidentel. Mais il ést
facile de voir que cela tient à notre manière d’envisager les choses. Si
nous jugions à propos de ne plus appeler arbres que les cerisiers, la
faculté de porter des cerises deviendrait un mode essentiel aux arbres.
Il ést d’ailleurs bien difficile de trouver quels sont les modes
essentiels de certains sujets. Quels, par exemple, sont ceux de l’homme?
La raison en ést-elle? Non: car on ne refuse pas le titre d’homme aux
idiots. Est-ce la faculté de la parole? Les muets ne l’ont pas. Est-ce
le pouvoir de marcher à deux pieds? Quelques estropiés ne le font pas:
et cependant on donne le titre d’homme à toutes ces exceptions, et l’on
aurait beaucoup de peine à trouver un caractère distinctif de l’homme,
tel qu’on ne pût pas trouver des hommes qui ne l’eussent pas. Que veut
donc dire ce qu’on a tant de fois répété, que les attributs essentiels
des choses sont immortels? Ce que tout le monde accordera facilement,
savoir que si nous donnons à un objet quelconque un nom auquel nous
attachons l’idée d’une certaine propriété, l’objet ne saurait perdre
cette propriété sans perdre son nom.

Des modes absolus et rélatifs.On appelle modes absolus d’un sujet, ceux
qu’il aurait encore si tous les autres corps étaient anéantis: tels sont
la forme, la consistence, la dureté ou la mollesse, etc. du sujet. Les
modes rélatifs sont ceux qui dépendent d’autres objets, sa situation,
par exemple, dans l’espace.

De l’espace et du tems.Il y a deux idées d’une nature toute
particulière, et qui méritent d’être considérées à part. Je veux parler
des idées du tems et de l’espace. Descartes, qui regardait l’univers
comme plein de matière, voulait que l’étendue ne fût autre chose que les
corps eux-mêmes.7 Condillac ne croyait voir, dans l’espace et dans la
durée, que de pures abstractions.8 Nous apercevons, disait-il, qu’on
peut placer un objet entre deux corps: nous fesons abstraction de ces
deux corps, et nous formons ainsi une idée abstraite de situation dans
l’espace. L’espace, disait-il, n’ést que la capacité de recevoir les
corps: en sorte que s’il n’y avait point eu de corps il n’y aurait point
eu d’espace.9 Kant regardait les idées de l’espace et du tems comme des
formes de notre Edition: current; Page: [166] sensibilité, portées au
monde avec nous.10 Il ést possible qu’il ait raison jusqu’à un certain
point, car si nous supposons tous les corps anéantis, nous retenons
encore l’idée de l’espace: Nous ne concevons pas que l’étendue et la
durée puissent être anéanties: elles sont infinies et
impérissables.—D’autres philosophes ont regardé l’espace et le tems
comme des attributs de la divinité.

Des idées du présent, du passé et de l’avenir.Trois autres idées assez
singulières sont celles du présent, du passé, et de l’avenir. On peut
dire que toute notre vie se passe à jeter de l’avenir dans le passé: car
le présent n’ést qu’un instant indivisible. On pourrait tirer de ce fait
un argument assez bizarre, pour prouver que le plaisir et la peine
n’existent pas. A chaque instant nous ne souffrons plus ce qui ést
passé, nous ne souffrons pas encore ce qui ést à venir: toute notre
souffrance se renferme donc en un instant indivisible: et ne souffrir
que pendant un tel instant n’ést pas souffrir du tout: et de même pour
la jouissance. On peut réfuter ce raisonnement par le fait que nous
accumulons sur le présent tous les maux passés et futurs, par la mémoire
qui nous reste des sensations passées, et par la crainte de ce qui ést
encore à venir.

La matière existe-t-elle?Une question qui a beaucoup de rapport avec ce
dont nous venons de parler, c’ést celle de l’existence des objets
externes. Les Matérialistes ne veulent voir partout que des corps,
tandis que les Idéalistes en nient absolument l’existence. Lorsqu’on
regarde dans un miroir, on croît voir beaucoup d’objets; cependant on
n’en voit point. Dans le sommeil nous croyons voir, entendre, agir, etc.
Ne serait-il pas possible que la vie ne fût qu’un long sommeil, dans
lequel nous croyons voir des objets que nous ne voyons pas réellement?
Berkeley, savant evêque Anglais, à écrit pour détruire les preuves de
l’existence des corps.11 Malbranche même la trouva si difficile à
prouver, qu’il disait qu’il n’y croirait pas sans la révélation.12 M.
Destutt-Tracy a cru pouvoir la démontrer par les mouvemens voulus et
empêchés.13 Les premiers mouvemens d’un enfant, sont, dit-il, sans
volonté. Mais lorsqu’il trouve qu’il en ést capable, il en fait de
volontaires. Enfin, se trouvant empêché par quelqu’obstacle de faire un
certain mouvement, cela lui prouve l’existence des objets externes. Pour
moi je ne trouve pas ce raisonnement très concluant. L’enfant serait
également en droit de conclure que son bras n’était pas Edition:
current; Page: [167] organisé à faire ce mouvement-là. En effet, le cas
des paralytiques ést directement opposé à la conclusion de M.
Destutt-Tracy, car ils veulent faire un mouvement, et ne le peuvent pas,
sans pourtant que l’obstacle vienne de dehors.—Maupertuis croît que
c’ést par l’expérience que nous acquerrons la notion de l’existence des
corps. Un homme, dit-il, passe dans un lieu, et voit un arbre: il y
repasse, et reçoit la même sensation: il en conclut que toujours les
mêmes circonstances reproduiront le même phénomène, et que cette
succession constante d’un evènement à un autre ne peut se rapporter qu’à
des causes externes.14—Ce qu’il y a de certain, c’ést qu’il serait fort
difficile de donner une preuve convainquante de l’existence des corps,
et qu’il y a toujours de l’incertitude à cet égard.


CHAPITRE VI: DE LA DIVISION

Utilité de la Division.je suppose que tout-à-coup il se montrait un
incendie dans la bibliothèque de la Faculté de Médecine, qui contient
des livres d’une très grande valeur. Pour sauver ces livres, on les
jeterait par la fénètre, on les emporterait dans une charrette, et on
les garderait jusqu’à ce qu’une nouvelle salle fût préparee pour les
recevoir. De quelle manière faudrait-il alors s’y prendre pour les
arranger? La manière la plus courte, et qui exigerait le moins de
travail, ne serait certainement pas de prendre une volume au hasard, et
de chercher parmi tous ces livres les autres volumes du même ouvrage: ce
serait de séparer cet amas en classes selon le format des livres, puis
chaque classe en d’autres classes plus petites selon le sujet, etc. etc.
Le même expédient qui facilite tant l’arrangement d’une bibliothèque,
ést encore plus essentiel pour bien profiter de l’étude de la nature,
qu’on peut regarder comme une immense bibliothèque. Nous avons déjà vu
de quelle utilité sont les termes généraux dans cette étude. Or les
termes généraux ne sont que des noms de classes. On ne peut donc en
tirer aucun avantage, sans une bonne distribution des objets de la
Nature en grandes et en petites classes.

L’opération par laquelle l’esprit distribue les objets en classes ést
appelée division, distribution, ou dénombrement. Aujourd’hui quelques
métaphysiciens se plaisent à y donner le nom d’analyse: mais ce nom a
été donné à tant de choses, qu’il vaut mieux, ce me semble, conserver à
l’opération que nous allons traiter, le nom qu’elle porte depuis deux
mille ans. C’ést pourquoi nous l’appellerons toujours division.

Edition: current; Page: [168]
Tout physique et moral.On distingue deux sortes de tout: l’un physique,
et l’autre moral. Le tout physique ést composé de parties, dont chacune
pourrait encore exister, si l’on ôtait toutes les autres. On les appelle
parties intégrantes: et la division qui y répond ést appelée partition.
Le tout logique ést composé de parties qui ne peuvent exister que dans
un sujet: ce sont les parties subjectives. On emploie l’une ou l’autre
division, selon la nature du sujet. Elles sont soumises à des règles,
dont la première seule ést essentiellement nécessaire, quoiqu’elles
soient toutes d’une grande utilité.

Règles de la Division.1° La division doit être entière, c.à.d. que
l’ensemble de tous les membres doit contenir tout ce qui ést contenu
dans le tout. Cette règle ne présente aucune difficulté: car lorsque
nous divisions le tout en ses parties, quel ést notre objet? C’ést sans
doute celui d’en simplifier l’étude en considérant chaque partie
séparément. Or si la division n’ést pas entière, nous n’atteindrons pas
ce but: car après avoir étudié toutes les parties, nous ne connaîtrons
pas le tout. Cette règle est donc de rigueur.

2° Les membres de la division ne doivent pas rentrer les uns dans les
autres, c.à.d. que rien ne doit être contenu en même tems en deux
membres: car dans ce cas on serait obligé d’étudier deux fois les mêmes
individus. Ex. la division des opinions humaines en vraies, fausses, et
douteuses: car il faut que tous les individus de cette dernière classe
rentrent dans l’une ou l’autre des deux premières. Il ést évident qu’une
division peut pêcher contre cette règle sans être absolument
inadmissible.

3° Il doit exister entre les membres d’une division un certain dégré
d’opposition: car si deux d’entr’eux se ressemblent beaucoup, il
vaudrait mieux n’en faire qu’un.

4° Il ne faut pas mettre une grande disproportion entre les membres
d’une division: En Géographie, par exemple, il serait ridicule de mettre
la France d’un côté, et tous les autres pays de l’autre. En France la
division qu’on a adoptée dans les affaires de l’état pèche contre cette
règle: Le ministère de l’Intérieur ést beaucoup trop chargé d’affaires,
à proportion des autres ministères.

5° Il ne faut pas mettre trop de membres à une division. Pierre Ramus et
quelques autres Logiciens ne veulent permettre que les divisions
binaires ou bifurquées:1 Mais on voit bien que la nature du sujet peut
quelquefois exiger la division ternaire ou quaternaire. Il y a pourtant
des cas où la division binaire peut être utile: M. Lamarck l’a employée
avec un très grand avantage dans la Flore Française: il se sert pourtant
de la division à plus de deux membres lorsque le sujet l’exige, et il
rend par là son témoignage au principe que je Edition: current; Page:
[169] viens d’établir.2 Mais il faut bien se garder de mettre à une
division plus de membres qu’il n’ést absolument nécessaire: ce serait
compliquer le sujet sans aucune utilité.

Application de la Division.On a besoin de la division logique dans une
foule de cas. Si par exemple le chef de l’état voulait créer une
administration, il faudrait diviser toutes les opérations du
gouvernement en un certain nombre de Ministères, puis sous-diviser
chaque ministère en bureaux, et ainsi de suite.—On a surtout besoin
d’une bonne division logique pour bien profiter des études qu’on fait:
sans cela, quelque nombreuses que soient les connaissances qu’on peut
avoir acquises, elles restent toujours, faute d’arrangement, inutiles
dans l’esprit.

Classification des connaissances humaines.On a quelquefois tâché de
faire une classification de toutes les connaissances humaines, et de la
réduire en tableau synoptique. Tel ést l’arbre encyclopédique de Bacon,
qui a été modifié par les auteurs de l’Encyclopédie.3 Bacon mettait les
connaissances humaines sous trois chefs principaux: les connaissances
fournies par la mémoire, par la raison, et par l’imagination. Dans la
première classe se trouvaient l’histoire (considerée comme un simple
énoncé des faits), la géographie, et l’histoire naturelle déscriptive.
Dans la seconde classe il mettait la philosophie en général, les
sciences du raisonnement, de Dieu, de l’homme, et de la nature. Dans la
troisième se trouvaient les beaux arts, les belles lettres, la peinture,
la sculpture, et les arts d’imitation. Ce serait un ouvrage très utile
qu’une Encyclopédie où l’ordre qu’on suit ordinairement serait renversé.
Dans une Encyclopédie ordinaire, on ést censé connaître le nom, et l’on
cherche la nature de la chose: dans celle-ci l’on connaîtrait la chose,
et l’on en chercherait le nom. Nous avons en histoire naturelle de
pareils ouvrages: j’ai une plante devant les yeux, j’en examine les
caractères, et par une suite de recherches, j’arrive jusqu’au nom de la
plante.

Une application importante de cette classification des connaissances
humaines serait dans le cas où l’on voudrait créer un corps enseignant:
car il faudrait que ce corps réunît autant que possible tous les genres
d’enseignement. Nos Universités sont composées de quatres facultés, 1.
de Médecine, 2. de Droit, 3. des Sciences et des Arts, 4. des Lettres.
Cette division ést Edition: current; Page: [170] imparfaite: car les
sciences morales et politiques n’y sont pas comprises. Aussi ést-elle
rentrante: car à ce compte la médecine ne serait pas une science.
L’Institut des Sciences et des Arts, société centrale créée après la
révolution pour encourager les sciences, et qui, pour qu’elle fût utile,
devrait les encourager toutes également, a été de même divisée en quatre
académies.4 L’ancienne division, en 1. sciences physiques et
mathématiques, 2. sciences morales et politiques, et 3. beaux-arts,
valait beaucoup mieux: et il vaudrait mieux encore de faire trois
facultés, 1. des lettres, 2. des sciences, 3. des arts. L’histoire et la
philosophie des langues serait du département de la première; la
médecine, le droit, la chimie, la physique, les mathématiques, les
sciences morales et politiques, seraient de la seconde; enfin les
beaux-arts, c.à.d. la poésie, la peinture, la sculpture, et la musique,
de la troisième. Dans un cas si compliqué une division logique ést
difficile à bien faire. La nature ne nous présente que des individus:
nous-mêmes nous les arrangeons en classes, mais elle se joue quelquefois
de nos divisions.

Méthode et Système.On distingue deux manières de faire les divisions
logiques: par méthode, et par système. Les objets sont classés suivant
une méthode toutes les fois qu’ils le sont par l’ensemble de leurs
propriétés, de telle manière que les objets les plus voisins par leurs
propriétés sont aussi les plus rapprochés dans notre classification. Ils
sont classés au contraire suivant un système lorsque la division ést
fondée sur une seule propriété, sans égard aux autres. Dans les
dictionnaires les mots de nos langues sont rangés d’après un système, et
c’en ést un très commode pour les recherches, aussi voyons-nous que même
les enfans trouvent facilement un mot dans un pareil ouvrage. Dans la
grammaire au contraire les mots sont rangés d’après une méthode. Un
certain M. Butet à Paris prétendait enseigner les langues avec plus de
facilité, en arrangeant les mots de la même manière dont on arrange les
plantes dans une méthode naturelle.5 Mais on remarqua qu’il avait fait
une foule de mots nouveaux, et qu’il expliquait les mots par d’autres
que l’étudiant comprenait tout aussi peu que les premiers.6 La
classification des plantes de Linné ést systématique, Edition: current;
Page: [171] parcequ’elle ést fondée en entier sur les organes de la
reproduction, sans égard aux autres organes.7 Celle de Jussieu ést au
contraire méthodique: car il examina toutes les parties de la plante, et
rapprocha entr’eux les végétaux qui avaient le plus d’analogie par
l’ensemble de leurs caractères.8 Dans les systèmes de Linné, des plantes
ou des animaux de nature bien différente, se trouvent souvent l’un
auprès de l’autre, s’ils se ressemblent par hasard en ce caractère
particulier sur lequel la classification ést fondée: on a remarqué par
exemple que la violette n’ést pas éloignée du chène, ni la souris d’un
lion: Ce désavantage ést inséparable de la nature d’un système, mais en
revanche, il faut avoir bien plus étudié les plantes pour les classer
suivant une méthode que suivant un système, aussi les recherches
sont-elles beaucoup plus faciles à exécuter par un système que par une
méthode.


CHAPITRE VII: DE LA DÉFINITION

Utilité des Définitions.celui qui veut arranger un nombre considérable
de papiers n’ira pas les mettre tous séparément: il réunira dans une
liasse tous ceux qui traitent du même sujet, et il écrira sur chaque
liasse l’indication des papiers qu’elle renferme. C’ést ce que nous
fesons avec les mots de nos langues: nous réunissons dans notre esprit
un certain nombre d’idées et nous exprimons leur ensemble par un mot.
Les définitions servent à nous apprendre le sens qu’on attache à un mot,
c.à.d. de quelle collection d’idées ce mot ést l’abrégé. On voit,
d’après cela, que la plupart des mots de nos langues sont des résultats
de définition, placés pour abréger le discours, et pour éviter les
periphrases: tout comme en Sténographie; si l’on a souvent besoin d’une
suite de mots, on invente un caractère pour la désigner. On a souvent
été obligé de parler d’une figure plane dans laquelle toutes les lignes
droites qui partent du centre et qui aboutissent à la circonférence,
sont égales: pour éviter cette circonlocution on ést convenu de
substituer toujours à cette phrase, le mot cercle. Sans l’invention de
pareils mots, le discours serait devenu excessivement prolixe, et même
inintelligible: car avant d’arriver à la fin de la phrase, l’esprit
aurait été si souvent détourné du but, qu’il ne pourrait plus retrouver
le fil du discours. Nous savons combien il ést difficile de comprendre
au premier abord, un théorème dont l’énoncé ne tient pas plus d’une
demi-page.

Edition: current; Page: [172]
Leur origine, dans la nécessité d’imposer des noms aux nouvelles
combinaisons d’idées.Il ést des connaissances communes à tous les
hommes: ce sont les connaissances essentielles à notre bien être. Tout
le monde sait parler, marcher; tout le monde sait enfin pourvoir aux
besoins les plus pressans de la vie. Le paysan le plus grossier a
quelques notions élémentaires sur les phénomènes de la nature. Quelques
hommes ne se contentant pas de ces connaissances communes à tous,
cherchent à les etendre et à les développer, les uns sur un sujet, les
autres sur un autre. Ces hommes sont appelés savans, et le résultat de
leurs observations et de leurs réflexions ést la science. Tout le monde
a, par exemple, quelques idées vagues sur le mouvement des astres: des
hommes industrieux cherchent à augmenter ces connaissances, delà vient
la science de l’astronomie.—Mais il arrive souvent que ceux qui
refléchissent un peu profondement sur quoi que ce soit, y trouvent des
rapports, des propriétés, etc. qui échappent au vulgaire. Delà vient la
répétition fréquente de longues phrases, qui ne laissent pas de beaucoup
embarasser le discours, et qui augmentent beaucoup la difficulté
d’étudier les sciences. On donne alors un nouveau mot pour répresenter
chacune de ces phrases. Chaque science parvient donc enfin à avoir une
langue distincte, qui ést particulière à elle-même. C’ést là ce qui a
fait hérisser chaque science, et surtout la médecine, de tant de mots
techniques, qui dégoûtent les commençans: c’ést un mal, mais un mal
nécessaire: on le sent lorsqu’on considère que sans ces mots il serait
presqu’impossible de comprendre même les livres élémentaires. Mais s’il
ést nécessaire d’inventer des mots, il ést également nécessaire de les
expliquer: ce qu’on ne peut faire qu’en indiquant les phrases dont ils
sont l’abrégé: et c’ést là ce qu’on appelle définir.—La répugnance que
nous avons ordinairement pour les mots nouveaux, empêche ordinairement
les métaphysiciens1 non pas les physiciens, ni les mathématiciens, de
désigner les nouvelles combinaisons d’idées par des mots de leur
invention: Ils aiment mieux se servir de mots qui sont déjà employés
dans un sens un peu analogue. Quelle différence entre le sens des mots
grandeur, quantité, fonction, en mathématiques et dans la vie ordinaire!
du mot produit en mathématiques et dans les arts! Il vaudrait beaucoup
mieux en de pareils cas, inventer de mots nouveaux. D’autres, au
contraire, ont porté trop loin cette licence: parcequ’ils ont voulu
faire croire qu’ils avaient trouvé de nouvelles combinaisons d’idées,
lorsqu’ils n’avaient vraiment inventé que des mots.

On peut dire, Mais si nous donnons un mot pour désigner une combinaison
d’idées, et si toutes les fois qu’on emploie ce mot, il faut y
substituer dans la pensée cette suite d’idées, il n’y a véritablement
d’abrégé que le langage. Pour cela il n’y a qu’à s’en rapporter à
l’expérience, et à voir si l’on ne se rappelle pas beaucoup plus
promptement l’idée d’un cercle lorsqu’on l’a représenté Edition:
current; Page: [173] par un seul mot, que si on l’avait appelé “une
figure plane bornée” etc. Cette facilité ést dûe à l’association
habituelle du mot avec l’idée qu’il représente.—Aussi voyons nous
qu’elle ne nous vient que peu à peu: que nous ne nous familiarisons pas
tout de suite à l’emploi d’un mot nouveau.

Définitions de mots, et de choses—distinction purement verbale.Il y a
des logiciens qui admettent deux sortes de définitions; celles de mots,
et celles de choses: ils prétendent que les définitions de mots sont
arbitraires, que celles de choses ne le sont pas.2 Pour moi je ne trouve
aucune différence entre ces deux sortes de définition, et je me range
sans hésiter avec ceux qui n’admettent que les définitions de noms. J’ai
écrit quelque chose là dessus dans un journal que je rédige, et cela m’a
valu l’honneur d’une réfutation, où l’on me dit qu’en n’admettant que
des définitions de noms qui sont nécessairement arbitraires, la morale
ést violée, qu’on peut appeler la vertu, vice, et le vice, vertu, que
tuer son bienfaiteur pourra alors s’appeler un acte de vertu, faire
l’aumône un crime.3 En effet, cela serait très facile, mais alors il
faudrait changer l’énoncé de nos lois; il faudrait pendre ceux qui
feraient des actes de vertu, et recompenser ceux qui feraient des
crimes. Si, au commencement d’un ouvrage, un auteur avertissait le
lecteur qu’il appellerait toujours vertu ce qu’on appelle vice, et vice
ce qu’on appelle vertu, ce serait certes une grande bizarrerie, mais il
n’en résulterait rien de fâcheux pour la morale, car le lecteur averti
ferait toujours les corrections convenables.4

Définition complette et incomplette.Une définition ést complette, si
elle renferme tout ce qui ést nécessaire pour qu’on puisse en déduire
toutes les propriétés du défini. Les définitions des notions abstraites
en sont des exemples. En Géométrie, toutes les définitions sont
complettes: celle, par exemple, d’un cercle, renferme toutes les
propriétés du cercle, car on peut les déduire toutes de sa définition.
Celle d’un tout physique ést toujours incomplette: car bien qu’on
connaîsse les propriétés qui suffisent à distinguer un objet de tous les
autres, on n’en connaît pas pour cela les autres qualités.

Définition explicite et implicite.Une définition ést explicite si elle
ést présentée sous forme de définition: elle ést implicite, si sans
qu’elle soit directement exprimée, on peut pourtant la deviner en
parcourant une phrase. Lorsque j’entends dire par exemple que le tout
ést plus grand que sa partie, et qu’il ést égal à l’ensemble de toutes
les parties, je devine à l’instant qu’un tout ést ce qui ést composé de
parties. D’autres fois on ne peut pas deviner le sens d’un mot par une
seule phrase, parcequ’un autre mot, qu’on ne connaît pas, entre dans la
phrase; mais on peut Edition: current; Page: [174] deviner tous les deux
par le moyen de cette phrase et d’une autre: C’ést comme en algèbre on
trouve par deux équations la valeur de deux inconnues. C’ést ainsi qu’en
lisant un ouvrage qui emploie, sans les définir, des mots que je ne
connaîs pas, je parviens enfin à le comprendre. J’ai peutêtre commencé
le livre sans comprendre une grande partie des mots: mais en parcourant
beaucoup de phrases où ces mots sont employés, je vois qu’il n’y a que
certains sens qui puissent y convenir, et alors si je recommence le
livre, je l’étudie avec beaucoup plus de fruit.

Règles de la définition.Les définitions sont arbitraires, jusqu’à un
certain point; car chacun peut être permis de lier ensemble toutes les
idées qu’il voudra, et de les désigner par le nom qu’il jugera à propos.
Mais de même que celui qui a la liberté de se promener dans une chambre,
au lieu d’être attaché par les mains et les pieds, n’ést pas, pour cela,
moins prisonnier; de même les définitions, bien qu’en partie
arbitraires, sont pourtant soumises à des règles; dont quelques unes
sont de rigueur: d’autres ne le sont pas, mais il ést bon de les suivre
tant qu’on peut.

1° Il faut définir par des mots connus de celui à qui l’on s’adresse.
Cette règle ést de rigueur, car à moins qu’on ne l’observe on n’atteint
point le but de la définition, qui ést celui de faire connaître le sens
du mot défini. C’ést une difficulté qu’on trouve à tout moment auprès
des enfans en bas âge. Encore moins doit-on définir un mot par lui-même
ou par ses dérivés. J’ai vu dans un ouvrage sur l’Arithmétique, cette
définition, “La Multiplication ést l’opération par laquelle on multiplie
un nombre par un autre.”5 Si je sais ce qu’on fait lorsqu’on multiplie,
je n’ai pas besoin de la définition.

2° Il faut que la définition renferme tout ce qui ést nécessaire pour
fixer le sens du mot défini, et rien de plus. La première partie de
cette règle ést de rigueur: car si le mot n’ést pas fixé à une seule
signification, la définition ést vicieuse. Mais s’il y a quelque chose
de superflu dans une définition, elle n’ést pas pour cela absolument
inadmissible.

Pour qu’on puisse observer cette règle, il faut savoir ce qu’il faut
pour que la signification d’un mot soit fixée. L’espèce diffère du genre
par une propriété qu’on a nommée caractère différentiel: c’ést ce qui la
distingue des autres espèces contenues dans le même genre. Et comme nous
verrons dans la suite que ce ne sont que des noms d’espèce qu’on peut
définir, on a donné pour règle qu’on doit définir par le genre et la
différence caractéristique de l’espèce. Mais alors il faut prendre le
genre qui se trouve immédiatement au-dessus de l’espèce qu’on veut
définir.

3° Il vaut toujours mieux définir par des qualités positives que par des
qualités négatives, c.à.d. que pour expliquer un mot, il vaut mieux
faire connaître ce qu’il exprime, que ce qu’il n’exprime pas. Il y a
pourtant des mots qu’on ne peut définir que négativement: tels sont ces
mots néant, rien, Edition: current; Page: [175] infini: la seule
définition qu’on puisse donner de l’infini, c’ést ce qui n’a point de
fin. Même lorsqu’on peut définir un mot des deux manières,—si la
définition par les qualités positives ést très compliquée, et celle par
les qualités négatives très simple, celle-ci ést la meilleure.

4° Puisqu’on n’impose des noms que pour abréger le discours, il ne faut
donner des noms qu’à des réunions d’idées qu’on ést souvent obligé
d’exprimer en mots. Mais celle-ci ést plutôt une règle de nomenclature
que de définition.

5° Il ne faut pas donner le même nom à deux choses différentes: Il faut
donc que la définition ne puisse s’appliquer qu’au défini. C’ést une
régle dont on s’écarte assez souvent: exemple, la définition célèbre que
Platon donna de l’homme, un animal à deux pieds sans plumes. On raconte
que Diogène dépouilla un oiseau de ses plumes, et le porta dans l’école
de Platon, en s’écriant, Voilà l’homme de Platon.6

Mais il n’y a pas de danger à donner plusieurs noms à la même chose: et
je crois que les poètes seraient quelquefois fort embarrassés si on les
bornait à un seul mot pour exprimer une chose.—C’ést pourtant un abus du
droit de donner les noms, que d’avoir pour la même chose, un nom
scientifique et un nom vulgaire. Les botanistes nous donnent pour les
plantes les plus communes, un nom tout différent du nom vulgaire. Il
faudrait employer, ou les noms vulgaires dans la science, ou les noms
scientifiques dans le langage ordinaire.

Lorsqu’on veut donner un nom à une nouvelle combinaison d’idées on
pourrait le faire en prenant les lettres au hasard, ou en les tirant au
sort. Mais crainte de dégouter, on les prend d’ordinaire dans les
langues étrangères et savantes. Je m’arrêterai ici pour un moment afin
de lever une erreur qui ést assez répandue. Beaucoup de monde croient
que l’étymologie ést nécessaire aux sciences. Il ést vrai qu’elle ést
utile pour suppléer à l’histoire: lorsque celle-ci ne fait pas connaître
l’origine d’une nation, les rapports de la langue de cette nation avec
les autres langues peut souvent l’indiquer. Ils peuvent aussi beaucoup
aider ceux qui veulent étudier le progrès de l’esprit humain.
D’ailleurs, un mot dérivé du Grec ou du Latin donne sur le champ à ceux
qui connaissent ces langues, l’idée de ce qu’il signifie. Mais on peut
toujours suppléer par les définitions au défaut de l’étymologie: Elle
n’ést donc pas nécessaire aux sciences.7

On tâche ordinairement de donner à chaque objet nouveau un nom qui en
Edition: current; Page: [176] rappellerait quelque proprieté
remarquable. Mais on risque alors de donner un nom qui ne sera plus
applicable dans un autre lieu ou à un autre époque. Quand Lavoisier
inventa la nouvelle nomenclature chimique, il donna le nom d’oxygène à
une substance où il croyait voir le principe de l’acidité.8 Des
découvertes récentes ont prouvé que l’acidité peut fort bien exister
sans l’oxygène:9 ce nom a donc cessé d’être bon. Une objection qu’on fit
contre le Calendrier républicain, fut qu’il n’était pas propre à l’usage
de tout le monde. Le mot Nivôse désignait un mois où il tombe
ordinairement de la neige à Paris, mais où il n’en tombe certainement
pas au Cap de Bonne Espérance.

Faut il donner aux idées qui se ressemblent, des noms qui se
ressemblent? Il y a là beaucoup à dire des deux côtés. Les uns disent,
Oui: car si on les confondait, la méprise ne serait pas grande. Les
autres disent, Non: car on ferait beaucoup plus de méprises.

On dit souvent qu’un mot ést mal fait, s’il ést tiré en partie du Grec,
et en partie du Latin. Mais cela ne fait rien à l’application du mot. Et
il n’y a proprement de mots mal faits que ceux qui sont durs, qui
choquent l’oreille.

6° Il n’y a besoin de definir que des mots dont la signification peut
être douteuse. Il ést inutile de définir les noms d’objets physiques
tels qu’arbre, homme, etc. mais il faut définir le mot gouvernement, le
mot analyse, auquel les métaphysiciens ont appliqué tant de
significations.

Mais (peut-on demander) quoiqu’il ne soit pas nécessaire, ést-il
possible de définir tous les mots? Non, certainement: Car il faut
définir chaque mot par d’autres mots dont le sens ést connu: Si donc on
définit ceux-ci par d’autres, et ainsi de suite, on arrivera enfin à des
noms qu’on ne pourra définir que par un cercle vicieux, en se servant
d’autres mots qui renferment dans leur signification celle des mots
qu’on veut définir.

Les noms des idées simples ne sont pas susceptibles de définition.Quels
sont donc les mots qu’on ne peut point définir? La réponse n’ést pas
difficile à faire. Que fait-on lorsqu’on définit un mot? On explique de
quelles idées simples, l’idée qu’il désigne ést composée. On ne peut
donc définir que les mots qui expriment des idées composées. Ceux qui
désignent les idées simples, (les noms des couleurs, par exemple) ne
sont pas susceptibles de définition.

Edition: current; Page: [177]
Comment en faire connaître le sens?Cependant il faut faire connaître le
sens de ces mots: Comment les faire comprendre à un étranger?—Les idées
simples sont ou sensibles ou intellectuelles. Pour faire connaître à
quelqu’un le sens du nom d’une idée sensible, il faut prononcer le mot,
tandis qu’on lui fait éprouver la sensation. Mais il y a ici quelque
chose à remarquer. Si pour faire comprendre à un enfant le sens du mot
rouge, on met devant lui des fraises, des groseilles, des cerises, etc.
il risquera de croire, que le mot rouge désigne ce que nous appelons
fruit. Il faut donc beaucoup varier les objets, et lui en présenter qui
ne se ressemblent que dans la qualité d’être rouge.

On n’a pas la même ressource auprès d’un homme privé de l’organe qui
reçoit la sensation dont il s’agit: Aussi ne pouvons-nous jamais faire
comprendre à un aveugle le sens du mot blanc, ni à un sourd de
naissance, ce que c’ést que le son.

Si le nom dont il s’agit exprime une idée intellectuelle, il faut
examiner dans quelles circonstances nous en fesons usage, et faire
hypothèse de quelqu’une de ces circonstances. Pour faire comprendre à un
enfant ce que c’ést que la crainte, je lui dirais, Si tu te perds dans
un bois vers le commencement de la nuit, tu éprouves de la crainte:—Si
tu vois un chien qui s’approche de toi pour te mordre, tu éprouves de la
crainte,—et ainsi de suite.

On ne peut donc pas définir les noms des idées simples: mais on peut
rappeler dans l’esprit de celui à qui l’on parle, l’idée dont il s’agit.
Ces idées sont les mêmes dans tous les pays; aussi les noms qui les
expriment sont synonymes dans toutes les langues.

Il y a des idées si composées qu’il faudrait tout un livre pour en
expliquer la composition: en supposant même qu’elle fût constatée, ce
qu’elle n’ést pas toujours: car nous employons des mots tous les jours
sans savoir quelles sont les idées simples dont ils désignent la
réunion. Tel ést le mot génie, qui représente une idée très complexe, et
dont la composition ést encore loin d’être constatée. Presque toutes nos
disputes naissent de ce que nous employons des mots sans être convenus
sur leur signification: car il arrive presque toujours que les deux
partis prennent le mot en deux acceptions différentes. En géométrie l’on
définit toujours les mots avant de les employer, et c’ést ce qui fait
qu’il n’y a jamais des disputes sur la vérité ou sur la fausseté d’une
proposition géométrique. Mais dans les autres sciences, où l’on ne prend
pas la même précaution, il y a des disputes incessantes: et il y en aura
toujours jusqu’à ce qu’on ait réfait tout le système de nos idées, et
avec lui celui de nos langues et qu’on ait fait un tableau de toutes les
idées simples, par lequel on pourra déterminer la composition des idées
complexes. On voit delà combien il ést nécessaire de mettre des
personnes intelligentes auprès des enfans, même en bas âge: sans cela
ils se serviront des mots par habitude, sans en connaître la
signification.

Quelquefois la définition qui était bonne à tel époque, sera mauvaise à
telle Edition: current; Page: [178] autre: c’ést que le sens des mots
change avec le tems. Pour faire des lois invariables, il faudrait avoir
une langue invariable: ou bien on pourrait ajouter à chaque code un
vocabulaire qui ferait connaître le sens dans lequel on y a employé tous
les noms qui expriment des idées complexes et intellectuelles. Moi-même
j’ai été témoin d’une dispute venant d’un changement dans le sens d’un
mot. Il y avait à Nîmes un procès sur la validité d’un testament. Le
plaignant ne voulait pas l’admettre, car il disait qu’il n’était pas
signé. Le nom et la signature du testateur y étaient, ainsi que ceux des
témoins mais la date n’y était pas: et il affirma qu’on n’avait pas
signé, tant qu’on n’avait pas mis la date. Il perdit sa cause, comme il
le devait.

On ne définit que les noms de genre et d’espèce.On ne peut définir que
des noms de genre et d’espèce.10 Les noms individuels ne sont pas
susceptibles de définition: car dès que le moindre changement survient
dans les qualités, physiques ou morales, de l’individu, le nom a changé
de sens: il n’exprime plus la même combinaison d’idées simples. On ne
peut que décrire les individus: mais ce serait un travail bien grand,
puisqu’enfin on ne saurait donner qu’une idée très imparfaite d’un
individu: car on ne peut pas en énumérer en détail toutes les
propriétés.

Les définitions ne sont jamais fausses.Une définition peut être
blamâble, ou sujette à la critique: mais elle ne peut jamais être
fausse. On peut permettre à chaque écrivain de donner aux noms qu’il
emploie, les significations qu’il veut, pourvu qu’il ne s’en écarte pas
lui-même. On ne saurait réfuser d’admettre la définition même d’un être
imaginaire. Je puis bien donner un nom à un bâton à un bout: je puis
définir ce nom: J’ai fait un nom dont on ne fera aucun usage; mais la
définition n’ést pas fausse.

Si donc les définitions ne peuvent pas être fausses, on peut les
admettre parmi les principes, quoiqu’en dise Condillac, qui veut que les
sensations soient les seuls principes de nos connaissances.11 C’ést une
pure dispute de mots:12 car parmi les nombreuses significations du mot
principe, il en a celles-ci, 1° la source ou l’origine (et dans ce
sens-ci les sensations sont à coup sûr les seuls principes de nos
connaissances), 2° une vérité qu’on peut poser comme certaine, et dont
on peut déduire d’autres vérités par le raisonnement: et dans ce sens-là
on ne disputera guère aux définitions une place parmi les principes de
nos connaissances.13

Un secte de métaphysiciens modernes attaquent les définitions: ils
disent qu’au lieu de définir, il faut montrer les objets qu’on nomme.
Cette manière d’enseigner ést indispensable pour des mots qui ne sont
pas susceptibles de Edition: current; Page: [179] définition: Mais pour
ceux qui le sont, il vaut beaucoup mieux définir: L’autre méthode à des
inconvéniens très graves. On ne peut montrer que des individus; et l’on
ne définit que des noms d’espèce et de genre. Celui donc à qui vous
montrez un objet, pourrait croire que le nom générique exprime un
caractère particulier à l’individu. Si je montre un triangle à
quelqu’un, et que par hasard ce triangle soit équilatère, il pourra
croire que c’ést un caractère essentiel du triangle d’avoir les trois
côtés égaux entr’eux.

Condillac dit qu’il faut remplacer les définitions par des analyses.14
Ici il faut faire attention qu’il n’y a que deux espèces d’idées;
simples et complexes. On ne peut point analyser les idées simples, non
plus que des objets simples. Et l’analyse d’une idée complexe fait
connaître la signification du mot qui l’exprime, ou ne le fait pas
connaître. Si elle la fait connaître, elle ne diffère point de la
définition. Et si elle ne le fait pas, il ést absurde de nous dire que
la définition peut être remplacée par l’analyse.


CHAPITRE VIII: DU LANGAGE

nous n’aimons pas à jouir tout seuls. Nous aimons à voir le plaisir
d’autrui, et que les autres hommes voient le nôtre. Un de mes amis me
dit une fois qu’il voudrait faire un voyage à un autre planète, revenir
à la terre pour raconter ce qu’il avait vu, et mourir sur le champ. Il
se garda bien de vouloir mourir avant d’avoir raconté aux hommes les
merveilles d’un autre planète. Cette loi de la nature s’étend même aux
animaux: ceux-ci ont la sociabilité, mais à un plus faible dégré que les
hommes.

Nécessité d’avoir des signes sensibles de nos idées.Il ne suffit donc
pas à l’homme d’avoir des idées. Il faut qu’il puisse les communiquer
aux autres: et pour cela, il faut qu’il ait des signes sensibles de ses
idées, qui lorsqu’il les présente aux sens des autres hommes, exciteront
dans leur imagination ces mêmes idées.

Divisions des signes.On distingue les signes en signes naturels, et
signes de convention. La chaleur extraordinaire du corps, le dérangement
du pouls, le changement de couleur de la langue, sont des signes
naturels de maladie: Lorsque le malade décrit au médecin les sensations
qu’il éprouve, il emploie, pour les lui faire connaître un signe
conventionnel, le langage.

On divise aussi les signes en permanens et en fugitifs. Parmi les signes
conventionnels, la parole ést un signe fugitif; l’écriture ést un signe
permanent. Parmi les signes naturels, le rire, les pleurs, etc. sont des
signes fugitifs; le dessin ést un signe permanent.

On ne sait pas toujours à quelle classe appartient tel ou tel signe: car
il ést Edition: current; Page: [180] des signes d’institution qui sont
très analogues aux choses qu’ils représentent. Tels sont ces signes, (>)
(<) (=); plus grand, plus petit, égal. On ést convenu de mettre le
nombre le plus grand du côté où la distance des deux lignes ést la plus
grande; et si les nombres sont égaux, on met les lignes à des distances
égales.—Dans la musique, on ést convenu de dire que la voix monte
lorsqu’elle va du grave à l’aigu, qu’elle descend lorsque’elle va de
l’aigu au grave: et par conséquent dans la musique écrite les notes sont
hautes ou basses, à mesure que les sons qu’elles désignent sont aigus ou
graves. Il ést bon d’employer les conventions les plus générales qu’on
peut, afin d’être compris par le plus de monde qu’on peut.

(Je remarquerai ici par parenthèse que nous confondons souvent les
signes avec les choses: c’ést une erreur dont on doit se garder. Nous
parlons habituellement du nombre huit: cependant huit n’ést pas un
nombre, c’ést un chiffre.)

Définition du langage.L’ensemble de tous ces signes, soit naturels, soit
conventionnels, qui servent à communiquer les idées d’un être sentient à
un autre, fait le langage dans le sens le plus étendu. On voit que dans
ce sens le langage n’ést point particulier à l’homme. Ce ne sont que les
langues articulées qui lui sont particulières. Pour former une langue
articulée, il paraît que deux conditions sont nécessaires: d’abord, un
certain dégré d’intelligence, puis l’organisation nécessaire pour varier
les sons de la voix. Ces deux conditions se trouvent réunies chez
l’homme: chez les autres animaux il n’y en a tout au plus qu’un seul.
Chez les singes il paraît y avoir assez d’intelligence, mais
l’organisation leur manque: Les perroquets et quelques autres oiseaux
ont l’organisation propre, mais ils ne paraîssent pas avoir assez
d’intelligence. Une autre cause pourquoi les animaux n’ont pas le don de
la parole, c’ést que leurs besoins sont plus bornés que les nôtres; ils
n’ont pas, autant que nous, besoin l’un de l’autre; ils manquent de
motifs pour inventer une langue articulée. Diderot a dit quelque part
que l’homme n’était qu’un chien couvert d’habits: il a voulu dire par là
que sans nos besoins, sans notre luxe, nous n’aurions guère plus
d’intelligence que les brutes. C’ést donc à tort qu’on s’écrie contre le
luxe: Nous voyons d’ailleurs que les nations qui ont le plus de besoins,
le plus de luxe, ont aussi le plus d’intelligence.

Le langage ést l’instrument de la pensée.On connaît depuis longtems deux
avantages qu’on retire du langage: le premier ést celui de pouvoir
communiquer ses idées à autrui: c’ést un usage commun à la langue parlée
avec la langue écrite: le second ést particulier à la langue écrite,
c’est celui d’aider la mémoire à se rappeler des pensées, et de tenir la
conversation avec ceux qui n’existent plus, ou qui sont en des lieux
éloignés. Mais il y a un autre usage non moins important qu’on ne
connaît que depuis peu: et de tous les services que la Métaphysique doit
à Condillac, le plus grand ést peutêtre celui d’avoir mis au jour ce
troisième usage. C’ést lui Edition: current; Page: [181] qui a le
premier démontré que le langage aide à la pensée elle-même:1 fait dont
on peut s’assurer si l’on écoute avec attention une horloge qui sonne,
sans se rappeler à l’esprit les noms des nombres: On ne pourra pas dire
l’heure qu’elle a sonné: on saura seulement qu’elle a sonné beaucoup de
fois. Condillac a dit que nous ne pourrions jamais sans les noms des
nombres, compter au delà de trois: et un fait qui confirme cet
hypothèse, c’ést que dans la langue d’un tribu de l’Amérique, il n’y a
de noms numéraux que ceux-ci, un, deux, trois: au delà de trois il n’y a
qu’un seul mot pour désigner tous les nombres: ce mot à la même force
qu’a chez nous le mot beaucoup.—La doctrine de Condillac ést encore
supportée par le fait que ceux qui ont été dès leur enfance abandonnés
dans les bois, et qui n’ont par conséquent appris aucune langue, n’ont
presque point d’idées.—Comment pensent donc les sourds et muets? Il ést
constaté qu’ils pensent avec des mots écrits.2 Quelques individus même
qui ne sont pas privés du sens de l’ouie, pensent avec des mots écrits:
c’ést qu’ils ont commencé à lire avant de savoir parler.

Mais, me dira-t-on, vous tombez dans un cercle vicieux: car s’il faut
une langue pour penser, il faut aussi penser pour former une langue. Je
réponds que nos langues n’ont pas toujours été aussi parfaites qu’elles
le sont aujourd’hui. Il y a des signes naturels indépendans de toute
convention, qui ont donné le moyen de penser assez bien pour former une
langue un peu plus parfaite: Celle-ci a donné de meilleurs moyens
encore, et c’ést par une progression presqu’insensible que nos langues
sont arrivées au point de perfection où elles se trouvent maintenant.

La perfection de la langue d’une science en facilite beaucoup
l’étude.Les avantages que je viens de signaler sont si importans, que
Condillac a été porté jusqu’à dire que toute science se réduit à une
langue bien faite:3 Mais il ést probable qu’il a un peu exagéré: qu’il a
dit plus qu’il ne pensait. Sans doute, on ne peut point faire une
science avant d’en faire la langue: mais il ést également certain qu’on
ne peut point faire la langue, avant de faire la science. La
nomenclature et la science naissent et se perfectionnent ensemble. La
géométrie a une langue encore très imparfaite: malgré cela, elle n’a
cessé depuis deux mille ans de faire des progrès rapides et elle en fait
aujourd’hui de plus rapides encore. La langue de la chimie ést toujours
à refaire. Tout cela prouve qu’une science peut faire beaucoup de
progrès avec une langue mal faite. Cependant, la perfection de la langue
d’une science, en facilite Edition: current; Page: [182] beaucoup
l’étude: et le soin qu’on donne depuis Lagrange à la notation
algébrique,4 et les changemens qu’y a faits ce grand mathématicien,
n’ont pas peu contribué aux progrès qu’a fait cette science depuis sont
tems. En quoi consiste donc la perfection de la langue d’une science?

Examen de la langue des nombres.L’idée sur laquelle tout le monde ést le
plus d’accord, c’ést l’idée des nombres. Examinons donc la langue des
nombres: et commençons par supposer qu’il n’y a point de langue. Il faut
alors un signe pour peindre l’unité, et un nom pour la désigner. Si l’on
voulait écrire ou nommer plusieurs unités, on pourrait répéter le signe:
ce seraient alors des signes presque naturels des nombres. Cette langue
aurait aussi l’avantage de ne pas fatiguer la mémoire: aussi le calcul
serait-il très facile, car si l’on voulait ajouter cinq à sept, il n’y
aurait qu’à mettre cinq chiffres à la suite de sept autres. Mais cette
langue ne pourrait pas aller très loin; car il faudrait bien longtems,
pour lire ou pour prononcer les noms des grands nombres: aussi
n’aurait-on pas d’idée nette de ces nombres.—De cet extrême on pourrait
aller à l’autre, et donner un nom propre à chaque nombre. L’avantage de
cette méthode serait qu’un grand nombre ne tiendrait pas plus de place
qu’un petit. Les désavantages seraient qu’elle chargerait excessivement
la mémoire; que d’ailleurs elle ne pourrait pas aller bien loin, car on
a calculé qu’il faudrait toute la vie d’un homme pour apprendre dix
mille caractères et pour les retenir dans la mémoire: par conséquent on
ne pourrait, dans toute sa vie, aller plus loin qu’à dix mille. Aussi
les caractères ne pourraient pas être très simples; car il faudrait les
beaucoup varier pour réprésenter les nombres hauts: On a pris le parti
de combiner les deux méthodes: on a donné un caractère à chaque nombre
jusqu’à 9, et l’on a donné aux chiffres deux valeurs, leur valeur
absolue, et la valeur qui dépend de leur place, de manière que reculés à
gauche d’une seule place, ils acquierrent une valeur dix fois plus
grande qu’auparavant. Ces caractères, rassemblés pour servir de signe à
un nombre élevé, sont donc des signes composés que notre esprit
décompose. Ce système ést parfait quant à l’écriture: mais il y a des
bizarreries dans l’énonciation. Pourquoi par exemple ne dirait-on pas
trois-dix pour trois fois dix ou trente, quatre-dix pour quarante, etc.?
Cela aurait l’avantage que les enfans apprendraient à compter presque
d’eux-mêmes: ils n’auraient pas besoin de quelqu’un pour leur dire que
trois fois dix font trois-dix. Aussi pourquoi dit-on soixante et dix
pour septante? Pourquoi quatre-vingts pour huitante, ou octante?
Autrefois l’on disait aussi six-vingts pour cent-vingt: c’ést une grande
bizarrerie que de compter par vingtaines, après avoir commencé par
dixaines. Pourquoi dit-on seize pour dix-six, quinze pour dix-cinq etc.?
Ce système a d’ailleurs quelque chose d’arbitraire; c’ést qu’on pourrait
aussi bien compter par huitaines ou par douzaines que par dixaines. Les
signes sont tous conventionnels: quoiqu’il ne Edition: current; Page:
[183] soit pas difficile de trouver des signes naturels pour le chiffre.
Un autre défaut c’ést que les chiffres se ressemblent trop: en écrivant
vîte, on peut quelquefois les confondre.

Examen de la langue de la musique.La langue de la musique a trois choses
à exprimer, l’intonation, la durée, et l’intensité du son. On exprime la
première par des notes, qui sont plus ou moins hautes sur l’échelle,
selon que les sons qu’elles représentent sont plus ou moins aigus. Pour
représenter la durée on n’a pas été aussi heureux. Il ést vrai qu’il y a
des rondes, des blanches, etc. mais les signes sont donnés à contresens:
les notes les plus chargées d’encre sont souvent celles qu’il faut jouer
le plus vîte. On pourrait obvier à cette difficulté en exprimant les
notes par des barres qui seraient plus ou moins longues suivant que le
son devait durer plus ou moins longtems. Pour l’intensité, on n’a guère
de signe aussi naturel. Il y a bien le piano, le forte, etc. On pourrait
employer de l’encre de différens dégrés de noirceur selon l’intensité du
son: mais cela serait assez difficile, et, de plus, assez ennuyant. Il y
a un autre contresens dans cette nomenclature: la double-croche, ést
jouée deux fois plus vîte que la simple croche. Pour la vîtesse générale
du mouvement, on n’a que des 3/6, des 3/8, ou des Adagio, des Andante,
etc. qui ne signifient rien. Il faudrait pour la régler exactement,
employer une machine qui battrait regulièrement tel ou tel nombre de
fois dans une minute, et qu’on connût le nombre de fois qu’elle devait
battre dans une mesure de l’air qu’on voulait jouer. On a fait un pareil
instrument: il s’appelle le Métronome.

Des nouveaux poids et mesures.Les nouvelles langues des poids et des
mesures sont très bien faites. Le mètre, par exemple, ést pris, aussi
exactement qu’il ést possible, égal à la dix-millionième partie du quart
du méridien terrestre. On le multiplie et on le divise par les
puissances du nombre dix. On a de l’un côté des decamètres, des
hectomètres, des kilomètres, et des myriamètres; et de l’autre côté, des
decimètres, des centimètres, et des millimètres. On en use de même avec
les autres poids et mesures.

Examen des langues Européennes.Je passe à l’examen de nos langues
Européennes. Dans ces langues tout ést conventionnel. Les caractères ne
sont pas faits avec la plus grande perfection: Ils se ressemblent trop:
et en écrivant vîte on pourrait les confondre. Nos règles grammaticales
sont défectueuses, à cause des nombreuses exceptions. Bien des mots ont
un grand nombre de significations. Mais il ne faut pas que j’entre dans
tous les détails de la Grammaire. Il suffit de donner une vue générale
des qualités qu’une langue devrait avoir: C’ést ce que nous ferons dans
la suite.

On a tâché de raccomoder les langues: mais il y a des défauts radicaux,
qui ne pourront se lever que lorsqu’on refera les langues en entier.

Projet d’une langue universelle.On a quelquefois tâché d’inventer une
langue universelle, qui serait commune aux savans de tous les pays. La
langue Latine, qu’ils employaient autrefois pour se faire entendre les
uns des autres, suffirait bien pour cet Edition: current; Page: [184]
usage, mais elle aurait le désavantage de faire des savans une caste
particulière. Pour qu’une langue devînt universelle, il faudrait qu’elle
fût facile à apprendre; et il ne faudrait pas employer la violence pour
la faire recevoir: ce serait un moyen très-sûr de dégoûter.

Structure grammaticale d’une langue philosophique.Pour faire une langue
philosophique, il faudrait créer un caractère pour chaque son simple qui
ne blesse pas l’oreille: Les caractères se ressembleraient, suivant que
les sons qu’ils désignaient se ressembleraient. On en ferait ensuite des
syllabes de deux ou de trois lettres: Les mots d’une syllabe
répondraient aux choses dont on aurait le plus souvent occasion de
parler. Il y auraient trois genres, le masculin et le féminin pour les
animaux, le neutre pour tous les autres objects. Les noms seraient tous
indéclinables, et l’on exprimerait les cas par des propositions, dont
ils ne sont en effet que l’abrégé. Les verbes seraient actifs, passifs,
et neutres: Les tems ne seraient que trois, le passé, le présent, et le
futur. On pourrait, si on le voulait, subdiviser le passé, en ce qui
était passé, présent ou futur, à tel époque. A chaque substantif
répondrait un adjectif, un verbe, et un adverbe, tous dérivés du
substantif d’une manière uniforme invariable.

Une langue tellement construite serait bien facile à apprendre. Mais
elle ne saurait jamais devenir tout à fait vulgaire: et elle ne pourrait
guère se garantir d’un certain dégré de corruption. Les gens qui ne sont
pas instruits gâtent les langues, et en altèrent toute la formation. Une
preuve, c’est que les verbes auxiliaires sont dans presque toutes les
langues, les plus irréguliers de tous: car ils sont le plus usés par le
vulgaire.

Moyens de suppléer à une langue universelle.On a supplée au défaut d’une
langue universelle par des dictionnaires synonymiques, et par des
langues en chiffre. On fait, je suppose, un dictionnaire de tous les
mots de la langue Française, avec un numéro affiché à chacun. Les mêmes
numéros, dans un pareil dictionnaire de la langue Russe sont affichés
aux mêmes noms qui répondent à ces mots français. Lorsqu’un Français
veut écrire à un Russe, il commence par arranger sa lettre de la manière
simple dont parlent les sauvages, sans aucun égard aux règles de la
grammaire, pour obvier à la différence de la tournure des phrases dans
les deux langues. Il traduit ensuite sa lettre en chiffres, il l’envoie
en Russie, où son correspondant, par un dictionnaire semblable, la
traduit dans la langue Russe.

Origine des langues.Comment une langue a-t-elle pu se former? C’ést une
question que bien des gens trouvent fort difficile à résoudre: c’ést ce
qui leur a fait supposer que le langage ést venu directement de l’Etre
Suprème. C’ést qu’ils ne considèrent les langues qu’au dégré de
perfection où elles se trouvent chez nous: et qu’ils les croient
particulières à l’homme. Il ést certain que les animaux ont une manière
d’exprimer leurs désirs, qu’on peut appeler en quelque sorte une langue,
quoiqu’elle en soit une très imparfaite.

L’invention et l’emploi des langues écrites exige un dégré de
civilisation Edition: current; Page: [185] déjà assez haute. Chez les
Américains, lorsqu’ils furent conquis par les Espagnols, les langues
écrites n’étaient pas connues, quoique certaines nations d’entr’eux, les
Péruviens par exemple, et les Mexicains, eûssent déjà une société
policée. Ils suppléaient par la peinture au défaut du langage. Mais la
parole et le geste employés comme signes de la pensée, ne supposent pas
un aussi haut dégré de civilisation. On n’a jamais découvert de
peuplade, quelque barbare qu’il fût d’ailleurs, qui manquait entièrement
de langue parlée.

Systèmes sur le progrès des langues.Sur le progrès des langues, il y a
deux systèmes; dont l’un ést directement opposé à l’autre. M.
Destutt-Tracy pense qu’il n’y a eu d’abord que des interjections, et que
nous avons ensuite décomposé la pensée, et donné des noms aux parties:5
d’autres croient que les noms substantifs ont été les premiers mots;6 et
que nous avons procédé par composition, en rassemblant les idées en
groupes, et en donnant des noms à ces groupes. Pour moi je crois que
nous avons suivi tantôt l’une et tantôt l’autre méthode. Il ést
impossible, par exemple, que nous ayons formé l’idée de génie par
composition, car nous n’en connaissons pas la composition: de l’autre
côte, les définitions sont des preuves que nous n’avons pas toujours
procédé par analyse; car elles ne seraient pas nécessaires, si nous
n’avions pas lié plusieurs idées ensemble, et donné des noms à leurs
combinaisons.

Histoire de la langue parlée.Il ést probable que les premiers mots ont
été des imitations: qu’un animal, par exemple, a été distingué par le
son qu’il fesait habituellement. Le langage était alors composé de
signes naturels. Il y a encore dans nos langues quelques vestiges de
cette formation: mais les mots s’altèrent avec le tems; de manière à ne
conserver enfin qu’une très légère trace de leur origine: ainsi, de
signes naturels, ils dégénèrent en signes purement de convention.
D’ailleurs il faut absolument des signes conventionnels pour désigner
les idées intellectuelles, et la plupart même des objets inanimés.
Malgré cela, il y a bien des gens qui croient leur langue la langue
naturelle. Il y en a beaucoup aussi qui croient leurs noms les noms
naturels, parcequ’ils leur sont familiers, et qui font pas conséquent
les signatures de manière à ce que personne ne puisse les lire. De même,
on imagine que l’oeil juge naturellement des distances: c’ést qu’on a
oublié l’apprentissage qu’on a servi dans son enfance, en comparant les
impressions reçues par le sens de la vue, avec celles qu’on reçoit par
le toucher.

De la langue écrite.La première langue écrite a dû être une
représentation des objets qu’on voulait rappeler. Cette manière était
bonne pour représenter les objets sensibles. Tout le monde pouvait alors
lire sans apprendre. Mais comment peindre les idées intellectuelles? On
l’a fait par allégorie: et c’ést peut être à Edition: current; Page:
[186] cela qu’ést dû le style figuré qui ést si répandu parmi les
Orientaux.Ecriture hieroglyphique. Dès qu’on représenta par des
allégories les idées intellectuelles, la langue écrite n’était plus à la
portée que de ceux qui étaient doués d’assez d’intelligence pour
comprendre les allégories. Mais il y en a que les gens les plus
instruites ne comprendraient pas. De cette nouvelle complication,
quelques hommes sont parvenus à retenir à eux-mêmes le langage écrit,
comme le fesaient les prêtres en Egypte. La langue hiéroglyphique a un
autre desavantage: pour l’écrire, il faut avoir acquis une certaine
facilité de dessiner. Les caractères se sont altérés entre les mains des
mauvais dessinateurs. Quelquefois on en a fondu plusieurs en un seul:
enfin il n’en ést resté que les premiers lineamens, comme nous le voyons
dans l’écriture Chinoise.

Des langues alphabétiques.Les langues Orientales sont évidemment fondées
sur le dessin. Quelquesuns ont voulu rapporter les langues Européennes à
la même origine: mais il y a une longue dissertation dans l’Idéologie de
M. Destutt Tracy, qui prouve effectuellement que cette opinion n’ést
point soutenable.7 Nos langues semblent dériver plutôt de la musique que
du dessin. On a voulu peindre les sons de la voix: on a cherché quels
étaient les sons élémentaires, on les a représentés par des caractères,
et les sons complexes par les combinaisons de ces caractères.

Comparaisons de ces deux sortes de langue.Ces deux espèces de langue ont
chacune leurs avantages. La langue hiéroglyphique, dans sa première
simplicité, a l’avantage d’être une langue universelle, et d’être facile
à lire. Mais elle a aussi ses désavantages. D’abord, on ne peut peindre
que des objets sensibles: ensuite, pour peindre un objet, il faut le
connaître parfaitement: et l’on a souvent besoin de parler d’objets
qu’on n’a jamais vus. La langue alphabétique peut exprimer tant les
idées intellectuelles que les sensibles, et cela sans qu’on connaisse
l’objet qu’on veut désigner. Mais elle ést très difficile à lire,
surtout si aux autres difficultés, on ajoute celle de la prononciation:
D’ailleurs, nous croyons souvent avoir compris un livre, lorsque nous en
avons lu tous les mots: or il arrive souvent que nous n’en avons presque
rien compris, ce qui n’arriverait pas si tous les signes étaient
naturels, comme dans l’écriture hiéroglyphique.

On a voulu reformer nos langues, et conformer toujours l’écriture à la
prononciation. Mais de graves difficultés se présentent ici. D’abord,
quelques-uns tiennent aux étymologies, et veulent les conserver:
ensuite, notre prononciation peut bien s’altérer: nous n’avons pas de
diapason invariable pour la régler: Un chanoine ingénieux que j’ai connu
à Nîmes avait eu l’idée d’une machine parlante, qui conserverait les
sons, et qui les empêcherait de varier: il avait réussi à construire une
espèce d’orgue, qui lorsqu’on tournait la manche, prononçait d’une
manière assez semblable à la voix humaine, les voyelles a, e, i, o, u,
et les mots papa, maman. Il n’y avait Edition: current; Page: [187] que
cet inconvénient-ci, que lorsque la chose devint connue, chaque fois que
l’inventeur se promenait dans les rues, les enfans le suivaient, et
criaient, a,e,i,o,u, papa, maman: a,e,i,o,u, papa, maman.


CHAPITRE IX: DE L’ORIGINE DES IDÉES

Système des idées innées. Des idées acquises.nous avons vu tout ce qui a
rapport à la nature et à la subdivision des idées: il nous reste à
examiner les divers systèmes qu’on a débités sur leur origine.

Ils se réduisent à deux principaux. Platon prétend que nous naissons
avec toutes les idées que nous aurons jamais de notre vie:1 et que
lorsque nous croyons acquérir des idées, elles ne font que se développer
en nous: il appelle ces idées que nous avons naturellement dans
l’esprit, types intellectuels. Selon lui nous avons aussi, dès notre
naissance, des idées que les circonstances empêcheront de se jamais
developper dans notre esprit. Descartes et Malebranche ont adopté ce
systême, à quelques modifications près.2 Aristote tient au contraire que
rien n’ést dans l’esprit qui n’ait été dans les sens.3 Lui-même il n’a
pas dans ses ouvrages démontré ce maxime: Locke l’a mis hors de doute:4
Condillac, Bonnal, etc. l’ont encore plus développé:5 Cabanis et
Destutt-Tracy l’on porté à un dégré plus haut encore: ils ont adopté
l’opinion que penser ést sentir.6 La doctrine de Platon ést appelée
celle des idées innées: celle d’Aristote ést la doctrine des idées
acquises. Celle de Platon fut d’abord reçue dans nos écoles: mais celle
d’Aristote la supplanta, et y domina jusqu’au tems de Descartes. Depuis
son tems, les idées innées sont encore en vogue.

Edition: current; Page: [188]
Examen de ces systèmes.Ce qu’il faut remarquer, c’ést que les partisans
des idées innées n’ont jamais démontré leur existence: ils se sont
contentés de l’affirmer. Mais il ne faut pas admettre ce système sans
preuve. Démontrez-moi que j’ai apporté toutes mes idées au monde, et
alors je le croirai: mais je ne le croirai pas auparavant: d’autant plus
que cette notion n’ést pas de la moindre utilite dans la pratique. Ce
qui a pu égarer Platon, c’ést que lorsque nous décomposons une nouvelle
idée, nous la réduisons à des idées simples que nous connaissions déjà
depuis longtems. Cela pourrait faire croire que nous apportâmes ces
idées avec nous au monde. D’un autre côté, chaque fois que nous voyons
un nouvel objet, nous acquerrons une nouvelle idée: il y a donc des
idées acquises; car si elles étaient dans nos esprits sans que nous en
sûssions rien, ce serait pour nous comme si elles n’y étaient pas. Ce
n’ést qu’après avoir vu l’objet, que nous avons la conscience que l’idée
se trouve dans notre esprit: où donc y a-t-il des preuves qu’elle s’y
trouvait auparavant?

Nous avons déjà prouvé que les idées intellectuelles même ont leur
source dans les sens. D’ailleurs les noms qui expriment ces idées
l’indiquent assez: car ce sont presque tous des allégories, tirées de la
sensation. Celles-même d’entr’elles qui sont fantastiques, qui sont
imaginaires, ont leur origine dans la sensation: Que quelqu’un fasse
tomber par exemple mon chapeau dans la boue, et que je prenne le parti
de me couper la gorge avec ce quelqu’un pour venger l’affront: c’ést de
l’honneur mal entendue, mais c’ést toujours de l’honneur: et l’on ne
niera guère qu’elle ne vienne des sensations.

Objections resolues touchant les idées acquises.On objecte que s’il n’y
avait point d’idées innées, les hommes ne seraient pas d’accord sur tant
de choses. Mais doit-on s’étonner qu’ils soient d’accord? N’ést-ce pas
beaucoup plus étonnant qu’ils ne s’accordent pas davantage? N’ont-ils
pas la même organisation, les mêmes besoins, les mêmes facultés? On a
encore affirmé que les sentimens du juste et de l’injuste doivent être
innés, parcequ’ils sont plus vifs dans la jeunesse qu’ils ne le sont
dans l’âge mur. D’abord, on peut disputer le fait. Hobbes a appelé le
méchant, un enfant robuste:7 et certes si les enfans n’avaient jamais
appris ce que sont le juste et l’injuste, ils n’en auraient guère un
sentiment aussi vif. Ceux d’entr’eux à qui on a donné le sentiment,
l’ont plus vivement que nous: c’ést qu’à force de vivre dans le monde,
on s’use un peu là dessus, et l’on se résigne à l’injustice, comme à une
chose dans l’ordre de la nature.

Les pompes, les cérémonies, sont autant de témoignages rendues à
l’opinion d’Aristote:8 elles sont faites pour parler aux sens. Et que de
gens n’y a-t-il pas au monde, qui n’ont d’idée nette d’un juge, passée
celle de sa perruque et de sa robe?

Edition: current; Page: [189]
Aptitudes innées.J’ai donc de la peine à croire qu’il puisse y avoir des
idées innées. Il peut y avoir une aptitude innée pour recevoir plus
facilement et pour retenir plus longtems les idées d’une certaine
classe. Je crois qu’il en ést des idées à l’esprit ce qu’il en ést des
alimens au corps: Nous n’avons pas des alimens innés: mais chacun de
nous ést organisé de manière à digérer plutôt tel genre d’aliment que
tel autre. Je crois qu’il en ést de même des idées: et que le systême
d’Helvétius qui veut que nos aptitudes originaires soient les mêmes, ést
tout à fait insoutenable.9

Quoique je ne croie pas aux idées innées, je ne crois pourtant pas avec
Condillac que l’enfant vient au monde sans idées:10 je crois qu’il peut
en acquérir dans le sein de sa mère, car on sait qu’il y éprouve des
sensations.

Dispositions instinctives.Ce que les physiologistes appellent
disposition instinctive11 s’oppose au système d’Aristote. Un enfant
tette, un poulin bondit, etc. presqu’au moment de naître. Mais pour
renverser une théorie il ne suffit pas de montrer un phénomène isolé
dont elle ne rend pas raison. Nous ne pouvons pas expliquer ces
déterminations naturelles: mais nous aurons peutêtre un jour plus de
lumières à cet égard.

Système de Kant.Les philosophes Allemands trouvèrent le système
d’Aristote trop matérialiste. Ce fut, dit-on, pour cela que Kant inventa
son système. Ce métaphysicien croît que les idées de l’espace et de la
durée sont innées, ainsi que celles du juste et de l’injuste, et
plusieurs autres, qu’il croit être des formes de notre intelligence.12
Pour moi je ne conçois pas comment nous pourrions avoir l’idée de
l’espace s’il n’y avait qu’un seul corps au monde; ni comment un être
seul dans l’univers aurait celles du juste et de l’injuste, qui me
semblent dériver entièrement de convention.

De Bonnal.Je ne dirai qu’un mot du système de M. Bonnal, que le langage
a précédé la pensée.13 Il ést vrai que le langage nous aide beaucoup a
penser: mais aussi sans penser on n’aurait jamais pu inventer le
langage.

Action de l’esprit sur la matière. Harmonie préétablie de Leibnitz.Une
autre question qui a fort agité les philosophes, c’ést de savoir comment
l’esprit agit sur la matière, et comment la matière réagit sur l’esprit.
Leibnitz nie absolument cette action.14 Un paysan, dit-il, voit deux
horloges, dont les aiguilles se meuvent de la même manière, et d’égale
vîtesse: il croirait que ces horloges communiquent entr’elles.15 De
même, nous voyons que nos actions Edition: current; Page: [190] suivent
nos pensées, et nous croyons qu’elles en sont les effets: C’ést une
erreur: Dieu a arrangé nos esprits,16 dès le commencement, de manière à
recevoir une certaine suite de modifications, et nos esprits à recevoir,
aux mêmes instans, des modifications analogues. Ainsi le corps et l’âme
sont comme deux horloges qui vont d’une vîtesse égale.

Modifiée par Malebranche.On objecta à ce système qu’il détruisait le
libre arbitre. Pour obvier à cet inconvénient, Malebranche imagina que
le corps avait la liberté de ses modifications: mais qu’à chaque
impression, Dieu, qui n’était pas loin, arrangeait l’âme sur le champ de
la même manière.17 Il faut avouer que ce système fait jouer à l’Auteur
de l’Univers un rôle bien ridicule.

L’esprit pense-t-il toujours?Une troisième question qu’on a tâché de
resoudre, ést celle-ci, L’esprit pense-t-il toujours? On assure qu’il
pense, même dans le sommeil le plus profond: et si nous croyons n’avoir
pas rêvé, c’ést que nous avons oublié nos rêves. Pour appuyer cette
proposition, on a défini l’esprit, une substance essentiellement
pensante, et l’on a dit, Puisqu’il ést essentiellement pensant, il faut
qu’il pense toujours. On pourrait, de cette manière-là, prouver tout ce
qu’on voulait. Faut-il que je regarde comme démontrée la proposition que
l’esprit pense toujours, parceque vous avez jugé à propos de le définir,
une substance essentiellement pensante? La conclusion n’ést d’ailleurs
pas une suite rigoureuse des prémisses. On dit bien que les corps sont
essentiellement mobiles: cependant ils ne sont pas toujours en
mouvement.

Edition: current; Page: [191]


3.: Lecture Notes on Logic
 1820-21

MS, British Library of Political and Economic Science, Mill-Taylor
Collection, Vol. XXXVIII. These, the only extant notes, are for lectures
18 through 32 of the course given by Joseph Diez Gergonne at
Montpellier; the course began on 16 November, 1820, and continued, with
lectures on Tuesdays and Thursdays at 3:30 p.m.; the 18th lecture was
given on 18 January, and Mill’s record in his Notebook runs up to 6
February (the 23rd lecture); presumably the course terminated on 8
March. In the 18th Lecture and the first three paragraphs of the 19th,
there are suggested changes of wording in an unknown hand (a different
one from that correcting No. 2). These are indicated in variant notes,
where “CH” signifies the correcting hand, and the minus sign indicates a
proposed deletion. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in
his bibliography.


18ME LEÇON

nous avons vu que les impressions faites sur nos organes des sens par
les objets exterieurs, sont communiquées au cerveau par le moyen des
nerfs: que ces impressions sont appelées sensations: que la manière
d’être d’une sensation dans l’esprit ést une idée: que c’ést
ordinairement dans notre enfance que nous acquierons le plus d’idées,
mais que chacun de nous ést susceptible, quel que soit son âge, d’en
acquérir plus ou moins d’autres, suivant les circonstances où il ést
placé.

aMais lesa idées ne sont que la matière de nos connaissances: Pour en
brecueillir le fruitb, il faut comparer les idées entr’elles, cetc
saisir leurs dressemblancesd et leurs différences. Sans cela, on epeute
avoir fune très grande quantitéf d’idées, sans qu’elles gpuissentg
servir que de fardeau à la mémoire. L’opération de comparer les idées
entr’elles ést appelée jugement: ce n’ést autre chose que la perception
des rapports et des différences: Par ce moyen on s’assure si on peut
affirmer ou nierh de tout un sujet, iou seulementi d’une partie
certaines Edition: current; Page: [192] proprietés. Le jugement jexprimé
par les mots de nos langues ést appelé proposition.

Une question qui a ksouventk produit des disputes dans les écoles ést
celle ldont l’objet éstl de savoir si ml’acte de jugerm ést un acte
simple. Pour résoudre cette question, il faut d’abord savoir ce qu’on
entend par acte simple. La définition qui me paraît la plus nnaturellen
ésto une action où l’on ne distingue point de commencement, de milieu,
ni de fin. Or quelque lente que puisse être la comparaison qui pprécède
le jugement, cette opération elle même me paraît êtrep toujours
instantanée.

Mais de quelle utilité cette question ést-elle? Quel objet s’ést-on
proposé en tâchant de le résoudre? C’ést que les métaphysiciens ont cru
y voir une preuve que la substance pensante ést une substance simple. Un
acte simple, disaient-ils, ne peut sortir que d’une substance simple: Or
le jugement ést un acte simple de l’esprit: donc l’esprit ést une
substance simple: Mais la matière est nécessairement une substance
composée: Donc la substance pensante ést immatérielle. Cette philosophie
qest ce qu’on peut appelerq avec rraison philosophie à arrière pensée:
J’ai inventé un système, dit un métaphysicien: Pour établir ce système,
telle ou telle proposition me sera fort commode: Donc il faut spar tout
moyen possibles établir cette proposition. D’ailleurs, ce traisonnementt
n’ést pas entièrement libre d’objections. Il y a des actes simples qui
résultent des substances composées: upar exempleu, la percussion de deux
billes de billard: Cette percussion n’a ni commencement, ni milieu, ni
fin: cependant on ne dira pas qu’une bille de billard véstv un corps
simple. Le raisonnement que j’ai cité ést en effet si loin d’être
convainquant, qu’on pourrait wbâtir de la même manière un pareil
raisonnement également fort, pour prouver tout le contraire de ce qu’on
veut appuyer sur ces argumensw. Pour comparer les idées, pourrait-on
dire, il faut en avoir au même instant xaux moins deux dans l’esprit:
Donc l’esprit doit avoir au moins deux parties, pour contenir ces deux
idées. yMais tout ce qui ést divisible ést matière: Donc l’esprit ést
matériel. On a tâché de prouver zd’une pareillez manière Edition:
current; Page: [193] l’immortalité de l’âmea. On a dit que laa mort
n’ést que la séparation des parties: Or l’âme, bn’étantb pas divisible,
n’a point de parties: Donc elle ést immortelle: cMais cec raisonnement
ést aussi fallacieux que les autres: dcar lad mort n’ést pas la
séparation des parties: ec’est lorsquee les divers organes d’une
substance organisée n’éxécutent plus les fonctions qui leur sont
propres, fque nous disons que cette substance ést morte. gMême il y a
des substances divisibles et cependant immortelles, comme le tems et
l’espace.g hAussi l’onh peut dire ique la matière ne meurt pas, non plus
que l’esprit: Elle se présente à la vérité sous diverses formes, mais
elle ne meurt jamais: Cependant les parties de la matière sont très
souvent séparées l’une de l’autre. Il y a donc fort peu de différence à
l’égard de l’immortalité, entre jl’esprit et la matière.j. Il y aurait
kunek temerité à dire que Dieu n’a pas le pouvoir d’anéantir l’esprit
aussi bien que la matière. Locke, philosophe très réligieux, n’a pas
douté de la possibilité de faire penser la matière.1 On peut demander
comment il ést possible de concevoir que la matière puisse penser: Mais
en effet, commentl concevoir beaucoup d’autres faits? dont mon n’éstm
pas, pour cela, moins nassurén. Pourquoi borner la puissance de Dieu?
Une autre objection, non moins forte, à ces raisonnemens ést que suivant
eux il ofauto accorder une âme immortelle aux animaux: Car si on leur
accorde la faculté de penser, ce qu’il ést presqu’impossible de leur
réfuser, on ne peut pas nier que leur âme ne soit indivisible, et par
conséquent, immortelle, psuivantp le raisonnement qque j’ai citéq tout à
l’heurer. Descartes se tira de cette difficulté, spar la seule manière
possible, savoirs en supposant que les animaux tne sontt que de pures
machines.2 Malbranche, après lui, fit la même supposition.3 L’abbé
Baran,4 Edition: current; Page: [194] uvoyantu les objections auxquelles
cet hypothèse ést sujet, va supposév que l’âme des animaux wéstw quelque
chose d’intermédiaire entre la matière et l’esprit. Il n’y a pas besoin
de réfuter cette supposition. Que xpeutx être, en effet, une substance
intermédiaire entre l’esprit et la matière? Si elle pense, comment lui
réfuser le nom d’esprit? ySiy elle ne pense pas, zést-cez autre chose
que la matière?

On s’ést aussi demandé si l’acte de juger ést un acte libre de la
volonté, ou un acte forcé de l’intelligence? Il me paraît aindisputablea
qu’on ne peut pas s’empêcher de penser que la plus petite de deux lignes
n’ést pas la plus grande: On peut s’empêcher de le dire: On peut même le
nier: Mais alors on ment: Cela ne démontre point, qu’on bpeutb penser
comme on veut. Quelques-uns ont répondu, que nous avons la faculté de
suspendre nos jugemens: cSans disputec: mais seulement dlorsqued nous
avons encore des doutes: et jugeons que nous n’avons pas assez de
lumières: Dans un autre cas nous ne pouvons pas suspendre nos jugemens.
Si je vois deux lignes, menées en deux directions econtrairese, et
longues l’une de 60, et l’autre de 61 pieds, je ne puis pas fau premier
abord savoirf laquelle des deux ést la plus longue: je suspends donc mon
jugement jusqu’à ce qu’en mesurant les lignes, gj’acquiersg les
hlumièresh, qu’il me faut: alors je ne puis plus le suspendre. Mais si
les deux lignes étaient longues, l’une de cent et l’autre seulement de
dix pieds, iil est évident quei je ne pourrais pas jsuspendre mon
jugement: Mais, kdit-onk, nous revenons quelquefois sur nos jugemens:
D’accord: mais nous le fesons lpar la suite d’un jugementl postérieur,
que nous avons porté le premier jugement avec trop de précipitation, et
sans assez de preuves. On répond, Mais nous pouvons tâcher d’acquérir
plus de lumières: Oui, si nous jugeons que nous n’en avons pas assez:
mais dans tout autre cas, nous ne pourrons pas nous empêcher de porter
un jugement. On a mfait beaucoup de disputes sur ce sujetm, parcequ’on a
voulu bâtir nun système de morale sur cette Edition: current; Page:
[195] proposition que l’acte de juger ést un acte libre de la volonté.
En effet, ola morale est facile à établir là dessus, car si l’on peut
juger (suivant ces philosophes)o comme on veut, tout défaut de jugement
ést un crime. C’ést là ce qui a allumé les bûchers de pla superstitionp:
On a cru dignes de mort tous ceux qui n’ont pas jugé d’une certaine
manière sur la religion.

On a fait une objection assez grave à l’opinion que le jugement ést un
acte forcé de l’intelligence: On a dit: Toutes nos déterminations sont
la suite de nos jugemens: Si donc nos jugemens ne sont pas libres voilà
le libre arbitre détruit. Pour répondre à cette objection, on a fait
comme on qleq fait très souvent: On nous a payé de mots, en fesant une
distinction entre les causes et les motifs. Les corps rbrutesr, a-t-on
dit, ne sont pas libres, parcequ’ils agissent en vertu de causes; smaiss
nous le sommes, parceque nous agissons par des motifs. tMais c’estt une
distinction sans aucune différence: uOn ne fait que d’appeler par le nom
deu motifs, les causes qui agissent sur notre esprit.

vIl faut observer cependant que lorsque je dis que notre jugement n’ést
pas libre, je ne veux pas dire, comme les anciens, que nous wsommesw
poussés par une fatalité qui nous empêche d’agir en vertu de nos
jugemens: Au contraire, nous agissons toujours en vertu de ces jugemens,
formés en comparant les avantages et les desavantages xqui résulteront
si nous agissons d’une certaine manièrex. yOn a dit, Voilà une doctrine
très désolante, que nous n’avons pas le pouvoir d’agir à notre volonté:
Soit: je ne connais point znon plusz de doctrine plus désolante que
celle de la contagion de la peste: cependant je crois qu’on aurait grand
tort, si, dans une ville où rageait cette maladie on conseillait à tout
le monde de s’y exposer sans aucune précaution.y aOn a dit baussib qu’il
ést injuste de punir ceux qui ne peuvent agir autrement qu’ils ne le
font, et que tout l’ordre social se trouve par conséquent anéanti si
l’on cadmet cette doctrinec: Mais en effet, que fait-on, den punissantd
les criminels? On ajoute un poids à la balance: Celui qui se trouve
disposé à commettre un crime, ne le ecommettra pase s’il croît devoir
être puni: en Edition: current; Page: [196] ajoutant la punition aux
désavantages, et en les comparant avec les avantages, il juge que
ceux-là prédominent.a Il faut observer en même tems que des êtres qui
seraient parfaitement libres ne pourraient pas avoir un sentiment plus
vif de leur liberté que nous. Si le Roi ordonnait, fsans que j’en sûsse
rienf, que je fîsse tous les jours ce que je fais; je le ferais comme je
l’aurais fait sans cet ordre, et gne sachantg pas que je hsuish esclave,
je serais aussi heureux que si je ne l’étais ipoint en effeti. jNotre
cas est parfaitement pareil à celui làj.k


19ME LEÇON

aJ’ai oublié dans la dernière séance de vous parler d’una système qui a
quelque rapport avec ce bqui a déjà été l’objet de notre considération.
Je parle du systèmeb de Gall, qui déduit ctoutes les habitudes, toutes
les propensions, de l’individu, de l’organisation du cerveauc.1 Jusqu’à
un certain point, je dsuis de son avis: car puisque led cerveau ést le
siège de l’âme, pourquoi ele développement d’un organe particulier du
cerveau ne produirait-ilf un gpareil développementg dans une faculté
particulière de l’esprit? hAussi par ce moyen-là on peut parvenir àh
expliqueri pourquoi les hommes ont quelquefois une facilité particulière
à se rappeler de telle jou tellej chose, plutôt que de telle autre. Je
me souviens que dans mon enfance j’avais la plus grande facilité à me
krappelerk des sons, mais pour les noms lje ne pouvais jamais réussirl.
Je voudrais donc accorder qu’il peut y avoir une partie du cerveau
appropriée aux noms, une autre aux sons, etc.

Edition: current; Page: [197]
Un talent qui a quelque rapport mavecm celui que Gall prétendit avoir
ést celui de juger des caractères et des dispositions des hommes à la
simple vue. Tout le monde possède ce talent jusqu’à un certain point:
nparcequ’onn voit habituellement que telle ou telle ofigure s’accorde
communément aveco telle ou telle disposition. Mais certaines personnes
le portent à un degré de perfection où les hommes en général ne peuvent
point atteindre. Tout le monde connaît l’histoire de Socrate, qui
pétaitp jugé très méchant homme par une femme qui ne l’avait jamais vu,
qet quiq répondit qu’en effet il avait eu dans son enfance de très
mauvaises dispositions, et que ce n’était qu’à force de rtravailr qu’il
sétaits parvenu à les guérir.2 Cette histoire nous donne taussit une
autre leçon, qu’il ne faut point trop nous fier aux conclusions que nous
donne la physiognomographie: ucar onu peut avoir eu de mauvaises
qualités, et pourtant être parvenu à les perdre après que les traits du
visage se fussent formés: car après un certain âge ils ne sont plus
susceptibles de changer leur forme avec autant de facilité. vDe même
certainesv persones, wd’un naturel très doux, ont souffert des revers de
fortune qui leur ont enlevé cette qualité tandis qu’ils conservent les
mêmes traits.—Cependant il serait fort utile qu’un grand nombre de
personnes eussent ce talent: car il pourrait souvent donner de grandes
lumières dans les cours xde justicex, dans la choix des fonctionnaires
publics, etc. Mais ymalheureusement il ne peut guèrey se communiquer:
car il dépend de la faculté de saisir de petites nuances qu’on peut
dessiner mais qu’on ne peut zguèrez décrire.

abQuant au libre arbitre, nous avons vub que nos actions sont le
résultat de nos jugemens, qui sont euxmêmes forcés par la comparaison
des avantages et des désavantages. Mais ce n’ést pas tout: Nos jugemens
sont très souvent modifiés par des circonstances externes, et par notre
organisation. Ceux que nous portons sur Edition: current; Page: [198]
les actions d’autrui sont presque toujours plus sévères qu’ils ne
devraient l’être. Toutes ces circonstances nous apprennent combien il
faut être indulgens aux actions de nos semblables cpuisqu’ilsc ne
peuvent s’empêcher de faire comme ils font. Je dle crois indisputabled
qu’en ôtant le libre arbitre, loin de détruire la morale, on l’appuie,
en fesant voir que les actions des autres hommes méritent notre pitié au
lieu de notre indignatione: c’est en effet ce qui constitue la vraie
moralee.

Nous avons vu qu’en comparant les idées nous en saisissons les rapports
et les différences, c’ést à dire, nous portons des jugemens, qui,
exprimés par des signes extérieurs, soit par les mots, soit par le
geste, deviennent propositions. Il paraît donc qu’on peut en faire sans
parler: Non seulement le geste, mais quelquefois même les cris,
deviennent des propositions. Examinons la manière dont on a classé les
propositions; en réflechissant que les mots ne sont en eux mêmes que des
sons, qui ne valent que par le sens qu’on y attache, mais qu’il ést
essentiel de connaître ce sens, afin de comprendre le discours dont ces
mots font partie.

D’abord donc, les propositions sont ou simples ou compliquées. Une
proposition simple ést celle qui ne renferme qu’un seul jugement, et par
conséquent deux idées comparées l’une à l’autre. Cette proposition
L’homme ést mortel ést une proposition simple, puisqu’elle ne renferme
qu’un jugement. Mais celle-ci, L’homme, qui ne fait que passer sur la
terre, conçoit pourtant de vastes entreprises, renferme deux jugemens,
d’abord, que l’homme ne fait que passer sur la terre, et ensuite, qu’il
conçoit de grandes entreprises: Elle ést donc une proposition
compliquée.—Quand un sujet peut recevoir plusieurs qualifications, on
peut sous-entendre une d’entr’elles, et celle, de préférence, qui ést de
l’usage le plus fréquent: nous sous-entendrons donc toujours la
qualification de simple, et lorsque nous parlerons de proposition sans
aucune modification nous entendrons toujours proposition simple.

On a voulu donner un nom particulier à chacune des idées que nous
comparons pour faire un jugement: On a donné le nom de sujet à l’idée
dont on prétend affirmer ou nier quelque chose: cette idée ést exprimée
ordinairement par un nom substantif ou par un pronom demonstratif ou
personel. L’idée qu’on affirme ou nie d’une autre idée a reçu mal à
propos le nom d’attribut, cependant on ne se borne pas à attribuer, on
nie quelquefois une idée d’une autre idée. Lorsque je dis Nul homme
n’ést parfait, Parfait n’ést pas certainement un attribut d’homme.
L’attribut ést toujours un adjectif. Dans cette proposition Tout homme
ést mortel, Tout homme ést le sujet, mortel ést l’attribut. Le lien qui
réunit ces deux et qui ést ordinairement le verbe ést s’appelle copule.
Ces trois choses se retrouvent dans toutes les propositions. Comme on a
souvent occasion de parler collectivement du sujet et de l’attribut, on
leur a donné, pour abréger le langage, le nom commun de Edition:
current; Page: [199] termes de la proposition. On a appelé quelquefois
l’attribut le grand terme et le sujet le petit terme: parceque
l’attribut ést ordinairement (mais pas toujours) d’une plus grande
étendue que le sujet. Il faut remarquer ici qu’il serait ridicule de
comparer l’étendue de deux idées qui ne seraient pas l’une à l’autre
comme genre et espèce: il serait absurde, par exemple, de demander si
l’idée de chat ou celle de chien ont le plus d’étendue: mais on peut
fort bien faire cette question pour les idées d’animal et de chien.

Les propositions simples sont quelquefois exprimée par plus de trois
mots: que ce soit dû à la pauvreté de nos langues, ou à notre désir
d’énoncer nos propositions avec élegance. Quelquefois au contraire on
prend l’autre extrême: On fond la copule avec l’attribut dans un mot qui
prend le nom de verbe adjectif: comme je vois pour je suis voyant. Il y
a deux opinions sur ces verbes: les uns prétendent qu’il n’y avait
d’abord que le verbe être et des adjectifs: qu’ensuite on ést devenu las
de repéter si souvent ce verbe, et qu’on l’a réuni avec l’adjectif.
D’autres au contraire sont de l’avis que d’abord il n’existait que des
verbes adjectifs, qu’on a ensuite séparés en adjectifs et en verbe
auxiliaire. L’abbé Sicard et M Destutt-Tracy sont de cet avis.3 Pour moi
je crois que nous avons procédé tantôt par composition et tantôt par
décomposition.—Quelquefois si le sujet ést un pronom personel on le
réunit avec le verbe dans un seul mot, qui exprime alors toute une
proposition. Cela n’arrive guère dans notre langue, mais dans la langue
Latine il n’y a rien de plus commun. Chez nous il n’y a guère que les
impératifs, les particules Oui et Non, et certaines interjections, qui
expriment seules une propositon entière.

Les trois mots qui entrent dans une proposition pourraient à la rigueur
être mises dans un ordre quelconque, mais on ést convenu d’un certain
ordre logique: On énonce d’abord le sujet, puis la copule, et
dernièrement l’attribut. Cependant on s’écarte souvent de cet ordre pour
l’élégance et pour la harmonie du langage: il ne faut donc pas juger par
l’ordre seul, lequel des deux termes ést le sujet ou l’attribut. Souvent
même on mêle une partie des mots qui expriment le sujet, avec ceux qui
expriment l’attribut. Dans ce vers, Heureux qui près des feux peut avoir
des pincettes, Celui qui étant près des feux peut avoir des pincettes
ést le sujet, Est sous-entendu ést la copule, et Heureux ést l’attribut.

La copule peut être rélative au présent, au passé, ou à l’avenir. Dans
le premier cas elle ést exprimée par le mot ést, dans la seconde par fut
ou était, et dans la troisième par sera. Mais ces circonstances
n’influent en rien sur la théorie des propositions.

L’attribut peut être affirmé ou nié du sujet. S’il ést affirmé la
proposition est dite affirmative; s’il ést nié, elle ést négative et
cette différence ést appelée différence de qualité. Mais on peut
observer que cette distinction, quoique très réelle, pourrait souvent
être eludée: car un même acte de l’esprit peut très souvent être
Edition: current; Page: [200] exprimée par une proposition ou négative
ou affirmative: Elle le pourrait toujours en effet si nos langues
possédaient un terme négatif qui répondrait à chaque terme positif: Ces
propositions, Tout homme ést mortel, Nul homme n’ést immortel, expriment
le même jugement. On peut donc se tromper quelquefois sur la qualité des
propositions.

L’attribut peut être affirmé ou nié de tout le sujet, ou seulement d’une
partie. S’il l’est de tout, la proposition ést universelle; s’il ne
l’est que d’une partie indéterminée, elle ést particulière. Cette
manière de diviser constitue la qualité des propositions. Quoique je
croie avec M Destutt Tracy qu’on peut toujours remplacer les
propositions négatives par des propositions affirmatives, je ne suis pas
d’accord avec lui sur la possibilité de remplacer les propositions
particulières par des propositions universelles. Il dit que si je
n’affirme l’attribut que d’une partie du sujet, c’ést cette partie seule
qui ést vraiment le sujet: et que la proposition ést universelle par
rapport à cette partie.4 Mais il n’a pas refléchi que le caractère d’une
proposition particulière ést que l’attribut ést affirmé ou nié d’une
partie indéterminée du sujet. En effet, si la partie était déterminée,
la proposition particulière rentrerait dans la proposition universelle.
Quand je dis Les Tartares de la Crimée sont Mahométans, j’énonce une
proposition universelle: car le sujet n’ést pas les Tartares, c’est les
Tartares de la Crimée: si j’avais un seul mot pour exprimer tout cela,
je pourrais en faire usage: et la proposition ést évidemment universelle
par rapport à ce sujet.

On a voulu faire un autre genre, de ce qu’on a appelé proposition
singulière, c.a.d. proposition dont le sujet est un nom d’individu. Mais
ce n’ést pas l’étendue du sujet qui constitue la quantité de la
proposition: c’ést l’affirmation ou la négation de l’attribut, de tout
ou d’une partie indéterminée du sujet. Il ést donc évident que la
proposition singulière rentre dans la proposition universelle. Il y a
donc quatre genres de propositions: On divise d’abord en Universelle et
Particulière, puis on divise chacun de ces membres en Affirmative et
Négative.


20ME LEÇON

nous avons vu qu’il y a quatre sortes de propositions: La proposition
universelle affirmative, universelle négative, particulière affirmative,
particulière négative. Cette proposition, Tout P ést G (P réprésentant
le sujet, ou le petit terme, et G l’attribut, ou le grand terme) ést un
exemple de la proposition universelle affirmative. Nul P n’ést G ést un
exemple de l’universelle négative: Quelque P ést G de la particulière
affirmative, et quelque P n’est pas G de la particulière négative. Pour
éviter la répétition de ces phrases, les anciens logiciens leur ont
donné pour signes, les voyelles, A, E, I, O: en sorte qu’A réprésentait
la Edition: current; Page: [201] proposition universelle affirmative, E,
l’universelle négative etc. et pour assister à la mémoire ils ont lié
ces signes par un vers technique. Mais ce qui vaut beaucoup mieux qu’un
vers technique ést de choisir des signes qui approchent des signes
naturels, et tels qu’il ne sera pas nécessaire de faire un effort de
mémoire pour s’en rappeler. Voici comment on pourrait parvenir à ce but:

Il ést naturel de réprésenter par la lettre A les propositions
Affirmatives, et par N les propositions négatives: et la quantité ést
facile à exprimer en réprésentant les propositions universelles par de
grandes lettres, et les particulières par de petites. Nous avons donc

  --- ------------------------------------------------------------
  A   signe des propositions universelles affirmatives
  N   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . universelles négatives
  a   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . particulières affirmatives
  n   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . particulières négatives
  --- ------------------------------------------------------------

Pour bien saisir le sens des propositions il faut considérer que leur
nature dépend de l’étendue rélative des idées. Exprimons donc cette
étendue par des signes.

On peut réprésenter l’étendue d’une idée par une espace bornée, telle
qu’un cercle. Or deux cercles peuvent être entièrement hors l’un de
l’autre, ils peuvent se couper, ils peuvent coincider précisément, ou
l’un peut être entièrement contenu dans l’autre. Deux idées sont dans le
même cas. Les idées, par exemple, de Français et d’Anglais sont
entièrement hors l’un de l’autre: car nul Français n’ést Anglais, ni nul
Anglais n’ést Français. Les idées de médecin et de géomètre sont dans le
second cas, car quelques médecins sont géomètres, mais pas tous: C’ést
comme les deux cercles qui se coupent: chacune a une partie en dedans et
une partie en dehors de l’autre. Pour exemple du troisième cas il faut
prendre deux noms exactement synonymes, tels que Suisse et Helvetien,
Hollandais et Batave.1 Les idées d’arbre et de cerisier sont dans le
quatrième cas: l’une ést contenue dans l’autre: il y a des arbres qui ne
sont pas des cérisiers, mais tout ce qui ést cérisier ést arbre. Donnons
à chacun de ces cas un signe aussi naturel que nous pouvons.
Réprésentons par H le premier cas: d’abord parceque c’ést la lettre
initielle du mot hors, et que dans ce cas les idées sont entièrement
hors l’une de l’autre, ensuite parceque cette lettre ést composée en
partie de deux barres qui ne se coupent pas, qui n’ont rien de commun.
La lettre X, composée de deux barres qui se croisent, peut réprésenter
le cas de deux cercles qui se coupent. I, lettre initielle du mot
identité, et d’ailleurs ne consistant qu’en une seule barre, peut
réprésenter deux idées qui coincident l’une et l’autre: C ou reverse-cUC
(on verra bientôt pourquoi je donne deux signes) étant la lettre
initielle du mot contenant, peut réprésenter le quatrième cas. Il faut
observer que dans les deux premiers cas les deux idées sont
symmétriques, c’ést à dire que l’une a la même relation à l’autre que
celle-là à la première: Car si P ést hors de G, G ést hors de P: si P
coupe G, G coupe aussi P. De Edition: current; Page: [202] même les
lettres H et X sont symmétriques: car si on les renverse ils ne changent
pas. Si les deux idées sont identiques ils sont évidemment symmétriques
par rapport l’une l’autre: de même la lettre I ést symmétrique. Mais
dans le quatrième cas, les idées ne sont plus symmétriques: l’une ést
contenante, et l’autre contenue: de même la lettre C n’ést pas
symmétrique. On ne saurait en créant les notations, soulager l’attention
en liant les signes aux choses.

Si ensuite nous considérons les idées comme termes d’une proposition,
nous trouvons qu’au lieu de quatre cas, il y en a cinq: car on peut
demander, dans le dernier cas, si l’idée contenue ést le sujet, ou
l’attribut. Puisqu’il ést plus conforme à la nomenclature que le petit
terme soit l’idée contenue dans le grand terme nous réprésenterons ce
cas par C: et le cas où le grand terme ést contenu dans le petit terme,
par reverse-cUC. Nous avons donc

  ------------------- ---------------
  Ⓟ Ⓖ                 (H)
  circPcircGoverlap   (X)
  circPG              (I)
  circGsmcircP        (C)
  circPsmcircG        (reverse-cUC)
  ------------------- ---------------

Examinons dans chacun de ces cas quelle serait la quantité et la qualité
de la proposition dont les termes seraient dans ce cas.

Dans le cas H, peut on dire, Tout P ést G? Non: puisque P ést hors de G.
Peut on dire, Nul P n’ést G? Oui. Quelque P ést G? Non. Quelque P n’ést
pas G? Oui. Donc le cas H ne s’étend qu’aux propositions négatives, N et
n.

Dans le cas X, peut on dire Tout P ést G? Non, puisque P a une partie
hors de G. Nul P n’ést G? Non, également: car P a aussi une partie qui
n’ést pas hors de G. Mais on peut dire, Quelque P ést G, et Quelque P
n’ést pas G. Ce cas s’étend donc aux propositions particulières, a et n.

Dans le cas I, peut-on dire Tout P ést G? Oui, puisque les idées
coincident. A plus forte raison on peut dire Quelque P ést G. Mais on ne
peut dire ni Nul P n’ést G, ni Quelque P n’ést pas G. Ce cas s’étend
donc aux propositions affirmatives, A et a.

On trouvera le même résultat dans le cas C, car on peut pas2 dire Tout P
ést G, et quelque P ést G, puisque l’idée P ést entièrement renfermée
dans l’idée G: mais on ne peut dire, ni Nul P n’ést G, ni Quelque P
n’ést pas G.

Edition: current; Page: [203]
Dans le cas reverse-cUC, on ne peut pas dire Tout P ést G, car P a une
partie hors de G: toutefois on ne peut pas dire Nul P n’ést G, car ces
idées ont une partie commune, c’ést à dire l’idée G elle même. Mais on
peut dire Quelque P ést G, et Quelque P n’ést pas G. Ce cas donc, comme
le cas X, s’étend aux propositions particulières. On a donc

  -------------------------- ---------
  Dans le cas H,             N et n
  Dans le cas X,             a et n
  Dans le cas I,             A et a
  Dans le cas C,             A et a
  Dans le cas reverse-cUC,   a et n.
  -------------------------- ---------

Refesons maintenant notre tableau en ordonnant par sorte de
propositions.

  ---- ----------------------
  A,   I, C
  N,   H
  a,   X, I, C, reverse-cUC
  n,   H, X, reverse-cUC
  ---- ----------------------

Ce tableau signifie que dans la proposition universelle affirmative,
réprésentée par la lettre A, les termes sont, ou dans le cas I ou dans
le cas C. Que dans la proposition universelle négative, ils sont
toujours dans le cas H, et ainsi de suite. Donc énoncer une proposition
universelle affirmative ést dire que les idées sont ou dans le cas I ou
dans le cas C, c’ést à dire que le petit terme ou coincide avec le grand
ou ést contenu par lui. Donc, pour qu’une proposition universelle
affirmative soit vraie, il ést nécessaire et il suffit que le sujet
n’ait rien d’étranger à l’attribut. Prenons pour exemple la proposition
Tout avare ést malheureux. Si l’on peut montrer un seul individu qui
répond à l’idée d’avare, mais qui ne répond pas à celle de malheureux,
la proposition ést fausse. Pour qu’une proposition universelle
affirmative3 soit vraie, il faut que les deux idées n’aient rien de
commun. Quand je dis Nul avare n’ést heureux, la proposition ést fausse
si vous pouvez montrer un individu qui soit en même tems avare et
heureux. Dans une proposition particulière affirmative il faut que les
deux idées aient au moins une partie commune. Cette proposition,
Quelques avares sont malheureux, ést vraie, si je puis montrer un seul
individu qui soit avare et malheureux. Dans une proposition particulière
affirmative il faut que le sujet ait du moins une partie hors de
l’attribut: Comme dans celle-ci, Quelques médecins ne sont pas
géomètres, il faut, et il suffit, pour en prouver la vérité, qu’on
puisse montrer un médecin qui ne soit pas géomètre. On peut observer que
les caractères de vérité des propositions universelles affirmatives sont
ceux de fausseté des particulières négatives: que les caractères de
verité des universelles negatives sont ceux de fausseté des
particulières affirmatives.

Il ést des cas où l’on peut juger facilement de la verité des
propositions. Si un Edition: current; Page: [204] genre ést l’attribut,
et le sujet une de ses espèces, la proposition universelle affirmative
ést vraie. Si les termes sont deux espèces du même genre, en supposant
toujours que la division logique soit bien faite, que les termes ne
rentrent pas les uns dans les autres, la proposition universelle
négative ést vraie. Si le sujet ést genre et l’attribut une de ses
espèces, les propositions particulières affirmative et négative sont
vraies.

On peut demander, Puisqu’il ést si facile de decouvrir si une
proposition ést vraie, par l’étendue rélative de ses termes, pourquoi
dispute-ton tant sur la vérité de certaines propositions? C’ést faute de
bonne classification et de définitions précises: C’ést que souvent les
uns entendent un mot dans un certain sens, et les autres dans un autre:
ce qui fait qu’une proposition vraie pour un homme ést fausse pour un
autre.

Je ferai ici une observation faite pour la première fois par Aristote,4
et qui pourra nous être utile lorsque nous traiterons le raisonnement.
Dans les propositions universelles, on prend le sujet dans toute son
étendue: car si je dis Tout homme ést mortel, je nie5 l’attribut de tous
les individus compris dans le sujet: De même si je dis Nul homme n’ést
parfait, je nie l’attribut de tous ces individus. Mais dans les
propositions particulières on ne prend pas le sujet dans toute son
étendue: Car lorsque je dis Quelques médecins sont poètes, je ne veux
pas affirmer l’attribut poète de tout le sujet, mais seulement d’une
partie. De même si je dis Quelques docteurs ne sont pas doctes.
L’attribut ést pris dans toute son étendue, dans les propositions
négatives. Quand je dis Nul homme n’ést parfait, ou Quelques docteurs ne
sont pas doctes, Je veux nier du sujet tout l’attribut: Je ne veux pas
dire que Nul homme n’ést cet individu-ci ou celui-là parfait, mais que
nul homme n’ést rien de parfait. Au contraire dans les propositions
affirmatives, telles que Tout homme ést mortel, ou quelques médecins
sont poètes, je ne veux pas dire que tout homme ést tout mortel, mais
que tout homme ést un seul mortel. Changeons donc notre notation, et
réprésentons par de grandes lettres les termes pris dans toute leur
étendue, et par de petites lettres ceux qui ne le sont pas.

  ----- -----------------------
  (A)   Tout P ést g
  (N)   Nul P n’ést G
  (a)   Quelque p ést g
  (n)   Quelque p n’ést pas G
  ----- -----------------------

Comparons maintenant deux propositions qui ont le même sujet et le même
attribut, mais qui diffèrent en quantité ou en qualité.

Deux propositions qui diffèrent en quantité et en qualité sont appelées
Edition: current; Page: [205] contradictoires. Telles sont les
universelles affirmatives et les particulières négatives: les
universelles négatives et les particulières affirmatives. Deux
propositions universelles, qui diffèrent en qualité, sont contraires:
Deux propositions particulières qui sont dans le même cas, sont
subcontraires. Enfin si deux propositions de même qualité diffère en
quantité, celle qui ést particulière ést censée subalterne de celle qui
ést universelle: Ainsi une proposition particulière affirmative ou
négative ést subalterne de la proposition universelle affirmative ou
négative dont les termes sont les mêmes.

Les propositions contradictoires ont cette propriété, qu’elles ne
peuvent être ni toutes deux vraies ni toutes deux fausses. En effet, si
une proposition universelle affirmative ést vraie, il faut que les
termes soient ou dans le cas I ou dans le cas C; or pour que la
proposition particulière négative fût vraie, il faudrait qu’ils fussent
dans un des trois cas H, X ou reverse-cUC. Donc les deux propositions ne
peuvent pas être toutes deux vraies: mais la faussesse de l’une s’ensuit
de la vérité de l’autre, et réciproquement.

Deux propositions contraires peuvent être toutes deux fausses, mais
elles ne peuvent pas être vraies toutes deux. Car si une proposition
universelle affirmative ést vraie, il faut que les termes soient ou dans
le cas I ou dans le cas C: ils ne sont donc pas dans le cas H, ce qui
ést nécessaire pour qu’une proposition universelle négative soit vraie.
Mais si la proposition universelle affirmative ést fausse, et que par
conséquent les termes ne sont ni dans le cas I ni dans le cas C, il ne
s’ensuit pas delà qu’ils soient dans le cas H, puisqu’ils peuvent être
dans l’un ou l’autre des cas X et reverse-cUC: donc les propositions
contraires peuvent être fausses à la fois, mais ne peuvent être vraies à
la fois.

Il n’en ést pas de même des propositions subcontraires. Si la
proposition particulière affirmative ést fausse, il faut que les termes
ne soient dans aucun de ces quatres cas, X, I, C, reverse-cUC: il ést
donc nécessaire qu’ils soient dans le cas H, un des cas de la
proposition particulière négative. Donc ces propositions ne sauraient
être fausses à la fois. Mais si la proposition particulière affirmative
ést vraie, il faut que les idées soient dans un de ces quatres cas, et
puisque deux de ces cas sont communs à la proposition particulière
négative,—quoiqu’il ne soit pas nécessaire, il ést possible que les
propositions subcontraires soit vraies à la fois.

La verité d’une proposition universelle détermine celle de la
proposition particulière qui lui ést subalterne: mais la faussesse de
l’universelle ne démontre pas celle de la particulière. Si les termes
sont dans une des deux rélations I et C, il s’ensuit que la proposition
particulière ést vraie, puisque ces deux cas entrent dans les cas de
cette proposition. Mais si les deux termes ne sont ni dans le cas I ni
dans le cas C, il ne s’ensuit pas que la proposition particulière soit
fausse, puisqu’elle peut être ou dans le cas X ou dans le cas
reverse-cUC. Au contraire, la fausseté de la proposition particulière
entraîne celle de l’universelle, mais la vérité de la première
n’entraîne pas celle de la seconde. Car si les termes ne sont ni dans le
cas I, X, C, ni reverse-cUC, à coup sûr ils ne sont ni dans le cas I, ni
C: mais il ne s’ensuit pas que Edition: current; Page: [206] s’ils sont
dans un des quatre cas, ils soient dans le cas I ou C. Delà on tire un
moyen puissant pour le raisonnement. Si quelqu’un nie un cas
particulier, prouvez-lui l’universel, et le particulier ést prouvé:
affirme-t-il l’universel? Refutez-le en prouvant que le particulier ést
faux.

Il peut y avoir aussi des propositions qui aient les mêmes termes, mais
celui qui ést l’attribut de l’un peut être le sujet de l’autre. Elles
peuvent différer de quantité ou de qualité. La réciproque d’une
proposition ést celle qui résulte en mettant tout simplement le sujet à
la place de l’attribut, sans changer ni la qualité, ni la quantité. La
converse ést celle dont la vérité ést une suite nécessaire de la verité
de la proposition dont elle ést la converse. La réciproque ést
quelquefois, mais pas toujours, la converse.

Dans la prochaine séance j’examinerai les cas dans lesquels elle l’ést,
ou ne l’ést pas.


21ME LEÇON

dans la dernière séance j’ai exposé plusieurs principes de la doctrine
des propositions, que j’ai prouvé par des moyens qui peuvent paraître
très mécaniques, mais il faut considérer combien ést grand l’avantage de
pouvoir réduire un raisonnement en langage de cette nature, de manière à
n’avoir plus qu’une opération mécanique à faire.

Nous avons vu que la réciproque d’une proposition ést une autre
proposition qui a le même sujet, le même attribut, et qui diffère de la
première en cela seul que le terme qui ést sujet dans l’une, devient
attribut dans l’autre: que la converse ést une proposition qui de même a
les termes deplacés, mais qui n’ést pas restreint à être de la même
quantité et de la même qualité, mais seulement à être vraie si l’autre
proposition l’ést. La réciproque d’une proposition ést quelquefois sa
converse, mais pas toujours. La réciproque de cette proposition Quelques
médecins sont propriétaires ést celle-ci Quelques propriétaires sont
médecins, qui en ést aussi la converse, car si l’on concède la première
on ne peut s’empêcher de concèder l’autre. Mais de cette proposition
Tout homme ést mortel on n’ést pas en droit de conclure que Tout mortel
ést homme. Si la réciproque et la converse sont les mêmes nous appelons
cette espèce de converse converse simple: mais si elles ne le sont pas,
la converse ést appelée converse par accident. Puisque pour convertir
une proposition il faut mettre le terme G à la place de P, réprésentons
par les lettres A, N, etc. renversés, les réciproques des quatres genres
de propositions, et trouvons quelle ést la rélation des deux termes par
rapport à l’étendue, qui ést nécessaire pour que l’on puisse dire Tout G
ést P, Nul G n’ést P, etc. et nous aurons

  --------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- --------------
  (reverse-aUC)             I,        reverse-cUC,
  (reverse-nUC)   H                   
  (reverse-a)          X,   I,   C,   reverse-cUC,
  (reverse-n)     H,   X,        C,   
  --------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- --------------

Edition: current; Page: [207]
De ce tableau nous deduirons avec la plus grande facilité les règles de
la conversion des propositions.

1° Si la proposition A ést vraie, il faut que les termes soient ou dans
le cas I, ou dans le cas C. Il ne s’ensuit donc pas que reverse-aUC soit
vraie, puisque pour la vérité de cette proposition il faut que les idées
soient dans un de ces cas I, reverse-cUC. Mais il s’ensuit que la
proposition reverse-aUC soit vraie, puisque l’un ou l’autre des cas I,
C, suffit pour la constituer vraie. Donc la proposition universelle
affirmative a pour converse une proposition particulière affirmative.
Elle n’ést donc susceptible que d’une conversion par accident.

2° Si la proposition N ést vraie, les termes sont nécessairement dans le
cas H, d’où il s’ensuit que reverse-nUC aussi ést vraie. Donc la
proposition universelle négative ést susceptible de conversion simple,
et a pour converse une autre proposition universelle négative. Mais ce
n’ést pas là sa seule converse: puisque la lettre H entre dans les trois
cas dont un quelconque suffit pour que la proposition u soit vraie. Donc
la proposition universelle négative ést aussi susceptible de conversion
par accident: elle a pour seconde converse une proposition particulière
négative.

3° Si nous regardons les quatre cas de la proposition a, et ceux de
reverse-a, nous trouvons qu’ils sont les mêmes: donc la proposition
particulière affirmative a pour converse, sa réciproque, savoir une
autre proposition particulière affirmative.

4° Enfin, la proposition particulière négative n’ést vraie que si les
idées sont dans un quelconque des trois cas, H, X, reverse-cUC. Ceux-ci
ne se rencontrent ensemble dans aucun des quatre cas reverse-aUC,
reverse-nUC, reverse-a, reverse-n: donc la proposition particulière
négative n’ést pas susceptible de conversion.

La conversion des propositions donne un autre moyen de raisonnement,
mais on se trompe souvent lorsqu’on en fait usage: puisque la réciproque
ést toujours1 la converse, on croît qu’elle l’ést toujours, ce qui n’ést
point vrai. Pour eviter cette faute, il suffit de considérer que dans
les propositions universelle négative et particulière affirmative il ést
indifférent lequel des deux termes on met le premier, puisque ces
propositions sont convertibles par la conversion simple. Dans les deux
autres cas il suffit de considérer lequel des deux termes ést pris dans
sa plus grande étendue, et d’en faire le sujet dans la proposition
universelle affirmative, l’attribut dans la particulière négative.

Comme plusieurs choses que j’ai dit peuvent paraître étranges, il faut
observer qu’en Logique on admet une proposition particulière lors même
que l’universelle ést vraie. On admet par exemple la proposition
Quelques hommes sont mortels: ce qui paraîtrait ridicule dans le langage
ordinaire: Bien plus, on pourrait souvent offenser plusieurs personnes
en se servant ainsi de la proposition particulière. Si par exemple vous
disiez à un homme Vous avez plusieurs honnêtes gens dans votre famille,
vous auriez beau dire que vous ne niez pas que toute la famille ne soit
des honnêtes gens, mais que si tous le sont, à plus forte raison
quelques-uns le sont, il ne vous entendrait pas, mais il serait très
fortement offensé.

Edition: current; Page: [208]
J’observerai aussi qu’on peut très bien raisonner sur des idées qui me
sont tout-à-fait inconnues. Si un Botaniste, par exemple, me parle de
certaines plantes que je ne connaîs point, s’il en affirme ou nie
quelque chose, je pourrai déduire de cette proposition sa converse et sa
proposition subalterne, je pourrai nier sa contradictoire, et ainsi de
suite. Il n’ést donc pas nécessaire de connaître les objets, pour
pouvoir raisonner sur eux: il suffit d’avoir reçu sur ces objets des
renseignemens auxquels on peut se fier.

Si nos langues étaient simples, nous n’aurions que ces sortes de
propositions, dont je viens de parler. Mais, soit un avantage, soit un
desavantage, nos langues ont été fort travaillées, et elles renferment
beaucoup de propositions qui contiennent plus d’un jugement: On les
appelle propositions compliquées. Il ést presqu’impossible d’énumérer
les propositions compliquées: Chaque fois qu’un écrivain donne un
nouveau tour à une pensée il crée une nouvelle proposition, et
quelquefois la même ouvrage en contiennent de tous les genres. Il ést
donc très difficile, pour ne pas dire impossible, de faire des règles
pour les propositions compliquées. Mais il ést bon de pouvoir les
séparer en les propositions simples dont elles sont formées, afin de
pouvoir, dans les cas difficiles, leur substituer une suite de
propositions simples qui ait la même valeur: Et cet art fera le sujet de
la séance prochaine.


22ME SÉANCE

nous avons vu que les propositions sont ou simples ou compliquées:
simples, si elles ne renferment qu’un seul jugement; compliquées si
elles renferment plus d’un jugement. Nous avons donné des règles pour
les propositions simples: il nous reste d’examiner les différens genres
de propositions compliquées.

1° Le premier genre consiste dans les propositions appelées composées,
qui ne diffèrent des propositions simples qu’en ce qu’il y a plusieurs
sujets, plusieurs attributs, ou en même tems plusieurs sujets et
plusieurs attributs, comme dans ces propositions: L’or ni la grandeur ne
nous rendent heureux: Le sage ést ménager de tems et de parôles:
L’éxtrême opulence et l’éxtrême misère sont rarement accompagnées de la
gaîeté, de la santé, de la vertu. Il ést clair qu’on peut réduire chacun
de ses propositions en propositions simples: ainsi L’or ne nous rend pas
heureux, La grandeur ne nous rend pas heureux: Le sage ést ménager de
tems, Le sage ést ménager de paroles, etc: Il ést clair qu’une
proposition peut devenir composée en substituant au sujet ou à
l’attribut, si ce terme ést général, l’ensemble des espèces ou des
individus qu’il contient: et réciproquement. Dans les propositions
composées, puisque chaque attribut se rapporte à chaque sujet, il ést
évident que pour trouver le nombre des jugemens renfermés dans la
proposition il Edition: current; Page: [209] faut multiplier le nombre
des sujets par le nombre des attributs: Mais cette règle n’a pas lieu
dans le cas où les sujets et les attributs sont du même nombre, et que
chaque attribut se rapporte à un seul sujet auquel il ést propre: Comme
si je voulais dire que j’aime l’été, et qu’un autre aime l’hiver, je
pourrais dire Vous et moi nous craignons le chaud et le froid: je ne
veux pas dire ici Vous craignez le chaud et le froid, Je crains le chaud
et le froid, mais vous craignez le chaud, je crains le froid. Dans ce
cas il faut mettre les attributs dans le même ordre que les sujets, pour
que l’on puisse savoir quel attribut convient à tel sujet.

Une proposition ést appelée complexe, si l’on énonce en passant un
jugement sur le sujet ou sur l’attribut de la proposition: comme
lorsqu’on dit Le Tems, qui détruit tout, fortifie les mauvaises
habitudes. Il y a alors une proposition principale et une proposition
incidente, car il ést clair que celle que je veux principalement énoncer
ést que Le Tems fortifie les mauvaises habitudes, mais je dis aussi en
passant que le tems détruit tout. Il faut cependant observer que le qui
ou le que ne donne pas toujours la certitude que la proposition ést
complexe; ces particules peuvent être déterminatifs, pour limiter le
sujet par rapport à son étendue; comme si je dis L’homme qui sait borner
ses désirs n’est jamais pauvre, je ne veux pas dire que l’homme n’ést
jamais pauvre ni que l’homme sait borner ses désirs, mais je veux
limiter le sujet, et faire voir que je ne dis pas que L’homme n’ést
jamais pauvre, mais seulement que L’homme qui sait borner ses désirs ne
l’est jamais. Quelquefois il y a de l’équivoque dans une proposition, et
l’on ne sait pas si elle ést en effet complexe. L’homme léger et
inconstant ne conduit jamais à la fin de grandes entreprises. Ici on ne
sait pas si le sens de la phrase ést que l’homme ést léger et
inconstant, ou bien que l’homme qui ést leger et inconstant ne conduit
jamais à la fin de grandes entreprises. On ést convenu d’éviter cette
ambiguïté en mettant une virgule après le sujet principal toutes les
fois que la proposition ést complexe. Quelquefois la complication ne
porte ni sur le sujet ni sur l’attribut, mais sur l’affirmation ou sur
la négation: Les astronomes assurent que la terre se meut. Il faut
observer que cette proposition peut avoir deux sens. Si je veux dire que
les astronomes l’assurent, mais que je n’en sais rien, la proposition
ést simple, ne renfermant qu’un seul jugement: mais si je veux dire que
la terre se meut, et appuyer mon affirmation en ajoutant que les
astronomes l’assurent, la proposition ést complexe, et la complication
porte sur l’affirmation. Il ést clair qu’une proposition complexe peut
être fausse, bien que la proposition incidente soit vraie: ou vraie
quoiqu’elle soit fausse. L’homme, qui ést léger et inconstant, est
immortel: La proposition principale ést ici fausse, quoique la
proposition incidente soit vraie. L’homme, qui ést dépourvu d’organes,
est mortel: C’est ici la proposition incidente qui ést fausse, tandis
que la principale ést vraie.

Une proposition ést dite absolue si l’on y affirme que l’attribut
convient au sujet sans aucune restriction: elle ést modale si on affirme
ou nie avec quelque réstriction. Telles sont ces propositions L’eau
n’ést pas constamment liquide: Il faut que les citoyens obéissent aux
lois. Je ne veux pas dire ici que les citoyens Edition: current; Page:
[210] obéissent aux lois: car dans ce cas il n’y aurait plus besoin de
cour d’assises. Il ést clair que la suppression de l’adverbe peut
souvent rendre la proposition fausse: Si au lieu de dire L’eau n’ést pas
constamment liquide je disais L’eau n’ést pas liquide, il ést clair que
ma proposition serait fausse.

Une proposition ést dite conditionelle lorsqu’elle affirme que tel ou
tel attribut convient ou ne convient pas à tel ou tel sujet, si tel
autre attribut convient ou ne convient pas à tel autre sujet. Il y a
donc deux propositions, l’antécedente et la conséquente. Si les animaux
sont de pures machines, ils doivent être insensibles. (Il faut observer
que dans cette proposition le pronom ils tient la place d’un sujet.) La
proposition, Les animaux sont de pures machines ést l’antécédente; Les
animaux doivent être insensibles ést la conséquente. Il ést clair que la
verité ou la fausseté de la proposition conditionelle ne dépend pas de
celle de l’antécédente ni de la conséquente: Il suffit pour sa vérité
que celle de la conséquente résulte nécessairement de celle de
l’antécédente. Dans la proposition que je viens de citer je crois
fermément à la fausseté de toutes deux: cependant l’une me paraît être
la suite nécessaire de l’autre. Dans celle-ci, Si la neige ést blanche,
les hommes sont mortels on ne niera point la vérité de l’antécédente ni
de la conséquente, cependant la proposition ést fausse, et même
ridicule.—Si l’on met l’antécédente et la conséquente à la place l’une
de l’autre, on a la réciproque; La réciproque de la proposition que j’ai
citée tout à l’heure ést Si les animaux ne sont pas sensibles, ils sont
de pures machines. Comme dans les propositions simples, la réciproque
d’une proposition vraie n’ést pas toujours vraie: Pour trouver la
converse il faut en même tems changer la qualité de l’antécédente et de
la conséquente: Si les animaux sont sensibles, ce ne sont pas de pures
machines: proposition qui ést une suite rigoureuse de la proposition
primaire. On a donc quatre propositions conditionelles qui ont les mêmes
deux propositions pour en faire leurs Conséquentes et leurs
Antécédentes: Pour prouver toutes les quatre, il suffit d’en prouver
deux, qui ne sont pas converses l’une de l’autre.—Les anciens Logiciens
ont rassemblé les règles de la Proposition Conditionelle en ces quatre:
Qui accorde l’Antécédente accorde la Conséquente: Qui nie la Conséquente
nie l’Antécédente: mais qui accorde la Conséquente n’accorde point
l’Antécédente, ni celui qui nie l’Antécédente nie-t-il la Conséquente.

Viennent ensuite les Propositions Disjonctives, Si l’on donne deux
sujets ou deux attributs tels que si l’un ne convient pas, l’autre
convient. L’envie ou le mépris ést le sort des écrivains. On peut les
changer en propositions conditionelles: Si l’envie n’ést pas le sort des
écrivains, le mépris l’ést. Il faut un certain degré d’opposition entre
les deux membres de la proposition comme dans l’exemple: L’envie attend
les bons écrivains, le mépris attend les mauvais.

Dans les propositions causales on affirme que tel attribut convient ou
ne convient pas à tel sujet parceque tel autre attribut convient ou ne
convient pas à tel autre sujet. Il y a ici, comme dans les propositions
conditionelles, une Antécédente et une Conséquente: mais avec cette
différence, qu’il ést nécessaire que toutes les Edition: current; Page:
[211] deux soient vraies. Il y a ici trois jugemens: d’abord que
l’antécédente est vraie, ensuite la conséquente, et enfin que la vérité
de l’une ést la cause de la vérité de l’autre. Quoiqu’il soit nécessaire
que les deux membres soit vrais ils peuvent cependant l’être sans que le
jugement causal le soit: comme dans cette proposition Les hommes sont
mortels parceque la neige ést blanche.

Les propositions comparatives ou discrétives sont celles où l’on dit que
tel attribut convient à tel sujet, mais qu’il convient mieux à tel
autre, ou que tel attribut convient à tel sujet mais que tel autre
attribut lui convient mieux. Il y a ici trois jugemens. Lafontaine dit
qu’il ést bon de parler, mais meilleur de se taire.1 Il y a d’abord le
jugement qu’il ést bon de parler, ensuite qu’il ést bon de se taire, et
enfin qu’il vaut mieux se taire que de parler. Ici il faut un certain
degré de contraste entre les deux membres.

Les propositions exclusives affirment que tel attribut convient seul à
tel sujet, qu’aucun autre ne lui convient: ou que tel attribut convient
à tel sujet seul, et à aucun autre. Il y a ici deux jugemens: d’abord
que tel attribut convient à tel sujet, ensuite qu’aucun autre ne lui
convient. Mais il faut distinguer ce cas de celui où le mot seul ne sert
qu’à limiter le sujet ou l’attribut à une seule chose, comme lorsque
Boileau dit Un sonnet sans défaut vaut seul un long poème;2 il ne veut
pas dire qu’un sonnet sans défaut ést la seule chose qui vaille un long
poème, mais qu’à lui tout seul il le vaut.

Les propositions inceptives affirme que tel attribut convient à tel
sujet depuis que tel autre attribut convient à tel autre sujet. Les
propositions desitives affirment que tel attribut ne convient plus à tel
sujet depuis que tel autre attribut a cessé de convenir à tel autre
sujet. Ici il y a une antécédente et une conséquente. Lorsqu’on dit Les
oracles n’ont cessé de parler que depuis qu’on a cessé d’y croire,
l’antécédente ést Les oracles ont cessé de parler, la conséquente ést On
a cessé d’y croire. La vérité de la proposition ne dépend pas de celle
de l’antécédente ni de la conséquente. Lorsqu’on dit Les hivers sont
doux à Montpellier depuis que les femmes ne portent plus de gros paniers
les deux membres sont vrais, mais la proposition inceptive ést fausse.

Les propositions réduplicatives, peut être mal nommées, sont celles qui
affirment que tel attribut ne convient à tel sujet que sous certains
rapports et à tels égards. La terre comme corps céleste ne diffère point
des autres planètes.

Les propositions impératives ou supplicatives sont celles qui
manifestent un voeu que tel attribut convienne ou ne convienne pas à tel
sujet. Si la proposition exprime un ordre, on l’appelle impérative; si
elle exprime un simple voeu, elle ést supplicative. Quelquefois il y a
des doutes si la proposition ést impérative ou supplicative. Dans ce
morceau de Voltaire Descend des cieux auguste Vérité etc.:3 Edition:
current; Page: [212] le ton de la phrase fait bien voir que la
proposition ést supplicative, mais Voltaire se serait servi des mêmes
mots s’il avait voulu ordonner.

Enfin, les propositions interrogatives sont des propositions tronquées,
qui expriment un désir de savoir quelque chose: Elles ne sont ni vraies
ni fausses en elles-mêmes, et pour prononcer sur leur vérité il faut
attendre que la réponse ait complété la proposition.

Je ne quitterai pas ce sujet avant de dire un mot sur un genre peu
important de propositions, mais qui a beaucoup tourmenté les sophistes
Grecs: ce sont les propositions qui ne peuvent, pour ainsi dire, être
vraies qu’étant fausses, ni fausses qu’étant vraies. En voilà des
exemples. Un dervische fait voeu de jeûner jusqu’à ce qu’on lui ait dit
une fausseté. On lui dit, Derviche, tu as assez jeûné pour accomplir un
voeu: Est-ce vrai? donc on ne lui a point dit encore de fausseté, donc
il n’a pas encore assez jeûné, et par conséquent la proposition est
fausse: Est-elle fausse? donc il n’a pas assez jeûné, donc on ne lui a
point dit de fausseté, et par conséquent la proposition ést vraie. Le
dervische ne sait pas s’il doit jeûner ou non. On ouvre un livre qui ne
contient que cette seule phrase, Tout ce qui ést écrit dans ce livre est
faux: mais il n’y a que cette phrase: donc si elle ést vraie elle ést
fausse, si elle ést fausse elle ést vraie. Tout cela remonte à ce
sophisme très connu. Un jeune homme apprit la Rhétorique d’un autre, sur
cette condition qu’il ne paierait qu’après qu’il eût gagné sa première
cause. Le jeune homme ne voulut point plaider. L’autre devint impatient,
et le poursuivit devant des juges. Le jeûne homme dit aux juges, Si je
suis condamné, j’ai perdu ma première cause, et je ne vous dois rien:
Dans le cas contraire, le juge aura déterminé que vous avez tort, donc
je ne vous dois rien.4


23ME SÉANCE

dans la dernière séance j’ai oublié de dire qu’une proposition
interrogative, s’il y a énonciation d’époque, peut être inceptive ou
desitive, en vertu d’un véritable jugement qu’il contient implicitement.
Si je demandais à un juge, Vendez-vous encore la justice? il se
fâcherait à bon droit, car cette question contient implicitement
l’affirmation qu’il la vendait auparavant. De même si je demandais à un
jeune docteur en médecine, Tuez-vous déjà beaucoup de malades? la
question suppose que le tems viendra où il doit en tuer beaucoup.

Il arrive quelquefois qu’on ne peut pas répondre à une question en
disant simplement Oui ou Non. Cela tient à ce que la question renferme,
comme dans le cas que nous venons de voir, d’autres jugemens.

Il y a aussi des propositions dubitatives, comme lorsque Voltaire dit,
en parlant des anges, Newton, le grand Newton, que nous admirons tant,
ést peut être pour Edition: current; Page: [213] eux ce qu’un singe ést
pour nous:1 Il exprime une doute par cette proposition. Les propositions
hypothétiques affirment que tel attribut convient ou ne convient pas à
tel sujet dans une certaine supposition, qui peut en elle même être
vraie ou fausse. Si la conclusion ést la suite nécessaire de cette
supposition, on ne peut jamais nier la vérité de la proposition. Les
définitions sont toujours vraies, parcequ’elles expriment que celui qui
les énonce veut entendre telle chose par tel nom, donc elles sont vraies
par cela seul qu’elles sont énoncées. Les divisions logiques sont
toujours vraies, pourvu qu’elles ne pèchent pas contre les règles.

Il faut observer enfin qu’une proposition peut renfermer un grand nombre
de ces sortes de complication que nous venons d’expliquer.

Une observation très importante à faire ést que dans la Logique il faut
toujours prendre une proposition pour tout ce qu’elle signifie, et
uniquement pour ce qu’elle signifie. Mais dans le langage ordinaire, qui
n’admet pas une si grande rigueur dans les expressions, il faut souvent
considérer le ton, le geste, et les habitudes de l’individu qui énonce
la proposition. Souvent nous prononçons une proposition d’un ton
d’ironie, alors il ne faut pas l’entendre à la rigueur. D’ailleurs quand
nous énonçons une proposition particulière dans la conversation
ordinaire, nous sous-entendons que l’universelle n’ést pas vraie. Aussi
énonçons nous souvent comme universelle une proposition qui ne l’ést pas
à la rigueur, mais qui n’a que peu d’exceptions: Et c’ést ce qui donne
lieu à ce que nous disons communément, qu’il n’y a point de règle sans
exception; car il ést clair que si les propositions étaient toujours
énoncéés de la manière la plus exacte possible, il n’y aurait jamais des
exceptions. Lorsqu’on dit que les Allemands manquent de goût, il ést
bien certain qu’on ne veule pas dire qu’il n’y a pas un seul homme dans
toute l’Allemagne qui ait du goût; on veut seulement dire, Quelles que
soient d’ailleurs les bonnes qualités des Allemands, le goût n’ést pas
le caractère général, au moins de la plus grande partie. Les Flamands
sont de bons peintres: Cette proposition ne veule pas dire que tous les
Flamands soient peintres, ni que tous ceux qui le sont réussissent dans
cette art, mais que les Flamands s’y donnent volontiers et y réussissent
ordinairement. Quelquefois on applique à un être des caractères qui
s’appliquent proprement à un autre, comme lorsqu’on dit Les moeurs des
Français ont beaucoup changé depuis Charlemagne: Puisque il n’existe
aucun Français du tems de Charlemagne, il aurait fallu dire que les
Français d’aujourd’hui n’ont pas les mêmes moeurs que ceux du tems de
Charlemagne. Lorsqu’on dit qu’il y a eu un monde innombrable à la
promenade, il ne faut pas prendre cela à la rigueur, car on peut les
compter. J’ai passé la nuit, dis-je à quelqu’un. Il pourrait répondre,
Et moi aussi, et tout le monde: Et nous sommes arrivés au lendemain.
Mais c’ést qu’on sous-entend sans me coucher. Lorsqu’on me dit à la
porte d’une maison, “Monsieur n’y ést pas,” il faut entendre cela comme
un réfus honnête de me voir. Quelques-uns considèrent cela comme une
mensonge: Il me paraît qu’ils ont bien Edition: current; Page: [214]
tort: Une mensonge ést ce qui trompe: Or cette manière de parler ést
convenue dans la société pour dire qu’on ést occupé, qu’on ne peut pas
recevoir les visites. On va voir quelqu’un au moment qu’on sait qu’il
n’ést pas chez lui: Le lendemain on le rencontre, on a eu le plaisir
d’aller chez lui la veille, et on a été au désespoir de ne pas l’y
trouver. Nous disons communément, l’or ést jaune; à la rigueur il
faudrait dire que l’or à la qualité de nous donner l’idée de jaune: Car
demandez à un aveugle ce que c’est que le jaune; il ne pourra rien dire.
Je ne parle pas des locutions des poètes, car tout le monde sait qu’il
ne faut pas les prendre à la rigueur.

En comparant les propositions entr’elles, on peut en déduire d’autres,
qui étaient à la vérité implicitement contenues dans les premières, mais
qui avaient cependant besoin d’un certain art pour les faire ressortir.
Cet art ést la Dialectique, ou l’art de raisonner. Il a sa source dans
la faiblesse de notre esprit, qui n’aperçoit pas tous les rapports des
idées à une seule vue: Nous sommes obligés d’établir des intermédiaires
pour rapprocher l’une de l’autre deux idées très disparables. On peut se
servir ici d’une comparaison physique. Si nous étions assez hauts nous
n’aurions pas besoin d’échelle ni d’escalier pour monter: mais ce que
nous ne pouvons pas faire en grand à une fois, nous tâchons de faire à
plusieurs fois en petit, par le moyen des échelles. Les idées
intermédiaires sont comme les échellons: et par leur moyen les esprits
les plus médiocres parviennent à monter des connaissances communes à
tous les hommes, à des vérités qui paraissent trop éloignées pour qu’on
eût pu les conclure des autres. Voici un exemple de raisonnement. Je
veux prouver que quelques bons écrivains ne sont pas de vrais
philosophes. Je ne saisis pas d’abord des rapports ni des différences
très frappantes entre les idées qui forment les termes de la
proposition. Je me sers des intermédiaires, homme raisonnable,
enthousiaste, et passionné, de la manière que voici:

-   

    Tout vrai philosophe ést
-   

    raisonnable.
-   

    Nul homme raisonnable n’ést
-   

    passionné.
-   

    Tout enthousiaste ést
-   

    passionné.

-   

    Quelques bons écrivains sont
-   

    enthousiastes.
-   

    Donc Quelques bons écrivains
-   

    ne sont pas de vrais
-   

    philosophes.

On peut décomposer cette suite de raisonnemens en d’autres plus courts
qui ne contiendrait que deux idées comparées par le moyen d’une autre
idée de cette manière:

-   

    Tout vrai philosophe ést
-   

    raisonnable.
-   

    Nul homme raisonnable
-   

    n’ést passionné.
-   

    Edition: current; Page: [215]
-   

    Donc, nul vrai philosophe
-   

    n’ést passionné.

-   

    Nul vrai philosophe n’ést
-   

    passionné.
-   

    Tout enthousiaste ést
-   

    passionné.
-   

    Donc, nul enthousiaste n’ést
-   

    vrai philosophe.

-   

    Nul enthousiaste n’ést vrai
-   

    philosophe.
-   

    Quelques bons écrivains sont
-   

    enthousiastes.
-   

    Donc, quelques bons écrivains
-   

    ne sont pas de vrais
-   

    philosophes.

Ces comparaisons de deux idées par le moyen d’une autre idée ést appelée
syllogisme.

Mais il faut que l’échelle soit bien construite, pour que je ne cause
aucun risque en la montant, et bien posée, pour que j’arrive en le
montant, au lieu où je veux aller. De même il faut des règles pour le
syllogisme. Ces règles ont été pour la première fois signalées par
Aristote:2 Elles ont depuis occupé Gallien,3 Gassendi,4 MM de Port
Royal,5 et Euler.6 Les métaphysiciens modernes parlent ordinairement de
ces règles avec une sorte de dédain. Condillac dans un Petit Traité de
Logique dit dans une note, “Je me rappelle qu’on m’a enseigné au collège
qu’on comparait deux idées par le moyen d’une troisième: qu’on concluait
que l’idée A convient à l’idée B parceque l’une et l’autre convient à
l’idée C: On ne verra rien de tout cela dans ce livre.”7 Et que
verra-t-on donc? Depuis que l’homme a raisonné sur la terre, il ést
certain qu’il n’a jamais raisonné que de cette manière. Et si l’on peut
reprocher à Aristote de s’être trop attaché au mécanisme du
raisonnement, s’ensuit-il delà qu’il n’y faut rien donner? Nous avons
déjà dit que plus on peut reduire d’opérations de l’esprit à un pur
mécanisme, mieux cela va, car nous ne pouvons jamais être sûrs que du
résultat d’une opération mécanique.

L’art de la Dialectique consiste donc à conclure la rélation entre deux
idées de celle de chacune de ces deux avec une idée intermédiaire. Si
toutes les trois propositions sont simples, le syllogisme ést dit
simple: Si une quelconque d’entr’elles ést compliquée, le syllogisme ést
compliqué. Nous ne nous occuperons d’abord que des syllogismes simples.

Edition: current; Page: [216]
Des trois propositions qui forment un syllogisme, les deux desquelles on
conclut la troisième sont appelées du nom des premisses: la troisième
ést la conclusion. Les prémisses contiennent toutes deux le terme moyen,
ou idée intermédiaire: Celle des deux qui contient l’attribut de la
conclusion, que nous pouvons appeler grand terme du syllogisme, ést
appelée proposition majeure, et celle qui contient le sujet de la
conclusion, ou le petit terme du syllogisme, ést la proposition mineure.
On énonce, dans la Logique, la proposition Majeure la première, puis la
mineure et enfin la conclusion: mais dans le langage ordinaire on les
arrange comme on le veut.

Un syllogisme ést exacte et régulier, si la conclusion ést une suite
rigoureuse des premisses: il ést vicieux, si les premisses ne sont d’une
nature à donner aucune conclusion, ou du moins si celle qu’on a tirée
n’ést pas celle qu’on doit tirer. La vérité ou la fausseté des premisses
ne fait rien à l’exactitude du syllogisme. Montpellier ést en France,
Languedoc ést en France, donc Montpellier ést en Languedoc. Voilà trois
propositions bien vraies, cependant le syllogisme ést vicieux: il ne
s’ensuit pas que Montpellier soit en Languedoc, parce qu’il ést en
France aussi bien que le Languedoc ést en France: car on pourrait dire
autant de la ville de Lyon, qui n’ést pourtant pas en Languedoc. Le
Château d’Eau du Peyrou ést dans la lune, La lune ést dans ma poche,
Donc le Château d’Eau du Peyrou ést dans ma poche. Ces trois
propositions sont fausses, cependant le syllogisme ést exacte, car si
l’on admet les prémisses, il faut nécessairement admettre la conclusion.

On a classé les syllogismes selon leur mode, c’ést-à-dire, selon la
quantité et la qualité des propositions. Deux syllogismes sont censés de
même mode lorsque les deux prémisses et la conclusion sont de même
qualité et de même quantité dans les deux syllogismes. Comme chaque
proposition peut varier de quatre manières possibles on aura 64 modes.
De tous ceux-là il y en a bien qui sont vicieux.

On a aussi classé les syllogismes selon leur figure, c.à.d. selon la
place que tient le terme moyen dans les deux prémisses. Si ce terme ést
sujet dans la Majeure, et attribut dans la Mineure, la proposition ést
censé de la 1re figure: s’il ést attribut dans la Majeure et sujet dans
la Mineure, elle ést de la 2de: s’il ést attribut dans toutes les deux
elle ést dite de la 3me figure: enfin s’il ést sujet dans toutes les
deux, elle ést de la quatrième.

En combinant chacune de ces quatre figures avec chacune des 64 modes on
a 256 différentes espèces de syllogisme. Mais de toutes celles-ci il n’y
a que 24 qui ne soient pas vicieuses. Pour les déterminer Aristote a
réjeté toutes les autres espèces par des règles, et a conclu delà que
ces 24 sont bonnes:8 mais il ést vrai que cette manière de raisonner ést
peu exacte, car on ne peut pas conclure que puisque les autres sont
vicieuses, celles-ci sont bonnes. Euler a pêché du coté opposé: Il a
établi des règles auxquelles il a trouvé que ces 24 espèces sont
conformes, et il a Edition: current; Page: [217] établi ceux-là en
rejetant les autres: Mais il ést évident que pour constater les
résultats il faut chercher si les règles d’exclusion sont nécessaires,
et en même tems suffisantes.


24ME LEÇON

nous avons vu que les deux termes d’une proposition peuvent avoir
entr’elles cinq rélations différentes. Elles peuvent être entièrement
hors l’un de l’autre, ou dans le cas H: ils peuvent avoir une partie
commune, ou être dans le cas X: ils peuvent être identiques, ou dans le
cas I: le petit terme peut être contenu dans le grand, cas que nous
avons réprésenté par la lettre C; ou le grand peut être contenu dans le
petit, ils sont alors dans le cas reverse-cUC.

Examinons maintenant quelles peuvent être les rélations des idées dans
les trois propositions d’un syllogisme.—D’abord, les idées peuvent être,
dans la conclusion, dans un quelconque des cinq cas: ou pour le dire
d’une autre manière, le grand terme et le petit terme peuvent être dans
le cas H, dans le cas X, etc. Réprésentons par deux lettres combinées le
syllogisme dans lequel la rélation des termes des deux premisses serait
réprésentée par ces mêmes lettres séparées l’une de l’autre. Ainsi si le
terme moyen et le grand terme sont dans le cas H, et que le terme moyen
et le petit terme sont dans le cas X, réprésentons le syllogisme par HX,
et ainsi de suite. Il faut ajouter à chacune de ces combinaisons de
lettres une troisième lettre pour réprésenter la rélation des formes de
la conclusion.

Supposons d’abord que le grand et le petit terme sont dans le cas H.
Puis-je avoir un moyen terme qui soit hors de tous les deux?
Certainement, comme dans la figure. Si P et G sont hors l’un de l’autre,
puis-je avoir un moyen terme qui soit hors de P et qui ait une partie
commune avec G? Certainement. Qui soit hors de G et qui ait une partie
commune avec P? De même. Donc les formes HH, HX, XH, peuvent être admis,
en sousentendant toujours que P et G soient dans le cas H. (Il faut
ajouter la lettre H à ces deux lettres.) Enfin si P et G sont hors l’un
de l’autre, puis-je trouver un terme moyen qui soit dans le cas I avec
tous les deux? Non: il faut donc rejeter le cas II. En allant de cette
manière on trouve enfin 54 formes: comme dans le tableau suivant.

[lf0223-26_figure_003.jpg]

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------
  HH, HX, HI, HC, Hreverse-cUC, XH, XX, XC, IH, CH, reverse-cUCH, reverse-cUCX, reverse-cUCC,                                            H
  HH, HX, Hreverse-cUC, XH, XX, XI, XC, Xreverse-cUC, IX, CH, CX, Creverse-cUC, reverse-cUCX, reverse-cUCC                               X
  HH, XX, II, CC, reverse-cUCreverse-cUC,                                                                                                I
  HH, XH, XX, XC, IC, CH, CX, CI, CC, Creverse-cUC, reverse-cUCC                                                                         C
  HH, HX, Hreverse-cUC, XX, Xreverse-cUC, Ireverse-cUC, Creverse-cUC, reverse-cUCX, reverse-cUCI, reverse-cUCC, reverse-cUCreverse-cUC   reverse-cUC
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------

J’emploie ici le signe C pour dénoter que dans la Majeure, le grand
terme renferme le moyen, ou que dans la Mineure, le moyen renferme le
petit. La lettre reverse-cUC Edition: current; Page: [218] indique au
contraire que le moyen terme renferme le grand, ou que le petit renferme
le moyen.—Revenons maintenant à notre ancien tableau de la rélation qui
existe entre les termes des propositions universelles affirmatives,
universelles négatives, etc. Nous avons trouvé que ces rélations sont

  --------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- -------------
  Dans la proposition   A,             I,   C    
  Dans                  N,        H              
  Dans                  a    X,        I,   C,   reverse-cUC
  Dans                  n    X,   H,             reverse-cUC
  --------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- -------------

Il s’agit de trouver quelles sont les rélations qui peuvent exister
entre le moyen terme d’un syllogisme et les deux autres, pour que la
conclusion soit universelle affirmative. Il suffit et il ést nécessaire
pour cela que le grand et le petit terme soient l’un à l’autre dans le
cas I ou dans le cas C: Pour donc que la conclusion soit universelle et
affirmative il faut que les termes aient dans les prémisses les
rélations qui se trouvent sous I et C mais qui ne se trouvent sous aucun
autre des cinq cas. On trouve ainsi,

II, CC, IC, CI
donnent A
HI, HC, IH, reverse-cUCH
donnent N
XI, Xreverse-cUC, IX, CX, Creverse-cUC, II, CC, reverse-cUCreverse-cUC,
IC, CI, Ireverse-cUC, reverse-cUCI
donnent a
HX, HI, HC, Hreverse-cUC, IH, reverse-cUCH, reverse-cUCX, XI,
Ireverse-cUC, reverse-cUCI
donnent n

On peut déterminer de cette manière quelles seront la quantité et la
qualité de la conclusion, si l’on connaît celles des prémisses.
Supposons que la majeure ést universelle négative et la mineure
particulière affirmative, et que par conséquent nous ayons Na: le moyen
terme et le grand terme sont donc dans le cas H, le moyen et le petit
terme sont dans un des quatre cas X, I, C, reverse-cUC. En combinant
nous aurons les quatre formes de syllogismes HX, HI, HC, Hreverse-cUC,
dont un quelconque répond à Na. Mais ces quatre ne se trouvent réunis
que sous la lettre n: donc la conclusion sera particulière négative, et
le syllogisme sera Nan.

De cette manière on a trouvé que de toutes les formes de syllogismes il
n’y a de bons que les vingt-quatre qui suivent:

-   

    1re fig. AAA, NAN, AAa, Aaa, NAn, Nan
-   

    2de fig. reverse-aUCreverse-nUCN, reverse-aUCreverse-aUCa,
    reverse-areverse-aUCa, reverse-nUCreverse-aUCn,
    reverse-aUCreverse-nUCn, reverse-nUCreverse-an
-   

    3me fig. reverse-nUCAN, reverse-aUCNN, reverse-aUCNn, reverse-aUCnn,
    reverse-nUCAn, reverse-nUCan
-   

    4me fig. Areverse-aUCa, areverse-aUCa, Areverse-aa, Nreverse-aUCn,
    nreverse-aUCn, Nreverse-an

J’ai réprésenté par des lettres renversées celles dans lesquelles le
moyen terme devient sujet et le petit terme attribut, ou le moyen terme
attribut et le grand terme sujet.

Dans la plupart des livres de Logique on ne trouve que dix neuf formes
régulières: c’ést que ces auteurs n’admettent pas celles où, comme dans
AAa, la Edition: current; Page: [219] conclusion n’ést que particulière,
tandis qu’on peut avec autant de régularité déduire l’universelle, par
la forme AAA. Cependant il ést clair que celles-là sont des formes
distinctes: Et les logiciens qui les ont réjetées ont d’autant plus de
tort, qu’ils admettent d’autres formes bien plus équivalentes que
celles-là, et dans lesquelles en effet il suffit de renverser l’une des
prémisses pour changer la forme du syllogisme.

Pour éviter la nécessité de retenir ces 24 formes dans la mémoire, on a
cherché d’en déduire des principes généraux, qui soient en même tems
nécessaires et suffisants, c’ést à dire qu’ils rejettent toutes les
formes excepté ces 24, et qu’ils ne rejettent pas celles-là. On ést
tombé sur les règles suivantes:

1° Une seule au plus des deux premisses peut être négative: et si l’une
des deux l’ést, la conclusion ést aussi négative.

2° Une seule au plus des deux premisses peut être particulière: et si
l’une des deux l’ést, la conclusion ést aussi particulière.—Les anciens
Logiciens ont exprimé ces deux règles par celle-ci; que la Conclusion
suit toujours le parti le plus faible.—

On ést convenu apparemment de considérer les propositions négatives
comme inférieures en mérite aux propositions affirmatives, et les
propositions particulières comme inférieures en mérite aux propositions
universelles.

3° Si la Majeure ést universelle, il faut que la Mineure ést
affirmative.

4° Deux premisses affirmatives ne peuvent pas donner une conclusion
négative.

Il y a ensuite une autre règle pour chacune des quatre figures.

5° Dans le 1re figure, il faut que la Majeure soit universelle, et que
la Mineure soit affirmative.

6° Dans la 2de figure, si la Majeure ést affirmative, il faut que la
Mineure soit universelle: Si l’une des deux prémisses ést négative, il
faut que la Majeure soit universelle: Si la Mineure ést affirmative, la
conclusion ést particulière.

7° Dans la 3me figure, il faut que la Majeure soit universelle, et que
la Conclusion soit négative.

8° Dans la 4me figure, il faut que la Mineure soit affirmative et que la
Conclusion soit particulière.

On peut observer que toutes les formes peuvent se réduire à la 1re
figure. Car on peut renverser les propositions universelles négatives et
Particulières affirmatives: Si la conclusion ést dans l’un de ces cas on
peut transposer la Majeure et la Mineure: Si la conclusion ést
particulière elle ést renfermée dans l’universelle, etc. Les règles de
cette transformation sont appelées règles de la réduction des
syllogismes. Cette réduction ést quelquefois utile, parceque la
conséquence ést plus claire aux yeux ordinaires lorsqu’on se sert de la
1re figure. Même on pourrait ramener toutes les formes à la première, en
substituant des termes négatifs au lieu de positifs etc. en changeant
par exemple la proposition Nul homme n’ést immortel en Tout homme ést
mortel, et ainsi de suite.

Les anciens logiciens ont inventé des mots baroques à trois syllabes
pour se Edition: current; Page: [220] rappeler des 24 formes; dans ces
mots les voyelles a, e, i, o réprésentaient la quantité et la qualité
des trois propositions, et les consonnes, dans les noms des syllogismes
des trois dernières figures, réprésentaient à quel mode de la lre figure
ils peuvent être ramenés, et comment il faut s’y prendre pour effectuer
la transformation. On avait ensuite liés ensemble ces mots par quatre
vers hexamètres pour aider à la mémoire:

-   

    Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio; Baralipton,
-   

    Celantes, Dabitis, Fapesmo, Frisesomorum.
-   

    Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco: Darapti,
-   

    Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison

J’ajouterai qu’un syllogisme peut être matérialement ou formalement
faux. Si les premisses sont fausses il ést dit matérialement faux; si la
conclusion n’ést pas une conséquence forcée des premisses le syllogisme
ést formellement faux. Il ést évident qu’un syllogisme peut être faux en
même tems par la forme et par la matière. Si donc vous voulez combattre
un syllogisme, il suffit de nier la conséquence: ou bien si vous pouvez
nier l’une des prémisses: votre adversaire sera obligé de la démontrer
par le moyen d’un autre syllogisme. Si vous ne pouvez pas nier l’une des
prémisses, il suffit de la révoquer en doute: ou bien tâcher de faire un
syllogisme correcte à conclusion contradictoire. Voilà comme on
argumentait autrefois dans les Ecoles. Aujourd’hui on cache l’art par le
moyen du langage: mais celui qui argumenterait d’une manière différente
n’argumenterait jamais bien.


25ME LEÇON

messrs de port royal, qui ont traité toutes les règles de la Logique
avec beaucoup d’éxactitude, croyant pourtant qu’il serait difficile de
les retenir, ont voulu trouver une seule règle qui les remplacerait
toutes.1 Ils ont dit qu’un Syllogisme ést bon si la Majeure renferme
implicitement la Conclusion: et que la Mineure n’y ést que pour indiquer
qu’elle le renferme en effet. Ainsi dans le syllogisme

-   

    Tout M ést G,
-   

    Or tout P ést M,
-   

    Donc tout P ést G

la proposition tout M ést G renferme implicitement celle-ci Tout P ést
G, puisque P fait partie de M. Mais cette règle, comme toutes les règles
trop concises, ést facile à retenir, mais difficile à appliquer. [ ]2 a
regardé les premisses comme deux équations où il faut éliminer le moyen
terme, en prenant sa valeur dans l’une, et en Edition: current; Page:
[221] la substituant dans l’autre. Lorsqu’on dit Tout M ést G, on veut
dire que tout M ést quelque G: en substituant cette valeur de M dans
l’équation Tout P ést M on trouve, Tout P ést quelque G, ou tout P ést
G.

Si je veux prouver telle ou telle proposition, il me faut chercher un
moyen terme. Les anciens logiciens ont donné des lieux logiques pour le
chercher, comme on a donné des lieux oratoires dans la Rhétorique: mais
celui qui pour trouver un argument, ést obligé de recourir aux lieux
logiques ne fera pas de meilleurs argumens que les vers d’un poète qui
ést obligé de chercher dans un dictionnaire de rime. Je me contenterai
donc d’indiquer les conditions que ce moyen terme doit remplir.

Pour le premier mode il faut que M contienne P et soit contenu dans G.
Ainsi pour démontrer que Tout avare ést malheureux, je me sers du moyen
terme homme inquiet, qui contient avare, car il ést certain que tout
avare ést inquiet, et qui ést contenu dans l’idée de malheureux, car
tout homme inquiet ést malheureux. Donc j’ai le syllogisme

-   

    Tout homme inquiet ést malheureux,
-   

    Or tout avare ést homme inquiet,
-   

    Donc tout avare ést malheureux.

Dans le deuxième mode il faut que M contienne P et soit étranger à G.
Pour démontrer que nul animal n’ést machine, je me sers de l’intermède
être sensible, qui contient animal, mais qui ést étranger à machine.

-   

    Nul être sensible n’ést machine,
-   

    Or tout animal ést un être sensible,
-   

    Donc nul animal n’ést machine.

Dans le troisième mode, il faut que M ait au moins une partie commune
avec P, et soit contenu dans G. Ainsi pour prouver que quelques poisons
sont utiles, j’emploie l’idée de médicament, qui a une partie commune
avec poison, et qui ést contenu dans utile.

-   

    Tout médicament est utile,
-   

    Or quelques poisons sont médicamens,
-   

    Donc quelques poisons sont utiles.

Dans le quatrième mode il faut que M ait au moins une partie commune
avec P, et soit étranger à G. Pour démontrer que quelques marchands ne
sont point estimable, je fais usage de l’intermède fripon, qui
malheureusement a une partie commune avec l’idée de marchand, mais qui
ést étranger à celle d’homme estimable.

-   

    Nul fripon n’ést homme estimable,
-   

    Or quelques marchands sont fripons,
-   

    Donc quelques marchands ne sont pas des hommes estimables.

Edition: current; Page: [222]
Dans l’emploi des règles des syllogismes, il y a deux abus à craindre:
En se méprenant sur l’application, on pouvait rejeter un bon syllogisme
qui a l’apparence d’être vicieux, ou l’on pourrait admettre un vicieux
qui paraît entrer dans une des formes admises. Je m’expliquerai par des
exemples.

-   

    Le lion rugit,
-   

    Or le lion ést une constellation céleste,
-   

    Donc une constellation céleste rugit.

Ce syllogisme paraît bon, mais il ést véritablement vicieux: car il y a
quatre termes au lieu de trois; le mot lion n’ayant pas la même
signification dans la Majeure et dans la Mineure: Donc il n’y a pas
comparaison de deux idées à une troisième.

-   

    Nous devons aimer nos ennemis,
-   

    Or les Espagnols ne sont pas nos ennemis,
-   

    Donc nous ne devons pas aimer les Espagnols.

Ce syllogisme, qui paraît bon, n’ést pas correctement énoncé. Il fallait
dire

-   

    Nos ennemis sont devant être aimés par nous,
-   

    Or les Espagnols ne sont pas nos ennemis,
-   

    Donc les Espagnols ne sont pas devant être aimés par nous:

syllogisme de la première figure à Mineure négative, et par conséquent
vicieux.

-   

    Les filous sont adroits,
-   

    Or les lois punissent les filous,
-   

    Donc les lois punissent les gens adroits:

syllogisme qui paraît de la première figure, devrait être énoncé comme
il suit.

-   

    Les filous sont adroits,
-   

    Or les filous sont punis par les lois,
-   

    Donc les gens adroits sont punis par les lois:

syllogisme de la troisième figure à conclusion universelle, ce qui n’ést
par permis.

-   

    Ce qui ne sent pas ne pense pas,
-   

    Or nulle pierre ne sent,
-   

    Donc nulle pierre ne pense.

Ce syllogisme, quoiqu’il porte la conviction dans les esprits de tous
les gens raisonnables, paraît pourtant pêcher contre la règle qu’il ne
faut pas que les prémisses soient toutes les deux négatives. Mais on
remedie à cette difficulté en le mettant sous cette forme,

-   

    Nul être insensible ne pense,
-   

    Or toute pierre ést un être insensible,
-   

    Donc nul pierre ne pense:

Edition: current; Page: [223]
syllogisme régulier de la première figure.

-   

    La seule vertu ést estimable,
-   

    Or la temérité n’ést point vertu,
-   

    Donc la temérité n’ést point estimable.

Ce syllogisme paraît être de la première figure à Mineure négative, et
par conséquent vicieux: mais lorsqu’on le tourne

-   

    Nul vice n’ést estimable,
-   

    Or la temérité ést vice,
-   

    Donc la temérité n’ést point estimable,

on ést convaincu de la régularité du syllogisme.

-   

    La lumière des planètes ne leur ést point propre,
-   

    Or Saturne ést planète,
-   

    Donc la lumière de Saturne ne lui ést point propre.

Ce syllogisme paraît n’appartenir à aucune de nos formes. Mais lorsqu’on
dit,

-   

    Les planètes n’ont point de lumière propre,
-   

    Or Saturne ést planète,
-   

    Donc Saturne n’a point de lumière propre,

on voit la régularité du raisonnement.

On a établi une distinction entre les paralogismes et les sophismes: qui
pourtant sont les mêmes dans le fond, mais qui diffèrent dans
l’intention de celui qui parle: Un faux raisonnement ést un paralogisme
si celui qui le débite y croit sincèrement dans soi-même: mais s’il
débite ce qu’il sait n’être point soutenable, dans l’espérance de
tromper son adversaire, il fait un sophisme.

Je passe aux syllogismes compliqués. Il ést facile de voir que ceux-ci
sont innombrables. Je me contenterai de citer des exemples de
quelques-uns les plus importants.

Un syllogisme ést complexe lorsque la Majeure ést une proposition
complexe:

-   

    La raison nous dit que la vertu ést estimable,
-   

    Or la modération ést une vertu,
-   

    Donc la modération ést estimable.

Un syllogisme ést disjonctif si la Majeure ést une proposition
disjonctive dont on affirme un membre, et nie l’autre. En voici un
exemple.

-   

    La conviction, ou l’esprit de parti, peuvent seul faire déclamer
    contre les sciences,
-   

    Ce n’ést point la conviction:
-   

    Donc c’ést l’esprit de parti.

Un syllogisme conjonctif ést lorsque la Majeure ést une proposition
conjonctive:

Edition: current; Page: [224]
-   

    On ne saurait être à la fois réligieux et superstitieux,
-   

    Louis XI fut superstitieux,
-   

    Donc il ne fut point réligieux.

Voici un exemple du syllogisme conditionel, qui ést très employé dans le
raisonnement:

-   

    Si le mouvement est rectiligne, les planètes ne peuvent circuler
    autour du soleil que par une force qui les attire vers cet astre,
-   

    Or le mouvement ést rectiligne,
-   

    Donc les planètes ne circulent autour du soleil que par une force
    qui les attire vers cet astre.

On pourrait de même nier le conséquent et en conclure la vérité de
l’Antécédente:

-   

    Si les bêtes sont des machines, elles ne sentent pas,
-   

    Or les bêtes sentent,
-   

    Donc ce ne sont pas des machines.

Enfin, le syllogisme exclusif ést celui dont la Majeure ést une
proposition exclusive.

-   

    Le vice seul ést méprisable,
-   

    Or la pauvreté n’ést point vice,
-   

    Donc la pauvreté n’ést point méprisable.

Je passe à plusieurs autres formes de raisonnement, qui peuvent être
ordinairement ramenées au syllogisme, mais dont on fait très fréquent
usage.

Lorsqu’on entasse une proposition sur une autre, en liant à une idée
intermédiaire une des deux idées qu’on veut comparer, en liant cet
intermède à un autre intermède, et enfin le dernier intermède à l’autre
idée qu’on veut comparer à la première, on fait un sorite. Cette forme
de raisonnement ést très employée dans les Mathématiques. J’en ai donné
un exemple dans une leçon précédente. Voulant prouver que quelques bons
écrivains ne sont pas de vrais philosophes, j’ai fait le sorite suivant

-   

    Quelques bons écrivains sont enthousiastes,
-   

    Tout enthousiaste ést passionné,
-   

    Nul homme raisonnable n’ést passionné,
-   

    Tout vrai philosophe ést raisonnable,
-   

    Donc quelques bons écrivains ne sont pas de vrais philosophes.

Il ést évident que les sorites sont des abrégés de syllogismes: qu’on
pourrait les décomposer en syllogismes, comme nous l’avons déjà vu. Il
faut aussi observer Edition: current; Page: [225] qu’il ne saurait y
avoir dans un bon sorite, deux antécédens négatifs, ou deux
particuliers: car si cela était, on tomberait nécessairement sur un
syllogisme où les deux prémisses seraient toutes deux négatives, ou
toutes deux particulières. Mais ces conditions, quoique nécessaires, ne
sont pas suffisantes, car un sorite peut fort bien être mauvais sans
avoir deux antécédens particuliers ou négatifs.

Aussi faut-il que les antécédens soient rigoureusement vrais: car la
moindre erreur pourrait mener à une conclusion tout à fait fausse,
surtout si les Antécédens sont un peu nombreux. On dit souvent que
lorsqu’on dîne, quand il y a pour trois il y a pour quatre: proposition
qui n’ést pas rigoureusement vraie, mais qui en approche de beaucoup. A
plus forte raison, quand il y a pour quatre il y a pour cinq: quand il y
a pour cinq il y a pour six, etc. et enfin on serait conduit à la
conclusion que lorsqu’il y a pour trois il y a pour cent.

L’enthymème ést un syllogisme tronqué, où l’on sousentend, pour la
brieveté, une des prémisses, qu’on suppose être suffisamment connue. Je
ne puis citer un exemple plus célèbre que celui de Descartes. Je pense,
donc je suis:3 il sousentend ici la Majeure du syllogisme, Tout ce qui
pense, existe. Mais souvent les écrivains cachent, en se servant de
l’enthymème, l’impossibilité de trouver leur seconde prémisse. Ainsi
lorsqu’on dit Le soleil a toujours brillé, donc il brillera toujours. Où
chercher la Majeure de ce syllogisme? Ce qui a toujours été, sera
toujours, proposition loin d’être démontrée.

La dilemme ést un raisonnement composé de quatre propositions. La
première ést une Disjonctive: dans la seconde on fait voir que si l’on
admet l’un des deux membres, il s’ensuit une certaine conséquence. Dans
la troisième on prouve que la même chose a lieu lorsqu’on admet l’autre
membre. Donc on conclut que cette conséquence ést vraie dans tous les
cas. Tout le monde connaît la célèbre dilemme du Calife Oram lorsqu’à la
prise d’Alexandrie on lui a demandé comment il fallait disposer de la
bibliothèque. Il a dit, Ou ce qui ést contenu dans cette bibliothèque
ést contenu dans l’Alcoran, ou il lui ést contraire. S’il lui est
contraire, il faut brûler les livres: s’il y ést contenu, nous n’en
avons pas besoin: Dans tout cas, il faut les brûler.4

Il y a quelques espèces de conclusion qu’on appelle conclusions
asyllogistiques, parcequ’on ne peut pas les reduire au syllogisme,
quoique d’ailleurs elles soient parfaitement convaincantes. Telle ést la
conclusion de la proposition Particulière lorsqu’on connaît
l’Universelle à laquelle elle appartient: de la Converse d’une
proposition quelconque lorsqu’on connaît la proposition, etc.

On a bien dit qu’il n’y a qu’une manière de bien raisonner, mais que les
manières Edition: current; Page: [226] de mal raisonner sont
innombrables. Il serait impossible de les étudier toutes: cependant les
logiciens en ont vu certaines qui sont plus communes que les autres, et
les ont signalé particulièrement. Ces manières de mal raisonner nous
occupera dans la prochaine séance.


26ME LEÇON

dans les séances précédentes, j’ai tâché d’enseigner la manière de bien
raisonner: je vais, dans celle-ci, indiquer les principales manières de
faire un faux raisonnement, afin que vous ne soyez pas trompés par des
argumens fallaces.

Une des faux raisonnemens les plus communs ést celui de confondre deux
choses distinctes, et de supposer que l’adversaire affirme de l’une ce
qu’il n’affirme que de l’autre. C’est par un mépris de cette nature
qu’on dispute souvent sur le mérite comparatif de la prose et de la
poésie, en confondant la poésie avec la versification. Ainsi lorsqu’on
dit que la versification gêne le talent de l’écrivain, quelqu’un s’écrie
“Vous êtes donc ennemi des belles images” etc. etc. Point du tout: la
poésie et la versification ne sont pas inséparables. Dans “le poème des
Racines Grecques” il y a de la versification sans poésie;1 dans le
Telémaque il y a beaucoup de bonne poésie sans versification.2 On a
aussi confondu la religion avec la morale: et le clergé avec l’église,
car, a-t-on dit “vous voulez ôter les biens des réligieux, donc vous
voulez ôter ce qui appartient à l’église, donc vous êtes impie;” mais on
ne réfléchissait pas que si l’on veut appeler le clergé les réligieux,
ôter leurs biens n’ést pas plus pour cela ôter ceux de l’église.

L’erreur appelée de composition, ou de fausse division, ést aussi très
commune. C’ést celle de conclure du tout ce qui n’ést vrai que d’une
partie, ou de conclure d’une partie séparement ce qui n’ést vrai que de
toutes les parties ensemble. Par exemple

-   

    Les Apôtres étaient douze pauvres pêcheurs,
-   

    or St. Pierre était apôtre,
-   

    donc St. Pierre était douze pauvres pêcheurs.

Si l’erreur était toujours aussi manifeste que dans ce cas-ci il n’y
aurait point de danger: mais elle ést souvent mieux cachée.

Dire d’une chose en général ce qui n’ést vrai de cette chose que dans un
certain état, ou d’affirmer d’elle dans un certain état ce qui n’ést
vrai que dans un autre Edition: current; Page: [227] état, ést aussi une
erreur très commune. Ainsi on pourrait dire,

-   

    Ce que vous avez mangé aujourd’hui, vous tuâtes hier à la chasse,
-   

    Or vous avez mangé aujourd’hui une perdrix rôtie,
-   

    Donc vous tuâtes hier à la chasse une perdrix rôtie.

C’ést à cette erreur que se rapporte ce qu’on a appelé appliquer le
concret à l’abstrait. Il paraît souvent dans les discussions qu’on
considère la vérité comme étant quelque chose hors des choses vraies: la
justice, les principes également. Lorsqu’il fut question d’affranchir
nos colonies, et qu’on réprésenta le danger qu’il y aurait d’une guerre
civile entre les nègres et les blancs, un membre de la Convention
s’écria “Périssent plutôt les colonies qu’un principe.”3 Or qu’ést-ce
qu’un principe si ce n’ést une proposition générale tirée de
l’expérience et appliquée pour produire le plus haut dégré possible de
bonheur? Et si la conservation d’un principe ne pourrait arriver que par
la destruction de l’espèce humaine, ce n’ést pas un principe, ou plutôt
c’ést un principe de déstruction.

Quelquefois aussi on dit une chose sans restriction qui n’ést vrai qu’à
certains égards. De cette manière on a declamé contre les sciences
parcequ’on ést quelquefois pédant: mais si l’on proscrivait tout ce qui
ést susceptible d’abus, il n’y a rien qu’on ne proscrirait. On a voulu
proscrire sur ce principe l’instruction des femmes, parce qu’elles sont
quelquefois pédantes, et qu’elles ne voudraient pas s’occuper des soins
domestiques. Mais si l’instruction était universellement répandue parmi
les femmes, elles ne se glorifieraient pas plus pour leur savoir que
pour la possession de bras et de jambes: et si les femmes instruites
sont d’ordinaire plus pédantes que les hommes, c’ést que l’instruction
ést moins répandue parmi elles. D’ailleurs si elles étaient parfaitement
bien instruites, elles ne se réfuseraient point aux soins domestiques;
elles en sentiraient la nécessité de s’y appliquer: tout comme les
hommes les plus savans sont très souvent obligés à s’appliquer à des
choses qui n’exigent pas une intelligence égale à la sienne, mais ils en
voient la nécessité, et s’y donnent sans murmurer. Mais le pis ést qu’on
a même été au point de faire des règles générales de l’erreur dont je
viens de parler. Clairaut à 18 ans présenta à l’Académie des Sciences de
Paris un papier sur les Mathématiques qui paraissait très extraordinaire
puisqu’il aurait fort bien pu être attribué à un homme dans la plus
grande vigueur de l’âge. Ce cas a tellement frappé les membres de
l’Académie qu’ils ont demandé au Roi la permission d’admettre ce jeune
homme dans L’Académie malgré sa jeunesse.4 Si quelqu’un tirait de cette
pétition, la Edition: current; Page: [228] conclusion qu’on ne peut pas
être admis dans l’Académie à cet âge, parceque il a fallu une ordonnance
spéciale du Roi pour dispenser à la règle, cette conclusion serait bien
fondée: et dans ce sens on peut dire sans dispute que l’exception prouve
la règle. Mais de quels abus ce principe n’ést-il pas susceptible! On
pourrait prouver par là que la philosophie mène à l’incrédulité, et que
tous les philosophes sont nécessairement incrédules. Mais, dites-vous,
voilà Malbranche et tant d’autres qui ne le sont pas. Non: tant mieux;
L’exception prouve la règle. Que tous les nombres sont paires, mais le
nombre trois ne l’ést pas:—L’exception prouve la règle. Mais 5 ne l’ést
pas:—L’exception prouve la règle. Il y en a, je suis content.

Une autre source très commune de faux raisonnemens ést l’abus des
comparaisons. Les comparaisons sont utiles quelquefois pour exciter
l’attention, ou pour faire comprendre une proposition qui laissée dans
l’état abstrait, serait peut-être difficile à comprendre. Mais l’abus de
ce moyen ést très fréquent. En voulant expliquer les phénomènes de la
lumière on a comparé les molécules de lumière à une bille de billard
qu’on frappe obliquement contre le mur et qui se réfléchit en fesant
l’angle d’incidence égal à celui de réflection, loi qui ést en effet
celle de la réflexion de la lumière. Mais pour la réfraction on a trouvé
de l’embarras. Il ést vrai que si l’on tire un coup de fusil dans l’eau
la balle change de direction, mais il s’approche du perpendiculaire: au
lieu que la lumière s’en écarte. On a trouvé pourtant le moyen
d’expliquer ces faits par une comparaison. La lumière, dit-on, ést comme
un fleuve qui va plus rapidement lorsqu’il ést confiné dans un canal
plus étroit. On s’ést servi de cette comparaison pour justifier la
versification: La rime, dit-on, en resserrant l’esprit entre des bornes
plus étroites, augmente son activité. Il faut donc, si quelqu’un ne peut
pas écrire en prose, lui dire “Ecrivez en vers: votre esprit deviendra
plus actif lorsqu’il sera resserré et gêné par les rimes et par
l’obligation d’arranger les mots en vers de tel ou tel nombre de
syllabes.” Je ne veux m’en rapporter qu’aux versificateurs: Demandezleur
si la rime ne les a pas souvent forcés d’abandonner une belle pensée.—Il
paraît donc que lorsque nous marchons dans une foule nous devrions
marcher plus vîte, puisque la foule nous resserre en des bornes moins
écartés.—On a abusé la comparaison de beaucoup d’autres manières. On a
souvent dit que le chef d’un état devrait être comme un père de famille,
qu’il devrait être envers ses sujets comme un père à ses enfans. Jusque
là il n’y a rien à redire: Mais il ne faut pas pousser trop loin cette
comparaison. Un père a l’habitude de voir journellement toute sa
famille: un roi ne voit jamais qu’une petite partie de ses sujets. On
sait d’ailleurs que le père qui a dix ou douze enfans n’a pas pour
chacun une tendresse égale à celle qu’un autre a pour son fils unique:
Toutes ces circonstances considérées, il ne faut pas s’attendre à
trouver dans un roi ces entrailles de père qu’un enfant ést en droit
d’attendre de la part de celui dont il tient la vie. Aussi y a t-il de
ces pères sur la côte de Barbarie qui n’ont pas la même tendresse
paternelle pour leurs sujets qu’un vrai père en a pour ses enfans: et je
crois qu’il y a peu de nations qui voudraient donner à leur roi ce
pouvoir absolu qu’il ést juste et même nécessaire qu’un père ait sur sa
famille.

Edition: current; Page: [229]
Lorsqu’on voit que deux évènemens se succèdent ou s’accompagnent très
fréquemment, on conclut avec trop de précipitation que l’un ést cause et
l’autre effet, tandis qu’en effet celui peut être l’effet qu’on a cru la
cause, ou bien l’un et l’autre peuvent être effets d’une même cause, ou
bien encore ils peuvent ne s’accompagner que par accident. C’ést
l’erreur que les anciens Logiciens ont appelée cause non cause, et
qu’ils ont exprimée par la phrase Post hoc, ergo propter hoc. Je vois un
homme qui chancelle en marchant, je lui fais une question, et il me
répond des absurdités: cependant je ne suis pas en droit de conclure
qu’il dit des absurdités parcequ’il chancelle en marchant, car la cause
de l’un et de l’autre ést qu’il a trop bu de vin. C’ést par cette erreur
qu’on a cru que tel phénomène dans le ciel ést cause ou du moins présage
d’un évènement funeste sur la terre. C’ést ainsi qu’on a cru que les
comètes portaient malheur. Il y en a un très petit maintenant dans le
ciel, on pourrait l’interpréter comme présage du congrès de Laybach:
s’il était venu un peu plutôt il aurait pu être présage de celui de
Troppau, de Vienne, de Paris, etc.5 Et je suis convaincu que jamais
comète ne parait qui ne soit contemporain de quelqu’évènement important
dans l’Europe. Aujourd’hui peu de gens croient à l’influence des
comètes: mais il y en a beaucoup même dans la bonne société qui
s’effraient à la vue d’un verre cassé, de deux couteaux croisés, de
trois lumières, d’une salière renversée, et qui ne voudraient point
s’asseoir treizièmes à une table, ou qui du moins se trouveraient fort
mal à leur aise s’ils le fesaient, et qui peut être courraient quelque
risque d’accomplir la prédiction. Pour moi je crois que s’il y a
quatorze à table il y a plus à parier qu’un d’eux sera mort avant la fin
de l’année que lorsqu’il n’y en a que treize, et plus encore s’il y a
quinze.—Un jeune docteur ést appelé auprès d’un malade; il lui préscrit
un traitement; le malade guérit: petit mouvement de vanité: c’ést mon
traitement, dit-il, qui l’a guéri: peut être n’a-t-il fait qu’un peu
retarder la guérison. Un autre préscrit le traitement le plus
raisonnable à un malade, mais la maladie ést plus forte que la médecine,
et le malade succombe: on ne sait à qui s’y prendre, c’ést alors le
médecin qui l’a tué: autre erreur de même nature.

Un sophisme très commun ést celui qu’on a appelé ignoratio elenchi:
lorsque pour cacher la faiblesse de la proposition attaquée, on tâche à
prouver une autre qui n’ést pas contestée.

La petition de principe ést lorsqu’on demande à son adversaire
d’accorder ce qu’il s’agit de prouver. Aristote lui même, à qui nous
devons la plupart des règles de la Logique, a fait une fois la faute de
petition de principe.6 Voulant prouvé que le centre de la terre ést le
centre du monde il s’ést servi du raisonnement que les Edition: current;
Page: [230] corps pesants se dirigent au centre du monde: or ils se
dirigent vers le centre de la terre: donc le centre de la terre ést le
centre du monde. Je sais fort bien que les corps pesants se dirigent au
centre de la terre: mais comment puis-je savoir s’ils se dirigent vers
le centre de monde? Il ést bien apparent qu’Aristote a eu alors dans sa
pensée le centre de la terre, et qu’il a supposé la chose même qu’il
s’agissait de prouver: il n’était plus difficile alors de prouver,
l’ayant adoptée comme principe. Autre petition de principe, trouvée bien
communément dans les livres de la Logique: Tout effet a sa cause: Le
monde ést un effet, donc il a une cause: Que suis je si le monde ést un
effet? Qu’ést-ce qu’un effet? Le résultat d’une cause. En disant que le
monde ést un effet, ne dis-je pas tacitement qu’il a une cause? C’ést
une faute du même genre lorsqu’on définit un nom par un de ses
conjugués. “La multiplication ést l’opération de multiplier un nombre
par un autre.”—Si je savais ce que c’ést que multiplier, demanderais-je
ce que c’ést que la multiplication?

Le cercle vicieux ést lorsqu’on prouve A par B et B par A. On trouve
dans presque tous les livres de métaphysique moderne que la matière ést
méprisable, car elle ne pense pas. Un peu plus loin on trouvera qu’il
ést impossible que jamais la matière puisse penser, c’est un être trop
vil, trop méprisable.—Autrefois on reconnaissait quatre sources de
connaissance: le sentiment intime, par lequel je sais que j’existe; la
sensation; le raisonnement; et enfin les témoignages humaines: Un
métaphysicien moderne7 a renversé tout cela: il a amené tous les
argumens des Sceptiques contre le sentiment intime; tous les argumens
des Sceptiques contre les sensations, et, on peut ajouter, tous les
argumens des Sceptiques contre le raisonnement, et il a conclu enfin que
la seule source de véritables connaissances sont les témoignages
humains. Mais ces hommes qui vous indiquent les faits, d’où les
savent-ils? Il faut que ce soit ou par le sentiment intime, ou par les
sensations, ou par le raisonnement: ôtez ces trois sources de
connaissance, et il ne vous reste rien.

Une autre source fréquente d’erreur ést l’énumération incomplette.
Lavoisier conclut que tous les acides contenaient de l’oxygène:8 c’ést
qu’il ne connaissait pas beaucoup d’acides qui ne le contiennent pas.
Pour prouver l’horreur de la nature pour le vide, les anciens citaient
le phénomène que l’eau s’élève dans les pompes pour remplir le vide
formé dans l’intérieur. Ils ne savaient pas alors qu’au dessus de 32
pieds l’eau ne s’y lève plus.

Je n’ai pas besoin de vous parler d’un autre faux raisonnement qui ést
très commun, c’ést celui de commencer par dire des injures contre ceux
qui sont d’une opinion différente. J’ai lu dans le tems beaucoup de
livres sur l’éxistence de Dieu, et j’ai rémarqué qu’ils commencent
presque toujours par les mots Aveugle athée etc., etc., etc., et que ces
mots sont suivis par quelques pages d’injures. Je dirais aux auteurs de
ces livres, “N’employez pas les injures pour prouver votre conclusion,
ou bien je croirai que vous n’avez pas de meilleurs argumens.”

Edition: current; Page: [231]
Enfin on raisonne fort souvent en citant les autorités. Pour des faits,
dont on ne peut pas soi-même être témoin, il faut admettre les
autorités, et l’on ne peut pas faire autrement: mais pour des matières
de raisonnement, l’opinion d’un autre n’influerait jamais sur la mienne,
excepté que si je vois qu’un homme de beaucoup de jugement a une opinion
différente de la mienne, cela me porterait à bien examiner la question
avant de me déterminer.

J’ai tâché d’expliquer de la manière la plus courte possible, les règles
du raisonnement. Il faut s’accoutumer à l’application de ces règles, en
fesant beaucoup de lectures, surtout des lectures de plaidoyers pour et
contre sur une question de barreau, ou des oraisons dans nos chambres
délibératives, pour voir sous combien de formes une question peut être
présentée: car aussi bien dans la médecine qu’au barreau, la vie d’un
individu dépend souvent d’un raisonnement vrai ou faux.


27ME LEÇON

il en ést de nos facultés intellectuelles comme de nos facultés
physiques. De même que nous ne pouvons jamais créer de nouveaux corps,
mais seulement donner une nouvelle forme à ceux qui existent; de même
toute notre puissance à l’égard des vérités ést limitée au développement
de celles qui sont connues à tout le monde: en sorte que tout ce que
nous saurons jamais se trouve renfermé dans ce que nous savons déjà, qui
ést lui-même renfermé dans ce que tout le monde sait. Tout ce que font
certains hommes, qui ont plus de loisir que les autres, ayant aussi un
goût particulier, et peut être un peu plus de sagacité, (ce sont ceux
que nous appelons savans,) c’ést de réfléchir sur une suite d’idées et
de notions, et de leur donner tout le développement possible. Par
exemple, il n’y a personne, même le paysan le plus grossier, qui n’ait
quelques notions élémentaires sur le mouvement des astres: il sait que
dans l’hiver il n’aperçoit pas les mêmes étoiles qu’il voit dans l’été;
il sait que les rayons du soleil et de la lune entrent dans sa chambre à
des heures différentes selon la saison, etc. etc. Les savans développent
ces connaissances en inventant des instrumens pour mesurer avec
précision le mouvement des astres, et en déterminant la cause de chaque
phénomène en séparant les circonstances accessoires. De même il n’y a
personne qui ne puisse distinguer un malade de quelqu’un qui ést en
bonne santé, qui ne connaisse vaguement les symptômes de diverses
maladies, et même dans les cas ordinaires les rémèdes les plus faciles à
procurer. Les savans sont sortis de ce point, et sont parvenus, en
amplifiant ces connaissances, à former la science de la médecine telle
qu’elle ést maintenant.

Il ést donc une multitude de connaissances que tout le monde possède:
après cela les savans savent un peu plus. Mercier a dit quelque part
qu’entre Newton et le paysan le plus grossier la différence n’ést peut
être pas aussi grande qu’on le Edition: current; Page: [232] pense.1 Ici
je crois que Mercier a raison, et tout convaincu que je suis du mérite
de Newton, je crois que le paysan ferait un fort mauvais marché s’il
changeait tout ce qu’il sait pour tout ce que Newton sait de plus que
lui: car il fait grand usage des connaissances qu’il a, mais de celles
de Newton il ne pourrait en faire aucun. La science ne consiste donc
qu’à tirer de ces vérités communes à tous les hommes, le plus grand
nombre de conséquences qu’il ést possible d’en tirer.

Quelques philosophes, voyant que les enfans apprennent d’eux mêmes tant
de choses avec une facilité à peu près égale, mais qu’ensuite nos
méthodes qui tendent à augmenter leurs connaissances échouent auprès
d’un grand nombre, ont cru que nous gâtons l’ouvrage de la nature. Mais
pourquoi ne peut-on pas attribuer cette différence de facilité à
l’inégalité des esprits, dont il ést impossible de douter l’existence,
soit qu’elle ést naturelle, soit qu’elle ést produite par des causes
externes? Il faut réfléchir que les connaissances qu’acquierrent les
enfans avec tant de facilité sont celles qui sont essentielles à notre
bien être. Un enfant voit quelque chose qu’il désire, il apprend à
tendre le bras pour s’en emparer: un autre objet se présente qui n’ést
pas à la portée de son bras; il apprend à se mouvoir vers cet objet:
enfin il désire des objets qu’il lui ést impossible d’atteindre de
lui-même; il veut faire connaître son désir à ceux qu’il sait posséder
les objets, il voit que les autres ont cette faculté, par le moyen des
sons de la voix; il écoute ce qu’on dit, et apprend à parler: Il apprend
de la même manière à prendre sa nourriture, et à satisfaire à tous ses
besoins, soit de nécessité, soit de luxe. Mais à mesure qu’il acquiert
ainsi des connaissances, l’accès devient moins libre pour les autres
connaissances: l’enfant ést moins intéressé qu’auparavant à étendre ses
connaissances: il ést plus distrait par d’autres idées plus agréables:
et sans nos méthodes il s’arrêterait à ce point. La nature prend le seul
moyen possible pour ceux qui ne savent rien: mais quoiqu’on en dise, ses
soins sont très superficiels: ils ne sont que jusqu’à la satisfaction
des besoins de l’enfant. Nos méthodes en applanant les difficultés qui
se présentent à l’étude, compensent l’inégalité des esprits, et nous
trouvons en effet qu’à mesure que les méthodes sont perfectionnés,
telles connaissances deviennent le partage d’un jeune homme sorti du
collège, qui un peu plutôt auraient exigé une très grande force
d’esprit.

Il doit nécessairement y avoir des méthodes parfaites et imparfaites,
les parfaites pour les sujets qui sont susceptibles de la rigueur des
raisonnemens de la géométrie; les imparfaites pour ceux qui n’admettent
pas cette rigueur. Ce n’ést guère qu’en mathématiques qu’on peut avoir
des méthodes parfaites: Elles sont déjà moins parfaites en physique,
moins encore en médecine, et beaucoup moins dans l’administration
publique.

Il y a dans les sciences deux sortes de propositions, qui répondent aux
deux espèces d’interrogation. On peut demander à quel attribut convient
tel sujet, ou Edition: current; Page: [233] bien à quel sujet convient
tel attribut. Le théorème répond à la première question, le problème à
la seconde. Le théorème affirme que tel attribut convient à tel sujet:
il ést donc nécessairement vrai ou faux. Un problème n’ést ni l’un ni
l’autre; car il n’ést en effet qu’une interrogation quel ést le sujet à
qui convient tel attribut; la vérité et la fausseté n’appartiennent qu’à
la réponse. Les théorèmes, comme les définitions, forment un sens
parfait: mais ils en diffèrent en ce qu’il n’y paraît point de mot
nouveau qui soit sensé n’être pas connu et que la définition ést
toujours vraie, puisqu’elle ne fait que d’expliquer le sens qu’il faut
donner à un mot, tandis que le théorème, se servant de mots connus, a
besoin de démonstration pour assurer la vérité.—Dans un problème il faut
des choses inconnues, que le problème propose à trouver. Mais l’art de
résoudre un problème n’ést pas l’art de deviner; il faut donc, pour
trouver les choses inconnues, des choses connues, par le moyen
desquelles on peut parvenir à la connaissance des premières. Mais les
choses connues seraient elles-mêmes inutiles, sans quelques conditions
qui les lieraient aux inconnues. Si je dis, “J’ai pensé deux nombres:
l’un ést douze, quel ést l’autre,” il s’agit de deviner, et non de
résoudre un problème. Il faut donc dans l’énoncement d’un problème, des
choses connues et des choses inconnues. Quelquefois les données
elles-mêmes ne sont pas données explicitement: et la plus grande
difficulté d’un problème ést souvent celle de trouver les données. Si
l’on propose par exemple ce problème en politique, “Quel système
d’impôts ést le plus avantageux à l’état,” il faut trouver les données:
ce sont, la différence des frais de collection, la manière de produire
le moins possible de peine à ceux qui payent les impôts, etc. etc. car
il ést certain qu’on ést bien moins blessé par les contributions
indirectes, qu’on paie peu à peu, et sans qu’on s’en aperçoive, que si
l’on payait directement au bureau des contributions une valeur égale à
celle qu’on paie indirectement.—Souvent on prend pour solution d’un
problème la simple indication de la manière dont il faut le résoudre. Si
l’on me propose un problème en géométrie, tel que celui-ci, “Décrire un
cercle qui passe par tous points donnés,” on se contente d’indiquer la
manière de le faire. Si je vais chez un médecin pour lui demander une
consultation, il ne va pas chez le malade pour administrer les rémèdes;
il se contente de me dire ce qu’il faut faire. Cependant il faut que
l’exécution ait lieu: et si le malade se contentait de lire la
consultation, sans faire ce qu’elle ordonnait, il n’en serait pas
beaucoup mieux. Les indications qu’on donne peuvent nous tromper: On
peut indiquer des moyens qui ne suffisent pas pour la résolution du
problème; il y a donc besoin de démonstration, pour assurer la bonté des
moyens.

Les conditions d’un problème peuvent être insuffisantes pour fixer la
valeur des inconnues. Il y a alors un nombre infini de solutions, et le
problème ést dit indéterminé. Par exemple si je demande la manière de
tirer une ligne droite qui passe par un point, le problème ést tout à
fait indéterminé, car il peut y avoir une infinité de lignes droites qui
passent par le même point. Mais si je demande le moyen de faire passer
une ligne par deux points donnés, le problème ést déterminé: Edition:
current; Page: [234] et en général, un problème ést déterminé lorsqu’il
n’y a qu’une seule ou un nombre déterminé de solutions. Il peut y avoir
trop de conditions, et alors le problème ne peut être résolu que lorsque
ces conditions s’accordent entr’elles. Si par exemple on demande la
manière de remplir le trésor public sans vider la poche des
particuliers, je dirais qu’il y a trop de conditions.

Tout théorème peut être traduit en problème, si l’on tronque l’énoncé.
Par exemple le théorème que la somme de trois angles d’un triangle ést
égale à deux angles droites, peut être traduite en ce problème, “A quoi
ést égale la somme des trois angles d’un triangle?” Mais un problème ne
peut être traduit en théorème que lorsqu’on en connaît la solution.

Il y a des problèmes que nous ne pourrons jamais résoudre, car les
données ne peuvent pas nous être connues. Tel est ce problème: Quelle
ést la forme des molécules originaires des corps.


28ME LEÇON

les théorèmes qui résultent d’autres théorèmes, déjà démontrés, et qu’on
peut prouver être vrais si les autres le sont, en sont appelés les
corollaires. Je pense, donc je suis;1 ici le théorème je suis ést un
corollaire de celui-ci je pense.

Qu’ést-ce que c’ést que démontrer un théorème? C’ést le lier avec une
proposition déjà admise, par une suite d’autres propositions, de manière
que l’on puisse dire que la dernière proposition sera vraie si la
première l’ést. Il en ést de même pour la résolution d’un problème.

Mais, me dira-t-on, vous tombez dans un cercle vicieux: de même qu’on ne
peut définir tous les mots, puisqu’il faut pour cela employer d’autres
mots déjà définis, on ne peut non plus démontrer tous les théorèmes,
résoudre tous les problèmes, puis qu’on ne pourrait le faire qu’au moyen
d’autres théorèmes déjà démontrés, ceux-ci par d’autres, et ainsi de
suite. C’ést précisément ce qui arrive: mais heureusement il y a des
théorèmes qu’on admet sur leur simple énoncé, comme aussi des problèmes
dont la résolution se présente naturellement. On a donné le nom
d’axiomes à ces vérités premières, et celui de postulatum, petition, à
tous les problèmes que l’on sait resoudre naturellement. Quand je dis
que la même chose ne peut pas être et n’être pas en même tems, j’énonce
un axiome, parceque tout le monde tombe d’accord de la vérité de ce que
j’avance. Il y a deux sortes d’axiomes: axiomes à syllogismes et axiomes
à définitions. Si je dis que la France ést plus petite que l’Europe,
parceque la partie ést moindre que le tout, voilà un axiome qui a assez
la forme d’un syllogisme. Les axiomes à définitions sont ainsi conçus
que si le sens d’un seul des mots qui le forment ést inconnu, on le
devinera par le simple énoncé de l’axiome. Tels sont les suivants, Tout
effet a une cause, La Edition: current; Page: [235] partie ést moindre
que le tout. Les axiomes doivent être énoncés en termes généraux, de
manière à renfermer une infinité d’autres axiômes particuliers. La
France ést plus petite que l’Europe n’ést qu’un cas particulier de cet
axiome, La partie ést moindre que le tout.

Les axiomes sont formés de mots indéfinissables. Par conséquent, ils ne
peuvent pas se démontrer. Quelques philosophes modernes n’ont voulu
regarder comme axiôme que cette proposition, Une chose ne peut pas être
et n’être pas en même tems: Ils sont partis delà pour démontrer tous les
autres. Wolff, disciple de Leibnitz, a voulu démontrer que la partie ést
moindre que le tout, et il l’a fait avec assez peu de succès pour faire
douter de la vérité de ce principe si l’on ne savait pas d’ailleurs
qu’elle ést incontestable.2 Un axiome peut avoir besoin d’explication,
surtout quand son énoncé ést un peu long, mais il n’a jamais besoin de
démonstration. D’ailleurs, il ne faut pas démontrer les propositions
même qui sont susceptibles de démonstration, pourvu que tout le monde
les admette. On pourrait bien, par exemple, démontrer ce théorème que la
ligne droite ést le plus court chemin d’un point à un autre, mais comme
c’ést une vérité incontestable, dont personne ne peut douter, on la
regarde comme un axiome, et on ne la démontre pas ordinairement.

Dans le tems de la vogue des idées innées, les axiomes étaient regardés
comme des jugemens innés, et l’on en fesait le fondement des sciences
humaines: on croyait que c’était par les axiomes qu’on s’assurait de la
vérité des propositions particulières qui s’y trouvaient comprises. Mais
un examen plus réfléchi a prouvé qu’au contraire les axiomes en sont le
résumé, et que c’ést en réunissant ces propositions particulières,
résultats de l’observation, pour faire une proposition générale, que
nous arrivons aux axiômes. Cela ést si vrai qu’un enfant ou une personne
qui n’est pas instruite n’a aucune idée de ces propositions générales,
et que cependant elle connaît bien les cas particuliers. Demandez à une
femme de la halle si deux choses égales à une troisième sont égales
entr’elles, et elle vous dira qu’elle ne comprend rien à ces beaux
discours: mais si vous lui dites, Si deux de vos oranges pèsent chacune
autant que celle-ci, l’une pesera-t-elle autant que l’autre, et elle
vous répondra certainement oui.

En évitant l’écueil que je viens de signaler, on ést tombé, comme il
arrive souvent, dans un écueil tout opposé. Les axiômes sont aujourd’hui
en grand discrédit auprès de certains logiciens: ils disent que c’ést la
chose du monde la plus ridicule, que c’ést une simple identité, que
c’ést dire le meme ést le même. Mais s’il fallait sur cette objection
proscrire l’usage des axiomes, les sciences, et surtout celles qui
approchent le plus de la perfection, recevraient un grand échec,
puisqu’une proposition n’y peut pas être admise si elle n’ést pas une
identité. Un cercle, dit-on, ést une figure bornée par une circonférence
dont tous les points sont Edition: current; Page: [236] également
distans d’un même point, c.à.d. Une circonférence dont tous les points
sont également distans d’un même point, ést une circonférence, etc.
Toutes les propositions doivent être rejetées des sciences, qui ne
peuvent pas se réduire à des identités.—On a dit que les axiomes étaient
abstraits, qu’ils n’avaient aucune utilité qu’à cause des cas
particuliers qu’ils contenaient et qu’on pouvait se contenter de ces cas
particuliers sans charger la mémoire d’une formule générale: mais on
pourrait répéter ce que nous avons dit sur les notions abstraites: Il
n’y a pas dans la nature d’arbre général, il n’y a que des individus:
cependant on ne conteste pas l’utilité de ces notions abstraites. Ce
sont en quelque sorte des magasins où nous tirons au besoin des idées
individuelles. Il ést vrai que c’ést par les particulières que nous
arrivons aux générales: mais remarquons aussi que lorsqu’il se présente
une chose particulière moins familière, c’ést de la proposition générale
que nous tirons beaucoup des notions que nous avons sur elle.

Il faut bien se garder d’un danger qui se présente très communément.
Certains raisonneurs avancent comme des axiomes des propositions
fausses, et raisonnent ensuite bien sur de faux principes. D’Alembert
combat avec agrément cet abus des axiômes, en supposant que transporté
dans un autre planète où l’on ne connaît pas notre végétation il
demandait aux savants de ce pays-là s’il ést possible qu’un petit corps
mis en terre produise un corps vaste et élevé qui couvre de son ombre
une vaste étendue de terrain: Non, diraient-ils, le moins ne saurait
produire le plus. Croyez-vous, leur dit-il, que quelques livres d’une
certaine poudre placées sous un grand édifice puissent le renverser?
Non, disent-ils, les effets sont proportionnels aux causes.3 Tout crime
doit être imputé à celui qui en retire du profit: Voilà un de ces
axiômes ridicules: car je puis retirer du profit d’un crime que
j’ignore. Il ést vrai que lorsqu’on voit, comme dans l’Aveyron, cinq
personnes d’une même famille périr successivement dans l’espace d’un
mois, sans qu’il eût épidémie dans le lieu, et cela dans l’ordre
convenable pour que la succession arrivât à une de leurs parentes qui
les avait toutes soignées, on peut présumer que cette personne entre
pour quelque chose dans ces morts si bien arrangées: mais ce n’ést
pourtant encore qu’une présomption.—Un témoin, point de témoins, ai-je
entendu dire à un avocat dans une cour d’assises. Cependant un seul
homme digne de confiance, qui assure d’une chose probable, et qui n’a
point d’intérêt à mentir, me donne plus de croyance que cinq cents
hommes de mauvaises moeurs, et qui peuvent beaucoup gagner à dire ce
qu’ils disent; surtout s’ils disent une chose improbable, en elle-même.
On trouve jusque dans Newton des axiomes avances un peu trop hardiment.
Il dit quelque part que des effets du même genre doivent être attribués
aux mêmes causes.4 On doit à la vérité soupçonner l’existence d’une
seule cause, mais on ne peut pas l’assurer. Si on examine une pierre
fausse, on s’appercevra Edition: current; Page: [237] qu’elle présente
les propriétés du diamant, qu’elle a l’aspect brillant, qu’elle ést
transparente, qu’elle raye le verre, etc. Faut-il conclure delà que ces
deux substances sont composées des mêmes élemens chimiques?

Ce sont les philosophes de l’antiquité qui ont donné l’exemple de mettre
les axiomes en évidence: forcés par le nombre des Sceptiques et des
Sophistes dont ils étaient entourés, et qui s’amusaient à tout revoquer
en doute. Ils durent donc poser des axiomes que personne ne contestait,
et de proposition en proposition, tâcher d’amener leurs adversaires à
nier un de ces axiomes pour pouvoir leur dire, “Ou vous êtes de mauvaise
foi, ou vous n’avez pas le sens commun.” Maintenant que les sceptiques
sont plus rares, on n’ést plus si rigoureux sur l’énoncé des axiômes.

Ce que je dis des axiômes, je pourrais le dire des postulatum.


29ME LEÇON

tout l’art de nous instruire consiste à déduire de ce que nous savons,
quelque chose que nous ne savons pas encore, ou à rattacher ce que nous
apprenons, à quelque chose que nous savons déjà. Qu’ést-ce en effet que
faire une découverte? C’ést lier la proposition dont on soupçonne la
vérité, à une autre proposition, celle-ci à une autre, etc. jusqu’à ce
qu’on parvienne à la rattacher à quelque chose de connu. Qu’ést-ce que
se convaincre d’une découverte? C’ést éxaminer l’exactitude avec
laquelle toutes les propositions sont liées les unes aux autres, et voir
si d’après le rapport qu’il y a entr’elles on peut trouver de l’analogie
entre les deux extrémités de la chaîne. On arrive à ces buts, soit en
allant du connu à l’inconnu, soit en allant de l’inconnu au connu. La
première de ces manières s’appelle synthèse, ou méthode de composition;
la seconde, analyse, ou méthode de décomposition.

Outre le sens propre et le sens figuré, beaucoup de mots ont un sens
plus ou moins détourné de leur sens rigoureux. Ouvrez un dictionnaire
Latin, et vous trouverez pour un mot de cette langue plusieurs
expressions françaises, qui, quoique dérivant de la même source, n’ont
pourtant pas la même signification. Les mots analyse et synthèse sont
dans ce cas. A la rigueur analyse veut dire décomposition, et synthèse,
composition: Il ne devait donc y avoir d’analyse ni de synthèse que dans
la chimie. Un chimiste fait de la synthèse lorsqu’il combine plusieurs
élémens; il fait de l’analyse lorsqu’il sépare un mixte en ces principes
composans: Hors delà les deux mots ne devraient être employés que dans
un sens plus ou moins rapproché de celui-ci. Je veux faire un traité
d’administration publique: je trouve que le sujet peut être reduit à une
série de questions plus simples: je le reduis à ces questions, que je
considère ensuite séparément: je fais alors de l’analyse. Si au
contraire je suis amené par mon goût à traiter une suite de questions et
je m’aperçois en les étudiant qu’en liant ensemble ces matériaux je puis
faire un traité d’administration publique, je fais alors de la synthèse.
Ce Edition: current; Page: [238] sens-ci des mots analyse et synthèse
n’ést pas très éloigné de leur signification naturelle; mais on les
emploie en d’autres cas où il l’ést bien davantage. Je suppose que je
veux m’assurer si Henri quatre descend d’Hugues Capet;1 si j’examine
quels furent les fils de Hugues Capet, quels furent les enfans de ses
fils, etc. jusqu’à ce que j’arrive à Henri quatre, j’aurai fait de la
synthèse: si au contraire j’examine quel fut le père d’Henri quatre,2 et
qu’en descendant ainsi des branches aux souches j’arrivasse à Hugues
Capet, j’aurais fait une analyse, quoiqu’il n’y ait pas plus composition
de l’un côté que décomposition de l’autre: On a cependant conservé ces
dénominations vicieuses.

Le propre de la Synthèse ést de partir des principes avoués, et en les
liant successivement à d’autres propositions, de parvenir à des vérités
nouvelles. Le propre de l’Analyse ést de partir de la vérité qu’on veut
établir et en lui attachant d’autres propositions, d’arriver à quelque
chose que l’on sait déjà. L’analyse va du composé au simple, la synthèse
va du simple au composé. Dans ces deux méthodes on suit la même route,
mais en sens contraires. Par l’analyse on traduit une proposition
compliquée dans un langage plus simple, celle-ci dans un autre encore,
jusqu’à ce qu’on arrive à une vérité déjà établie. Par la synthèse on
suit la marche contraire. Ces deux méthodes n’ont de préférence l’une
sur l’autre que celle que causent les circonstances, car une vérité
pourra tout aussi bien être démontrée synthétiquement qu’analytiquement.

Il ést des cas cependant où l’une où l’autre de ces méthodes mérite la
préférence. Il faut d’abord distinguer deux cas: l’un, où n’envisageant
rien en particulier, on veut faire des découvertes nouvelles; l’autre où
l’on veut reconnaître la vérité de telle ou telle proposition en
particulier. Dans le premier cas on doit employer la synthèse; dans
l’autre cas, l’analyse. Si par exemple je veux savoir de qui descend
Henri Quatre, je ne puis pas employer la synthèse, car alors il faudrait
prendre tous les Français du tems de Hugues Capet, et reconnaître qui
furent les fils de chacun, les enfans de leur fils, etc. etc. jusqu’à
trouver Henri Quatre. Même si je suis limité à savoir si Henri Quatre
descend de Hugues Capet, il y auraient de grands inconvéniens à employer
la synthèse, car il faudrait trouver qui furent les fils d’Hugues Capet,
qui furent les enfans de chacun de ses fils, qui furent les fils de
chacun de ces enfans, cela ne finirait pas. Mais si j’emploie l’analyse,
il suffit de trouver qui fut le père d’Henri quatre, qui fut le père de
son père, etc. etc. pour voir si j’arriverai à Hugues Capet. Donc pour
confirmer la vérité d’une proposition soupçonnée d’être vraie, il faut
employer l’analyse: De même on trouvera que pour faire des découvertes,
sans aucun objet particulier, on ne doit pas employer l’analyse, car on
ne pourrait pas savoir où il fallait commencer.

Cette analyse date du tems de Platon, quoiqu’il y ait beaucoup de monde
qui la croient plus moderne. Avant Platon, les géomètres Grecs
s’occupaient des Edition: current; Page: [239] problèmes sans méthode.
Il y avait alors beaucoup plus à faire dans la géométrie qu’il n’y en a
maintenant, et les géomètres se laissaient conduire par le hasard, en
fesant des découvertes. Platon leur dit, Si vous voulez resoudre un
problème, faites en une traduction équivalente, mais plus simple,
traduisez encore cette traduction, jusqu’à ce que vous arriviez à un
problème que vous savez déjà resoudre.3

Puisque la méthode de prouver un théorème consiste à le lier par une
suite d’intermédiaires à un autre théorème déjà démontré, il se présente
une question: Faut-il établir peu d’intermédiaires, ou beaucoup? Cela
dépend de la facilité de ceux pour qui l’on écrit. On pourrait établir
tant d’intermédiaires que chaque proposition soit la suite immédiate de
la précédente: Mais ces raisonnemens seraient ennuyans pour ceux qui
sont déjà familiers avec le sujet. On pourrait d’un autre côté omettre
tant d’intermédiaires qu’il faudrait un esprit très exercé pour pouvoir
les suppléer. C’ést ce qu’a fait M. de Laplace dans sa Mécanique
Céleste, livre si difficile qu’il n’y a peut être pas douze personnes en
Europe qui le comprennent:4 Il y en a bien plus à la vérité qui ont cet
ouvrage dans leur bibliothèque, pour dire J’ai la Mécanique Céleste, et
pour faire croire qu’ils la comprennent. Mais c’ést que M. de Laplace a
écrit pour les savans. Il faut donc proportionner le nombre
d’intermédiaires à la capacité de ceux pour qui l’on écrit. Dans les
ouvrages élémentaires il ne faut rien omettre: mais comme l’étudiant
devient plus avancé, on peut en mettre de moins en moins. C’ést pour
cela que très souvent dans les ouvrages élémentaires on met plus
d’intermédiaires au commencement que vers la fin, parce que le lecteur
ést censé être plus avancé comme il s’approche plus de la fin. C’ést
donc par erreur qu’on dit que les livres écrits pour la jeunesse doivent
être courts, pour ne pas trop charger la mémoire. Si l’on veut dire
qu’ils ne doivent renfermer que peu de chose, passe: mais si l’on dit
qu’ils doivent dire beaucoup en peu de mots, c’est une erreur: car
certes on ne doit pas omettre le plus d’intermédiaires, lorsqu’on écrit
pour ceux qui peuvent le moins les suppléer.

Souvent on peut lier une proposition à une autre par plusieurs chaînes
d’intermédiaires. Dans ce cas, laquelle faut-il choisir? Il y a trois
choses à considérer. Lorsqu’il y a plusieurs routes d’un lieu à un
autre, il y en a toujours une qui ést plus courte que les autres.
Souvent on ne connaît pas la route la plus courte de toutes: car on voit
continuellement quelqu’un qui prétend avoir trouvé une manière de
démontrer un théorème plus courte que celles qu’on connaissait Edition:
current; Page: [240] auparavant. Mais il y a toujours une route la plus
courte qu’on connaisse. Il faut ensuite réfléchir quelle route ést la
plus aisée. A coup sûr quelqu’un qui serait de l’autre côté du Pic St.
Loup et qui voudrait arriver à Montpellier, n’irait pas traverser la
montagne, quoique ce fût souvent son plus court chemin. De même il faut
choisir la manière de démontrer un théorème ou de resoudre un problème,
la plus facile à comprendre. Enfin, il faut considérer par quelle route
on peut faire en passant les découvertes les plus utiles. C’ést ainsi
que font les Naturalistes en voyageant: ils ne vont pas toujours par le
chemin le plus court: ils se détournent souvent pour ramasser des objets
d’histoire naturelle. Même les voyageurs ordinaires prennent souvent le
chemin le plus long pour voir une ville, ou quelqu’autre chose digne de
leur attention.

Non seulement on peut aller d’une proposition à une autre par plusieurs
routes, mais on peut avoir plusieurs points de départ. D’Alembert a eu
l’idée d’une carte géométrique qui réprésenterait les différentes
manières de démontrer différentes propositions.5 Cette carte
réprésenterait les différentes propositions, et les différentes routes
d’une proposition à une autre.

Ce que j’ai entendu par les mots analyse et synthèse ést ce qu’on a
entendu par ces mots pendant vingt siècles. Pour faire faire un progrès
quelconque à une science, on emploie la synthèse: pour établir telle ou
telle vérité en particulier, on se sert de l’analyse. Mais les
métaphysiciens modernes, de l’école de Condillac,6 ne font plus question
que d’analyse. Ils ont été induits en erreur par un pur équivoque. Comme
on fait assez souvent usage de l’analyse dans l’algèbre, on a donné aux
méthodes algébriques le nom d’analyse: En effet, on réprésente la
proprieté de nombres qu’il s’agit de prouver, par une équation entre des
nombres connus et des nombres inconnus: on fait passer ensuite cette
équation par une suite de traductions toujours équivalentes, jusqu’à
trouver le nombre qu’on cherche. Ce procédé ést assez semblable à
l’analyse logique: mais il faut observer que dans celle-ci les équations
ne sont pas toujours équivalentes, car on déduit quelquefois le
particulier du général: aussi ne peut-on pas toujours, comme dans
l’algèbre, renverser le calcul, et prouver la vérité qu’on cherche, par
un procédé synthétique, en partant de vérités reconnues: Car quoiqu’on
puisse déduire le particulier du général, on ne peut pas déduire le
général du particulier. Condillac, qui savait assez peu les
mathématiques, et qui avait entendu parler des grands progrès que
l’Analyse (c.à.d. l’Algèbre) avait fait faire à la Géométrie, prit le
parti de vanter l’analyse au dépens de la synthèse.7

Condillac prend l’exemple d’une montre:8 il dit que pour en reconnaître
le mécanisme on la démonte et puis on remet les parties. On peut
répondre à cela, que d’abord il y a des gens assez adroits pour saisir
le mécanisme au premier coup Edition: current; Page: [241] d’oeil sans
démonter la montre. Aussi, y en a-t-il de si maladroits qu’ils n’y
comprendraient rien, quand ils l’auraient demontée et remontée mille
fois. Ensuite on peut dire que ce que Condillac appelle analyse renferme
aussi la synthèse: et il dit en effet qu’il n’y a point de véritable
analyse sans décomposition et récomposition. Alors tout se réduit à une
dispute de mot,9 et il paraît seulement que ce que nous appelons analyse
et synthèse réunies, Condillac appelle analyse. C’ést réunir sous un
même nom deux choses bien différentes, et même opposées l’une de
l’autre: c’ést comme s’il disait, Nous appelerons dorénavant monter un
escalier les deux actes de le monter et de descendre ensuite. On peut
ajouter, que la vérification par la synthèse, du résultat de l’analyse,
quoiqu’elle puisse quelquefois [être] utile dans l’exposition, n’ést
jamais nécessaire. On ést tout aussi sûr d’un résultat lorsqu’on y ést
parvenu par la méthode analytique, pourvu qu’on ait bien raisonné, que
si l’on avait employé la méthode synthétique.

“La synthèse,” dit Condillac, “cette méthode ténébreuse, qu’on appelle
méthode de doctrine, a créé la maine des définitions. J’aurai de la
peine à la faire comprendre, puisqu’en vérité je ne la comprends pas
moi-même. Mais un ouvrage connu en donne cette idée.”10 C’ést la Logique
de MM de Port Royal, qui après avoir parlé de l’Analyse et de la
Synthèse, donnent deux comparaisons, dont la première ést à la vérité
assez mal choisie, mais dont la seconde est bonne. Ces deux méthodes
diffèrent, disent-ils, comme le chemin qu’on fait pour monter d’une
vallée à une montagne, et celle qu’on fait pour descendre d’une montagne
à une vallée; ils ajoutent ensuite une autre comparaison, en disant que
si je voulais savoir si quelqu’un descendait de St. Louis, je
remonterais de fils en père jusqu’à parvenir à St. Louis, et pour
exposer ensuite ce fait aux autres, je commencerais par St. Louis et
descendrais de père en fils.11 Condillac tronque la phrase, et s’arrête
à la première comparaison. Il dit, “Puisque ces deux méthodes sont
directement opposées l’une de l’autre, il faut nécessairement que si
l’une ést bonne, l’autre soit mauvaise: car il ést clair que si ce que
je cherche ést sur la montagne, je ne le trouverai pas si je descends
dans la vallée; s’il ést dans la vallée, je ne le trouverai pas sur la
montagne. De pareilles opinions ne méritent pas une réfutation plus
sérieuse.”12 Mais de tels raisonnemens ne suffisent guère à faire
rejeter la synthèse de la science.


30ME LEÇON

j’ai remarqué deux procédés pour s’assurer d’une vérité nouvelle: celui
de partir d’un principe et de le lier à la proposition qu’on veut
établir, ou bien celui de partir Edition: current; Page: [242] de cette
proposition, et de faire voir qu’elle serait vraie si telle autre l’ést,
etc. jusqu’à parvenir à une proposition reconnue vraie. Nous avons vu
que pour démontrer une vérité déjà découverte on peut se servir
indifféremment de l’une ou de l’autre méthode: mais qu’il n’en ést pas
de même lorsqu’il s’agit de découvrir des vérités nouvelles: que si l’on
cherche à faire des découvertes, sans se limiter à un objet particulier,
on doit employer la synthèse: mais que si l’on veut constater si telle
ou telle proposition ést vraie, c’ést de l’analyse qu’il faut se servir.
On a aussi appelé l’analyse, méthode de doctrine, et la synthèse,
méthode d’exposition: mais ces noms ne peuvent pas être admis, car on
peut exposer aux autres, en tant par l’analyse que par la synthèse, les
vérités que l’on a découvertes, aussi on peut quelquefois par hasard
tomber, par la synthèse, sur une proposition quelconque qu’on veut
établir.

Ni l’une ni l’autre de ces méthodes ne peut toujours nous mener là où
nous voulons aller: il faut qu’elles soient employées par une main
habile, autrement la découverte de nouvelles vérités serait à la portée
de tout le monde.

C’ést à tort qu’on donne souvent le nom d’Analyse à l’Algèbre: ce sont
deux choses bien distinctes: L’Algèbre, à la vérité, se sert souvent de
l’Analyse, mais elle se sert tout aussi souvent de la synthèse. C’ést
cet abus qui a trompé Condillac. Ce logicien appelle analyse, tantôt une
chose, tantôt une autre. Il l’appelle l’art d’examiner successivement et
avec ordre.1 C’ést la méthode des naturalistes: non s’ils se bornent à
la simple observation des objets de la nature: mais s’ils en font une
classification, s’ils les éxaminent avec soin pour en reconnaître les
caractères. Condillac dit ailleurs que l’analyse consiste à aller du
connu à l’inconnu.2 Mais il faut ici s’entendre. S’il veut dire que
l’Analyse se sert de ce qu’on sait pour arriver à la connaissance de ce
qu’on ne sait pas, je pense que nous serons tous d’accord avec
Condillac, car il serait difficile de trouver quelqu’un qui voudrait
arriver à la connaissance de ce qu’il sait par le moyen de ce qu’il ne
sait pas. Mais s’il veut dire, “Partir d’une proposition reconnue vraie,
et la lier par une suite de propositions à une autre proposition de
manière à prouver que cette autre ést vraie,” c’ést le propre de la
Synthèse, et il appelle Analyse ce que nous appelons Synthèse. S’il
entend par analyse la décomposition et la récomposition,3 c’est
l’Analyse et la Synthèse ensemble. On ne peut jamais comprendre, faute
de définitions, contre lesquelles Condillac s’écrie constamment,4 ce
qu’il entend par le mot Synthèse. Il paraît qu’il a formé une nouvelle
langue métaphysique: qu’il a dit, Convenons d’appeler analyse toute
bonne méthode, quelle qu’elle soit, et Edition: current; Page: [243]
synthèse, toute mauvaise méthode, alors il ést clair qu’il faut toujours
procéder par analyse et jamais par synthèse.

Il regarde ensuite l’analyse comme une méthode infaillible.5 Tout
problème, dit-il, ést facile à resoudre, lorsqu’on connaît bien les
données, et qu’on les a bien mises en avant. Cependant il y a beaucoup
de problèmes qui ont exercé sans effet les meilleurs têtes, et dont
l’énoncé ést pourtant bien clair et les données bien mises en avant. Il
dit ensuite que nos langues sont des méthodes analytiques.6 Je dirais
plutôt que nos langues sont des outils, qui comme les outils d’un
menuisier, sans être des méthodes, sont mis en oeuvre par des méthodes.
Les langues, dit Condillac, décomposent la pensée,7 qui en elle-même ést
une, mais nous la divisons en différentes parties, et donnons un nom à
chaque partie. Cela ést vrai en partie: M. Destutt-Tracy le porte au
point de dire que les premiers mots de chaque langue ont dû être des
interjections, et que nous avons procédé toujours par décomposition.8
Mais combien de fois nos langues ne composent-elles pas? Chaque fois que
la même groupe d’idées revient souvent à notre esprit, nous lui donnons
un nom, pour éviter la répétition d’une longue phrase.—J’ai entendu
faire à un élève par un logicien de l’école de Condillac cette question
entr’autres sur la définition, si en définissant on fait de l’analyse ou
de la synthèse: l’élève fut très embarassé, il ne sut que répondre.
Après que le logicien fût parti, je dis à l’élève que j’aurais répondu à
sa place qu’on ne fait ni de l’une ni de l’autre. Car l’analyse et la
synthèse sont des méthodes pour arriver à une vérité nouvelle: Dans la
définition on ne trouve point de vérité nouvelle: donc on ne fait ni de
l’analyse ni de la synthèse. C’aurait été une réponse pareille à celui
de quelqu’un du tems des Jansénistes et des Molinistes, qui lorsque son
confesseur lui demanda Etes-vous Janséniste ou Moliniste, croyait que
c’étaient des métiers, et répondit, Non, Monsieur, je suis Ebéniste.

D’Alembert a eu une idée, qu’il n’a point approfondie, qu’on pourrait,
en apprenant l’histoire, apprendre d’abord celle des temps les plus
voisins, ensuite celle des tems un peu plus reculés, etc.9 jusqu’à
parvenir aux évènemens les plus anciens qu’on connaît. Cette méthode
aurait peut-être quelques avantages, mais elle aurait du moins un grand
inconvénient, c’ést que le germe d’un évènement ést dans l’évènement qui
le précède: et il me paraît beaucoup plus naturel de connaître la cause
avant de connaître l’effet, que l’effet avant la cause.

Les disciples de Condillac se sont emparés de cette idée, que d’Alembert
n’avait Edition: current; Page: [244] qu’ébauchée: ils ont vanté cette
méthode d’étudier l’histoire, et ils l’ont appelée méthode analytique.10
Ils ont voulu l’étendre à la géographie, et ont proposé de commencer
l’étude de la géographie par bien connaître les rues de la ville qu’on
habite, d’étudier ensuite la campagne voisine, et après cela les autres
communes les plus proches de celle-là, et ainsi de suite jusqu’à ce
qu’on fût arrivé à la Chine. Il me paraît bien plus naturel de commencer
par faire de grandes divisions, et de subdiviser ensuite: mais l’autre
manière ést la bonne, car c’ést la manière analytique. Il paraît que
Condillac appelle analyse, faire le rebours de tout le monde.

Carnot, l’auteur de quelques ouvrages très estimés en géométrie,11 a
exposé un système particulier sur l’analyse et la synthèse: mais il ést
tombé dans l’erreur de croire que ces deux mots ont une valeur
intrinsèque, et indépendante de toute convention. Il cherche cette
valeur: et voici à peu près le syllogisme conditionel qu’il fait. Si
l’analyse et la synthèse ne différaient que par le sens dans lequel on
passe en revue les propositions, ce ne sont pas deux méthodes bien
différentes. Mais l’analyse et la synthèse doivent être deux méthodes
bien différentes, donc ils diffèrent par d’autres circonstances que le
sens dans lequel on passe les propositions en révue. Je demanderais
d’abord pourquoi elles doivent être deux méthodes très différentes:
ensuite je nie sa majeure, car le sens dans lequel on parcourt les
propositions fait une très grande différence dans la recherche,
quoiqu’il n’en fasse pas une grande dans l’exposition. Ce syllogisme
établi, voici le système que Carnot a bâti là dessus: On procède,
dit-il, par synthèse, toutes les fois qu’on emploie comme intermédiaires
des êtres concevables par l’esprit. Si on emploie des êtres de raison
comme intermédiaires, on procède par analyse. En admettant les termes
dans cette acception-là, il s’ensuit que, puisqu’on ne se rappelle pas
toujours de tous les intermédiaires qu’on emploie, il faudra revenir sur
ses pas pour savoir si on a fait de l’analyse ou de la
synthèse.—L’Academie de Bordeaux ést tombée il y a quelques années dans
la même erreur où ést tombé Carnot; elle crut que ces mots avaient une
signification intrinsèque. Elle proposa cette question: Caractériser
l’analyse et la synthèse, et exposer les effets que ces deux méthodes
ont eu sur l’enseignement. Mais, dira-t-on, l’Académie a voulu qu’on
caractérisât ce qu’on entend ordinairement par ces deux mots:—Il y a
cinquante ans que cette question aurait été raisonnable: mais
aujourd’hui que tout ést embrouillé, et que ces deux mots ont autant de
significations que de bouches qui les prononcent, une telle question ést
absurde.

Edition: current; Page: [245]
L’emploi de l’analyse et de la synthèse directe suppose qu’on peut
attaquer les vérités au front. Mais on connaît beaucoup de choses mieux
par ce qu’elles ne sont pas que par ce qu’ils sont. Il faut alors
employer des méthodes indirectes.

La première et la plus usitée des méthodes indirectes ést la reduction à
l’absurde, par laquelle on démontre qu’une proposition ést vraie en
démontrant que sa contradictoire ést fausse. On peut procéder par
synthèse ou par analyse. Si on emploie la synthèse, on part de la
contradictoire d’une proposition déjà admise, et l’on fait voir qu’elle
conduit à la contradictoire de la proposition qu’on veut établir: Par
l’analyse, on part de la contradictoire d’une proposition, et on procède
jusqu’à la contradictoire d’une proposition déjà admise. Ce genre a
toute la rigueur des méthodes directes, mais il a le désavantage de
convaincre plus qu’il n’éclaire. On ést obligé de s’accorder avec le
raisonneur sur la vérité de la proposition en question, car il n’y a là
rien à redire, mais cette méthode ne donne pas autant de renseignemens
que les méthodes directes. Aussi ne l’emploie-t-on guère dans la
géométrie que pour établir la réciproque d’une proposition déjà
démontrée: ce qu’on peut faire beaucoup plus courtement par la réduction
à l’absurde. Cependant il y a des cas où la démonstration par l’absurde
peut être employée, parcequ’elle ést beaucoup plus courte.—On pense
ordinairement que la réduction à l’absurde ne se trouve que dans les
livres de géométrie: Mais elle ést fort souvent employee par les
orateurs. Un orateur veut-il prouver le libre arbitre? Il nous dit que
si nous ôtons le libre arbitre nous ne devons plus punir les criminels,
ni avoir de la gratitude pour un bienfaiteur, car ils n’ont pas pu faire
autrement: Que les fondemens de la justice et de la morale sont sappés,
etc. etc.

Il y a donc quatre méthodes d’établir une proposition: la Synthèse,
l’Analyse, la Synthèse par reduction à l’absurde, l’Analyse par
reduction à l’absurde. Si l’on emploie ces méthodes selon les règles
d’une science logique, elles ne conduisent jamais à rien de faux: Mais
lorsqu’on perd de vue ces règles, on erre dans le vague, sans jamais
être sûr de rencontrer la vérité. Notez bien que je dis, sans être sûr
de la rencontrer, et non, sans jamais la rencontrer: car il y a cette
différence fort tranchante entre les bons raisonnemens et les mauvais,
que les bons mènent toujours à une conséquence qui ést vraie si les
principes d’où on part le sont: au lieu que les mauvais mènent
indifféremment à la vérité ou à l’erreur, et cela, que l’on soit parti
du vrai ou du faux. Cela trompe beaucoup de monde, qui ont l’habitude de
juger de la bonté des raisonnemens à postériori, en disant, Je suis
parti de principes vrais, je suis arrivé à une conclusion qui ést aussi
vraie, donc mon raisonnement a été bon. Cela ne s’ensuit pas du tout:
Car on peut fort bien tirer une vraie conclusion de fausses prémisses,
mais alors il faut qu’on se soit trompé plus d’une fois.

Pour les propositions qui sont susceptibles du plus ou du moins, il y a
une sorte de reduction à l’absurde qui ést fort commode, et d’autant
plus que j’ai observé qu’elle fâche toujours beaucoup ceux contre qui on
l’emploie; car comme on ne se fâche jamais que lorsqu’on a tort, c’ést
la meilleure preuve qu’on puisse citer pour faire voir que cette forme
de raisonnement ést fort convainquante. Elle consiste à Edition:
current; Page: [246] porter toutes les choses à l’extrême limite. Des
exemples feront comprendre ce que je veux dire. J’ai eu affaire avec un
arpenteur de terrain qui voulait arpenter les terrains inclinés sans
avoir égard à leur inclinaison. On lui réprésenta que comme les végétaux
croissent dans une direction verticale, et non perpendiculaire au
terrain, ces terres inclinées ne produiraient pas plus que ne produirait
leur projection horizontale: mais il ne voulut point écouter. Je lui
demandai, Acheteriez-vous cher une terre parfaitement verticale? Mais
vous exagerez, me dit-il. Vous ne feriez rien payer à un terrain
vertical, et vous ferez payer à celui qui s’en écarte tant soit peu,
autant que s’il était sur la plaîne? Où donc mettriez-vous la limite? On
a soutenu une fois devant moi que le père de douze enfans aurait les
mêmes entrailles de père pour chacun de ses fils que si ce fils était
unique: j’ai dit, Supposez-vous pour un moment le père de tout le genre
humain: il y aurait de vos enfans que vous n’auriez jamais vus. Même le
père de tout un régiment d’infanterie ne pourrait pas avoir pour chacun
de ses fils la même tendresse que pour un fils unique.—Dans le tems des
désordres à Nîmes le [] m’a dit qu’il avait une affaire très malheureuse
sous les mains, qu’il y avaient quarante accusés.12 Tant mieux, lui
dis-je. Pourquoi? C’ést, répondis-je, qu’on passe l’éponge là dessus,
car on ne voudrait pas faire une boucherie. Mais, dit-il, si quarante
hommes sont tous coupables, pourquoi ne les ferait-on pas tous mourir?
J’ai répondu, Supposez-donc que toute une province se révoltêrait:
Feriez-vous mourir toute la province? Et vous n’avez qu’à supposer tout
un royaume: Le roi ferait alors fusiller tous ses sujets, et règnerait
seul: il serait bien tranquille alors.

Il y a une autre méthode dont on n’a peut-être pas tiré tout l’avantage
qu’on pourrait en tirer: c’ést ce qu’on appelle la méthode d’exclusion.
Pour trouver un objet qui satisfasse à certaines conditions, on cherche
tous ceux qui n’y satisfont pas, on les exclut, et ce qui reste ést ce
qu’il s’agissait de trouver. C’ést de cette manière qu’on cherche les
mots dans un dictionnaire: Pour trouver le mot poète, j’exclus d’abord
tous les mots qui commencent avec une autre lettre que P, je n’ai alors
à chercher que sous la lettre P, ensuite je rejette ceux qui commencent
avec la lettre P suivie d’une autre lettre qu’O, et ainsi de suite. Les
naturalistes font souvent la même chose pour connaître les noms des
objets d’histoire naturelle qu’ils possèdent. Eratosthène, géomètre
grec, en voulant trouver quels étaient les nombres appelés premiers,
commençait par chercher ceux qui ne l’étaient pas:13 Edition: current;
Page: [247] C’ést pour cela qu’on a appelé sa méthode parmi les Grecs la
Crible d’Eratosthène, parce que les mots14 qui n’étaient pas premiers
passaient comme à travers la crible, et les autres restaient.—Malbranche
a employé cette méthode pour trouver la véritable manière dont a lieu
l’action de la matière sur l’esprit.15 Il a commencé par énumérer toutes
les manières qu’il croyait possibles, ensuite il les a toutes rejetées
par telle ou telle raison, et comme il n’en restait alors qu’une seule,
il croyait celle-là démontrée: mais comme on a fait beaucoup de systèmes
depuis Malbranche, auxquels il n’avait jamais pensé, il ést clair
d’abord que son énumération n’était pas complette: ensuite il ést
possible que quelques-unes de ses objections ne soient pas fondées.—Dans
les procès criminels on combine la méthode d’exclusion avec les autres
méthodes, avec beaucoup de succès. Est-il question d’un asassinat? On
peut exclure tous ceux qui n’étaient pas dans la ville: ensuite tous
ceux qui ne connaissaient nullement le défunt ou qui n’avait aucun
intérêt à le tuer: et ainsi de suite on va d’exclusion en exclusion,
jusqu’à ne pouvoir soupçonner que tout au plus huit ou neuf personnes.
Alors un jugement exercé peut facilement décider lequel de ces huit ou
neuf ést le coupable: ou s’il ne le peut pas, on les renvoie tous, non
comme innocens, mais comme n’étant pas convaincus.

Toutes ces méthodes ne sont bonnes que pour ce dont nous pouvons avoir
des preuves rigoureuses. Mais le nombre des choses susceptibles d’une
rigueur mathématique ést tellement petit qu’il faut attacher une grande
importance aux méthodes indirectes, qui feront le sujet de notre
prochaine séance.


31ME LEÇON

la méthode de démonstration rigoureuse n’ést malheureusement pas
applicable à tous les objets: il en ést une foule sur lesquels nous
n’avons pas des notions sûres, et les conséquences que nous tirons de
ces notions ne sont pas susceptibles d’être démontrées par la méthode
directe. Nous admettons par exemple que tous les corps sont pesans: nous
ne les avons pourtant pas tous pesés, mais nous en avons pesé un si
grand nombre, sans en trouver aucun qui ne soit susceptible d’être pesé,
que nous considérons la pensanteur comme propriété commune à toutes. Il
y a une manière de raisonner sans employer la démonstration rigoureuse:
elle consiste à supposer une certaine constance dans les lois de la
nature: De ce qu’un phénomène s’ést présenté souvent, nous pensons qu’il
doit s’opérer toujours; nous supposons que tous les corps jouissent de
la pesanteur, parceque nous trouvons que tous ceux que nous avons pesés
les possèdent. Cette manière de raisonner s’appelle tantôt induction,
tantôt analogie. On raisonne par induction lorsqu’on conclut qu’une
Edition: current; Page: [248] chose sera toujours parcequ’elle a été
longtems; par analogie lorsque nous concluons que deux objets auront les
mêmes propriétés, à raison de leur ressemblance. C’ést par analogie que
nous accordons aux hommes la faculté de penser, quoique nous n’ayons
rien qui nous le prouve: c’ést l’effet d’un jugement involontaire. Cela
ést si vrai, que le système de Descartes, qui fesait des animaux de
pures machines,1 n’a pas beaucoup eu de sectateurs. C’ést encore par
analogie que les astronomes pensent que les planètes sont habités,
parcequ’ils ressemblent à la terre par leur forme, leur mouvement autour
du soleil. C’ést par induction que nous attendons le lever du soleil
chaque matin, car nous l’avons toujours vu se lever tous les matins
jusqu’ici, et nos aïeux nous ont transmis que le même phénomène a
toujours eu lieu dans leurs tems.

L’analogie ést une méthode très imparfaite, car elle peut souvent nous
tromper, puisqu’elle conclut du particulier au général: C’ést cependant
la seule qui nous soit possible dans les sciences de fait et
d’observation, qui n’admettent point la démonstration mathématique, au
moins pour établir les principes, car lorsqu’ils sont établis, on peut
ensuite en tirer des conclusions par le raisonnement. On peut dire la
même chose pour l’induction. Ces méthodes ont, au reste, l’avantage de
frapper l’ignorant comme le savant: ce sont des moyens de raisonnement à
la portée de tout le monde. Il n’y a pas de paysan quelque grossier
qu’il soit, qui n’attende chaque année le retour des saisons comme
l’année précédente; il sacrifie chaque automne une partie de sa graîne
dans l’espoir d’en retirer l’été prochain, à moins de quelqu’accident
extraordinaire, une récolte qui le paiêra avec profit, et celà sans
penser à la possibilité que la récolte lui manque, suivant l’opinion de
quelques naturalistes, qui croient que la chêne entière est contenue en
petit dans le gland, que par conséquent tous les glands que portera
jamais cette chêne y sont aussi contenus, que chacun de ces glands
enferme une nouvelle chêne, etc. d’où il s’ensuit que si le nombre de
ces insertions successives est finie (et on a de la peine à concevoir
comment elle peut être infinie), il arrivera quelque jour que la récolte
manquera: Mais le paysan ne pense pas à tout cela; il sème sa graîne, et
il ést bien certain que l’été prochain il en retirera sa récolte, comme
l’ont toujours fait ces aïeux. De même si la lumière du soleil ést
épuisable, nous avons à craindre qu’un jour elle sera épuisée: cependant
nous comptons avec bien de la certitude sur le lever du soleil tous les
matins.

C’ést aussi l’analogie qui dirige les enfans dans leurs premières études
et réflexions. C’ést par analogie qu’ils apprennent à parler: voyant que
les autres expriment leurs besoins par certains sons, ils tâchent à
imiter ces sons, pour arriver au même but. L’analogie égare quelquefois
les enfans, en les fesant suivre la règle générale au lieu de
l’exception. Un enfant dira Fesez cela: on dit Parlons, parlez: donc on
doit dire Fesons, Fesez.

Edition: current; Page: [249]
Il y a une grande distinction entre l’analogie et la démonstration.
Celle-ci, pourvu qu’elle soit fondée sur de vrais principes, et tirée
suivant les règles d’une saine Logique, ést toujours bonne, quelque soit
le nombre des faits qu’on cite pour les y opposer: on peut fort bien se
dispenser de réfuter ces objections, en disant Je vous laisse vous même
à trouver votre erreur, pour moi je suis sûr de mon fait. L’analogie, au
contraire, quelque bien tirée qu’elle soit, ést renversée au moment où
l’on peut citer un seul fait bien constaté qui s’y oppose. C’ést sur ce
principe qu’on a écrit contre la vaccine. Lorsque ce préservatif contre
la petite vérole fut d’abord employé, on prétendit qu’elle ôta pour
toujours la possibilité d’avoir ce désordre. On a prouvé depuis qu’il y
a eu des cas où ceux qui ont été vaccinés ont eu la petite vérole à un
époque postérieur: l’analogie ést donc renversée. Mais comme ces cas
sont extrêmement rares, la vaccine agit comme préservatif dans la
plupart des cas.

Une autre différence entre la démonstration et les méthodes indirectes,
c’ést que celles-ci sont susceptibles du plus et du moins. Deux
démonstrations bien tirées sont toujours également fortes l’une que
l’autre, au lieu qu’il y a des inductions plus ou moins fortes.
L’induction qui conclut que la lune ést une des causes principales des
phénomènes des marées, parce que les hautes et les basses mers suivent
le mouvement de la lune, ést une induction beaucoup plus forte que celle
par laquelle on conclut que la lune ést habitée. Si on fondait une
induction pour prouver qu’elle ést habitée par des êtres de telle ou de
telle sorte, ce serait évidemment une induction plus faible encore.—Il
ést des inductions si voisines de la certitude qu’il faut avoir perdu
l’esprit pour en douter. Nous ne savons que par induction que tous les
hommes sont mortels; cependant je trouverais fort mauvais que quelqu’un,
surtout un père de famille, négligeât ses affaires, en disant, Peut être
je ne mourrai jamais, et je ne donnerai pas alors de l’embarras à mes
héritiers.

Ce qui nous égare souvent en fesant des inductions, c’ést que nous ne
fesons pas attention à la petite étendue du lieu et du tems où nous
sommes. Il ést des gens qui soutiennent que l’espèce humaine a vieillie:
peut être n’ést-elle pas encore sortie de sa première enfance. Nous
plaignons l’ancienne indigence de nos pères: peut être au bout de 2000
ans on pourra trouver notre indigence et notre barbarie encore plus
grandes. Réfléchissez aux progrès de la civilisation pendant les trois
derniers siècles. Nous rions des ordéals, qui étaient les meilleurs
moyens connus de nos ancêtres pour décider les causes, et qu’ils
appelaient jugemens de Dieu: peut être nos successeurs trouveront-ils
d’autres usages chez nous tout aussi barbares.—Lorsqu’on fait cette
induction,—il y a toujours eu des guerres, donc il y en aura
toujours—c’ést supposer que la civilisation humaine n’ést pas
susceptibles d’atteindre au point de perfection où l’on se passerait des
guerres. Pour bien juger du monde il faudrait en sortir: c’ést dans
cette vue que Montesquieu fit ses Lettres Persanes, pour mettre la
peinture de nos ridicules dans la bouche d’un étranger qui Edition:
current; Page: [250] en serait libre.2 C’ést d’après ce modèle qu’on a
fait tant de Lettres Péruviennes,3 etc.

Ces méthodes sont donc très imparfaites: mais il ne faudrait pas réfuser
la lumière d’une chandelle, parceque nous ne pouvons pas avoir celle du
soleil. Cependant il faut employer ces méthodes avec circonspection dans
la physique, encore plus dans l’administration publique: et jamais dans
les sciences exactes elle ne doit jouer d’autre rôle que celui de faire
soupçonner une vérité, qu’on démontre ensuite par des moyens plus
rigoureux.—Quelles sont donc les sciences exactes? Ce sont celles qui
ont pour objets de pures abstractions de l’esprit, qui étant notre
ouvrage, et indépendantes de la nature, sont susceptibles d’un calcul
exacte. Les conclusions qu’on fait sur ces abstractions ne sont vraies
que comme des vérités spéculatives: Dans la physique, elles ne sont
vraies qu’à peu près, et sont les limites des vérités physiques: comme
une ligne géométrique, qui ne doit avoir ni largeur ni épaisseur, ést le
limite des lignes physiques, qui peuvent s’en approcher de plus en plus,
mais qui ne peuvent jamais atteindre ce dégré de perfection.

Il y a pourtant quelques genres de recherche physique qui approchent
beaucoup des vérités géométriques: Telles sont les théories de M. Cuvier
dans l’Anatomie: Il dit, la Nature a toujours pourvu chaque animal de
tout ce qui ést nécessaire pour que l’espèce ne se perde pas: A un
animal de telle nature et manière de vivre, il faut telles ou telles
propriétés: donc si un animal présente ces propriétés, j’ai le droit de
conclure que cet animal ést de cette nature là.4 M. Cuvier ést parvenu
delà à pouvoir donner presque toute l’histoire d’un animal avec une
certitude presque géométrique, à la vue d’un seul ossement.


32ME LEÇON

lorsque nous connaissons les causes des phénomènes que nous examinons,
ils se lient les uns aux autres, et présentent un intérêt beaucoup plus
grand que si nous ne connaissions pas les causes. L’histoire bornée au
simple récit des faits ést entièrement dénuée d’intérêt: mais
lorsqu’avant d’étudier l’histoire Romaine, par exemple, on a lu avec
attention le celèbre ouvrage de Montesquieu sur les causes de la
grandeur et de la décadence des Romains,1 on lit dans le présent ce
qu’on peut Edition: current; Page: [251] attendre dans l’avenir, et on
étudie avec beaucoup plus de profit. C’ést ainsi que lorsque nous
suivions l’astronomie de Ptolomée,2 et observâmes les phénomènes, sans
nous inquiéter sur les causes, tous les mouvemens célestes nous
paraissaient bien compliqués: là dessus Copernic,3 voyant que d’une
autre manière on pouvait les expliquer d’une manière bien plus simple,
nous chasse du centre du monde, que nous avions occupé jusqu’alors en
paix, et y met le soleil: de cette manière tous ces phénomènes se
présentent sous un aspect beaucoup plus régulier. Ce que Copernic
n’avait que deviné, Newton démontra, et en découvrit la cause:4 ce qui
lui donna le moyen de rendre compte de quelques irrégularités qui
n’avaient pas encore disparu et même de calculer quelques inégalités à
longues périodes.—

De même lorsqu’on observe les phénomènes des marées, on reconnait
bientôt qu’ils suivent le mouvement de la lune: d’où on peut conclure à
bon droit que la lune entre pour quelque chose dans ces phénomènes. On
observe bientôt des irrégularités: on en recueille des observations
exactes, et on trouve que les hautes mers les plus considérables sont
lorsque la lune ést en conjonction et en opposition, et les plus petites
lorsqu’elle ést dans les quadratures: delà on conclut que l’action du
soleil modifie celle de la lune. On peut alors prévoir les
irrégularités.

Au défaut de connaissance des causes réelles, qui ont produit les
effets, nous en avons imaginées qui auraient pu les produire: c’ést
faire des systèmes ou des hypothèses. Et quoiqu’on puisse dire peut être
que ce n’ést qu’une manière plus douce d’ignorer, cependant cela
contente l’esprit jusqu’à un certain point: tout comme un mécanicien
habile, qui aurait vu une machine qui produisait certains mouvemens, et
qui n’aurait pas vu l’intérieur de la machine, chercherait dans sa tête
comment elle aurait pu être faite, et lorsqu’il l’a trouvé, quoiqu’il ne
sache pas si elle a été vraiment faite de cette manière, cependant il
ést content, car il sait comment elle a pu être faite, et dans le
besoin, il serait dans le cas d’en faire une qui produirait les mêmes
mouvemens. Aussi, sans les systèmes, toutes les sciences seraient bien
moins avancées qu’elles ne le sont: car les théories que nous
considérons aujourd’hui comme les mieux établies, n’ont été d’abord que
des hypothèses. Exemples la théorie du système du monde: l’anneau de
Saturne, et tant d’autres.

Mais on peut abuser de ce moyen comme de tout autre. Les anciens se sont
trop abandonnés à l’esprit de système: au lieu d’observer et de tenir
régistre des faits, ils ont trouvé plus court de faire un système qui
s’accorderait avec quelques faits qu’ils connaissaient déjà. Aussi le
Traité de Physique d’Aristote, ouvrage très éloquent, n’ést presque
point lu aujourd’hui.5 Trop souvent, soit par paresse Edition: current;
Page: [252] d’esprit, soit par amour propre, on n’abandonne pas son
système même quand la fausseté en ést parfaitement établie: on aime
mieux tordre les faits pour les accorder avec le système.

Jusqu’à quel point doit on donc employer les systèmes, et audelà de quel
point sont-ils dangéreux? Il faut commencer en s’assurant par
l’observation d’un assez grand nombre de faits: il faut ensuite les
classer méthodiquement, et ensuite tâcher de les exprimer par un petit
nombre de loix générales, aussi simples qu’il ést possible. Il faut
alors faire une hypothèse qui puisse satisfaire à ces faits jusque dans
les plus petits détails: mais pour cela il faut commencer par faire un
système qui satisfasse aux phénomènes en gros, et le modifier ensuite
pour expliquer les détails. C’ést ainsi que le fit Newton pour expliquer
le Système du Monde.6 Il supposa d’abord que le soleil exerçait envers
les planètes une force d’attraction: et il trouva que cet hypothèse
expliquait assez bien les phénomènes en gros. S’il avait rejeté ce
système aussitôt qu’il trouva l’impossibilité d’expliquer ainsi les
petites irrégularités des mouvemens planétaires, l’Astronomie aurait
probablement restée jusqu’aujourd’hui au niveau où elle était alors.
Mais il ne le rejeta point: il chercha à le modifier: et après de
longues réflexions, il trouva que s’il supposait que chaque planète
exerçait envers tous les autres la même force d’attraction que le soleil
exerçait envers lui, il pouvait expliquer jusqu’aux plus petits détails.

Dans la nature tout ést en même tems cause et effet. Chaque évènement
ést causé par un évènement antérieur, et à son tour il produit d’autres
évènemens. Mais il y a des causes prochaines, ou immédiates, et des
causes éloignées, ou médiates. Il ést évident que si nous ne pouvons pas
tracer un phénomène à sa cause remote, il faut au moins être content
d’arriver à la cause prochaine. Lorsqu’il n’y a qu’une seule cause qui
concoure à produire un même effet, il n’ést ordinairement pas bien
difficile de la trouver. La difficulté ést lorsque plusieurs causes qui
agissent à peu près avec la même force, concourent dans la production
d’un phénomène. Comme ces causes suivent une marche différente, tantôt
l’une prédomine, et tantôt l’autre, et l’effet, quoiqu’il dépende de
causes très regulières, parait pourtant on ne peut pas plus irrégulier.
En voici un exemple

  ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  1,   2,   3,   4,   5,   6,    7,    8,    9,    10
  1,   2,   3,   2,   1,   2,    3,    2,    1,    2
  3,   4,   3,   2,   1,   2,    3,    4,    3,    2
  5,   8,   9,   8,   7,   10,   13,   14,   13,   14,
  ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

Voilà une progression qui paraît très irrégulière, malgré qu’elle soit
composée de trois qui suivent une marche très régulière. Il serait fort
difficile de déviner ces trois séries, en ne connaissant que leur somme.
Si une de ces causes prédomine Edition: current; Page: [253] beaucoup
sur les autres, c’ést plus facile, car on n’a qu’à fermer les yeux à
tout ce qui n’ést pas l’effet de la cause prédominante; à fonder là
dessus un hypothèse, et le modifier ensuite pour le faire cadrer avec
les petites variations.

Enfin si l’on n’a pas d’autre moyen de démêler les causes d’un
phénomène, on suppose que telle ou telle cause y entre et l’on examine
quelles autres causes auraient pu y concourir avec celle-là. C’ést de
cette manière que se servent ceux qui déchiffrent les écritures
secrètes, qu’on ést obligé parfois à employer dans la guerre et dans les
négociations. Elles sont faites ordinairement en substituant tel ou tel
caractère de convention à chaque lettre de l’alphabète. Lorsque
l’écriture ést fort longue, c’ést bien facile à la déchiffrer, en
observant quels caractères se recontrent le plus souvent, car les
imprimeurs et les fabriquans de types savent parfaitement quelles
lettres se recontrent le plus souvent: lorsqu’un fabriquant vend des
types à un imprimeur il se gardera bien de lui donner autant d’x et de z
que d’e et d’i, etc. Mais si le morceau ést court, ce moyen manque, car
une lettre qui se recontre rarement dans une langue entière, peut bien
se rencontrer souvent dans une phrase. Prenez par exemple ce vers de
Voltaire, “non il n’ést rien que Nanine n’honore:”7 Quelle profusion d’n
là dedans! on serait tenté de croire que le caractère qui réprésente un
n réprésentait un e. Il faut alors supposer que deux ou trois caractères
réprésentent telles ou telles lettres de manière à faire un sens, et
voir ensuite quelle valeur il faut donner aux autres lettres pour que le
morceau entier puisse s’interpréter: si on ne réussit pas on donne aux
premiers caractères un autre sens, et ainsi de suite jusqu’à ce qu’on
arrive à son but. Pour obvier à ce moyen-là, il n’ést d’autre manière
que celle d’écrire le morceau de sorte qu’en donnant aux caractères
différentes valeurs, il soit susceptible de plusieurs explications. Mais
cette manière serait non seulement presqu’impossible; elle ne réussirait
pas toujours.

Edition: current; Page: [254] Edition: current; Page: [255]


DEBATING SPEECHES
 1823–29

Edition: current; Page: [256] Edition: current; Page: [257]


4.: The Utility of Knowledge
 1823

Typescript, Fabian Society. Typescript headed: “Speech on the Utility of
Knowledge, / spoken at the / Mutual Improvement Society in 1823.”
Published under substantively the same title in Autobiography by John
Stuart Mill with an Appendix of Hitherto Unpublished Speeches, ed.
Harold Laski (London: Oxford University Press, 1924), pp. 267-74.
Because the manuscript has not been located, the typescript and printed
versions have been collated. As unpublished in Mill’s lifetime, not
listed in his bibliography.

the beneficial effects produced upon the human mind and upon the
structure of society by the revival of science and by the cessation of
feudal darkness have been so obvious that there is scarcely room for the
smallest discussion. No one, I apprehend, would insult the
aunderstandinga of this Society by reviving the ascetic sophistry of the
fanatic Rousseau by maintaining that what are called the comforts and
conveniences of life are in fact neither comforts nor conveniences, and
add not the smallest particle to human happiness; that the progress of
civilization is in fact the progress of barbarism and that the Hurons
and the Iroquois are the happiest and the most enlightened of mankind.1
Were such a reasoner to arise I should ask him by what authority he
claims to know better than A, B and C what constitutes the happiness of
A, B and C. I should maintain that what all men have uniformly
considered as comforts and conveniences cannot be otherwise than
comforts and conveniences, and I should require him who considers
knowledge as standing in the way of happiness to go and legislate for
those savages upon whose blissful state of ignorance he would have ban
opportunity of trying his skill without those obstacles which he finds
in the knowledge of this comparatively enlightened country.

Such doctrines are scarcely worthy of a serious reply, but as the
refutation may be made remarkably pointed and concise, it may be better
to give it. In reasoning on these general questions a want of precision
in the use of language is the principal engine of sophistry. Here the
confusion lies in the word knowledge, a word so vague and indefinite as
to be an easy instrument in the hands of mala fide arguers, being
capable of signifying just as much or as little as they please. It is
not this kind Edition: current; Page: [258] of knowledge which is of
such extensive importance. The only useful knowledge is that which
teaches us how to seek what is good and avoid what is evil; in short,
how to increase the sum of human happiness. This is the great end: it
may be well or ill pursued, but to say that knowledge can be an enemy to
happiness is to say that men will enjoy less happiness, when they know
how to seek it, than when they do not. This reasoning is on a par with
that of anyone who should refuse when asked to point out the road to
York, saying that his inquirer would have a much better chance of
reaching York without direction than with it. It is impossible then to
suppose that anyone should get up in this Society and maintain that
knowledge in the abstract is mischievous. Arguments may indeed be
directed against much of what passes current under the name of knowledge
to show that it is not really knowledge but prejudice, and is therefore
not favourable but unfavourable to happiness. But this is one of those
cases where the reason of the exception proves the truth of the general
rule. It is precisely because knowledge is useful that prejudice is
mischievous.

The question, simple in itself, is in some degree confused by the manner
in which it is worded, and which, with deference to the worthy
proposer,2 might I conceive have been made more clearly expressive of
his meaning. If asked whether the revival of letters has tended to
promote happiness I know what to say, and by what arguments to support
it; but if I am asked whether it tends to refine or to corrupt manners I
confess myself at a stand. The three words, manners, corrupt and refine,
are to me in the sense here bestowed upon them equally enigmatical. If
by refinement of manners is meant that ceremonious politeness in
intercourse between the higher orders, and that assiduous gallantry
towards the fair sex which were the distinguishing characteristics of
the old feudal aristocracy, then I should say that manners had not
gained but lost by the revival of letters: but far from lamenting I
should rejoice in the change, as I do in everything which turns the
attention of mankind from the frivolous details of a petty and
ceremonious trifling to the concerns which interest their real and
substantial welfare. But if the intention of the proposer was to enquire
into the effect of increased civilization in promoting genuine morality,
then although on a general view of the question all will probably agree
with me that this effect has been highly beneficial, it will be no loss
of time to examine in detail from how dreadful a state of misery the
human race has been elevated by knowledge into a state where they have
at least the hope, the speedy hope, of establishing a better state of
things.

The revival of art and science has contributed to promote morality in
two ways; by the increase of wealth and by the diffusion of information.
The discoveries in chemical and mechanical philosophy—should I not
rather say the creation of these branches of cknowledge?c—has enabled
the human race to provide themselves Edition: current; Page: [259]
abundantly at little expense of labour with those necessaries and
comforts which formerly they either could not procure at all, or if at
all, only in a very small amount and with very great labour. This
increase of wealth must have contributed greatly to the improvement of
morality. I would not be understood as affirming that the rich are more
moral than the poor. As far as general reasoning and my own particular
experience can lead me I should rather adopt the contrary conclusion.
But when the augmentation of wealth is not, by being confined in the
hands of a few, reduced to be but one expedient more for the oppression
of the many; when I say instead of being exclusively devoted to the
enjoyment of a few the increase of wealth is generally and equally
diffused throughout the whole community; then by conferring upon the
working classes the inestimable benefit of leisure, it forces them to
seek society, it forces them to seek education. Each working man becomes
himself better qualified to distinguish right from wrong, while each
knows that he is under the constant surveillance of hundreds and
thousands equally instructed with himself. Thus does the improvement of
the physical sciences, by increasing and diffusing wealth, indirectly
tend to promote morality.

But the evils which man is doomed to suffer from the hands of nature are
nothing when compared to those which man frequently suffers from man.
Communities have been known to flourish in spots which Nature seems to
have selected for the sepulchre of the universe; but there is no
country, however favoured by nature, which superstition and
misgovernment do not suffice to ruin. Let us therefore take a general
view of the situation of our ancestors with respect to these two main
points, religion and government.

And first as to their government: he must be an adept in the art of
rendering mankind miserable who could devise anything more destructive
of all happiness. It was not here the common vice of a rude government,
where each man has not yet learned to trust his neighbour, and where no
one will as yet renounce the privilege of protecting himself. dThesed
are imperfect governments for they afford imperfect securities for
happiness, but they are not in every sense as execrable as the feudal
system. Imagine a tribe with a government such as that to which I have
alluded spreading itself by conquest over a large portion of the globe,
and reducing the native population to the state of domestic cattle! Each
chief absolute master of thousands of human beings, and himself
acknowledging no regular government, but striving to retain his pristine
independency! Not only is no one secure from the arbitrary will of a
master; even that master cannot afford him protection against other
despots and slaves! It has frequently been made a question whether
despotism or anarchy is worst; but this is not the question here, for
the feudal system united the evils of both. The laws were openly and
flagrantly violated, and the violations remained unpunished. Judge of
the security which the administration of justice could afford when the
trial by battle was the best expedient which Edition: current; Page:
[260] could be devised to ensure the purity of judicature, and where it
was usual for the party who was ecaste in a lawsuit to challenge his
judge to mortal combat.

The religion of our ancestors is next to be considered, and here I shall
begin by laying down a principle of which the ordinary reasoners on
these subjects have usually lost sight. It is not indeed extremely
recondite for it is no other than this, that priests are men. They are
usually considered as partaking of that perfect goodness and wisdom
which they verbally attribute to the Great Master whom they profess to
serve, although the actions and precepts which they ascribe to Him
partake but too often of a contrary character.

From the principle that priests are men I draw the inference that in
those cases which very frequently occur, and in which their individual
interest is opposed to the interest of mankind, they will act as other
men would act in similar circumstances; they would pursue their own
interest to the detriment of mankind. Now if all men agree to believe
whatever they say, they have a decided interest in making them believe
everything which is likely to make them venerate and worship their
spiritual guides; and if true opinions on the subject of religion are
not of a nature calculated to inspire the requisite degree of
veneration, it would be unfair to expect that these irresponsible
directors of the public mind should confine themselves strictly to what
is true; and we might indeed predict with tolerable certainty that they
would not fail to intermingle much of what is utterly false, the more so
as they may do this without the slightest insincerity. There is no fact
better ascertained than the facility with which men are persuaded to
believe what they wish. It is only necessary that there should be
someone, who may be either a knave or a madman, to start a falsehood; if
it is unfavourable to the clergy he will be hunted down as a heretic,
but if it is favourable to them it will not be long before he finds many
sincere disciples among the clergy themselves, who of course propagate
it among the laity. It is in this way that the Catholic priesthood added
to their religion the profitable doctrine of purgatory and masses for
the dead, the crime-promoting doctrine of indulgences, and above all the
terrific engines of auricular confession and absolution, the
concentration of which, and particularly of the former, in the hands of
the clergy, make it astonishing that mankind should ever have
emancipated themselves from the terrific sway of priests and their
coadjutors, aristocracies and kings. If at this day we rarely hear of
murders perpetrated in the name of religion, still more rarely of those
terrible persecutions which once disgraced every nation in Europe, we
owe this to the revival of letters and the consequent diffusion of
knowledge.

Such a government and such a religion as our ancestors had the happiness
to enjoy afford us in some degree the means of appreciating that
ancestorial wisdom which is even now held up to us as a model for
imitation.3 In the nineteenth century Edition: current; Page: [261] we
are not infrequently called upon to pursue the course which was followed
by those sages, our ancestors, in the eleventh and twelfth. But this
appeal from the age of civilization to the age foff barbarism is made,
we may observe, by those and by those alone who now, as then, would wish
to see the great mass of mankind subject to the despotic sway of nobles,
priests and kings. But although it is in one respect true that the
aristocracy of wealth and rank has given place to the democracy of
intellect, I would not insinuate that the evils of feudal despotism and
superstition are altogether eradicated even from this enlightened
country. Knowledge has done much, but it has not yet done all. We are
still subject to a constitution which is at best a shattered fragment of
the feudal system; we are still subject to a priesthood who do whatever
is yet in their power to excite a spirit of religious intolerance and to
support the domination of a despotic aristocracy. We cannot therefore be
surprised that those who are interested in misgovernment should raise a
cry against the diffusion of knowledge on the ground that it renders the
people dissatisfied with their institutions. When despotism and
superstition were in their greatest vigour the same cry was raised, and
for the same reason. Knowledge has triumphed. It has worked the downfall
of much that is mischievous. It is in vain to suppose that it will pass
by and spare any institution the existence of which is pernicious to
mankind.


5.: Parliamentary Reform [1]
 AUGUST 1824

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/1. Inscribed in Mill’s hand: “Speech on
/ Parl. Reform / at the / Mut. Impr. Soc. / 1823 or 24.” Typescript,
Fabian Society; published, ed. Harold J. Laski, in The Realist, I
(July-Sept. 1929), 51-62. The speech is dated on the inference that the
manuscript contains the opening argument in the debate continued in No.
6, which can be dated by a specific reference. As not published in
Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

it is not every one, Sir, I am convinced, who can appreciate the
difficulties of my present situation. To be the successful advocate of
opinions, which are at once so important, and with a large class of
society so unpopular, as those which I profess, is a task, for which all
the logic of an Aristotle, and all the eloquence of a Demosthenes,1
would not be too much. But I who am not more conscious of the Edition:
current; Page: [262] inexpressible importance of the question, than I am
of my utter inability to do it justice; I who am so little habituated to
public speaking, that even my thoughts, and my reasonings, feeble as
they may be, will appear still feebler by my manner of expressing
them;—and who to all my personal disadvantages, add the farther
disadvantage, of not even being a member of the Society, upon whose
indulgence I venture to throw myself,—I must indeed be arrogant, indeed
vainly and presumptuously confident, if I did not feel great
embarrassment in entering upon the task which I have undertaken.

Indeed where success is doubtful, and obloquy certain, I might well be
permitted to hesitate; and whatever may be my other deficiencies I do
give myself credit for some portion of courage, in braving the hard
names which I know will be levelled at me. For it has been too common to
consider the word Reform as a mere cover for sinister designs, and all
who presume to doubt that our Constitution is perfect, as enemies to
social order and to the existence of property. If then I should be so
fortunate, as to overcome all the preliminary obstacles, and in spite of
my own deficiencies, and the difficulty of the subject, to present an
intelligible exposition of my views; I might possibly do no more than
bring disrepute upon myself, without serving the cause in which I am
engaged. I am content however that they should call me radical,
revolutionist, anarchist, jacobin, if they please. I am content to be
treated as an enemy to establishments, to institutions, and to order.
For though I profess no attachment to bad institutions, I hope to prove
that I am as sincerely a friend to good institutions, as any person
here: and the attempt to cry down the truth, by applying bad names to
its supporters, though it might have some success in a darker age, may
in the present state of the human mind be regarded I think as nearly
hopeless.

We all know, Sir, that the simple forms of government as they are
called, are three: monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy. Each of these
is universally allowed to have its advantages: each of them has also its
disadvantages: and it has been pretty generally the doctrine of British
statesmen, and of British politicians, that in every one of them, the
disadvantages preponderate. Of every one of them, it is affirmed that
more may be said against it than for it: that more evil than good would
be the consequence of its unqualified adoption: and in short, that a
nation is almost sure to be ill governed, whether it be under a
monarchy, a democracy or an aristocracy. All the simple forms of
government being thus objectionable, the only chance for good government
is to be found, they allege, in a mixture of the three: a mixture
absurd, indeed, and inconsistent in theory, but which is said to be
realized in the British Constitution; a Constitution which, according to
them, combines all the advantages of democracy, aristocracy, and
monarchy.

Granting for the present what I am fully prepared to deny, viz. first
that a mixed government is possible, and next, that our own is a mixed
government, I wonder it should never have occurred to them as a possible
case, that some turbulent fellow might dispute the assumption, that if
the three forms of government are thrown pell mell into the melting-pot,
they would come out freed from all their defects, and Edition: current;
Page: [263] retaining their advantages: that this same turbulent fellow
might further maintain, that he had looked more closely into the
melting-pot than they had, and that instead of coming out refined and
corrected, all the pure spirit had evaporated, and nothing but the scum
and dross remained: to use plainer language, Sir, that the British
Constitution instead of combining the advantages, combined all the
disadvantages of the simple forms of government. If this were said, I do
not well see what on their own principles they could say against it, nor
what means they would possess of silencing the turbulent fellow,—except
by the old established method of knocking him down.

I have heard a great deal, Sir, about the balance of the Constitution.2
What this means, I confess myself to be in ignorance. One would think it
must be something unspeakably excellent, judging from the encomiums
which are heaped upon it. It is in truth a mere metaphor. There seems to
be something singularly captivating in the word balance: as if, because
any thing is called a balance, it must, for that reason, be necessarily
good. I know no artifice of language, more pernicious than this: to
invent a metaphorical expression, and then reason from it as if it was
the name of something real, of something tangible. What is there, that
may not be proved in this way? What form of government, what person,
what thing may not be demonstrated to be excellent, if nothing is
required but to call it by some fine high sounding name?

Even admitting the metaphor, one would think that if all the moving
forces are in equilibrio, the machine must stand still. This inference
seems to flow at least as naturally from the premises, as the former.

Stripped of its metaphorical language, the doctrine is that the British
Constitution is a system of mutual checks; that each of the three
branches when it oversteps its limits, and attempts to do wrong, is
restrained by the other two. But why should the three branches check one
another in doing wrong? Of three equal forces, any two must be stronger
than the third. May not two of them unite in doing wrong and overthrow
the third if it opposes them? What is to hinder the monarchical branch,
and the aristocratic branch, from uniting for the overthrow of the
democratic? Not only is this probable but certain. The reason why the
monarch would unite with the aristocracy, rather than either of them
with the people, is, that it can never be the interest of the people to
unite with either of them. It must always be the interest of the people,
that neither of them should enjoy more power than is absolutely
necessary for good government. It is their interest, to take as much
power as they can get. For this purpose, they are sure to conspire
against their common enemy, or at least the common enemy of their
sinister designs,—the Edition: current; Page: [264] people. Assertion,
however, is so much easier than proof, that no attempt to prove it has
yet come under my observation.3

But it is needless to enquire whether a mixed government is possible, or
what would be its consequences if it were so. I contend, Sir, that
whether a mixed government be possible or not, the British Constitution,
at any rate, is not a mixed government. I am prepared to maintain, that
the British government is an aristocracy: and I request the most serious
attention of this society to the proof. I am prepared to make it appear,
that there is not one of the distinguishing characteristics of an
aristocracy, which the British Constitution does not possess: that it is
controuled by a few; that it is administered by a few, that it is
conducted wholly for the benefit of a few; and that there is no check,
upon the conduct of those few, which would not equally exist under an
Oriental despotism, if the subjects of that despotism were equally wise,
virtuous, and enlightened with the people of Great Britain.

By the general admission of political writers in the present day, as
well those who are enemies, as those who are friends to reform, the
governing power in these kingdoms, the dominant authority under the
British Constitution, is lodged in the House of Commons. The royal
negative is become a mere name; and the Peers, though highly powerful by
their influence over elections, do not, in their capacity of Peers
exercise much influence on the legislation of the country.

But if this be true—if the supreme power is vested in the House of
Commons, whoever chuses the House of Commons, possesses the supreme
power. Now evidence was tendered at the bar of that House to prove that
two thirds of its members were actually nominated and appointed by less
than two hundred aristocratic families, mostly landholders.4 The offer
not having been accepted, the proof was never given to the world: but
from the circumstance that without being refuted an assertion like this
was not permitted to be proved, I should be entitled to consider it as
fully made out, even if it were not, as it is, notorious to all the
world. It is an insult to our understandings to tell us that this is a
mixed government. In every government the supreme power must be vested
somewhere; if it is vested in one, the government is a monarchy: if in a
few, it is an aristocracy; if in the people, through an assembly
responsible to them, it is a democracy. In this country, the supreme
power is vested in the House of Commons; and a great majority in the
House of Commons is returned by two hundred families. Those two hundred
Edition: current; Page: [265] families therefore, possess absolute
control over the government: and if a government controuled by two
hundred families, is not an aristocracy, then such a thing as an
aristocracy cannot be said to exist.

They will call this theory, Sir: and so it is: but so also it is to be
remembered that the doctrine of the balance is a theory: I will say
more: I will say, that if ever there was a theory which deserved the
epithets of wild and visionary, it is this: that there never was a
balance; that there never can be a balance; and that every government
which has ever been called a balance, has really been an aristocracy. It
is not however necessary at present to speak of any other government
than our own. It being proved that our own government is a government of
two hundred families: and it being evident that according to the laws of
human nature, a government of two hundred families cannot be otherwise
than a bad one: any one may supply the conclusion. They may call this
theory, Sir: but they cannot prove it to be false: they cannot detect a
flaw in the reasoning which proves it to be true.

Let us endeavour for a moment, to conceive what it is possible for them
to say. They cannot say without flying in the face of fact that the
House of Commons is not controuled by a small number of families. Nor,
one would think, can they say that absolute power, lodged in a few
families, is not sure to be abused. This, however, is what they will
say: I shall be accused of calumniating Honourable Gentlemen. The idea
that such men should not be perfectly disinterested, will be scouted
with disdain; and my venturing to suppose that they can abuse their
power, will without doubt be treated as an insult.

Nothing, in fact, is easier, than to get rid of obnoxious opinions in
this way. It is a compendious method of refutation. It is one of the
most hackneyed artifices of those who have a bad cause to defend, to
turn it into a personal question. With me, Sir, it is not a personal
question. I am willing to admit that ministers, and members of
parliament are as good as any other men. I will even grant that they are
better than most. All I contend for is, that good as they may be, they
are men: and would they have us believe that they are angels? Would they
assert, that they are exempt from bias—superior to seductive
motives—that their judgment is never warped by their interest? They may
say so; but I hope and trust no one will believe them.

If uncontrouled power is not sure to be abused, give me despotism: let
me have one master, who may be wise and honest, not a body of masters
who cannot. The theory however of the British Constitution, is, that
unchecked power is always abused: and it is because the King would be a
tyrant, if he could, that a House of Commons is given us, to controul
him. How absurd then to say that the same check which is required by a
king, is not required by a House of Commons! Have a hundred despots ever
been found to be a less evil than one?

Perhaps we shall be told, that the people though they have not a direct,
have an indirect controul over parliament: that a ministry must be
sensible that it cannot stand against the declared wishes of the people;
and that this consciousness serves to keep them from all flagrant abuses
of power: that in public opinion is to be found Edition: current; Page:
[266] the real checking power, the real balance of the Constitution that
is in appearance an aristocracy, but in truth is nevertheless a mixed
government, and unites the advantages of democracy, aristocracy and
monarchy.

If this be true, Sir, I say that we have no occasion for a parliament.
To resort to this doctrine is to give up the theory of the Constitution.
The Constitution supposes that the House of Commons is a check. But no!
it seems, the House of Commons, instead of being a check, itself
requires to be checked, and there is no check except public opinion. But
if the governing body is neither elected by nor responsible to the
people, and is only kept in awe by the partial and inefficient check of
naked and disarmed public opinion, where is the use of keeping up a
cumbrous and operose machinery to cheat the people by persuading them
that they really have some security in the constitution of the House of
Commons? If it comes to this at last, that the House of Commons are
tyrants, but tyrants subdued and kept down by the dread of public
opinion, methinks it were more honest to take off the mask, that the
people might know henceforward to what they have to trust, and may look
to nothing for security, but their own unassisted exertions.

No, Sir, it is a cruel mockery, to say that public opinion is a check
upon the members of parliament when public opinion can neither remove
them nor punish them. Carry this into practice. Let any one consider how
far he would be inclined to trust to public opinion for the prevention
and punishment of theft or robbery. Yet a thief is far more unpopular
than a bad member of parliament. How absurd to bid us trust for the
security of our happiness and of our lives, to a check that we would not
confide in for the safety of a few shillings or pounds.

Driven from the theoretical ground, the defenders of the Constitution
will take refuge in what they are pleased to call practice. The
experience of ages, it will be said is in favour of the British
Constitution. Notwithstanding some theoretical imperfections, so long as
it has lasted, it has worked well, and still continues to do so. Why
quit a certain good for one which is uncertain? Why substitute abstract
theories for practical experience?

We are well as we are. This is their grand argument. What do they mean?
Well as compared to better? But this is absurd. Well as compared to
worse? Truly a stupendous merit. They must therefore mean, well as
compared to what we once were. But this, far from being a reason for
stopping short, is one of the strongest of all arguments for advancing.
For if we look back and ask ourselves, why it is that we are well, as
compared with what we were 300 years ago,—what is the cause to which we
owe this prodigious difference,—we shall find it to be
progression,—improvement,—amelioration. Then too we were well, as
compared with our condition at a still earlier period; then too the
certainty of present good and the chance of future evil, might have been
urged as successfully as in the present day; then too we might have
stopped short, and said We are well as we are; all farther progression
is unnecessary. Nor were the aristocracies and hierarchies of those days
more slack than those of the present in diffusing and inculcating those
Edition: current; Page: [267] moderate, loyal, sober, experimental,
practical opinions. Our ancestors disregarded their interested
diatribes: improvement went on, and we are now in a situation as much
preferable to theirs, as theirs was to that of their wise and venerable
ancestors who painted their bodies and wandered naked in the forests.
Let our rulers then who so frequently insist upon our imitating our
forefathers in their crimes and in their follies imitate them also in
their wisdom. Let them no longer attempt to fix a period when
improvement has gone far enough, when mankind are sufficiently wise, and
sufficiently happy: assured that they can discover no argument for
stopping now, which would not have justified our ancestors in stopping
long ago.

I will concede to them, if they please, that our Constitution is already
a good one: but they shall not be allowed to assume that it is the best
possible, and that all farther improvement is unnecessary. I will grant,
if it be required, that some wonderful genius, soaring above the level
of a barbarous age, was the inventor and framer of our Constitution. Was
it by inspiration that he devised so perfect, so all-sufficing a plan?
For if it was by human reason, how inconsistent is it to maintain, that
reason ought not to criticize the work which reason has produced, and
that to apply wisdom to the improvement of a monument of wisdom, is a
presumptuous and uncalled for innovation!

I know not whether the contriver of our Constitution, if our
Constitution really had a contriver, partook in or was exempt from the
barbarism of his age. But this much I know, that if he was really wise,
he would have delighted in nothing more than in the improvement of his
work: that it is not from him that the cry of innovation would have
proceeded, but from the unwise or interested supporters of the
imperfections of the system. He knew well that his own work, when first
it was devised, was an innovation, and that he could quote no argument
against its improvers, which would not have been as much more strong
against himself than against them, as the change from anarchy to a
regular government is greater than from one form of government to
another. Let not these worshippers of the wisdom of our ancestors,
profess opinions which would stamp those ancestors with the grossest
folly. Our forefathers, barbarous in all besides, in this alone were
wise, that they were innovators. And their pretended admirers would
snatch from their brows the only glory to which they are justly
entitled, that of being sensible of their unfavorable situation, and
desiring amendment.

It would be easy, indeed, if that were the question, to shew that the
Constitution is far, very far, from working well. I might compute all
the useless places, all the excessive salaries, all the unmerited
pensions, which have been given under this admirable Constitution. I
might calculate all the blood and treasure which has been spent in wars,
for purposes entirely useless, if not mischievous: for the honours of
the flag, for the interests of continental despots, or to prevent the
establishment of free institutions in foreign countries—I might
enumerate all the restraints under which commerce has laboured and still
labours; all the oppressive powers lodged in aristocratical magistrates;
all the laws which have been made to aid the rich in Edition: current;
Page: [268] oppressing the poor;—above all I might call your attention
to that barbarous and confused mass of precedents and of statutes to
which the much abused name of Law is in this country applied.

But I will not occupy the time by detailing all the evils under which we
groan. From the mere existence of these evils, nothing can be inferred.
I should be as little justified in reprobating the Constitution, on the
mere ground that evil exists, as my opponents are in applauding it,
because every thing is not evil. And if no mischiefs at all had as yet
resulted from the Constitution, the obligation to reform it, if it were
proved to have a tendency to evil, would not be a whit less imperative.
Contrivance, combination, foresight, are the characteristics of the
philosopher: to wait for specific experience is that of the man who is
incapable of doing more than groping in the dark.

What, then? (it will be said) Do you set up visionary theories as the
rule of conduct? Is it not upon experience, and experience alone, that
all human knowledge, is founded?—Yes. Experience is the only legitimate
guide of human actions. By no other test can we determine what is good
and what is bad. None but a madman would question the authority of
experience.

But this experience, this infallible directive rule, to which we must
adhere or perish, does not consist in judging after a model,—in never
departing from what already exists—and in copying implicitly both the
excellencies and the defects of some favorite system. If this be the
meaning of the term, improvement in human affairs can only be effected
by deviating from experience. In this sense, the savage had experience
against him, when he first fixed his cabin in one spot, and commenced
cultivating the earth. Very different is the experience of a
philosopher. His is an experience which compares, which analyses: which
takes to pieces a complicated machine, and distinguishes between the
parts which promote and the parts which impede its operation. In this
sense, experience is synonymous with sound and enlightened theory. By
theory I mean general propositions; by sound theory, I mean theory
conformable to experience: theory founded on observation. Not
observation limited to a single field, but an enlarged view of the
actions and motives of mankind.

A country with the natural resources, and with the capital of Great
Britain, in a period of profound peace, and when commerce is subjected
only to moderate restraints, must be ill governed indeed, if it does not
rapidly increase in wealth; and before we ascribe any part of its
prosperity to the goodness of its government, we must ascertain what are
likely to be the effects of that government when no other causes of
prosperity exist. And if we can obtain a practical experiment of the
effects which that government produces when unassisted by favorable
circumstances, it will go far towards the ultimate decision of the
question.

Fortunately for our purpose, such an experiment presents itself in
Ireland. That country which enjoys in so preeminent a degree the
blessings of tranquillity and social order, admirably exemplifies the
tendency of our institutions. The Irish are Edition: current; Page:
[269] in the full enjoyment of the English Constitution; nor of that
alone, but of the unspeakable blessings which we owe to it: our
admirable system of law, an established Protestant Church,5 and a landed
aristocracy. With all these glorious things, Ireland ought to be “the
envy of surrounding nations, and the admiration of the world.”6 But what
is it? The completest specimen upon record of the combined horrors of
despotism and anarchy! These are the effects of the system which works
well. If therefore England is more prosperous than Ireland—if we have
not yet fallen quite so low—it is not to our institutions that we are to
ascribe our superiority.

After all, when I consider attentively the situation of this country, I
really cannot see what foundation there is for such unbounded self
applause, nor what these astonishing advantages are, which distinguish
us so preeminently above all other nations. We enjoy, it is true, a
certain degree of security for person and property: but how deficient
this security is, daily experience demonstrates. For greater security
for person and property has existed under governments universally
acknowledged to be bad. Under the Emperor Napoleon, the police was so
efficient that scarcely any crime remained free from detection. Then as
to cheapness, the other requisite of good government, no one, I
apprehend, will attribute this quality to our Constitution. A debt of
800 millions, and an annual taxation of 60, (without counting tithes or
poor rates) are indeed proud monuments of national prosperity! If
frequent wars are a proof of misrule, we have been engaged, since the
Revolution of 1688, in a greater number than any other nation in Europe.
If the degree in which the body of Civil and Penal Law answers its
purpose, be the circumstance chosen for the criterion of good
government; in this respect no European nation is worse, and one, at
least, in a remarkable degree is better, than ourselves. If
discretionary powers entrusted to public officers be regarded as a
symptom of misgovernment, our justices of peace may well be set off
against the most arbitrary and oppressive authority which ever existed
under the most despotic government.

I pity the man who can see any thing to admire in all this. I should
prefer even the straightforward despot, who is not imbecil enough to be
duped by his own fallacies but feels and acknowledges the power of
sinister interest.7 He, I am sure, would ere long be convinced, that it
is no longer for his advantage to hold out against popular feeling: that
the age is gone by when he could hope to do so with success. For a time
is approaching when the enquiry, What has been, shall no longer
supersede the enquiry, What ought to be, and when the rust of antiquity
shall no Edition: current; Page: [270] longer be permitted to sanctify
institutions which reason and the public interest condemn. In vain do
they who profit by misrule persist in shutting their eyes to the
advancement of knowledge in the world. In vain do they judge of the
future by the past, and hope to see the public sink back into the apathy
in which they were plunged during the age of despotism and superstition.
Never did the circumstances of the world bear the most distant
resemblance to their present state. Never were the blessings of
education so widely diffused, never were political questions so freely
discussed. Never were so many men in existence whose enlarged and
philosophic views will enable them, when reform takes place, to lead the
public mind and guard it from going astray as heretofore. To prevent a
change may, at the present day, be fairly pronounced impossible. The
only question is, Shall it be effected by moderate or by violent means.
The people have always been and still are peaceably inclined. They seek
not violence; they avoid it. May they avoid it ever, unless they are
driven to it. But moderate means have been tried. Petitions without
number have been poured into Parliament. If our rulers still persist in
their resistance, it is they and not the Reformers, who endeavour to
excite insurrection. It is true, the Reformers do not consider
tranquillity as absolutely the end of government, and if the greater
good, a government responsible to the people, can only be obtained by
means of a commotion, no weak and feminine humanity will induce me at
least to deprecate such a result. But if (which God forbid) it should
come at last to this; and if moderate means, after repeated trials,
should fail to produce the desired effect; let all the evils necessarily
occasioned by those commotions, which are the last and dangerous resort
of the people, be on the heads of those eternal enemies of mankind, who,
by their interested resistance to the spirit of the age,8 will have
rendered such a crisis inevitable.

And now, Sir, before I conclude, let me request as a favor what I might
fairly claim as a right of the gentlemen who will take a different view
of the question from myself: and who will support their opinions, I have
no doubt, with far greater ability than I have supported mine;9 I have
one thing to request: let them consider that this is a question of
argument: and that by argument only, can it fairly be met: let them
consider also, that if their cause is good, it has nothing to fear from
argument, and every thing to fear, if all the argument should seem to be
on the other side. Let me not then be met by vague and general
declamation; by appeals to the wisdom of our ancestors, or by angry
denunciations against innovation. This is not argument, Sir, it is
unworthy of the name. My case in fact, reduces itself into a Edition:
current; Page: [271] very small compass. I rest it upon two assertions:
that an aristocracy is bad, and that this government is an aristocracy.
One or other of these assertions they must disprove, or give up the
point. If they do not touch these propositions, they are talking in the
air: whatever may be their plea, it is irrelevant, and ought to be
dismissed.

Having asked this for my cause, I ask nothing for myself. That cause
would indeed be ill served, if its supporters feared to encounter a few
hard words, for the chance of doing it service. Let them but fairly
grapple with my arguments; and they have my free permission to exercise
as they please, their powers either of invective or of ridicule upon
myself.


6.: Parliamentary Reform [2]
 AUGUST 1824

Typescript, private. Headed in ink: “[On Reform].” The provenance of
this typescript is unclear (the Fabian Society Archive does not have a
copy), but internal evidence places it unquestionably with Mill’s
debating speeches generally, and with No. 5 specifically. It may be
dated (see 282.28-9) to the week following 3 August, 1824, and appears
to be Mill’s second contribution to the third session of the debate
opened with No. 5. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in
his bibliography.

if, Sir, when I rose to open this question,1 I felt myself to be in a
difficult situation, the difficulty is greatly enhanced by the result of
the debate. Contrary to my expectation, and not a little to my
disappointment, there is not one among the ordinary speakers in this
Society who has not differed more or less from me, and the only
gentlemen from whom I have obtained unqualified support, have been
those, who, like myself, stand in the situation of strangers and
trespassers on your indulgence: while those speakers whose reputation
stands highest in this Society, have embraced opinions irreconcilably at
variance with mine. Thus circumstanced, I may be considered, like Atlas
to carry the heavens on my shoulders; and I hope it will not be deemed
unpardonable, if I should be unable to bear up against the weight.

Among the foremost of my opponents there is one gentleman,2 from whom it
is always painful for me to differ: one whom I can never allude to
without the most profound respect, and with whom, if this were a
question of authority—I would rather go against this whole Society, than
with this whole Society against him. I Edition: current; Page: [272] had
hoped, Sir, that he would not have thrown his weight into that scale,
which was already so much the heaviest. I had hoped that by his support
he would have added authority to the cause which I advocate, that he
would have supplied as he can so well do, the numberless omissions which
in so vast a subject, I must necessarily have made, and aided me in
refuting the objections with which I have been assailed. Disappointed of
his aid, my labour will be the greater, but I must not shrink from it:
that cause in which it would have been my proudest boast to fight by his
side, I must now, when left alone, endeavour to the best of my ability
to defend even against him.

A considerable part of his speech consisted of a statement of objections
against one of the propositions of the reformers; the plan of secret
suffrage. I have abstained, Sir, throughout, and shall still abstain,
from discussing the merits of this, or that plan of reform. The question
as it stands is surely weighty and difficult enough without mixing it up
with a hundred of other questions. It is enough for me, if I can prove
that the Constitution stands in need of reform: of what precise sort of
reform it stands in need will be a fit subject for discussion on a
future occasion. And if that occasion should ever come; and if the
gentleman should there restate his objections against secret suffrage
and give me a fair opportunity of answering them; then, Sir, in spite of
that multiplicity of occupations which prevent and I fear will long
prevent me from aspiring to the honour of being a member of this
Society, I pledge myself to be present, and to show that of his
objections there is not one which is not utterly devoid even of the
shadow of plausibility.

Another large portion of the gentleman’s speech was devoted to the task
of defending the King and the Peers, though it must be acknowledged at
the same time, that he treated the latter body rather unceremoniously,
for he described them as a parcel of old women. All this, too, Sir, he
will forgive me for saying appears to me to be totally irrelevant. My
argument has nothing to do with the King and Peers: I have my opinion as
any one else may have, on the necessity or utility of these
institutions. But I maintained and still maintain, nor would it be
difficult to show from the Honourable Gentleman’s own words he agrees
with me, that the whole power is centered in the House of Commons, and
that according as that House is democratically or aristocratically
constituted, the government is a democracy or an aristocracy. So true is
this, Sir, that if the King and Peers were to be abolished to-morrow,
the government would remain in all its substantials exactly as it is.
Proclamations indeed would be no longer issued in the name of the King;
laws would be no longer passed by the King, with the advice of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons; but the powers of government would
be in exactly the same hands as they are now, and the government would
to all practical purposes be equally bad.

The one proposition on which my case is supported, and the one
proposition which the Honourable Gentleman should have refuted, is, that
the majority in the Edition: current; Page: [273] House of Commons is
returned by two hundred families.3 This proposition he has not denied. A
man of his judgment and good sense, would scarcely venture to deny it.
But he thinks that there is no harm in this, and unless all those who
are so returned were to combine together; and as some of them are Whigs
and some Tories he thinks they do not combine, but operate as a check
upon one another. If this were true, Sir, it would be no argument
against reform: Legislators are appointed to do good—not to check one
another in doing evil. But it is a singular inference, that because they
have these disputes among themselves, therefore they are a check upon
one another. Is anything more common than for a band of robbers, to
unite in perpetrating their robberies, and then quarrel about the
division of the spoil? It does not require the intellect of the
Honourable Gentleman to see that the aristocracy naturally divides
itself into two parties: the one consisting of those who are contented
with the share which they have got, or think they have most chance of
getting more, by attaching themselves to the present ministry; this is
the ministerial party: the other party, consisting of those who think
they have a chance of getting a greater share of the spoil than they
have got by expelling the present and putting in a different ministry;
this is the opposition party. To court the public, and obtain their aid
in effecting this object, the Opposition part of the aristocracy are
compelled to raise a cry against the small abuser; but they are careful
how they touch the great ones, by which, when they get into power, they
themselves mean to profit. Accordingly that majority in the House of
Commons, who are put in by the lords of the soil, and who are either
landowners themselves, or the mere attornies and nominees of the
landowners, if on the petty question of party they split into Whig and
Tory—if those who are in abuse those who are out and those who are out
abuse those who are in—it is very different when any great reform is to
be opposed, or any great abuse to be upheld. Did not they almost all
support the Six Acts? Do they not all support the Corn Laws? Who is it
that supports the Usury Laws? The Landlords. Who is it that supports the
Game Laws?4 The Landlords. Who was it that contracted the National Debt?
But here the landlords were joined by all the rest of the aristocracy.
But not to speak of anything else, is not the very greatest abuse for
which our government has to answer, the unpaid magistracy, a mere
creation for the benefit of the landlords? Who kicked out, without ever
a hearing, the petition of an unfortunate man who complained of Edition:
current; Page: [274] the misconduct of the unpaid magistrate Mr.
Chetwinde?5 Who but the unpaid magistrates and their nominees in that
house. In what other place would Mr. Holme Sumner have dared to say6
that no gentleman would undertake the office of a magistrate, unless his
misdeeds were covered from the public eye, unless he was assured of
impunity whether he was an Aristides or a Jefferies.7 Let me not hear
then that there is no combination among the members of that house: there
is combination enough: whenever there is mischief to be done.

The Honourable Gentleman further observed, that if our government is
bad, we are not yet prepared for a better. For this we have his
assertion it is true, but I am not aware that he attempted to give any
evidence for it, or to shew why if we are not yet altogether so wise as
could be wished, to be ill governed should be the best way to make us
wiser. I have always been accustomed to think, Sir, that one of the
worst qualities of an aristocratic government is, that it prevents men
from becoming wiser: that it makes education an instrument, as witness
our universities, not to emancipate the mind but to hold it in perpetual
bondage, not to expand it but to keep it for ever shackled and debased.
If I am to give up an opinion which I have considered to rest upon so
large and so universal an experience as this, it must be on some better
ground than the assertion of any men—even of the Honourable Gentleman.

I have begun, Sir, by replying to this gentleman because I consider him
to be by far my most formidable antagonist. When he is disposed of, the
task of dealing with my other opponents is comparatively an easy one.

I am greatly indebted to one gentleman,8 for the exemplary hardihood
with which he has come forward to deny that the British Constitution is
an aristocracy. Unfortunately however, what he denied in one part of his
speech, he admitted in another; and not only admitted, but went on to
justify it. After having declared the fact, that a majority of the House
of Commons is returned by a few families, to rest upon no better
evidence than the assertion of a few radicals, who offered to prove it,
but never made good their promise,9 he went on to tell us, how admirable
this majority of the House of Commons was, and how we ought to
congratulate ourselves on being governed by such excellent men; they
indeed seem to possess Edition: current; Page: [275] every virtue, their
opponents every vice, and why? because the others are returned by the
people, they by a few families: thus we see that the same fact can, when
it suits his purpose be applauded as the highest of excellencies, or
repelled as the most scandalous of insinuations. The beginning and end
of this gentleman’s speech thus destroying one another, the beginning
refuting the end, and the end refuting the beginning, it may seem
unnecessary to take the task out of his own hands and presumptuous to
suppose, that I can refute him, with greater ability than he has refuted
himself. Some, indeed may think that he has shewn more skill, and been
more successful in refuting himself than he has in refuting the
radicals; our faith cannot stretch wide enough to include two
contradictory assertions, which then are we to believe? Not the
proposition which rests upon his ipse dixit alone, but the proposition
which rests upon his ipse dixit also, and much better evidence besides.

The best men, he says, are sometimes returned for the rotten burghs;
which is true; but which proves, not that the rotten burghs are good,
but that everything else is still worse. The rotten burghs, Sir, in my
opinion, are the very best part of the system: and I should be very
sorry to see them abolished, if the rest of the system is to be
retained. A man, if he has but a good purse, may be returned for a
rotten burgh, without being a slave; but I defy any one who is not a
slave, to be returned for a nobleman’s pocket burgh, or for a county.

Even radicals, the gentleman observes, have been put in by the
aristocracy. This I think may fairly be doubted: but he quotes as
instances, Sir S. Romilly and the great radical, Mr. Brougham.10 It must
be acknowledged that the Honourable Gentleman selects his examples with
singular judgment, and with a perspicacity quite peculiar to himself. I
think he may justly claim the merit of having been the first to bring to
light the radicalism of these gentlemen. I, for one, should never have
found it out without his assistance. If he can prove that either of them
ever made a speech or gave a vote on any side of any question, contrary
to the interest of the great lord who put him in, I shall then say, he
has done something, but till then, I shall certainly take the liberty to
believe that a man is not necessarily a radical, because he opposes
ministers: and that the nominee of a lord who hopes to get in is just as
much an enemy to good government as the nominee of another lord who is
in.

The Honourable Gentleman feels a very proper contempt for those members
of parliament who are controlled by what he is pleased to call mob
influence, or who Edition: current; Page: [276] can brook the slavery of
being totally dependent upon their constituents. Vile tools. They are
compelled to do their duty. They are restrained from abusing their
power: how mean, how base, how despicable: can too much scorn possibly
be felt for those who can submit to so miserable a servitude? This
reminds one of the monarch, who said that if he could not do what he
pleased, it was of no use being a king; to be sure, what was royalty
good for, but to enable him to rob and murder as he pleased. The
Honourable Gentleman is a great stickler for something called
independence: he is for having members of parliament independent: I
presume he would have the king too independent; although you had once a
king who wished to be independent, and for this you sent him packing, to
count his beads at home. It is a fine thing, Sir, this independence, but
I should like to know, where is it to end? Is the Grand Seignor11
independent enough to suit the gentleman’s taste? I cannot say that I
relish this species of independence. What I want is good government: and
for this purpose I should prefer a king and parliament not independent
but dependent upon the people, that there might be somebody to watch
over them, and turn them out if they misbehave. I dare say the
Honourable Gentleman would be very angry if I were to tell him that he
is an anarchist: yet the only difference is that an anarchist is for
making everybody independent, and he only the king and parliament. An
anarchist, therefore, applies the Honourable Gentleman’s principles with
greater consistency than the Honourable Gentleman himself.

Among other proofs of the excellence of our Constitution the Honourable
Gentleman has assigned the excellence of our coats. I should have
thought that was rather a proof of the excellence of our tailors; and
might have been more appropriately urged, if any one had proposed a
radical reform in that useful branch of industry. I cannot learn,
however, that among the grievances complained of at the hands of the
parliament, any one has yet included the cut of their coats, or that a
petition imploring his majesty to change his ministers, has ever been
coupled with a request that he would change his tailor: Even in
tailoring, I doubt whether the Honourable Gentleman’s argument will hold
water: He himself, for aught I know may be peculiarly fortunate in his
tailor, but for my part I can assure him that I have philosophy enough
to bear improvement even in this respect, with resignation; and though I
certainly think it of more importance that we should be well governed
than well clothed, yet if my tailor should offer to furnish me
henceforward with cheaper or better coats than I have hitherto worn, I
should be the last person in the world to find fault with him on that
account.

As a further argument against reform, the Honourable Gentleman alleges
the goodness of our roads: thinking apparently that in the event of a
reform, they would infallibly be broken up by the hoofs of the swinish
multitude.12 Far be it Edition: current; Page: [277] from me, Sir, to
dispute the excellence of our roads, particularly when Macadamized,13
but I own I cannot precisely see the connexion between the Honourable
Gentleman’s premises, and his conclusion, nor why, because our roads are
good we should suffer our Constitution always to continue bad.

But it is not in our coats and roads alone that the beauty of our
Constitution manifests itself to the world, it shines forth still more
conspicuously in the beauty of our women: for every thing with this
gentleman is a proof of the excellence of our Constitution, and I have
no doubt that if our women were all ugly he would find the means of
drawing the same conclusion from their ugliness, as he now does from
their beauty, and certainly with as much reason. Sir, no one would
lament more than myself, that any deterioration should take place in
female beauty; but I must say, I think the Honourable Gentleman has
failed in proving that our women would be less handsome, after
parliamentary reform than before it, and I do say, Sir, that we have
some reason to complain of the Honourable Gentleman for having attempted
by scandalous insinuations, to prejudice the fair sex against us. If any
lady after hearing the Honourable Gentleman’s speech should have gone
away as I fear may be the case, with the impression that we wish to make
a bonfire of all the fine women in the country, I hasten to undeceive
her, and I beg that she will not believe such a charge, even if he
should swear it.

But this is not all. Good dinners, it seems, are still to be had in this
country, ergo, parliamentary reform is unnecessary. With all my
admiration for the Honourable Gentleman I cannot quite go along with him
in this inference: I see how it is: I see that we have been calumniated:
the Honourable Gentleman’s mind has been poisoned against us: some
insidious person has been practising upon his fears, and has persuaded
him that as the French constituent assembly abolished titles,14 so a
reformed House of Commons would abolish good dinners, would shut up the
London tavern, and decree that we should all live upon bread and water.
Sir, if I were at all apprehensive that parliamentary reform would lead
to such consequences, I am not sure that I should not turn round and
join with the Honourable Gentleman, though I hope I should not reason
quite so ill; but I own I cannot participate in the Honourable
Gentleman’s alarm: though the aldermen of the city of London might be
deprived of some of their privileges, I do not believe that they would
be deprived of their turtle soup: we wage no war on innocent enjoyment,
though we would strongly recommend to them to beware of indigestion: and
if the Honourable Gentleman be fond of French wines, I think I could
promise him that in the event of a reform, they would be as cheap or
cheaper than port, so that, on the whole, I think he may quiet his
apprehension.

Edition: current; Page: [278]
All these proofs of the excellence of our Constitution may perhaps prove
rather more than he would wish. It is quite true that in this country
there are fine women, good dinners and good coats for the rich: it is
quite true that not only this but all foreign countries are ransacked,
to pamper their appetites, or minister to their gratifications. That the
rich man however is feasting upon venison and turtle is small
consolation to the beggar who is starving at his door. It would be well
if this gentleman whose imagination seems to riot so voluptuously in the
luxuries of the rich, would bestow some commiseration on the sufferings
of the poor. Let him withdraw his eyes for one moment from the palace
and fix them on the hovel. There he will see rather a different
spectacle: not a good dinner, or a good coat will he see there: nothing
but rags and starvation: or let him visit our gaols: he will find that
two thirds of the unhappy convicts date the loss of their innocence, of
their character, and of every virtuous propensity, from the day when
they were first incarcerated,15 the victims of those savage laws created
for the sole purpose of supplying one viand more to the luxurious tables
of the lords of the soil. If this were all, Sir, this would suffice to
prove to us what an aristocracy is, and what value the man of power sets
upon the virtue and happiness of thousands of his countrymen, in
comparison with one paltry gratification of his own. I say this, Sir,
for you, and for this society, not for the Honourable Gentleman. He is
above being affected by the little miseries of little men: and he gave
us on the last evening a specimen of the temper with which he regards
the people and their wrongs. That triumphant laugh, which burst from
that part of the room where the Honourable Gentleman was seated, when
their wisdom and their virtue were mentioned in higher terms than he
thought they deserved—That laugh by which he seemed to glory in the
successful resistance which men like him have offered to the diffusion
of knowledge among the mass of people, and in the ignorance and
brutality which they have hitherto been able to perpetuate. If this is a
sign of what he wishes to be considered his feelings; I hope they are
not his real ones. If they are, I do not envy him. What renders others
miserable makes him laugh: what causes the woes of nations excites his
scorn. Sir, in the sacred writings it is said—Scornful men bring a city
into a snare:16 and it is ill for one who can feel scorn where he ought
to feel pity and indignation. It is well for the Honourable Gentleman
that he holds so high a rank in this Society as he does: had it happened
to any less eminent individual—had it happened to me, to do as he has
done, never more could I have faced this Society—never more could I have
shewn myself among a portion of that people, of whose dearest interests
I had made a mockery, and whose wrongs had been to me a subject of
laughter and merriment.

Perhaps, however, the Honourable Gentleman may plead ignorance: he may
not Edition: current; Page: [279] have been aware that there are good
dinners and good coats only for those who can pay for them. If so, I
acquit him of inhumanity and I moreover admire the short and easy method
which he has discovered of arriving at conclusions. We are very happy:
we are the happiest people in the world: no nation ever came up to us in
felicity: all this happiness we owe to change: all change therefore is
wicked and abominable: a process of reasoning which, if not altogether
logical, is at any rate convenient: but the Honourable Gentleman seems
to think its conclusiveness not sufficiently manifest: for he backs it
by another and a still stronger argument. I have read in books of logic
that a reasoner after stating his proof sometimes brings an auxiliary
syllogism, to prove the conclusiveness of the former one:17 the
Honourable Gentleman’s auxiliary syllogism is a very short one and it
amounts to this. My argument is conclusive: why? because all who dispute
it are radicals and cut throat thieves, which is a very pretty way of
arguing and a short cut to infallibility. The Honourable Gentleman seems
to be well read in that facetious history The Tale of a Tub and to have
taken some lessons from the celebrated Lord Peter. That worthy, as is
well known, doubtless, to all who hear me, was accustomed to maintain
some rather paradoxical opinions, among others that a crust of bread was
a shoulder of mutton and claret, a proposition which an ordinary stomach
might have had some difficulty in digesting. Lord Peter, however, had
one very powerful argument, by the help of which he could establish
that, or any thing else that he pleased: his astonished hearers were to
believe it at their peril, and why? because, I give you his own words,
damn their souls if they did not.18 To this irresistible mode of proof,
the line of argument adopted by the Honourable Gentleman seems to bear
no slight analogy.

The Honourable Gentleman has been called a political Goliath,19 and
seems indeed to be a Goliath in assertion: but to some it may perhaps
appear, that an apter analogy would have been that of Samson, who in his
eagerness to overwhelm his enemies, pulled down an old house about his
own ears.20

But enough of this: I pass to those gentlemen, whose arguments, if not
more conclusive, are at any rate less ludicrous and require a more
serious reply.

One gentleman21 admitted every evil of which I complained to be real,
and joined with me in reprobating the system under which such evils
could exist. But it was not the Constitution according to him, which was
the cause of the evils but the abuses which had crept into the
Constitution.

Edition: current; Page: [280]
One might suppose from this, that the abuses were of recent origin and
that there was a time when the Constitution existed in all its purity,
and made manifest its goodness by the beauty of its effects. When was
this time? Never. At all times, both in this and in every other nation,
the powers of government have uniformly been monopolised in the hands of
a privileged few, to whose interests, the interests of the many have
uniformly been sacrificed: with only one difference, that of old, when
the public were far more ignorant and prejudiced than they now are,
misgovernment was proportionately more flagrant.

It were indeed strange, if at that period of our history, when all the
other arts and sciences were in their infancy—when the earth was
believed to be a flat surface in the centre of the universe, and the sea
to flow round its outer circumference—when the philosopher’s stone and
the universal medicine were the only object of chemistry, and to
foretell events by the stars the sole purpose of astronomy—when our
roads were inferior to the worst lanes of the present day and when
navigators rarely trusted themselves out of sight of the shore: it were
strange I say, if a people among whom such things were could, amid all
their ignorance, superstition and barbarism, have taken an enlarged view
of human nature and human society—have foreseen every possible mode of
oppression and provided efficient securities against all—should in a
word have established a Constitution which could secure in perpetuity
the blessings of good government to mankind.

The word Constitution, Sir, is often used very loosely as it was by the
Honourable Gentleman22 who on the last evening made it include I know
not what fundamental laws and charters. Laws, Sir, without somebody to
stand up for them are a dead letter: and as for charters if vague and
general injunctions to govern well are sufficient to make a good
Constitution, what country was ever without one? What I understand by
the Constitution is, the securities which are taken for the good conduct
of public functionaries. When those securities are insufficient, the
Constitution is bad. In England, the Honourable Gentleman had
acknowledged that the securities are insufficient, for he has
acknowledged that public functionaries do misconduct themselves. This is
to admit every thing that I require. It is to admit that the
Constitution is inadequate to its end. Government may justly be held
responsible for all the evils which it might and does not prevent.

I ought now to make some remarks upon the speech of my Honourable
friend23 who opened the adjourned question on the former evening: but
upon consideration, I do not know whether I have any fault to find with
my Honourable friend: for all he professes to prove is, that if certain
amendments were made in the British Constitution it would be the best
possible government: now this is all that I say of the British
Constitution: I will add, or of any Constitution whatever. There are few
governments, even the most despotic, which might not be made exceedingly
good, Edition: current; Page: [281] by one single addition: viz. that of
a properly constituted representative organ, with the proper powers.
Now, Sir, I shall be contented with this degree of reform in the British
Constitution: give me but a real, instead of a sham representation of
the people, and every thing else that is desirable will follow in its
train.

One thing, however, my Honourable friend has said which imperiously
calls for a reply. He has endeavoured to show that all governments
however democratic in their forms, necessarily degenerate into
aristocracies: that even in a debating society, there is always an
aristocratic committee of management, and in the American democracy the
President and the Representatives are chosen in a Committee of leading
men called a Caucus.24 In using this argument give me leave to observe
the Honourable Gentleman commits one of the most obvious of all
mistakes: he confounds the influence of the understanding over the
understanding, with the influence of the will over the will. The Caucus
can only recommend; and if the landlord or the borough patron did no
more than recommend, I, for one, should be far from wishing that
influence of this kind should cease. What is more to be desired than
that the wisest men, those who are most competent to decide, should meet
and discuss the merits of the various candidates! So long as they cannot
force the people to vote as they recommend, their influence is purely
beneficial. Their object is to convince: for this purpose they must
state in the clearest manner they can, the claims and pretensions of the
candidate whose cause they expound; being clearly stated, these
pretensions, if false, may be clearly refuted: but they cannot force
down the throats of the people a man of whom they know nothing, or
nothing but what is bad: from all mischievous kinds of influence they
are debarred: the useful kinds are alone within their reach. And as for
the allusion to a debating society I must say that my Honourable friend
pays a very poor compliment to the understandings of this society, if he
thinks they will suffer that Committee, in which my Honourable friend
holds so distinguished a place to combine25 themselves into an
aristocracy. I will do this Society the justice to believe, that they
would resist such an attempt to the utmost of their means, and that if
the Committee were to abuse their power or were to forget themselves so
far as to endeavour to procure their re-election by any other than
proper means, I say if so very unlikely an event were to take place,
they would reap no fruit from it but the shame of the attempt.

It has been urged on us this evening that the British Constitution
affords security to person and property: and that to secure person and
property being the chief end of government, if this be attained, the
government cannot be a bad one. This is so far true, that to secure
person and property is one of the grand objects of government: but I
take the liberty to suggest, that gold may be bought too dear: is there
no difference between securing person and property at the expense of two
or Edition: current; Page: [282] three millions a year and that of fifty
or sixty millions? But I have more to say than this: I disrate the
fundamental assumption. Person and property it is said enjoy security
under the Constitution: but it is easy to cloak under a vague phrase the
most pernicious of all fallacies. When we say that person and property
are secure we may either mean that every individual is permitted to
enjoy with the greatest possible certainty, the fruits of his labor,
which is what constitutes good government, or we may only mean that our
purses are secured from the pickpocket, our houses from the burglar, and
our lives from the assassin. Even in this last sense of the word, it is
far from being strictly true that we have security for person and
property: and in the other sense it is not true at all. Look at the
government of Napoleon Bonaparte: if security from robbery and murderers
constituted good government, there never was a better government than
his. But security from robbers and murderers is a small part of good
government and includes only that very subordinate department called
police. Why do we call Bonaparte’s government a bad one? Because if
person and property were secure against individuals, they were not
secure against the despot. He suppressed all robbers and murderers but
himself. Here, Sir, we are far from having attained even this degree of
excellence. Here, Sir, and under the British Constitution a rich
landlord is free to oppress his poor neighbour almost without restraint:
and if he cannot put him to death, he can however inflict upon him in
the shape of imprisonment, torments worse than death, on the most
frivolous pretexts.26 If any one doubts this, let him look at the recent
convictions for breaking partridge’s eggs or cutting off the bough of a
tree.27 I myself know an instance in Surrey in which a Whig lord kept a
man in prison five months for picking up a stick in his park and another
in Yorkshire in which a man suffered three months hard labour at the
treadmill for being found in broad day on a public thoroughfare through
a gentleman’s grounds and suspected of being a poacher.28 But why need I
go further. I appeal to any one who has read in the Morning Chronicle of
last Tuesday the case of John Franks, whether after such a case it is
not a mockery to talk of English liberty! The law, indeed, is open to
the poor man, and so said Horne Tooke, is the London tavern, if he will
pay for it, but if he cannot, it is vain to expect a dinner at the one
or justice at the other.29

Edition: current; Page: [283]
And now, Sir, in what I have said, I have already anticipated the great
part of what it is necessary to say, in answer to the very eloquent
speech which we have heard this evening:30 since that speech, eloquent
as it was, contained in it very few arguments which we had not heard
before, and none which give me any great alarm as to the effect which
they can produce on this Society. In truth, that speech is the most
difficult to answer of any—for the difficulty of refutation is usually
proportional to the insignificance of the arguments, and it is not easy
to reply, where nothing has been adduced.

Yet there are some things even in that speech which it may be of use to
notice and particularly the lesson which the gentleman recommends us to
take from the Greek and Roman democracies. I maintain, Sir, and if it
were required, I could prove that these democracies with which he
frightens us never had any existence: that the ancient governments were
all of them aristocracies, though sometimes with the forms of popular
government, and whatever evil they did, is fairly chargeable, not upon
democracy, but upon aristocracy. If however, the Honourable Gentleman
should dispute this, and should affirm that these governments were real
democracies, let it be as he pleases: but if they were democracies, it
is not such a kind of democracies that I advocate: and I tell the
Honourable Gentleman for his information, that what I want is a
representative democracy, such as exists in the United States of
America, and never existed any where else, giving him leave however, to
tack a king and peers to it if he pleases, for I shall not enter upon
this question at present.

The strong point of the Honourable Gentleman’s argument seems to be,
that all I have urged is theory. If by calling it theory he means to
allege that it is unfounded, this is precisely the question on which we
are at issue. I dare him to the proof, but if by theory, he means
general principles I agree with him: every opinion in politics involves
a theory: the question is, not whether it is a theory, but whether it is
true. After accusing me, however, of being governed by theory, he
proceeded to inform us that he himself is governed by experience: and it
may be so: but experience, Sir, is a word of double acceptation. The
quack is guided by experience, as well as the philosopher: examine well
the doctrines of this gentleman, and you will find that it is precisely
the experience of the quack, which he is unconsciously passing off upon
himself. Wherein consists the experience of the quack? He has tried his
nostrum, and the patient has survived: he knows this, and it is evident
that he knows no more. But he tells a different story; according to him,
experience teaches, not only that the patient has survived, but that it
is his drug which has saved him: all he really knows is that it has not
killed him. Yet he calls this experience. It is the same sort of
experience which has been quoted against me. The British Constitution is
excellent: Why? because the country is prosperous; a Edition: current;
Page: [284] bold assumption: but granting that the country is
prosperous: what does it prove? Why, that the country is prosperous: of
the cause it proves nothing: except that there must have been some
cause: but when we go farther and endeavour to ascertain what that cause
is, this is not fact, but inference; not practice, but theory. So much
for the quack: now for the scientific physician. Is it enough for him
that a medicine has been tried once, twice, or a hundred times? No, Sir,
his experience is of a different sort: he reasons from the properties of
the human body, and so, Sir, I reason from the properties of the human
mind. Is there any better mode of reasoning? If there is, let the
Honourable Gentleman point it out, but if not only there is no better
mode of reasoning, but no other which is not sure to mislead, and if the
Honourable Gentleman openly rejects the only correct mode of reasoning
by proclaiming his aversion to theory, it only proves what we all knew
before, that to be an orator, and to be a philosopher, are two very
different things.

When I wish to foretel men’s actions, I endeavour to put myself in
possession of the motives under which they act, and to see how other men
would act in their situation.

Sir, I deny that we have experience of the British Constitution. In any
sense in which experience can be said to prove any thing, we have no
experience of it. It is not true, even between two forms of government
both in actual operation, the one attended with happiness, the other
with misery, that we could at once decide the one government to be good,
the other bad. There are a thousand causes of prosperity besides good
government. But even this sort of experience, inadequate and
inconclusive as it is, is much better, much more deserving of the name
experience, than any that we have of the British Constitution. You say,
we are happy under the British Constitution—therefore no reform is
needed. Do you know what it is you say when you assert that no reform is
needed? You think, perhaps, that you are only affirming the British
Constitution to be good: but you affirm a great deal more: you affirm
that the proposed form of government is not so good. You hold up
experience, specific experience, as the only ground of inference: and
here you are found vituperating a Constitution of which you not only
have no experience, but obstinately refuse to have any. You assume a
great deal more than you would be entitled to assume, even if the
reformers’ Constitution had been tried and failed: since even then it
would have been premature to affirm that it had failed in consequence of
its badness. On what ground do you affirm that the plan of the reformers
is ineligible? From experience? but you have none: From its presumed
tendency—This is something. Well then it is on this presumed tendency
that we are willing to meet you. And I ask from what is the tendency of
a government to be presumed, but from those general principles of human
nature, and of political philosophy, which under the name of theory you
cry down as visionary and chimerical.

I will not lengthen a speech already too long by going into any other of
the Edition: current; Page: [285] gentleman’s arguments: but I think, on
the whole, that the pleas of him and his supporters are remarkably
curious and instructive. I have often thought that if all the arguments
which have been urged against reform were noted down and collected
together, they would form a singular exhibition. These arguments are
numerous and cogent. First of all, they are all villains, who say that
reform is necessary. This is sound and substantial: and why: because
they are all villains, who dare to dispute it. Well! this is one
argument, favour us with another. The Greeks, or, more properly speaking
the Athenians, were all villains; and at a time when all the rest of the
world was distinguished for civilization and morality they were sunk in
the lowest brutality and barbarism. A third reason why the British
Constitution needs no amendment is, that the people who say it does are
called Radicals. A fourth reason is that Mr. Canning says it is not
needed.31 A fifth which may be called the argumentum ad hominem, and
which is the standing argument of the John Bull against great reform is
that Mr. Hume’s name is Joseph, that he was a surgeon in India, and made
a small fortune there; that he very often speaks scotch, and often makes
grammatical blunders.32 A sixth reason is, that Robespierre cut
throats.33 A seventh reason is that George IV is the best of princes. An
eighth reason is, that Cobbett and Hunt34 are rather suspicious
characters. A ninth reason is, that the world has always been very
foolish, and therefore there is no reason it should improve. It was
reserved for a member of this Society to furnish a tenth, viz. the
goodness of our dinners and coats, and the beauty of our women. It
remains to be seen whether this Society will give their votes in favour
of a cause for which these are the choicest and best of the arguments
which can be urged; or whether they will not rather pronounce that a
Constitution which has produced the Game Laws, the Corn Laws, and the
Court of Chancery,35 is more worthy of the barbarous age which gave it
birth, than of the civilized age which is now called upon to gaze and
worship without inquiry.

Edition: current; Page: [286]


7.: Population: Proaemium
 1825

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/2. Inscribed in pencil in Mill’s hand,
“Proaemium / of a speech / on population.” Typescript, Fabian Society.
On internal evidence, prepared for the first of the debates between the
Utilitarians and the Owenites at the latter’s Co-operative Society in
1825; judging by No. 8, however, Mill did not speak during the first
session, so this “proaemium” probably was not delivered. As not
published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

mr. chairman, If among those whom I now attempt to address there be any
one who has ever been placed in the situation in which I stand, he is
capable of appreciating the difficulties under which I labour. When a
question is proposed, in comparison with which the questions which have
hitherto been deemed the most important, are but as a feather in the
scale—a question of such magnitude that if mankind were right on every
other subject, and wrong on this, there would need no more to ensure
their perpetual misery and degradation; he who undertakes to bring such
a question before you, had he the logic of an Aristotle and the
eloquence of a Demosthenes, would at all times have a difficult task to
perform. But I who am not more conscious of the inexpressible importance
of the question, than I am of my utter inability to do it justice; I who
am so little habituated to public speaking, that even my thoughts and my
reasonings, feeble as they may be, will appear still feebler by my
manner of expressing them;—and who to all my personal disadvantages, add
the farther disadvantage of not even being a member of the Society, upon
whose indulgence I venture to throw myself,—I must indeed be
presumptuous, indeed vainly and arrogantly confident, if I did not feel
considerable embarrassment in entering upon the task which I have
proposed to myself,—and you will readily believe that my embarrassment
is not diminished, by the unpopularity of the opinions, which I have
undertaken to advocate. They are indeed opinions of which it has been
little the fashion in this country to speak well. Men of the most
opposite principles have united in reprobating them: Tory, Whig, and
Radical, however they may differ in other respects, agree in heaping
opprobrium upon the opinions which I hold, and which I am about to
express: and to crown all, though these opinions owe their chief
celebrity to their having been promulgated by a parson,1 other parsons
have not hesitated to stigmatize them as unchristian and impious. There
is no evil however without its good: and the very unpopularity of my
cause is in some respects a circumstance in my favour. It may convince
you of one thing: that as there is no credit to be gained by advocating
such Edition: current; Page: [287] a cause it is not for the sake of
gaining credit, that I have espoused it: that as there is no faction or
party by which it is not condemned, it is not devotion to any faction or
party which numbers me among its supporters; in short, that nothing but
sincerity in my opinion, and a deep conviction of its importance, can be
in any way concerned in bringing me here: and if sincerity and
conviction give any claim upon your attention, if you value them as I
do, far beyond the brilliant talents of the advocate,—I venture to hold
myself assured of a favourable hearing.

To me, Sir, who have so many causes to fear it may be allowed at least
to deprecate one of them: to hope that those who hear me will not be
alarmed at the supposed dryness of the subject, nor fear to be wearied
if they apply their attention to it. I am well aware that the most
interesting subject may be made dry by being unskilfully treated, and if
through a defect in power of thinking, energy of language, or skill in
illustration, I should fail of exciting that attention which I have
ventured to request, the fault is in me, and not in my hearers. All I
ask is, that they will not confound the defects of the speaker with
those of his cause, nor believe that the subject is devoid of interest
and importance, because I may fail to shew that it possesses the one or
the other. It is not indeed such a subject as is commonly selected for a
debating society. It gives little scope to panegyric on the one hand, or
invective on the other. It leaves little room for vivid painting, for
glowing and poetical description. It affords no place for elegant
metaphor, or florid declamation. If a subject in which the happiness of
the mass of mankind is involved in a degree far surpassing almost any
other question which can be named—if such a subject can be a dry one,
this subject is dry indeed. But if in the estimation of this Society, a
question is dry, in proportion as it is frivolous and useless,
interesting in proportion as it is great, comprehensive, and important,
then, Sir, a more interesting question than the present never was
proposed in this Society.


8.: Population
 1825

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/2 (first part); typescript carbon copy,
from Ney MacMinn headed (in ink) “[Population]” (second part). MS of the
latter formerly in possession of Harold J. Laski, who edited it with No.
9 below as “Two Speeches on Population by John Stuart Mill,” Journal of
Adult Education, IV (Oct. 1929), 38-48. Assigned on internal evidence to
the first of the debates between the Utilitarians and the Owenites at
the latter’s Co-operative Society in 1825. Because the manuscript of the
second part has not been located, the typescript and printed versions
have been collated.

i scarcely expected, Sir, when I entered the room on the last evening of
discussion, that any thing could have added to my persuasion of the
truth of the Edition: current; Page: [288] principle of population. That
principle appeared to me to rest upon evidence so clear and so
incontrovertible, that to understand it, is to assent to it, and to
assent to it once is to assent to it for ever: I flattered myself, that
I understood it completely; I assented to it without any reservation;
and I could not have believed that any discussion could have rendered my
comprehension of it more clear, or my assent to it more confident and
undoubting. Sir, that which I did not conceive to be possible has
actually come to pass: I have been strengthened in my opinions by the
discussion which they have undergone. It is not that any new evidence
has been brought forward in their support, or that I have heard any
thing advanced in their favour of which I was not previously aware. I
knew all which could be said on our side of the question; but I knew
not, nor was it possible to foresee, how little could be said on the
other. Gratifying as it was, Sir, to hear my own opinions so eloquently
and powerfully advocated as they were on the former evening by my
Honourable friend,1 yet even this was not half so gratifying as to find
that those who attempted to answer him, not only did not refute his
arguments, but did not venture even to look them in the face.

It was objected to my Honourable friend on the former evening that he
did not understand Mr. Owen’s system.2 That objection will not apply to
me. I flatter myself that I do understand Mr. Owen’s system; if not in
its details yet in its general principles. Should I unintentionally
commit any misstatements with respect to the system, I hope that some of
the gentlemen on the other side will do me the favour to set me right.
But I must say that it appears to me a very suspicious circumstance
attaching to Mr. Owen’s system, that whenever we bring forward any
arguments against the principle of that system, they constantly meet us
with the assertion, that we do not understand the system; but at the
same time, they do not tell us in what respect we have misconceived the
system, in order that we may misconceive it no longer.3

The charge which was brought against my Honourable friend, of not
understanding Mr. Owen’s system, was in the first place untrue, and if
true, it was irrelevant. Untrue, because notwithstanding the vehemence
with which Mr. Owen’s friends have reiterated the charge, they have as
yet failed of shewing any one instance, in which he has misrepresented
the system. Irrelevant, because if it were ever so true, that my
Honourable friend does not understand Mr. Owen’s system, we are not now
discussing Mr. Owen’s system, but the principle of Edition: current;
Page: [289] population: and in any other assembly than this, the
principle of population might have been discussed without adverting to
Mr. Owen’s system at all. It is true that if we should come to the
conclusion that no system which does not provide a check to population
can possibly be of any permanent utility, and if Mr. Owen’s system does
not provide a check to population, Mr. Owen’s system must be as
inefficient as the rest. But this proposition, however closely it may
follow as a corollary from the principle of population, surely is not a
part of the principle; still less is the truth of the principle of
population itself in any degree dependant upon the goodness or badness
of Mr. Owen’s system. The principle of population would have been just
the same, though Mr. Owen and his system, had never been heard of. First
settle the general principle, and then there can be no difficulty in
applying it to the particular case. If the principle of population can
be shewn to be a necessary consequence of the immutable laws of nature,
it follows of course that neither Mr. Owen nor any other person, not
commissioned to work miracles, can have it in his power to set these
laws aside.

I wish, Sir, to make this subject as clear as possible: and when the
clearness of the subject has been impaired, and the difficulty of coming
to an agreement, a difficulty already so great, has been still afarthera
enhanced by the different meanings which different speakers have chosen
to attach to a word, I am willing to give up that word, and to sacrifice
whatever advantage my case might have derived from its employment,
rather than that any unnecessary obstacle should stand in the way of a
clear understanding of the subject. In the present discussion it appears
to me, that some such confusion as I have described has arisen from the
application of the word capital: a word which almost all the speakers
have employed, and which scarcely any two of them seem to have
understood in the same sense. One gentleman has confounded capital with
money, and insisted that production could go on without capital, because
it would go on if we had leather money instead of gold and silver: which
is certainly true, but nothing at all to the purpose. Another gentlemen
understands capital to mean nothing more than the materials and the
instruments of production. Another extends it a little wider, and
includes under it the whole of the surplus which remains after the
immediate wants of the labourer have been supplied: and others, of whom
I am one, include under the word capital, all that portion of the
produce which is in any shape whatever applied to the purpose of
reproduction: whether as buildings, implements, materials, or in paying
or feeding the labourers. A word which has so many significations is
unfit for philosophical discussion, and I shall discard, not only the
name, but the very idea which it implies. In doing this, I wish it to be
understood how great is the concession which I make. The whole of the
arguments of Mr. Owen’s friends are founded upon the assertion, that
subsistence will follow mouths.4 Now, granting Edition: current; Page:
[290] this, I might fairly reply, that subsistence must precede mouths.
Obvious and important as this proposition is, I will consent to waive
it. I will consent to argue, as if, in order to set the labourers to
work, it were not necessary to have accumulated a previous supply of
implements, buildings, seed and material together with food sufficient
to maintain the labourers, at least till the first year’s harvest could
be gathered in. I will consent to let the controversy rest upon this
single question, whether subsistence would follow mouths.

Now, Sir, I admit that subsistence would follow mouths; that every
addition to the mouths would occasion an addition to the subsistence,
but I maintain that the addition to the subsistence would be not by any
means proportional to the addition to the mouths; I maintain that there
would be a much greater addition to the mouths than there would be to
the subsistence, and consequently that the condition of the whole would
be deteriorated. I rest this assertion, upon the immutable laws
prescribed by nature with regard to the productive powers of the soil.

It is a well known fact that after a piece of land has been cultivated
up to a certain point, any further increase of cultivation must be
attended with a considerable diminution of return. If the labour of ten
men on the soil, produce a return of ten bushels, the labour of a second
ten men, superadded to the former ten, will not produce so much as ten
bushels, and the twenty together will not be able to produce so much as
twenty bushels, probably not more than seventeen or eighteen. By
increasing the labour you increase the return, but not in the same
proportion. By doubling the labour, you do not double the return. It is
perfectly clear, therefore, that if the first ten labourers had not more
than enough to eat, when they had ten bushels to themselves, the twenty
will not have a sufficiency, when they have only seventeen or eighteen
bushels among them. If another ten labourers be added to the population,
the return to their labour will be still less: probably not more than
five or six bushels. An addition of ten to the population causes an
addition of five or six only, to the production; there will now be
thirty labourers and they will only have twenty four bushels among them:
they will therefore be still worse off than before.

This is the death blow to the gainsayers of the principle of population.
They all say, as so many persons said in this room that subsistence
would follow population. I answer—so it would; but as soon as that point
of cultivation was attained, at which any further application of labour
to the soil is attended with a diminution of return, subsistence would
follow population it is true, but it would follow at a rate which is
much slower, and which is every day growing still slower than before; it
would follow at a limping, halting pace, and would be continually
falling more and more behind.

What that point is, it is impossible exactly to say, but that there is
proof positive that not in this country alone, but in almost all the
countries of the old Continent, it has been long since attained. The
proof is that in all these countries it has been found necessary to
cultivate the barren soils. Land as is well known, is of various degrees
of fertility. In this country land even of the ninth and tenth degree of
Edition: current; Page: [291] fertility bhasb long since been taken into
cultivation. But it is demonstratively certain not only that we should
never have cultivated the ninth and tenth, but that we should not even
have cultivated the second quality of land, if we could have gone on
applying our labour to the land of the highest quality, without any
diminution of return as at first. If the labour of ten men on the best
land produces ten bushels, and the labour of ten men on the second best
can produce only nine, so long as every additional ten men could
continue on the best land to produce ten additional bushels, it could
never be the interest of anybody to employ them upon the second best,
and produce no more than nine. The farmer who had, as almost all farmers
have, land of all degrees of fertility on his farm would employ all his
labourers in adding to the productiveness of the best land and would
leave all the other land untouched. But does this happen? We find on the
contrary that the inferior lands are cultivated; and some lands are in
cultivation, which with a given quantity of labour do not yield probably
one tenth part as much as the best land of all. And how, I once more
ask,—how can this be accounted for? Why should the farmer employ any of
his labourers on the inferior lands, if he could employ them to greater
advantage on the better qualities? He can have no reason but one: and
that one is satisfactory. The better sort of lands are now cultivated up
to so high a point that any additional labour employed upon them would
not now yield a greater return than it does upon the very worst lands
which are at present in cultivation.

This great truth—the limited fertility of the soil—was the grand
proposition of my Honourable friend’s speech: it was the basis, on which
his whole argument was founded. Most extraordinary it is, that not one
of those who answered him condescended to notice this fundamental
principle, but went on assuming that every addition to population, would
occasion an equal addition to the produce, just as if the contrary had
never been demonstrated. Even now, when the proposition has been
separated from the various other propositions which my Honourable friend
was under the necessity of mixing up with it, and held up naked to the
view of this assembly—I cannot expect that a truth so new to most of
those who are present, should be acceded to at once. It will doubtless
be objected, that a very small proportion of the population can and does
produce food for the whole; and that the period when there shall be any
danger of a deficiency of subsistence, if indeed it can arrive at all,
is at any rate far distant.

Let us give to this objection as much as it is worth. Let us suppose
that a community is established, on the principle of Mr. Owen.5 A
gentleman on the other side has affirmed that in his native county one
man can produce food sufficient for the support of five.6 Let us suppose
then that in this community, one Edition: current; Page: [292] fifth of
the population is employed in the production of food, and the remaining
four fifths in the production of clothing, of lodging, and the other
necessaries and conveniences of life, in the practice of medicine, in
the cultivation of knowledge and in the government of the community, for
some sort of government I presume would be needed even under Mr. Owen’s
system. I shall suppose also that food sufficient for the whole
community could at first be raised, without having recourse to any but
the very best quality of land, and without being reduced to the
necessity of applying labour even to the best land with a diminution of
return. This, it is to be observed, is granting much more to the system
than the warmest of the panegyrizers have as yet ventured to claim. No
one has as yet affirmed that under Mr. Owen’s system food for the whole
community could be raised on the very best land. When we consider how
very limited in extent in this and most other countries land of the
highest quality is, and how small a proportion it bears in this country,
not only to the whole land of the country, but even to the whole of the
land which is in cultivation, it is obvious that I am granting
infinitely more than the boldest of my antagonists would dare to ask.
Yet I do grant it, because I have no occasion to deny it; false though
it be, my argument would be equally good if it were true. Let us see,
then, what would be the consequence.

Population would increase, additional mouths and additional hands would
be brought into play; these additional hands, if applied to the best
soils, would not produce a proportional increase of return. They must
either be applied to inferior soils, or to a higher cultivation of the
best; in either case they would be attended with an additional, but not
proportionate addition to the return. If one man could previously raise
food for five, one man, probably could now raise food for no more than
four. As it is one of Mr. Owen’s rules that no other article shall be
produced, until the community is supplied with all the food which it
requires,7 a greater proportion than before must betake themselves to
the production of food. One fifth of the population was formerly
sufficient to produce subsistence for the whole. One fourth would now be
requisite. Three fourths only, instead of four fifths would remain to
supply the other wants of the community. These wants therefore could not
be so well supplied as before. If the community was not previously
better clothed, better lodged, better attended when sick, and better
governed than enough, they could not now be well enough clothed, well
enough lodged, well enough attended nor well enough governed.

If population went on, the time would speedily come when one man would
be unable to produce more food than enough for three. One third of the
population must now be employed in raising food; and two thirds only
would remain for other purposes. With every increase in population, the
proportion employed in raising food must be increased; it would rise
from one third to ½, from ½ to ⅔, ¾, ⅚; and from the properties of the
soil the progression would be very rapid; until at length the Edition:
current; Page: [293] labour of each man applied to the soil, would not
be able to produce more than enough for the subsistence of one. Then
must the whole of the population apply themselves to the production of
food. There would be no clothes, no houses, no furniture. There would be
no physicians nor legislators. There would be nothing for elegance,
nothing for ease and nothing for pleasure; mankind would be reduced to
the level of a very low kind of canimal,c having just two functions,
that of raising, and that of consuming food. After population had
reached this point, if it were still to increase, the surplus, it is
evident, could not be supported. There would then not even be enough
food. Starvation must overspread the community, until the destruction of
the surplus population had reduced it again to that number for which
food can be provided, and food alone.

Let it not be objected that this period is far distant. The consummation
indeed, it is to be hoped, is far distant. The dreadful end of the
series might be long delayed, though not so long as may be supposed. But
though the end of the series may be distant, the series itself has long
since commenced. That progressive deterioration which if not checked
must end in destruction, commenced from the moment when it became
necessary to cultivate any but the finest soils. The cultivation even of
the second best land, demonstratively proved that additional labour
could not be applied to the best land without a diminution of return.
From that moment, every extension of cultivation drew and must draw a
greater and greater proportion of the labourers to the production of
food, and must leave a smaller proportion to the production of
everything else. Let Mr. Owen’s system be ever so admirable; let his
arrangements for the employment of labour be ever so efficacious: it
would nevertheless be true that unless the whole of the food requisite
for the nourishment of the community could be raised, not only without
cultivating any but the very best soil, but without expending more than
a very small quantity of labour even upon the best soil itself, every
increase of population must continually draw a greater and greater
proportion of the labourers to agriculture, leaving a less and less
proportion for all other pursuits, and consequently deteriorating the
condition of all. With every extension of cultivation, after the
inferior lands come under tillage, all must have less food, or less
something else.

There is only one case in which this would not be strictly true.
Although there would every day be a less and less proportion of the
population, to be spared for the production of the comforts and
conveniences of life, it is possible that by improvements in machinery
and more extended applications of the principle of the division of
labour, this smaller proportion might be able to produce enough for all.
That this principle has been powerfully called into action in this
country there can be no doubt; and it is the only cause why the increase
of our population was not stopped centuries ago by starvation and
misery. But as the increase of population is constantly going on; as the
proportion of labourers which can be spared from the Edition: current;
Page: [294] production of food is constantly diminishing; there must
likewise be a constant succession of improvements in production and we
shall be as ill off as before. But a constant succession of improvements
in production is what we cannot look for under any circumstances, and
least of all under Mr. Owen’s system, where the benefits of the
invention are to be shared with a hundred or a thousand others, and the
labour is for the inventor alone. That constant succession of
improvements which would be improbable even when the inventor is
permitted for a time to enjoy the entire fruits of his invention may be
pronounced impossible where he can have but a hundredth or thousandth
part.

From the moment then when additional labour can no longer be applied to
the best land with the same return as at first—a moment indicated by the
commencement of tillage on the inferior lands, the dfartherd increase of
population must deteriorate the condition of all, unless accompanied by
a constant succession of improvements in production. And even if it be
so accompanied: if for every man who comes into the world, a new
invention be made, which enables that man to add as much to the produce
as he does to the mouths which are to consume it: no one to be sure is
worse off, but give us the invention without the additional man, and all
will be better off. In every case, therefore, after inferior land begins
to be tilled, for every increase of population a portion of the physical
comfort of the people is sacrificed; or at any rate postponed to
something else. Up to a certain point it is desirable that it should be
postponed to something else. A certain density of population is
absolutely necessary for the complete enjoyment of the benefits of the
social union. Up to that point, it is desirable that population should
increase, even though it did take something from the physical comfort of
each. But beyond that point every increase of population, has the effect
of rendering the condition of each less favourable than it would
otherwise be; beyond that point, therefore, whether under Mr. Owen’s
system or any other system, an increase of population is not desirable.

I should like to know, Sir, what the gentlemen on the other side will
say in answer to this. One thing I hope will now be very clearly
understood. That unless they deny that original property of the soil, by
which an increased application of labour is attended with a diminished
rate of return, all that they can say is nothing to the purpose. They
may endeavour indeed to evade this principle—they may say that by the
application of labour, the most barren land may be made equal to the
most fertile, and this I know they will say; for this reason, because
they can say nothing else; but I have to request that when they do say
it, all who hear me will have the answer ready: It is this: You may
fertilise the most barren land—you may increase its produce tenfold: but
it must be by increasing the number of your labourers a hundredfold. A
gentleman declared on the former evening that if you had not twenty
times the produce, it is only because you have not twenty times the
Edition: current; Page: [295] population. The incorrectness of this
assertion, I hope is now evident. For my part, I am persuaded that not
with a thousand times our present population—indeed with no amount of
population—and with our present means of production, could we raise
twenty times our present produce. Without some gigantic invention, some
machine, or other mode of increasing the productive power of labour, all
the men in the universe concentrated onto this island, could not, I am
satisfied, raise more than three or four times our present produce.

After what I have said, it is scarcely necessary to state, how cordially
I agree in the resolution which was moved on the preceding evening,
“That, etc.”

There were two objections brought against the principle, which still
remain to be answered, and on which it may not be useless to add a few
words more.

A gentleman affirmed on the former evening that the principle of
population is unnatural: that it is contrary to nature and therefore
cannot be true. What he meant by nature, and unnatural, he did not tell
us: indeed he did not seem to know: nor did he offer any proof that the
principle of population is unnatural. What he meant by nature I cannot
tell: I will tell him what I mean by nature; I mean all the things which
we see and feel: the sun, moon and stars; men and animals, trees, plants
and shrubs; the earth with all its productions and these various
phenomena. If all this be not nature, I should like to know what is. Now
then, to what part of all this does the gentleman consider the principle
of population to be contrary? Is it contrary to the sun and moon?
contrary to the stars? contrary to the trees and shrubs? to the sea? to
the wind? to an earthquake or a volcano? If, Sir, as is abundantly
manifest, a man would make himself ridiculous by saying that the
principle of population is contrary to any of these, I should like to
know how that which is not contrary to any part, can be said to be
contrary to the whole.

But the gentleman may reply that it is contrary to some supposed law of
nature. If he can prove this, I have done. But to what law of nature is
it contrary? It is a law of nature that fire burns: is it contrary to
that? It is a law of nature that water freezes: is it contrary to that?
No, but it is a law of nature that to every application of additional
labour, the soil yields a diminishing return; and to this law of nature
it is so far from being contrary, that as I have shewn, it is a
necessary consequence of it.

If the word unnatural has any meaning at all, I suppose it has some
indistinct reference to the will of God. And this brings me to the other
objection which I promised to notice; that it is a libel on the Deity to
suppose that ehee would send mouths without sending meat to put into
them—that in short, the principle of population is an evil, and
therefore inconsistent with the benevolence of God. One would really
think, Sir, that there were no such thing as evil in the world—either
physical or moral. As long as any evil exists the argument of the
Honourable Gentleman is a dangerous one and may easily be carried a
great deal too far. In our present state of ignorance as to the final
causes of many things which we see upon Edition: current; Page: [296]
the earth, the existence of any evil appears to us inconsistent with the
divine benevolence. The principle of population is an evil it is true,
but certainly by no means an irremediable one: and he who can reconcile
the benevolence of God with the existence of war, pestilence, famine,
poverty, and crime might be able, one would think, to reconcile it also
with the principle of population. But if we admit, as we must do, that
in the present fconditionf of our knowledge the existence of these evils
under an all-wise and benevolent ruler is a mystery which we cannot
explain; let us at any rate allow as much to the principle of population
as we do to war, pestilence and famine and notg conclude that it does
not exist, because there is a difficulty in explaining it which it only
shares with all the other evils which afflict humanity.

So much for the religious objection; and with respect to the word
unnatural, I should be inclined to reverse the proposition of the
gentleman who made use of the word, and instead of saying that it is
unnatural and therefore cannot be true, I should say that it is true and
therefore cannot be unnatural.

If the gentleman says that the principle is repulsive to his feelings, I
answer, that this is the first time I ever heard that feeling is the
test of truth; that a proposition is true or false, according as we
happen to like or dislike it, and that there can be no such things as
unpleasant truths.


9.: Population: Reply to Thirlwall
 1825

Two MSS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/2. Two typescripts, Fabian
Society. (The typescripts conform to the two MSS.) Edited by Harold J.
Laski with No. 8 above as the second of “Two Speeches on Population by
John Stuart Mill,” Journal of Adult Education, IV (Oct. 1929), 48-61.
The first manuscript is headed in Mill’s hand, “Reply”; the second has,
again in his hand, on f. 6v, “In Answer to Thirlwall / Second speech on
population at the Cooperative Society” (“Second speech” originally read
“Two speeches”). The first manuscript ends, “Experience proves”; the
second, the initial folios of which are cancelled, has at the bottom of
the last cancelled folio, “Experience proves [cancelled that]”; the next
folio begins “and proves fully that” (see 305.17). The implication is
that the first manuscript is a revision (or fair copy) of a draft of the
first part of the speech, while the second manuscript (giving the rest
of the speech) was used by Mill without revision. As unpublished in
Mill’s lifetime, the speech does not appear in his bibliography.

the gentleman who opened the debate1 having been unavoidably absent upon
the two last adjourned discussions, and feeling himself incapable of
replying to arguments which he has not heard, has requested me to take
upon myself a task, Edition: current; Page: [297] which he has only the
alternative of imperfectly performing, or of declining altogether. I
regret the more deeply that unfortunate necessity which has thrown the
business of reply upon one so very ill qualified for it as I am, because
the difficulties of that business, difficulties at all times so great,
have been rendered unusually so at present by the unrivalled talents of
one, at least, of the gentlemen by whom the contrary side of the
question has been maintained.2 That gentleman, Sir, might fairly have
expected that the person who should be selected to attempt the arduous
task of effacing the impression which he has made, should be, not
perhaps his equal, for that would be too much to expect, but that he
should at least approach to an equality—he might have expected that his
opponents, if they could not have found an antagonist worthy to contend
with him, would at least have selected the most worthy whom they could
find, and not, as they have done, the most unworthy. But to whatever
degree I may regret that the task should have fallen on me; on me,
unfortunately, it has fallen, and though I am unable of my utter
incapacity to perform it as it ought to be performed,—though I well know
how little I can do; that little which I can do shall be done.3

aI have observed with no small satisfaction on this and the last
evening, that some of the most intelligent members of this society, have
not denied, or rather have tacitly acknowledged, the principle of
population, and have made it their chief object to prove that this
principle is not in any respect at variance with the doctrines on which
Mr. Owen’s system is founded. To what extent this opinion is correct,
and to what extent it is incorrect, I shall have other opportunities of
attempting to shew. In the mean time these gentlemen will excuse me if I
confine myself to the question which is more immediately before the
society,—whether the principle of population be true or false.a Several
of the speakers have maintained that it is false.

The most eloquent of these were the gentleman who closed the debate on
the second evening, and the gentleman who closed the debate on the third
evening.4 I Edition: current; Page: [298] have mentioned these gentlemen
together, because it is against what they have advanced that the few
remarks which I have to submit will chiefly be directed; but I owe an
apology to one of the gentlemen, for confounding under the same name an
eloquence of pomp, and glare, and tinsel, and frippery, and meretricious
ornament, with an eloquence which, in plain, but powerful language,
addresses itself to the understanding; for confounding one who treats
his audience like children, to be dazzled by a gaudy brilliancy of
colouring, with one who treats them like men, and I may add, like women,
of judgment and sense,—for confounding a dealer in tropes and figures
with a dealer in facts and arguments, even though the facts be
irrelevant, and the arguments sophistical. I am sure that I meant no
disrespect by the comparison, and I can with perfect sincerity assure
the two gentlemen concerned, that I know how to estimate them both at
their just value.

Before I reply to what has been said on the merits of the question, it
is necessary that I should take some notice of what has been said about
the question itself: because advantage has been taken of an inaccuracy
in the wording of the question, to stigmatize all which has been said on
one side of it as irrelevant. The tendency, it was said, of population
to increase faster than the means of subsistence, (if indeed there be
any such tendency) must be a law of nature: and it was pronounced to be
a gross absurdity to say, that in so far as human misery is referable to
social causes, it is referable, not to a social, but to a natural cause.
When a question is framed, as this was, upon the spur of the moment, it
is exceedingly difficult to preserve strict accuracy in the language,
and I doubt not that it will be in the recollection of many who are now
present, that the resolution was originally worded in a still more
objectionable manner than it now is. The framer of the resolution when
he entered the room, was not aware that he would be called upon to
propose a question: he had no time to consult with his friends, no time
even to consult with his own thoughts, but was compelled to write down
the resolution in the first terms which occurred to him, with all those
inaccuracies which at the moment were unavoidable, but which five
minutes’ notice would have prevented. It does not however follow because
the wording of the question was inaccurate, that all which has been said
upon it is irrelevant, and perhaps we did not the less speak to the
question in dispute because we did not speak to the question as it stood
upon the paper. Had I been consulted, I should most likely have proposed
to word the resolution as follows: That the condition of the great mass
of mankind can be permanently improved by no other means than by
limiting their numbers. The evils which may or may not have already
arisen from excess of population, I should have put entirely out of the
question. I should have said nothing of social causes, and the cavils
for which this word has given room would never have been raised or would
have been seen at once to be irrelevant. The word however, although it
may have been superfluous, was not altogether without a meaning; nor was
it introduced solely for the purpose of rounding a sentence. The meaning
which the proposer of the question evidently Edition: current; Page:
[299] intended to express, was that whatever quantity of human misery
may be referable to social causes, a still greater quantity of misery is
referable to the principle of population and that the evils occasioned
by the principle of population are of such a nature as no social
arrangement however perfect, can cure.

In my former speech,5 I advanced two propositions: that population has a
tendency to increase in a uniform ratio; and that subsistence, after a
certain point, can only be made to increase, in a constantly decreasing
ratio. If these propositions be made out, it inevitably follows that
after a certain point, any farther increase of population must be
detrimental. I took it for granted that the first of these
propositions,—the tendency of population to increase, would not be
disputed. I have rarely, if ever, heard it disputed. The other
proposition I have often heard disputed. I have often heard it
maintained, that with whatever rapidity population may increase,
subsistence can be made to increase as fast. It was therefore to the
refutation of this, the most common objection, that my arguments were
chiefly directed: and in the attainment of this object I have had more
success than I anticipated.6

bAlmost all the gentlemen who have spoken on the other side, have
tacitly abandoned this fallacy. One gentleman7 indeed did come forward
with something like it, though he did not seem to be altogether
conscious what he was saying. The opinion of this gentleman seemed to
be, that we should trust to the chapter of accidents. Some island might
be thrown up from the bottom of the sea. Some great agricultural
improvement might be introduced, which should effect as great a
revolution in the present modes of cultivation, as was created by the
introduction of the plough. I think Mr. Owen somewhere says, that the
time may come when instead of growing corn, we might be able to make
it—in which there might be no limit to population except the want of
elbowroom:8 and the gentleman seems to think that something of this kind
may possibly happen: to which I answer, possibly it may. The sky may
fall, and we may catch larks, but I should have a mean opinion of the
prudence of him who should trust to a contingency of this kind for his
supper. I certainly am not disposed to deny that an island may rise fom
the sea but without being very sceptical I think I may be permitted to
doubt whether it is quite sure to do so—and we might chance to find
ourselves in rather an unpleasant predicament, if we were to people the
island before we had it, and if after that it were never to come at all.
It will be quite time enough to people the island when we have got it.
In the mean time, there is no occasion for our starving ourselves, by
having a greater population than we can maintain. To live beyond the
means which we have, in consideration of those which the gentleman
thinks we may possibly Edition: current; Page: [300] have, at some
distant period, as it would be bad policy in a circle or a triangle, so
I am apt to think it could not be very good policy in a parallelogram.9b

I consider then the first10 of my two propositions as made out. I have
heard, however, to my surprise, a denial of the other proposition, the
tendency of population to increase, from the lips of both the gentlemen
to whom I am principally replying. I consider it a great triumph, Sir,
to have driven these gentlemen to this, which in my opinion is precisely
the most untenable ground upon which their doctrines can possibly be
put. I hope without much difficulty to make manifest to all who are now
present, that this my opinion is well founded.

In the first place, we were treated with an argument drawn from the
depths of natural philosophy. There is a necessary limit, we were told,
to the increase of population, because there is only a certain quantity
of life in the universe. As this is a mere assumption; as no proof was
offered, and as we were not even told where the proof is to be found; as
the gentleman who advanced it,11 rested it on his sole authority; I
might be permitted to dismiss it at once. No one can be required to
argue against a bare assertion: if I shew that it is a bare assertion, I
have surely done all that can be required. We were assured indeed with
great confidence, that it was a genuine deduction from all that was
known of chemistry and of natural philosophy. Of these sciences the
gentleman did not profess to know much; in which respect, his modesty
did him injustice: since he appears to have dived into the arcana of
nature with a boldness and success little short of miraculous: and
whether by long and patient enquiry, or by the mere force of his own
natural genius I cannot say, but he seems to have solved the great
problem which has engrossed the attention of chemists and physiologists
for centuries. We know, Sir, that philosophers, almost from the very
beginning of philosophy, have been engaged in the attempt to determine
what life is, and whether there be really such a thing as a vital
principle at all. But this gentleman has untied the Gordian knot; he is
not only perfectly familiar with that principle of life which has
hitherto remained imperceptible to all eyes save his own, but he can
measure it by the foot and by the yard—he can weigh it by the pound and
by the ounce: he knows exactly how much of it exists in the universe;
and no doubt, if properly solicited, he could inform us of its precise
colour, its shape, and its dimensions. The gentleman however seems to be
scarcely aware of the originality of his views. He referred us to the
writings of chemists and of natural philosophers. I do not know the
extent of the gentleman’s reading in chemistry and natural philosophy,
and as I have not the gift of divination, I cannot be supposed to know
who those philosophers are, by whose authority he wishes, though it is
scarcely necessary, to corroborate his own. But I too have paid some
attention to chemistry and natural philosophy. I do not indeed Edition:
current; Page: [301] lay claim to so much knowledge as the gentleman
possesses. I have stuck to experiment—I have not meddled with
mysteries—Nature has told me none of her secrets. But I have read, and I
trust not altogether without profit. I cannot say however that in the
course of my reading I ever met with this magnificent discovery; it was
reserved for the genius and penetration of Mr. Gale Jones. So new and so
important a truth ought not to be lost to the world. It ought not to be
confined within the walls of the Cooperative Society. I trust that we
shall shortly see it at full length, in the next volume of the
Philosophical Transactions. As however a philosopher who with so much
profundity combines so much modesty will doubtless not be offended at a
well meant suggestion, even though it should proceed from one whose head
is not yet even partially silvered over with years, I have a piece of
friendly advice to offer, which in the event of his determining to give
the public the benefit of his discoveries, he may not find altogether
undeserving of his attention. It is one part of the business of the man
of science to make assertions, but it is another part, more alien
perhaps to the fire of genius, but not for that reason the less
necessary, to prove them. As great philosophers as this gentleman, to an
exposition of the great truths which they have discovered, have not
disdained to join a succinct statement of the evidence, on which those
discoveries are founded. When Sir H. Davy, by means of the voltaic
battery, had decomposed the alkalis and earths,12 and made those other
glorious discoveries which have raised him to the very highest rank
among experimental philosophers, he did not say to the world, These
things are so, believe me for I have studied chemistry and natural
philosophy: No, Sir, he minutely described in the scientific journals
all the circumstances of the experiment, that others might have an
opportunity of verifying the truth of his discoveries: he opened his
laboratory to the world, that all might see the wonders which he
performed, and the means by which he performed them—he suffered not his
pupils to take any thing upon his authority; he placed the proofs before
them, and bid them doubt if they could. Perhaps it would not have
greatly impaired the splendour of this gentleman’s discovery, if he had
condescended in this respect to have imitated his great precursor; and
if he could not exhibit the proofs before our eyes, to have told us at
least where they were to be found.

As an admirer of moral courage, and a lover of free discussion, I should
be the last person to blame the gentleman for the honesty and manliness
with which he avowed his disbelief of one of the great doctrines of
Christianity, the doctrine of the creation; but I confess I was a little
astonished to find that he who knows so little of one being, because of
that being experience teaches us nothing, should yet know so much of
another being called the principle of life, of which, he must Edition:
current; Page: [302] surely acknowledge, that she teaches us as little.
I confess it did strike me as somewhat surprising, that the same person
should be so sceptical on the one hand and so dogmatical on the other.
But this is only one of innumerable instances to prove that it is among
the rarest of all human achievements to know when and where to doubt. It
is an easy matter, Sir, to doubt, but a very difficult matter to doubt
well; and there are a hundred persons who doubt much, for one who doubts
when he ought and only when he ought. We have good speakers, Sir, and
good thinkers, and good reasoners; but a good doubter may as yet be
truly pronounced to be rara avis in, etc.13

The other gentleman to whom I am replying14 took a different line of
argument. He did not deny—he did not profess to meddle with the power of
population to increase: but he denied that it had increased; and he
repeated after the second speaker of the same evening,15 that to ascribe
evil to a mere tendency, which has never had any practical operation, is
little better than absolute nonsense. This is plausible in appearance,
Sir, but in appearance only, for it is founded on ignorance of the
manner in which the increase of population is practically kept down. The
tendency of population to increase may not be the less a cause of
unspeakable misery, although the actual increase may have fallen far,
very far, short of the tendency. In order to know how far the tendency
to increase has been a cause of misery, it is not sufficient to know
what has been the actual increase: it must be known by what cause the
actual increase has been restrained. It is of little avail to say that
population has not doubled itself in 25 years, if it has only been
prevented from doubling itself by poverty and misery—that population has
been kept down is very little to the purpose, if it has been kept down
by starvation and disease. The gentleman must know that early deaths are
as sure a check to population as limitation of births, and unless he can
deny that early deaths with the diseases which lead to them are an evil,
I submit it for his consideration whether the tendency of population to
increase may not be a cause of abundant misery, even though that
tendency should not make itself visible in the population returns, even
though the population should not actually have increased.

But is it true, that population has not increased? In this country and
many others, the increase is so manifest that even he cannot deny it:
but forsooth in Greece and Asia, it has diminished. I can barely
conceive a mind so constituted as to consider this as a refutation of
the principle of population: but I for my part shall be satisfied, if he
will admit that in any one country, population has increased. I will
take America, or Ireland: in the one it is ascertained that population
has doubled in less than 25 years; in the other that it has increased,
in a century and a half, from less than two millions to more than seven.
On these premises I think I may venture to Edition: current; Page: [303]
assume that population in other countries has at least the physical
power of increasing at the same rate. I am not aware of any difference
in the fecundity of the female of the human species in different
countries. In warm climates, I believe, child-bearing begins earlier,
and terminates earlier: but if there be any difference in the duration,
it is a difference of too trifling a nature to occasion any material
inaccuracy in the conclusion. But if the physical power of increase be
the same, the difference can only be in the causes which counteract it;
and these causes are poverty, and prudence.16 In the countries to which
the gentleman has referred us, we happen to know that poverty is the
cause to which the extraordinary decay of the population is to be
ascribed; poverty—grievous and deplorable poverty—occasioned by the most
execrable government which ever cursed human kind. Does not the
gentleman know that in those countries neither person nor property
enjoys an hour’s security? That he who goes to bed a rich man knows not
that he may not rise from it a beggar, perhaps a slave? Let him consider
that under this yoke those countries have groaned for ages, and ask
himself whether it is wonderful that such countries should be
depopulated? That in such a state of things children are not born, or
are born only to die? True, there was a time when those countries were
populous, but why? because there was a time when those countries were
free.

A lame argument may occasionally be helped out by a great name, and
apparently with this view Mr. Cobbett’s name has been brought forward.
But if the gentleman was obliged to bring forward a name instead of a
reason, I think at least it should not have been Mr. Cobbett’s name.
That Mr. Cobbett is an able writer I do not deny: but it does not follow
that a man’s opinion is good for any thing because he has abilities;—it
is also necessary that he should have a little knowledge, and a little
principle. It is necessary, first that it should be quite certain that
he is speaking his real sentiments, and secondly, that there should be
at least some reason to believe that he knows what he is talking about.
It is one of the peculiar characteristics of Mr. Cobbett that he
pronounces with equal confidence upon the things which he knows, and
upon the things which he does not know; and he seems indeed to fancy
that he obtains that knowledge by inspiration, which in others is the
fruit of years spent in painful study. I can attach little weight to the
authority of a man who has professed in turns all opinions which suited
the accidental purpose of the moment—who affirms one thing one day, and
something diametrically opposite the next, but always with the same
confidence in himself, and contempt of all who question his
assertions—of a man who on almost every subject, has been found on all
sides except the right and who has tried all varieties of opinion except
common sense, and all kinds of morality, except common honesty.

But Mr. Cobbett, it seems, is of opinion that the population has not
increased, Edition: current; Page: [304] and why? because the churches
are empty.17 I have some difficulty in tracing any connection between
the premises and the conclusion. Mr. Cobbett perhaps thinks that
wherever there are churches there must at some time or other have been
people to fill them. I think I might fairly dispute even this
proposition. Mr. Cobbett says, and says truly, that in some parishes
there are not to be found twenty people in the church, and yet I will
consent to be judged by Mr. Cobbett himself, if in these parishes there
had hitherto been no church, and a church had now to be built for these
20 people, whether it would be built on a scale one inch smaller than it
is at present. The real truth I take to be, that the country was divided
into parishes, much more according to extent of space than amount of
population. It was necessary that every parishioner should be within a
moderate distance of the parish church, and there was of course a church
in every parish, whether there were people to fill it or not. But
suppose that when the churches were built there were people to fill
them, it surely does not follow that there were more. In those days,
every body went to church. In these degenerate days the churches are not
half full, and yet I do not remember that I ever saw a parish church
which would hold 1/20 part of the inhabitants, if they were assembled
together. We are to remember that those who go to church, do not all of
them go at the same hour—that a great many people go to the dissenting
parson—and a great many go to no parson at all.

It cannot well be expected, nor, after what I have said, is it
necessary, that I should follow the gentleman through his special
pleading with regard to Ireland, China and America. I have shewn as I
think the fallacy of the arguments by which he has attempted to prove
that population has not increased; and having done so much, I may safely
stop. I do not feel myself called upon to do more. And having now, I
hope, said enough to establish the existence of the evil, it is
necessary that I should still say something on the remedy.

The gentleman to whom I have so often alluded is pleased to deride that
expectation on which all our hopes of human improvement are founded, the
expectation of a gradual increase of prudence, among the people. To
expect so much philosophy from the bulk of mankind is in his opinion
altogether visionary: as if it required much philosophy to avoid leaping
into a gulph when it is gaping before us. I would not willingly renounce
these hopes, visionary as the gentleman may deem them. I expect more
from the diffusion of knowledge—more from the extension of education—I
was going to say more than the honourable gentleman, but we must
remember that he too expects no trifle from education. Let us reflect
what it is which he expects from education, and what it is which I
expect. I limit my expectations within a very moderate compass. I merely
expect that when mankind are taught to know their own interest, they
will follow it. He expects that through Edition: current; Page: [305]
the influence of education, they may be made to love their neighbours
better than themselves. The gentleman has at the same time two contrary
theories—the one, that education can do nothing, the other that it can
do every thing: both theories may be false, but both cannot be true. If
he holds fast to the opinion that education may bring men to a state in
which the public affections shall uniformly and universally predominate
over the love of indolence and of pleasure, there is little difficulty
in determining which of us expects most from education, the gentleman or
myself. If mine be a chimerical expectation, what are we to think of
his? If he denies that it is in the power of education to direct our
self-love, and affirms that it is in the power of education to overcome
it, I can only infer that he who has so keen an eye for the
inconsistencies of others, is as blind as a mole to his own.

To return to the alleged improbability of an increase of prudence among
the people. In human affairs, the criterion of probability is
experience. As the state of society which I contemplate has never yet
had existence, it cannot be in my power to quote particular experience
in justification of my expectations; but we have experience of the
general course of human affairs, and this experience, as far as it goes,
is all in my favour. Experience proves18 and proves fully, that men do
follow their interest more steadily, in proportion as they know better
what it is. It is easy to say that those who have most knowledge do not
always act the most wisely—but the gentleman I presume, will scarcely on
that account affirm that it is not the tendency of knowledge, to make
men act wisely. Nor have I ever yet heard of any other recipe of making
them wise except by giving them knowledge, uncertain as that method may
be. But we are not here under the necessity of contenting ourselves with
experience of this general kind. If we are to believe the gentleman,
moral restraint is impracticable—if we look around us, every thing
convinces us of its practicability. That prudence—that moral restraint
which in his opinion requires philosophy such as few among mankind can
ever be expected to attain, is actually practised to a greater or less
extent in every country with which I am acquainted except Ireland—that
ill-fated island I believe is the only country in the world where the
two sexes begin to propagate their kind as soon as nature enables them
to do so without the slightest thought of the future—and it is therefore
the only country where the mass of the people are reduced to the
smallest pittance which is sufficient to sustain life. I would not be
understood to mean that prudential habits prevail in any European
country to the extent which is desirable. One thing however experience
has fully established; that in proportion as the people are better
instructed, in that very proportion prudential habits prevail. If then
prudential habits have hitherto increased in a direct ratio with the
increase of knowledge, perhaps I shall not be far wrong in supposing
that they will continue to do so. Let us only observe what is passing
before our eyes. In this room I will suppose that there are 50
bachelors—and when I look at the numbers around me I Edition: current;
Page: [306] cannot suppose that there are fewer—I will venture to say
that of these 50 there are at least 40 who would willingly marry, and
are only restrained from doing so by prudential motives. When such is
the power of prudence, even in the imperfect degree in which it at
present prevails, perhaps in contemplating the possibility of
strengthening it to a degree which may eventually bring about all the
good that we desire, I am not far exceeding the bounds of a just and
reasonable expectation. To those, Sir, who can read the signs of the
times,19 there are even now indications that this process is going on.
It may perhaps be gratifying to the honourable gentleman, for though it
does not square with one of his theories, yet at the same time and for
that very reason it is in strict accordance with the other, that I have
some reason to know that prudential habits are rapidly gaining ground in
some of the most populous of our manufacturing districts; that a
knowledge that the wages of labour depend upon the number of the
labourers is rapidly spreading itself in these districts, and the
increase of prudence, which that knowledge cannot fail to engender, may
in time be productive of the happiest effects.

So much for the charge of indulging in chimerical expectations.

I have still one word of a personal nature to submit to you. It must be
a strong motive which can induce me in an assembly of this sort to speak
of myself, but there are occasions in which it is necessary, and this
appears to me to be one of them. The gentleman has accused me of not
having exhibited what in his opinion is a proper quantity of feeling—and
he thinks that if I had mixed up a greater portion of feeling in my
speech, I should have greatly improved the quality of the composition.
If the gentleman means, Sir, that the matter of my speech does not
derive that aid which it might do from the impressiveness of the manner;
that my delivery is not sufficiently warm and sufficiently animated—that
the tones of my voice are not sufficiently vehement and sufficiently
energetic—in short that I do not speak well—this may be true enough—and
the remark shall meet with that attention which any criticisms from such
a master of eloquence deserve. But if he means that in the substance of
what I have said there be any indications of a want of feeling, I dare
him to the proof. The question which I shall presently propose for the
succeeding discussion,20 is one which will give me an opportunity of
entering into considerable detail with regard to the state of society
which we contemplate as desirable, and of proving to you perhaps for the
first time the benevolent and philanthropic tendency of those opinions
which in your mind are perhaps connected with no ideas but those of
unfeeling cruelty or heartless indifference. Time does not permit me to
enter into such a detail at present. In the mean time however there is
one observation which I will not restrain myself from uttering: That I
look with great suspicion upon people who are constantly for introducing
Edition: current; Page: [307] feeling every where but in its proper
place—that I have indeed heard, as the gentleman supposes, that appeals
to feeling are out of place in a philosophical enquiry where the object
is to instruct and not to persuade: that I have heard, and believe that
feeling ought to be subordinate to reason, and not supreme over her, and
that the province of feeling commences where that of reason ends.
Feeling has to do with our actions, reason with our opinions; it is by
our reason that we find out what it is our duty to do; it is our
feelings which supply us with motives to act upon it when found. Let
these two operations be kept as they always ought to be kept, separate,
and let feeling no more encroach upon the province of reason, than
reason upon the province of feeling. The gentleman has quoted Plato,21
he must be well aware that this maxim holds a distinguished place in the
ethical system of that great philosopher; of which system in truth it is
the very foundation; but I do not adopt it because it is the language of
Plato but because it is the language of truth. When gentlemen talk of
introducing feeling into a question which ought surely to be decided by
arguments, and not by feelings, I am somewhat at a loss to understand
what it is that they mean. Do they mean that feeling ought to supersede
reason entirely? and if not entirely to what extent? Do they mean that
we ought to arrive by feeling at the very same conclusions at which we
should arrive by reason? or that we ought to arrive at different
conclusions? In the first case their appeal to feeling is unnecessary:
in the second, it is fraught with mischief and absurdity. Let feeling be
kept strictly to its proper function, that of stimulating our exertions
in that course which reason points out. But in the mean time I must
protest against any verdict which may be pronounced against the moral
part of my character merely from an observation of the intellectual, and
I must beg gentlemen not to suppose that I am destitute of feeling for
no reason perhaps but because my feelings are under better regulation
than theirs. No, Sir: if I am to be condemned for want of feeling, I
will have a fair trial—I will be tried in the proper province of
feeling—I will be tried in action—and if I am found inferior to any of
Mr. Owen’s disciples or to Mr. Owen himself, in the steady and laborious
pursuit of the best of ends by what my reason tells me to be the best of
means, let me be shaken contemptuously from the balance in which I shall
have been weighed and found wanting,22 and let Mr. Owen and his
disciples trample upon me as they will.

I might say more of myself if I had not already taken up much more of
your time on that subject than is warranted by its importance. I have
only now to state that in the loose and inaccurate way in which the
Resolution is worded, it is not the intention of the proposer to press
it to a division.

Edition: current; Page: [308]


10.: Cooperation: First Speech
 1825

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/3. This fragment, which internal
evidence suggests is part of Mill’s first (intended) speech on
Cooperation, in the second debate between the Utilitarians and the
Owenites at the latter’s Co-operative Society, is written on the back of
an East India Co. document, not earlier than 1823. As not published in
Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

the side of the question which I mean to espouse being unfortunately
very far from popular in this society, I should feel considerable
apprehension in addressing you, did I not know that this society
consists of persons, who having thrown off the yoke of authority,
venture to think for themselves, and who therefore cannot fail to be
indulgent to others who mean to claim the same privilege. They whose
opinions are founded upon reflection are always ready to give a fair
hearing to others. It is only the slaves of authority, who are anxious
to stifle discussion; those who are unable to give a reason for the
opinions which they hold, and who are therefore aware that their only
chance of success consists in silencing opposition.

I should be extremely sorry, if any thing that I may say this evening
were to be interpreted in a sense disrespectful to any of those whose
doctrines I take the liberty of opposing. For those of them who honor me
with their acquaintance I have the highest possible respect. Of Mr.
Robert Owen in particular, I can join my testimony.1


11.: Cooperation: Intended Speech
 1825

MS, Connecticut College. Inscribed in Mill’s hand: “Speech at the
Cooperative Society / Not delivered.” The speech (like Nos. 10 and 12)
was undoubtedly prepared for the second of the two debates between the
Utilitarians and the Owenites at the latter’s Co-operative Society in
1825. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

at the last meeting of this Society the opinions which I hold were
assailed with a variety of epithets, expressive of hatred and contempt.
I shall not follow this example: I shall not call Mr. Owen’s theory a
spurious theory nor shall I say that it ought to be torn into tatters
and scattered to the winds. But I shall endeavour to shew that it is
founded on mistaken views of human nature and of the course of Edition:
current; Page: [309] human affairs; and that the end which its
supporters have at heart, the greatest happiness of the greatest
number,1 would not be attained, but frustrated, by the adoption of the
means which they so warmly recommend.

Before I submit to this Society, my view of the subject, I deem it
proper to offer some few remarks on the principles, which were so ably
put forward by a gentleman2 on the last evening, as the basis on which
the system of Mr. Owen is founded.

The first of these principles is, that labour is the only source of
wealth:3 that the wealth of a country is wholly produced by labour, and
that all other classes are supported out of the produce of labour. From
this it was inferred, that the burden of poor-rates is wholly borne by
the labourer, that all other classes are living at the labourer’s
expense, are receiving a portion of that which of right belongs to him,
and which they either extort from him by force, or which at least they
owe to his charity and forbearance.

In answer to this, it was observed on the preceding evening that wealth
is indeed the produce of labour, but not of unassisted labour: and if
other classes enjoy a portion of the produce of labour, it is not
without giving some sort of an equivalent in return. It is of very
little use to tell the labourer that it is he, and not the capitalist,
who is the producer of wealth, when the labourer knows well that if the
capitalist deserts him, he must starve. Turn out a labourer or if you
please a score of labourers into an untilled field, of whatever
fertility, even the finest soil in the world—and without the aid of the
capitalist, what can they produce? Nothing; absolutely nothing. It is
not then labour alone, which produces the national wealth, but labour
assisted by tools, assisted by seed, or materials, and supported by a
previous supply of accumulated food. It is the capitalist who supplies
all these; and is not the capitalist entitled to some remuneration for
this assistance? Is it not the interest of the labourers themselves,
that he should be remunerated for it? Can it be expected that he would
afford this assistance, if he were not remunerated?

These things having been stated on the preceding evening, the gentlemen
on the other side brought forward in reply, an argument which they
seemed to think a complete coup de grâce to their opponents, and which,
judging from the applause with which it was received appeared so to most
of the persons present. This capital, said they, these tools, this seed
or material, and this accumulated food, was itself the produce of
labour. Well; so it was: and what then? Why, then it all belonged to the
labourer, and consequently it was not the capitalist who afforded the
capital, it was the labourer who produced it, and the capitalist took it
from him, and now demands a remuneration for allowing him to make use of
that which is of right his Edition: current; Page: [310] own. This was
the argument. I hope I have stated it fairly; if not, I request that
some gentleman will correct me.

Well, then, I proceed to point out the fallacy. The food, tools, seed,
and material, in one word the capital, is the produce of labour, sure
enough, but of what labour? They were not produced by the labourers who
consume them. They are the accumulated product of the labour of the
capitalists themselves, or of their ancestors, and they are wholly made
up of the savings from that labour. This may appear to many who hear it,
paradoxical, but I am entitled to be heard while I shew on what
foundation it rests.4

The journeyman weaver, the journeyman cotton spinner, the agricultural
labourer, and so forth, cannot say of the tools which they use, I made
them; they cannot say of the seed which they sow, or of the material
which they work up, I produced them; of the food which they eat, I
raised it from the ground. As individuals, therefore, it will be allowed
that they could not produce any thing, that they could not live, in
fact, unless the capitalists consented to cooperate with them in the
work of production. But then you will say, If they did not produce this
food, tools, etc., other labourers did. Very true; but how? Not unaided,
not by themselves; but with the assistance of other capitalists. Thus we
find that capital, although produced by labour, was not produced by the
unaided labour of any of the present generation, the present capital was
produced by the present labourers aided by a former capital: this former
capital was produced by former labourers, aided by a capital of a still
older date, and so on: All these capitals must have been paid for, or
they would not have been had: The labourers are under the necessity of
foregoing a part of what they produce, in order to obtain that
assistance, without which they could not have produced any thing: and
how far must we mount up in order to arrive at the period, when the
whole produce belonged to the labourer? Why, to the origin of the first
capital. Before there was any capital except the spontaneous produce of
the earth, the labourer was the owner of all that he produced. Let us
see then how capital originated, let us see who the first capitalist
was. Let us see how the other labourers were persuaded to let him rob
them of the fruits of their industry, that he might live in idleness at
their expense. They seem to have been easily duped by this cunning
fellow, to have been nicely taken in—No, Sir, this will not do. The
first capitalist was the man who laboured harder than his neighbours—the
man who worked when others were idle, or who saved when others spent.
This was the origin of capital. The first capital was produced by
labour, but it was by the labour of the capitalist: and it is to the
capitalist, and to him alone that it of right belonged.

The error lies in considering the labourer and the capitalist as men of
a different genus: like a man and a beast. It is true that at this
advanced stage of society, the same man is rarely a labourer and a
capitalist; but all capitalists were originally Edition: current; Page:
[311] labourers, or descendants of labourers, and all capital is the
saving from the produce of their industry.

The transformation of labourers into capitalists frequently takes place
even at the present day. A journeyman saves a small sum from his wages,
and sets up as a master: he begins in a small way; his business
gradually extends, and he becomes at length perhaps the richest man in
the country and if he does not, his son or his grandson may. Look at Sir
Robert Peel?5 Is not that his history? And all capital was originally
produced in the same way.

Two men produce the same quantity of food; one man squanders it all in
idleness, the other man goes on producing more and adding to his stock.
Thus one man obtains a great deal more than he has immediate occasion
for, and another man is starving. Well, the provident man says to the
spendthrift, You are a strong man, and have the physical power of
producing a great deal; but you are unable to work, because you have
squandered that food which ought to have maintained you while you were
working: I have food; come, and work for me: I will feed you; and you
will give me, all that you produce. Would you prevent him from making
this offer to his distressed fellow labourer? Would you prevent the
other from accepting it? Then you see the consequence: the one starves;
the other being unable to purchase the labour of others, has no resource
but his own labour, he is compelled to labour equally hard, whether he
saves or no, and of course he does not save.

Or I will alter the case. A labourer by the exertion of his ingenuity
invents an implement: a spade we shall suppose. With great time and
labour he makes this spade; and then says to his neighbours, Instead of
working for yourselves, come and work for me: With this spade, you will
be able to produce twice or three times what you can produce without it.
You will not indeed be suffered to retain the whole of what you produce,
but that portion which you will retain, exceeds the whole of what you
are now able to produce without the spade. The other labourers consider
the matter; they consider how much time and labour it will cost them to
make spades for themselves. And if they find that it will cost them more
time than the food which they possess will last, they accept the
proposal; and the inventor gets the reward of his ingenuity.

What then is the reason why there is a class of capitalists, and a class
of labourers? It is because one man has worked harder, or squandered
less, or had more skill, or more ingenuity, or a smaller family, than
another; and has thus acquired the means of paying others to work for
him, and because he has been permitted, at his death, to leave the
products of his industry to his children and those other persons whom he
holds most dear. The labourer therefore does not Edition: current; Page:
[312] support the capitalist any more than the capitalist supports the
labourer. The capitalist has nothing but what he or his ancestors have
actually produced by their labour, together with that which others have
voluntarily given them as a remuneration for the use of what they
produced. The fortune even of a Baring has no other source.6 Mr.
Baring’s father or grandfather or some of his ancestors produced a part
by the sweat of their brow; and in order to obtain the use of this part,
the labourers were willing to give to Mr. Baring a part of what they
produced, but what they could not have produced without his aid.

Having thus, as I think, shewn how utterly untenable are the doctrines
of my opponents, I shall endeavour to expound my own. And as the
spurious school of political economy has been charged with caring for
nothing but the accumulation of wealth, I will tell you, Sir, what are
my principles. They are these. That the working people being the
majority of the whole population, the interests of all the other classes
are of no importance compared with theirs. So far from thinking that
they are too well off I think that they never can be too well paid: that
they never can have too many comforts and enjoyments: and if it were
necessary I would willingly suffer every other person in the community
to starve, rather than that they should be inadequately provided with
the necessaries of life.

It is then an enquiry of no trifling importance, what the remuneration
of the labourer depends upon. In the present state of society, every one
here will agree with me that it depends upon competition. By
competition, I mean, the competition on the one hand, of capitalists to
get labourers, and on the other hand, of labourers to get employment.
Wages will be high or low, according to which of these competitions is
the greatest. When there is a greater number of labourers, compared with
capital, wages are low: when there is not a great number of labourers,
compared with capital, wages are high. I need not go, I presume, into
the proof of this proposition, which is indeed self evident.

This then being admitted, I say, that it is the tendency of population
to increase faster than capital; that consequently wages have a constant
tendency to fall; and therefore that every plan for ameliorating the
condition of the people, which is not founded upon a regulation of their
numbers, is futile and visionary.

It is acknowledged by my opponents that the working classes are in all
countries very inadequately provided with the means of subsistence.
Well, then, I ask, how this could possibly be the case, if population
had not always increased so fast as to overtake the most rapid
accumulation of capital? If capital on the contrary had increased faster
than population, wages would have been very high, and the labourers very
well off. Why is the fact so strikingly, so notoriously otherwise?

These gentlemen will probably tell us, that the cause of low wages is
the unequal Edition: current; Page: [313] distribution of wealth, which
gives so much to the other classes of society, and therefore leaves so
little to the labourers. And that if wealth were better distributed,
there would be enough for all.

Let us suppose, then, that wealth were distributed in the best possible
manner. I ask, would private property have any existence under that
system? I ask the question, because I wish to be informed, what
distribution of wealth these gentlemen would have. I pause for an
answer.

The gentleman has judged rightly. If private property had existence; if
the man who produced most, were suffered to have most, or if he who
saves instead of spending, were suffered to have an exclusive right to
that which he saves, there would in a few years be the same inequality
of property which is now so loudly complained of; we should soon see
those who have not working for those who have; wages would again be
regulated by competition, and the same cause which produces low wages
now, would produce low wages then.

Observe, then, these gentlemen renounce private property. With most
people, this would be considered a complete reductio ad absurdum. Let us
grant to them, however, the distribution of wealth which they wish for.
Let us place them in Mr. Robert Owen’s communities, and see what will
happen.

I will grant for the sake of argument that they would all be very well
off at first, though I might fairly dispute even this proposition7


12.: Cooperation: Closing Speech
 1825

MSS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/3 (main part), and Connecticut College
(conclusion). On the verso of the concluding folio (in Connecticut
College) appears, in Mill’s hand, “Cooperative Society / speech on the
Cooperative system.” Typescripts, Fabian Society. Edited by Harold J.
Laski, under the mistaken title, “Further Reply to the Debate on
Population,” Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, LXII
(1929), 225-39, 466-7. Prepared for the second debate, on Co-operation,
between the Utilitarians and the Owenites at the latter’s Co-operative
Society in 1825. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

were i to reply successively to all the objections which have been
advanced by different gentlemen in the course of the discussion, I
should count too much both upon my own powers, and upon the patience of
an auditory already wearied by so long a debate. It therefore gives me
some satisfaction to observe, that those whom I cannot now stop to
refute, have said, for the most part, nothing which was worth Edition:
current; Page: [314] refuting, and that those of our adversaries who
from their abilities have the strongest claim to be fairly met, are
precisely those who have made us the greatest concessions. If there be
any person in this room who has listened attentively, I will not say to
our arguments, but to those of the Goliath of our antagonists,1 and who
still persists in ascribing all the evils, or even the principal evils
of society, to competition,—I may be pardoned for supposing that my
reasonings can have little effect in altering a conviction, which has
been proof against those of Mr. Thompson. I cannot however lose this
opportunity of expressing my gratification on finding that there is one
person in this Society who does not see in us the advocates of vice and
misery, nor imagines that we must be the enemies of human improvement,
because we differ from this Society, with regard to the means by which
human improvement is to be attained. We are not the defenders of those
evils which Mr. Thompson so feelingly deplored. We are not the advocates
of the degradation of the working classes. We are not the advocates of
negro slavery; nor does Mr. Thompson himself lament more deeply than we,
that miserable thraldom in which the weaker half of our species are
held, by the tyranny of the stronger, aided and encouraged by their own
abject and slavish submission.2 But there is no question, I believe, in
this room, about these evils: let Mr. Thompson condemn them as strongly
as he will: he cannot condemn them so strongly that we shall not go
along with him. Unless therefore it can be shewn that these evils are
necessarily inherent in a system of individual competition, (which Mr.
Thompson himself has acknowledged they are not) I shall take the liberty
to dismiss them entirely from my consideration as totally irrelevant to
the question.

It seems to be allowed by the most intelligent members of the Society,
that a very great degree of happiness is attainable, under a system of
competition: That it is possible to attain a good government under a
system of competition,—that it is possible to obtain good laws, and a
good administration of them; and lastly, that it is possible, under a
system of competition, to give to the whole human race, a high degree of
intellectual and moral education. It is also allowed, that under a
system of free competition, combined with good laws, government and
education, and with a due regulation of the numbers of the people, every
labourer would enjoy the whole produce of his labour, with the exception
of what he might voluntarily give up, to obtain a greater good: And this
is the happiness which, by the admission of our opponents, is compatible
with individual competition. On the other hand, it was asserted in my
opening speech,3 and has not been denied, that the principle of
cooperation, considered merely in itself, and unconnected with those
other great changes to which I have alluded, would not afford an
adequate remedy to one of Edition: current; Page: [315] the great evils
which at present afflict the human race. By the principle of
cooperation, I mean the community of property; the fundamental principle
of Mr. Owen’s plan,4 and the only principle of that plan, to which I do
not assent. The Cooperative system might, and according to its
supporters would facilitate the attainment of good education, of good
laws, and of good government, and likewise the regulating of population:
but yet, the Cooperative system is not the same thing with good
government, good education, good laws, nor a regulated population, and
whatever may be the effect of these, is not the effect of the
Cooperative system, farther than as the Cooperative system may render
these things themselves, more easy of attainment. The Cooperative system
would not take off the taxes; it would not take off the tithe;
arrangements for education may be combined with it, but it is not itself
education. All which the Cooperative system of itself can do, is to add
to what the labourers already possess, the profits of stock and the rent
of land. Now I proved in my opening speech, on data the correctness of
which cannot be and has not been called in question, that rent and
profits, which in the present state of society, being collected into
large masses, make a vivid impression upon the imagination, and appear
to be much greater than they are, do not really exceed one tenth of the
produce; and if divided among those who already possess, with the
exception of taxes, the whole of the other nine tenths, would hardly
suffice to make a perceptible addition to their comforts, even if every
man were to work as many hours a day as he does now, which it is not the
intention of the promoter of the scheme that he should.

All idea therefore of that great and immediate addition which we were at
first told was to be made to the comforts of every person, by going to
live in a community, seems now, among the more intelligent members of
the Society to be given up, and they rest their case chiefly upon the
greater facilities which, in their opinion, the Cooperative system
affords to the attainment of good education and government and to the
regulating of population, and also upon the greater happiness which,
according to their ideas, it would afford the means of enjoying, when
good education and good government shall have been attained, and the
population regulated.

It is to the last of these topics that I shall in the first instance
advert. Mr. Thompson has favoured us with an enumeration of the evils
which he considers to be inherent in every system of competition. I know
not whether it will be expected that I should go over the whole list,
and drive him successively from every position which he has taken up:
but if I should not completely answer the whole of his arguments, I hope
it will not for that reason be supposed, that I am shirking or evading
any. An opinion, however erroneous, is much sooner stated than refuted.
To point out inconveniences, a superficial glance is commonly
sufficient. To lay open the mechanism by which those inconveniences may
be remedied, or in their Edition: current; Page: [316] turn rendered
instrumental to the production of a greater good, not only more labour,
but much more time is requisite. And yet, Sir, if in addition to all the
other things which I have to do, I were to bestow on the examination of
Mr. Thompson’s propositions only as much time as he occupied in stating
them, I leave you to judge when I should have done. I say this by way of
apology for the imperfect state in which my arguments will be presented
to you, but I hope still that I shall be able to give to those of Mr.
Thompson’s propositions which most require it, a full and satisfactory
reply.

He told us first that competition is incompatible with the full
operation of the principle of benevolence. His manner of proving this
was a remarkable specimen of the general mode of arguing which these
gentlemen adopt. He seemed to think that the principle of benevolence is
discarded whenever any other principle is brought to its assistance. The
object, said he, of competition, is and must always be, exclusively the
pursuit of wealth. He will not allow that there can be competition for
any other purpose. And even your physician, horrible to relate! when he
administers a medicine, or attends the sickbed of a patient, thinks more
of the one, two, or three guineas which he is going to pocket, than of
the honest fame which he may earn, or the service which he may render to
a suffering fellow creature. There cannot be two stronger objections to
a proposition, than first, that it is not true, and secondly that if
true, it is nothing to the purpose. Both these objections seem to me
peculiarly applicable to the proposition before us. With regard to its
truth, I will appeal to an authority which Mr. Thompson cannot well
dispute, since it is no other than his own. It is one of the accidents
to which a long speaker is liable, that before he has got to the end of
his speech, he occasionally forgets the beginning and blurts out the
direct contrary of that which he had previously maintained with all
imaginable emphasis, and with the fullest confidence. Thus in the early
part of Mr. Thompson’s speech, it suited his theory, that there should
not be competition for any thing except for wealth. Towards the close of
his speech, when he came to treat of the supposed tendency of
competition to occasion wars, it suited his theory that there should be
competition for a great many other things besides wealth; because we
know well that as every commercial country is interested in the
prosperity of its neighbours, competition for wealth between two
countries cannot exist. Competition, therefore, by his own admission is
not confined to wealth: the truth is, that there may be competition for
every thing—for good as well as ill: for fame and reputation, for the
pleasures of beneficence, as well as for the pleasures of wealth. But
suppose that as Mr. Thompson says, competition had for its object
exclusively the pursuit of wealth. Eating my dinner has for its object
exclusively the satisfaction of my appetite: yet is eating my dinner
inconsistent with the practice of benevolence? Must we either renounce
our virtues or our meals? I confess I never heard that the smallest
eaters were observed to have the greatest share of benevolence, nor do I
feel at all sure that it would add much to the benevolence of mankind,
though they should unanimously determine to keep a perpetual fast.

Edition: current; Page: [317]
Another of the evils which were declared inherent in competition is the
difficulty of apportioning the supply to the demand. The producers, it
is true, are sometimes at a great distance from the consumers and are
forced to undergo the labour of production, while it still remains in
some degree uncertain whether purchasers will be found to take off the
supply. To me, however, it appears that these things always regulate
themselves, and that if a commodity is produced at a great distance from
the place where it is to be consumed, it is only because it is conducive
to the purposes of human enjoyment, that every thing should be produced
in that place which possesses the greatest natural facilities for its
production. The evil is not an evil inherent in competition; it is an
evil inherent in commerce, and unless commerce is to be proscribed, both
individuals and communities must take the evil with the good. At
present, Essex, from the fertility of its soil, supplies a great part of
England with corn: the Welsh mountains, the downs of Sussex and
Wiltshire, supply the best sheep, and other places the best wool:
Northumberland supplies coals to the whole of England. Cornwall and
Derbyshire supply tin and lead almost to the whole world. Would this be
no longer the case under the Cooperative system? Would the inhabitants
of London be compelled to dig for coals in Blackheath? If not, the
producers must still be widely separated from the consumers. Of course,
they would sometimes find that they had produced more than was wanted,
and then they would lose something: but sometimes also they would find
that they had produced less than was wanted, and then they would gain as
much as they had lost before.

Some of the evils enumerated by Mr. Thompson, I am sure he must have
placed inadvertently among the evils of competition. He spoke of wars,
and of government loans, as the necessary consequences of competition:
as if it was fair that competition should be charged with being the
cause of those evils which are the effect of bad government. He also
enumerated among the evils of competition, the liability of every
individual to casualties, but he was also kind enough to inform us of a
sufficient remedy—the practice of insurance.

I shall touch slightly on the next objection, the injury which the
labourers sustain from the competition of machinery. After what was said
by Mr. Ellis5 on a former evening, it will not be necessary for me to do
more. The effect of machinery may be, to lower wages for a time; the
effect of machinery always is, to raise them ultimately. By increasing
the produce, it always and necessarily increases the demand for labour.
When the spinning jenny was introduced there can be no doubt that it
threw a number of cotton spinners out of employment—but look at its
ultimate effects—where one cotton spinner found employment before the
invention, there is now employment for thousands. The competition of
machinery, therefore is to be dreaded by the workmen, only when from
excessive population their wages are so low, that a slight depression
brings inevitable starvation. If the Edition: current; Page: [318]
market was understocked with labour, and wages were high, all would find
employment with a very slight reduction. Where wages are low, they
cannot bear the slightest diminution—where they are high, the labourers
can easily submit to a temporary and trifling decrease for the sake of
the great increase which is sure to follow.

If there is one argument on which the gentlemen of this Society lay
greater stress than upon any other, it is the tendency of competition to
make every man the rival, and consequently, the enemy of every other
man. If therefore I can shew that their grand argument is good for
nothing, absolutely for nothing whatever, it will probably be admitted
that I have done a great deal towards discrediting all the others: Among
the labourers who are the great mass of mankind, there would be no
rivalry whatever, if population were properly regulated, for there would
be employment enough for all much more than all could do: and it cannot
be said of the labouring man that he is like the dog in the manger, who
envied others the possession of that which could be of no use to
himself. Among merchants and other capitalists there would undoubtedly
be under the best system of competition a slight degree of rivalry. But
it is proper that the gentlemen of the Cooperative Society should know,
that there are two sides to the question. Under the Cooperative system,
would there be trade, would there be interchange of commodities, or
would there not? If not you are reduced almost to primitive barbarism.
But if one Community trades, and exchanges its commodities with other
communities, there would still be competition—and if competition must of
necessity be a cause of rivalry, there would still be rivalry—it would
only change its course—man indeed would be no longer the rival of man,
but one body of men—one community would be the rival of another
community. Mr. Thompson, to whose candour we are indebted for some of
the most important admissions which ever were made by one antagonist in
argument to another, has acknowledged that there would be competition
among communities—but observed that such competition would produce but
little rivalry because, said he, no one would depend upon it for
subsistence—every one would be able to gain an easy subsistence by his
labour. In these views I fully concur. I agree with Mr. Thompson that
where every one can gain an easy subsistence by his labour, competition
would very rarely produce such rivalry as could be a cause of mutual
hostility. But I humbly submit that the benefit of this admission is not
confined to Mr. Thompson. I too claim a part of it for my side of the
question. Mr. Thompson says, Under his system, every one could gain an
easy subsistence by his labour, and therefore there would not be
rivalry. Well: under my system every one would gain an easy subsistence
by his labour, therefore under my system also there would not be
rivalry. And now I appeal to any candid hearer, whether there ever was a
more complete discomfiture than has been sustained by this unfortunate
doctrine, that competition is a cause of mutual hostility among mankind.

But if all the evils attributed by these gentlemen to Competition were
as real and Edition: current; Page: [319] substantial as they are
shadowy and chimerical, it is not by these alone that the question is to
be decided. Though one side of the question were apparently made out to
demonstration, it is not by looking only to one side of the question
that truth is to be attained. The question is not whether a state of
Competition is exempt from evil, for we know that evil is mixed up in
every human lot; but whether Competition or Cooperation on the whole
affords the best chance for human happiness: and it is not by a review
of the evils of the Competitive system that this great question can be
decided, but by a fair comparison of the evils of the Competitive and
the evils of the Cooperative system.

If I were to deal with Cooperation as Mr. Thompson and the other
gentlemen of this Society have dealt with Competition—if I were to
display and make the most of every petty inconvenience which does or may
under any circumstances flow from it, I might easily make the catalogue
appear as long as I pleased. As however I do not consider this mode of
treating the question to be quite fair, and as moreover it is not every
one who has either the physical power or the inclination to speak for
two hours, I shall content myself with recapitulating four of the
principal disadvantages to which the Cooperative system appears to me to
be liable.

I object, then, to the Cooperative system,

First, because it prevents the powers of production which the society
possesses, from being called into full activity. It must be obvious that
if at present, when a man’s whole happiness and even his very existence
depends upon his labour, and when his reward is in the exact proportion
of his industry, there are yet so many who are idle, it would be far
worse when his subsistence would be nearly independent of his
labour—when he could live upon the labour of others, when his reward
would be equally great, whether he worked much or little, where he could
gain nothing by industry, attention and skill, and lose nothing by any
degree, except the greatest and most unusual excess of idleness,
inattention and stupidity. In such a state, the less any man
individually worked, the more bitterly he would inveigh against all
others for not working enough, and the community would be a scene of
perpetual bickering among those who, idle themselves, would never fail
to discover that their neighbours were still more so. It is assumed,
however, that all this would be counteracted by public opinion—I say
assumed because, although all experience is against it,—although there
is not one of these Cooperative gentlemen who in walking from Charing
Cross to Temple Bar with a silk handkerchief in his pocket, would trust
to public opinion to keep it there,—yet nothing has been said to
reconcile this startling assertion with probability, nothing to gloss
over its utter inconsistency with all that is known of human nature,
except merely that from the nature of the communities people would live
together—as if we had never seen such a thing as a town or a village. In
justice to the Cooperative Society, I am bound to suppose, that it would
not trust to public opinion alone—that there would be a graduated scale
of punishments, from something trifling, to expulsion from the society.
In this manner, you might, it is true, compel Edition: current; Page:
[320] them to work, but how? You substitute punishment for reward. For
the cheering and stimulating impulse of hope, you substitute the
degrading and chilling influence of fear. You would have none of that
labour which is sweetened by the consciousness that every moment of it
adds something to the enjoyment of the labourer. Your labourer would not
labour that he might produce, and producing might enjoy—he would labour
that he might not be driven from the common table of the community—that
the society might not reject him from its bosom. His labour would be
like that of the slave, submitted to only because he dares not to
disobey, and quitted eagerly at the first excuse, or opportunity for
evasion. It is not easy to calculate how great a deduction would be made
from the sum of human happiness by this one circumstance. After all, the
power of punishment is limited. The utmost that you could wring from him
is the performance of a prescribed task—a task which must be rated much
below the capabilities even of the weakest and most unskilful member of
the community. It might be possible that by a vigilant supervision,—the
performance—the careless, indolent, and imperfect performance—of such a
task might be extorted from the unwilling labourer. Beyond this there
are a few whom no circumstances can cause to slacken in the pursuit of
great and commanding excellence. These might labour; they would labour
alone.

It will be said perhaps that this would only be true if they are ill
educated and that it is your intention that they should be well
educated: to which I reply, My argument does not suppose that they are
ill educated, it only supposes, that they love themselves better than
they love the community of which they are members. If you say that you
have a plan of education by which they will be made to love the public
better than themselves, I have no objection whatever to your trying,
though I should be very much surprised if you were to succeed: but thus
much is clear, If it be possible to make men thus perfectly benevolent,
it can then be of no consequence what are their social arrangements, for
they will be perfectly happy under all—or if there be any difference, it
will be in favour of that system which leaves the greatest possible
freedom of action. The best possible form of government under such
circumstances would be anarchy.

I object, secondly, to the Cooperative system, because it affords no
sufficient security for the good management of the concern. I have shewn
in what manner the love of ease would operate upon the individual
members of the community. The managers of the concern, whether it be
managed by the whole or by delegates from the whole, would be as fond of
their ease, as the individual of his. Nothing more is necessary to
render inevitable all the evils which the worst possible management can
entail. It is a well known proverb, that what is every body’s business
is nobody’s. Witness the most enlarged experience in the case of Joint
Stock Companies. Mr. Thompson rather injudiciously quoted these
institutions as a partial exemplification which modern times have
introduced, of the cooperative Edition: current; Page: [321] principle.
He could not have hit upon a more unfavourable specimen of the
principle, since there is no experience more universal than that which
proves, that the affairs of a Joint Stock Company are always ill
managed. Except when the business to be performed is one of mere
routine, or where, as in the case of Assurance Companies, the guarantee
of numbers is requisite, or where a larger capital is required than it
is usually in the power of individuals to command, there never yet was a
Joint Stock Company which stood its ground for any length of time
against individual competition.

I object, thirdly, to the Cooperative system, because in its very nature
it is a system of universal regulation. I am not one of those, who set
up liberty as an idol to be worshipped, and I am even willing to go
farther than most people in regulating and controlling when there is a
special advantage to be obtained by regulation and control. I presume,
however, no one will deny that there is a pleasure in enjoying perfect
freedom of action; that to be controlled, even if it be for our good, is
in itself far from pleasant, and that other things being alike, it is
infinitely better to attain a given end by leaving people to themselves
than to attain the same end by controlling them. It is delightful to man
to be an independent being. The savage of the forest would be the
happiest of men, could he reconcile the comforts of civilized life with
the preservation of his independence. This indeed is impossible—he must
sacrifice a part—but this sacrifice is an evil, and can only be
submitted to, for the sake of a greater good. So conformable is this to
the general sentiments of mankind that benevolent enthusiasts, in their
plans for new modelling society, have hitherto erred in giving too much
freedom of action; their day dreams have been dreams of perfect liberty.
It was reserved for the nineteenth century to produce a new sect of
benevolent enthusiasts, whose day dreams have been dreams of perfect
slavery. If it be true of men, as Mr. Thompson says of women, that they
are not the less slaves, because they are well fed and clothed,6 I have
Mr. Thompson’s authority for saying, that it does not follow, that
control is not an evil though it may be exercised for no purpose but for
the good of those who are controlled. In order to shew that control is
an evil, it is only necessary to shew that it is control—and this surely
is an objection which it requires very strong reasons, on the contrary
side, to overrule.

Lastly, I object to the Cooperative system on account of the expense of
the outfit which, on the shewing of its supporters themselves, would
amount, in buildings alone, for Great Britain and Ireland, to upwards of
900 millions sterling. Even this, it may be thought, is not too great a
sacrifice for the happiness of eighteen millions of human beings.
Assuredly not—but when there is a sacrifice to be made, it becomes us to
look round, and see in what manner that sacrifice may be made most
effective to the end: and to hesitate before we adopt a plan, which
requires to be Edition: current; Page: [322] sunk at the beginning a sum
much more than sufficient to give the best possible education to every
inhabitant of the United Kingdom.7

It now appearing that it is not possible to obtain under the Cooperative
system more happiness than is compatible with individual Competition it
remains to consider the other plea of its supporters—that it enables the
same end to be attained in a shorter time.

If it were true as Mr. Thompson says that under the Competitive system
you cannot raise the condition of any until you raise the condition of
all, there would be some foundation for this plea. But this is a
mistake. It is true that if wages were high in England, and low in
Ireland, and you suffered the Irish to come into England, they would
prevent the English labourers from deriving any benefit from their
prudence. But the remedy is plain—keep the Irish out—I do not see any
thing in this proposal which can startle a member of the Cooperative
Society. You would keep all intruders out of your communities—You have
only to suppose all England covered with communities; foreigners would
then be kept out as a matter of course, unless in such numbers as the
communities might find it advantageous to admit. Why then should you
object to our doing what you would yourselves do without hesitation? But
you will perhaps tell me that if the labourers do not come to the
capital, the capital will go to the labourers. This would be true if it
necessarily followed, because the labourers in any country are ill off,
that the profits of stock are high, but experience shews that in those
countries where the people multiply without restraint, it is necessary
for their food to cultivate such bad land that the profits are reduced
just as low as they are any where else, and the landlord alone derives
any benefit from the degraded state of the bulk of the population. In
what country are wages higher than in America? If it were true that
capital moves from the countries where wages are high to the countries
where they are low,—we should find it moving from America to all other
parts of the world, instead of which it moves from all parts of the
world to America.

The supporters of the Cooperative system tell us, that they have the
advantage over us in this respect, that they make happy as many as they
can get hold of without waiting till prudential habits are become
general. One thing, however, seems to have escaped them, that in
proportion as they make some happy, they aggravate the misery of the
remainder. The condition of the labourers depends upon the ratio between
population and capital: if therefore it be necessary for the
establishment of a community to take more from the capital of the
country than you do from the population you deteriorate the condition of
the great mass of the people. Now this is exactly what you must do. Two
hundred thousand pounds are said to be required for the establishment of
a community. This capital previously Edition: current; Page: [323]
afforded annual subsistence to at least ten thousand labouring men and
their wives, and families. Unless therefore you can take all these into
your community you will inevitably throw a part of them upon the wide
world. I believe it does not enter into your plans to admit more than
2000 persons into a single community. You must at once see, therefore,
that you would absorb all the capital in the country, long before you
had provided for one third part of the labourers, and when Great Britain
at length should be covered with communities, two thirds of the
population would find themselves left out—they would be forced into the
sea, if they had not previously died of starvation, or raised a
rebellion, and subverted the establishments of that system which may
justly be denominated a plan for making one portion of the community
happy, at the expense of the remainder.

It is clear therefore that until the people shall first have raised
their wages by limiting their numbers, it is impossible for the
Cooperative system to have more than an experimental existence: and the
question is, whether a few experimental communities would sufficiently
secure the happiness of the very few persons who could possibly take
advantage of them. Provided then, that you could supply motives to
work—provided that you could supply securities for the good management
of the concern; and provided you could be sure of placing at the head of
every one of your Communities a number of enlightened men by whose means
you could secure for your inhabitants a good education and without whom
the chances are that they would have a very bad one—Provided, I say,
that you could do all this, I grant that you would secure to the
inhabitants of the community a very great degree of happiness. But I
cannot grant that the question turns upon these considerations alone,
and I cannot think that it would prove much in favour of the Cooperative
system, although you should be able to prove that by the aid of enormous
funds, and with the zealous assistance of a large number of individuals,
you could produce more happiness than we can produce without any
assistance and without any funds—or that it were granted to us to have
under our direction for the good of humanity a sum equal to that which
must be squandered on the buildings alone of one single community—By the
employment of such a sum partly in education and partly in working upon
the press, I would undertake in twenty years to effect a reform in the
government of my country—to effect a reform in its laws—to effect a
reform in its Church establishment—and to possess the whole of its
population with a knowledge of the means by which they might keep the
market constantly understocked with labour, and have the power of
regulating their wages as they pleased. I cannot but wonder that persons
so benevolent as the promoters of the Cooperative system undoubtedly
are, should think of converting to the exclusive and the very precarious
advantage of a few, funds which are sufficient to secure the greatest
happiness to the whole—and still more am I surprised that coming forward
with such a proposition they should call themselves and fancy themselves
the friends of universal equality.

I should be sorry if it were thought that I am an enemy to Mr. Owen’s
system. I Edition: current; Page: [324] am an enemy to no system which
has for its object the amelioration of mankind. Destitute as it appears
to me of all the securities which are necessary for the right working of
the social machine, I cannot but consider it to be a hazardous
experiment—yet hazardous though it be, if that chance, such as it is,
were the only chance for human nature; if there were not another and a
far surer foundation for our hopes, no childish dread of that which is
new, merely because it is new, no selfish anxiety to keep others
miserable only that I myself might by comparison appear more happy,
should restrain me from devoting my whole life to the pursuit of that
one only chance—So long as the slightest glimmering of hope remained,
there is no exertion, no sacrifice which I would spare rather than
renounce those cheering anticipations of the indefinite improvement of
mankind which I have cherished from my cradle, and which it is probable
I shall carry to my grave. But this is neither the only nor the best
chance—we are not yet forced upon such drastic remedies. There is a
principle in man, far more constant and far more universal than his love
for his fellows—I mean his love for himself: and without excluding the
former principle, I rest my hopes chiefly on the latter. Let
self-interest be or be not a principle which it is possible to eradicate
from the bosom not of one man only but of all: no one at least will deny
that it is a powerful principle—in the present state of things almost an
all-powerful one; and if so it is surely not very wise to court
opposition from it, when you might have it on your side. Let things be
so arranged that the interest of every individual shall exactly accord
with the interest of the whole—thus much it is in the power of laws and
institutions to effect; and, this done, let every individual be so
educated, as to know his own interest—Thus by the simultaneous action of
a vast number of agents, every one drawing in the direction of his own
happiness, the happiness of the whole will be attained. But the
Cooperative system—look at it on its best side—I can regard it only in
the light in which I should consider a man who with prodigious labour
and at the peril of his neck should employ himself in attempting to
scale a twenty-foot wall, when by casting his eyes about him he would
have seen a wicket gate through which he might have effected his passage
without danger or difficulty.

As this is probably the last time that I shall open my lips in this
Society, I am anxious, before I sit down, to express my acknowledgments
for the kind, indulgent and courteous manner with which the members of
the Society have listened to the expression of opinions, which must at
first have appeared repulsive to their minds, and which many of them, I
am certain, at first believed to be the opinions of none but the
lukewarm friends or concealed enemies of mankind. None of them I am
persuaded at this moment continue to think so. I am sure that we part in
kindness—I am sure that we all of us think better of one another than
when we began—and if this were the only good effect which the discussion
produced—if it had not, as I hope it has, added to our stock of
knowledge, the time it has occupied could not in any view be considered
to be time thrown away. You will continue to labour in your vocation; we
shall labour in ours, and though we differ in the means, we all have in
view the same great end, the improvement of the human race. For Edition:
current; Page: [325] myself, I shall always recur with pleasure to the
thought that I may in some small degree have contributed to set right in
your estimation a science which does not deserve the obloquy which you
have too readily cast upon it: and to prove to you that in the bosoms
even of political economists there may burn as pure a flame of
benevolence as even the torch of Mr. Owen can have kindled in yours.


13.: Cooperation: Notes
 1825

MS, Trinity College, Cambridge, Add. MS c. 8026. These notes seem most
closely connected with No. 12, though they bear on the whole issue
between the Owenites and the Benthamites; perhaps they formed the basis
of Mill’s opening speech, of which only a fragment (No. 10) remains.

allegation. Competition is the cause of the distress which is diffused
over all classes.

Answer.

1. Deny that there is general distress. Only labourers.

2. The produce is divided into wages profits and rent.

Competition does not lower rent.

Competition does not lower profits, 1. by making people sell cheap. 2.
by making people produce little. Competition only equalizes profits.

Competition does lower wages. But there is another competition tending
to raise them. Narrow the former competition and wages would be high.

3. Shew what would take place if population were diminished. That
profits would be little more than high wages. That rent would be little
or none, and that little might be appropriated. 1. expenses of general
govt. 2. all local expenses, roads, bridges, canals, etc. 3. education.
4. if necessary distributed among the labourers themselves.

4. Labourers equally rich with American labourers, and far happier.

5. What could Mr. Owen’s system do more? Cooperative production? Equal
distribution? Household saving?

6. Could they do it without limiting the population? Shew that they
could not.

7. Shew the purgatory to be gone through. Effect of taking away the
motive to work.

8. Mr. Owen’s system of education.1 Shew what is its improbability,
regard it as a hazardous experiment.

Edition: current; Page: [326]
9. Shew that the same system of education could be adopted now. E.g.
infant schools, and if adopted that it would give us all that we could
have by Owen’s system and more: the pleasures and virtues of individual
freedom of action. If then Owen’s system brings men more speedily to
this state, let us have it, and when brought let the comm. dissolve.

10. Shew that it cannot. Impr. in education why necessarily progressive:
Protract the evils to be gone through.

11. The end sooner attained without Owen’s system, because education
would not have to struggle with self-interest.

12. Recapitulation and Conclusion.


14.: Influence of the Aristocracy
 9 DECEMBER, 1825

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/5. Inscribed in Mill’s hand, “Speech on
the Influence of the Aristocracy. / London Union Society 9th December
1825” (at the head), and “Speech at / the London Union / 9th December
1825 / on the Influence / of the Aristocracy” (on f. 9, otherwise
blank). Typescript, Fabian Society. Edited by Harold J. Laski, as
“Speech on the Influence of the Aristocracy,” Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, LXII (1929), 239-50. This is
Mill’s first speech in the London Union Debating Society, renamed the
London Debating Society on 3 February, 1826. Mill opened for the
negative in this, the second debate of the Society, proposed by W.J.
Walter, “That the Influence of the Aristocracy in the Government of this
Country is beneficial.” The affirmative carried, 63 to 17. As not
published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

the society has been informed of the unlucky circumstance in consequence
of which I am so unexpectedly called upon to open the question: a
circumstance which I regret the more, as it is not a question which, if
I had any option, I should have chosen to open, or perhaps even to speak
upon. But it was necessary that some body should undertake the office;
and as no other person has presented himself, I shall endeavour to
discharge it as well as I can, without losing time in idle apologies;
satisfied that however badly I may speak no apology would make me speak
one jot better.

In appointing this question to be discussed by the Society at so early a
period of its existence, the late Committee has taken no bad method of
trying the good sense and good feeling of the Society. As there is no
question of greater importance, so there is none on which different
persons differ more widely in their opinions: and the interest which so
many persons feel in the question individually, in addition to the
general interest which is common to every member of the community, has
given to the discussions on this subject a character of bitter
hostility, which it is deeply to be regretted that a sincere difference
of opinion on any question should Edition: current; Page: [327] excite.
It is for the members of this Society to shew, by the mode in which they
carry on the debate that they are capable of discussing the most
important interests of their country, without departing from that
calmness of temper which is alone suitable to him whose sole aim is
truth: that they can abstain from any unnecessary introduction of topics
calculated to rouse animosities, and from vague and unmeaning
vituperation of those whose sentiments are opposed to theirs; and that
every member is charitable enough to suppose it possible that his own
side of the question does not possess an entire monopoly of sincerity
and good intentions. For my own part, although I feel that confidence in
the soundness of my opinions, which is natural to one who has maturely
considered them, I am perfectly ready to abjure them, if they can be
proved to be erroneous; and I beg of any gentleman who may be inclined
to treat me and my opinions with severity, to consider that I have no
interest in being in the wrong; and that therefore, if I am so, it is
probably because I cannot help it, and not because I am in love with
error, or indifferent to truth.

In the observations which I have to offer I shall endeavour to set the
example of confining myself strictly within the limits of the question:
and with that view I wish it to be distinctly understood, that, when I
speak of the influence of the aristocracy, I do not mean any kind of
influence, but that kind of influence alone, which is mentioned in the
question. I shall not touch upon the moral influence of the members of
the aristocracy as individuals; not only because I think it extraneous
to the question, but also because it would be idle to enquire whether
that be good or bad in general, which is in no two individual instances
the same; which varies with the innumerable varieties of individual
character, with the innumerable varieties of individual pursuits, and
with a hundred other ever varying elements, none of them capable of
being comprehended in one general expression: I shall therefore leave
this subject, first however taking the opportunity, as my subsequent
remarks may seem to bear hard upon the aristocracy, of testifying thus
much in their favour: that I think, in the matter of private character,
they have not always had justice done them; and that exception has been
taken, a little too readily, to the nature of some of their habitual
occupations. Thus I have repeatedly heard it advanced as matter of
reproach against that respectable class of society the country
gentlemen, that some of them betray a stronger attachment to the
innocent amusement of foxhunting, than is consistent with the ideas
which some persons entertain of perfect wisdom. But I hold these
strictures to be extremely illiberal: for I declare on my conscience
that I never heard of any person taking to foxhunting as an occupation,
who appeared to me to be fit for any other: and if the case be so, they
are surely deserving of commendation rather than of blame, in having
selected for themselves the only employment, to which the wisdom of
their Creator had adapted them. An employment, too, so admirably fitted
to keep their constitutions in repair,—and themselves out of mischief:
for I am persuaded that the whole Society will agree with me in the
opinion, that it is much better they should torment Edition: current;
Page: [328] foxes, than men; and that hunting is a far more proper
pastime for such persons, than judging or legislating.

To confine ourselves, then, to the topic which is particularly under
discussion, I shall endeavour to shew, that the influence of the
aristocracy in the government is not only no benefit, but a positive
evil. That there should be a class of rich men, I care not how rich, if
they become so no otherwise than by the natural operation of the laws of
property, is clearly not an evil. That this class should form a society
of their own, and should observe certain conventional forms in their
intercourse with one another; that they should be distinguished from one
another by titles, or any other artificial distinctions of a merely
honorary kind—all this, as it hurts no one, no one is entitled to object
to: and a class of persons thus circumstanced may call themselves an
aristocracy, or any word that is most agreeable to them: I do not
quarrel with a name. What I do object to, and very strongly, is, that
any such body should possess a monopoly of political power: or if the
word monopoly be too strong, I will say a predominance. So long as they
are satisfied with pursuing their own happiness in whatever way pleases
them best, without interfering with that of other persons, so long I
have no quarrel with them; I complain of them only when they seek for
power, power to oppress others.

I do not think it necessary, for the purpose of the present debate, to
enter very deeply into the science of politics, or to lay down any new
or alarming general principle. If indeed I were to speak my entire
sentiments upon the subject I should say, that I do not think it
desirable that an aristocracy, as such, should possess any political
power, or, in the words of the question, exercise any influence in the
government, beyond that to which their personal qualifications may
entitle them: but to narrow the discussion I will waive this point, and
will concede that good government is promoted by endowing the
aristocracy with some portion of political power. I know not what
quantity some gentlemen may deem sufficient: but I presume all will
allow that there ought to be some limit to the quantity; and this is the
only principle to which I shall demand their assent. I lay down no other
postulate—I ask for no other admission at their hands: I shall be
satisfied if they will only grant that the power of the aristocracy
ought to have a limit. This admission however I do require: it is the
foundation of my whole argument: and I shall not be contented with a
mere verbal assent: they must have a full and distinct apprehension of
the whole extent of the admission: they must be prepared to follow it
out even to its remotest consequences: their assent must be given, not
to the words alone, but to the sense; they must imbibe the whole spirit
and scope of the principle: they must not only confess it with their
lips, but they must feel it in their hearts.

There is no more common error among unthinking persons than to imagine,
that whatever is good in a certain quantity must be good in any
quantity: and the admirers of aristocratic rule, who are in general very
little alive to any political evils except those which emanate from a
seditious rabble, are apt to imagine, or to Edition: current; Page:
[329] talk as if they imagined, that we never could by possibility have
enough of so very good a thing. No doubt, they would be ready enough to
say, that a pure aristocracy, which is generally on these occasions
called an oligarchy, is not exactly a good thing: that is to say, that
although it is not quite so bad as a pure monarchy, and a fortiori not
so bad as that monster which is not to be thought of without trembling,
a pure democracy, yet there is not very much to be said in its praise.
That oligarchy is one of the three simple, and therefore bad, forms of
government, is a proposition which people are accustomed to repeat (as
they are accustomed to repeat so many other things) because they have
heard it when at school: But all those associations of badness, which
are connected in their minds with the Greek word oligarchy, depart when
that hard word is banished and the more courtly term aristocracy
substituted in its place: Under this change of denomination, what had
been so loudly reprobated is as loudly applauded, and though oligarchy
is no better than it should be, aristocracy is every thing that heart
can desire. If there be any persons of this sort in the room, it may be
of use to point out to them what are the consequences of giving too much
power to an aristocracy.

The materials of which a government is composed, are not Gods, nor
angels, but men. Now rather an extensive observation of the conduct of
men in all ages has shewn that, extraordinary instances of heroism
excepted, which of course are not to be reckoned upon, their actions are
pretty constantly governed by their interests: insomuch that if you know
what it is a man’s interest to do, you can make a pretty good guess at
what he will do. Now as men in power do not cease to be men, by being in
power, the same rules, which govern the conduct of other men, govern
theirs likewise: and therefore, when the interest of those who are
placed under them, clashes, as it is very apt to do, with their own, it
is not difficult to see which must give way to the other.

A few examples will shew in what a variety of ways the interest of a
ruling few is liable to be in opposition to the interest of the subject
many.

It is the interest of the many that the taxes should be as light as
possible: because it is the many who pay them: of the few, that they
should be as heavy as possible: because it is the few who receive them.

It is the interest of the few that they and theirs should receive as
much money, and render in return for it as little service, as possible:
and with this view, it is their interest to create the greatest possible
number of useless offices, in order that the pretence of service may be
rewarded with the reality of salary. It never can be the interest of the
many that any service should be paid for, which is not given; or given,
which is not required.

It is the interest of the few that all public situations should be held
by their sons and nephews, however unfit, to the exclusion of John Brown
or Tom Smith or any such vulgar person who has no other recommendation
than his fitness. It is the interest of the many that the best qualified
person should in all cases be preferred, whatever breed he may come of.

Edition: current; Page: [330]
It is the interest of the few to keep up an enormous army and navy, for
the twofold purpose of making incomes for sons and nephews, and forging
chains for the many. It is the interest of the many that neither army
nor navy should exceed the lowest scale consistent with security.

It is the interest of the few, to be engaged in continual wars: and this
for more reasons than one: 1st, for the glory of the thing, 2ndly for
the power it gives them, 3rdly as an excuse for increasing the army and
navy, and making more incomes for sons and nephews; and lastly, because
in time of war, people think so much of doing harm to others that they
have no leisure to think of doing good to themselves: from which cause a
period of war is a period of security for political abuses of all sorts,
sizes, and denominations. As for the many, it is scarcely ever their
interest to engage in a war; and never in any that is called a just and
necessary one: by which, so far as my observation goes, is always meant,
a war that has for its object something either contemptibly silly or
detestably wicked: the honours of the flag, the balance of power, or to
prevent the establishment of free institutions in foreign countries.

It is the interest of the few to assume to themselves, in the character
of justices of peace, unlimited power of vexing and annoying the many.
It is the interest of the many that no such power should be exercised
over them by any persons.

Lastly, for although there is no end to the subject, it is necessary
that there should be an end to my enumeration; it is the interest of the
few to enact corn laws in order to raise their rents, game laws to
protect their amusements, and vagrant laws to punish those who, being
guilty of poverty, obtrude the spectacle of their misery upon the
delicate senses of the few.1 Now it is not, nor can be, the interest of
the many, that any one of all these things should be done.

Of course I do not pretend that this picture of misgovernment has ever
been realized in any civilized country. I have only been speaking of
what is possible, not of what is real: and few will deny that even in
the present state of the human mind in Europe, an aristocracy might do
all this without endangering its existence. But if we look not to what
any aristocracy is now, or is ever likely to be again, but to what it
has a constant tendency to become, and would actually be at this moment
in every country where it exists, were it not restrained by its fears;
if in short we view the sinister interest2 of the ruling body in its
fullest extent and endeavour to conceive the effects of a perfectly
unchecked aristocracy, the picture is far more deplorable still.

It is the interest of an aristocracy to extract from the people in all
ways, the greatest possible quantity of money, and the greatest possible
quantity of power. When they have got this money and power it is of
course their interest to keep it: Edition: current; Page: [331] which
they have no chance of doing but by preventing the people from finding
out that it is their interest to take it away. Two modes of action
present themselves as conducive to this end: the one, calculated to
operate upon the understanding of the people, the other to operate upon
their will. Upon their understanding by debasing it down to the lowest
stage of debasement by means of bad education, the fruits of which are,
bad morals, bad religion, and almost every thing that is bad under the
sun. Upon their will, by inspiring them with the greatest possible
degree of terror, which is only to be done by the greatest possible
degree of cruelty. A despotic aristocracy, therefore, would be exactly
what a despotic monarchy, in its worst shape, is: with this difference,
that a despotic monarch, being one man, may be a man of extraordinary
virtue; but it would be worse than idle to expect extraordinary virtue
from a body of men, a whole class, an aristocracy.

If it be proved that any set of men, placed in the situation of an
aristocracy, and having power to oppress and misgovern, will oppress and
misgovern, I presume an exception is not to be made of the British
aristocracy. They are not, I take it for granted, cast in a different
mould from the rest of their species, nor is their conduct governed by a
different set of principles from those which govern the conduct of other
aristocracies. I do not say that they are worse than other men: they may
for aught I know be better, but still they are men. I must deprecate,
therefore, all arguments in defence of the political power of the
aristocracy, which are founded upon the bright examples of individual
virtue in their number. There are, in what are called the higher
classes, many excellent men, men whose influence as individuals I should
be extremely sorry to see diminished; but though they were every one of
them so many Cato’s and Fabricius’s,3 I should still think it possible
that they might have too much power. I would not give absolute power
even to one man, because he was virtuous; unless I meant to corrupt and
destroy his virtue: yet it would be ten times more reasonable to give
absolute power to one man, because he is virtuous, than to a body of men
because some of them are so. Individuals have been known to make great
sacrifices of their private interest to the good of their country: but
bodies of men, never. When the glory of doing right and the shame of
doing wrong are to be shared among so many that the share of each man is
a trifle, no principle remains of sufficient strength to counteract the
united force of the two great springs of human action, the love of money
and the love of power. I say no principle; for as to their morality,
that is regularly pressed into the service of their interest. When a set
of men are numerous enough to keep one another in countenance, and high
enough to be above the necessity of regarding any body’s opinion but
their own, they generally find little difficulty in manufacturing a
morality for their own private use: of which homemade morality the
fundamental principle is, that they are of such unspeakable importance
to the whole Edition: current; Page: [332] community, that the community
ought to be but too happy in suffering them to take, at its expense, as
much money and power as they have a mind to: and this morality they
preach to the people, aye! and believe it themselves, and teach it to
their children; for it is wonderful how easy a matter it is to believe
that to be right which we know to be pleasant.

I have now got through one half of my argument—and have shewn what sort
of a thing an unchecked aristocracy is, or would be, I should rather
say, for no aristocracy is, was, or ever will be totally unchecked. The
worst government is under some restraint; the fear of rebellion is
always something; and there is no government over which that fear has
not some influence. This check, which exists under the most odious
tyrannies upon the face of the earth, is not, nor ever would be wanting
in this country. It is even more of a check in this country than
elsewhere, because the British is a more determined and a better
instructed people than most, and therefore, when it does rebel, more
likely to rebel with success. While this is the case, and long may it
continue so, we must be better governed than other nations had we a
Nero, or a Muley Ismael,4 for our absolute sovereign.

With the exception of this check, which exists alike under the best
governments and under the worst, I am prepared to maintain that the
power of the British aristocracy is totally unchecked.

For if it be checked, it is clear that there must be something to check
it; and this something, let us see what it is. According to the
fashionable doctrine about the British Constitution,5 there are two
checks, two counterpoises; the influence of the Crown, and the influence
of the people. Let us examine these checks one after the other: and we
will begin with the last, because it is the most to the purpose.

If the people have any influence in the government of this country, the
seat of that influence must be the House of Commons; for that is always
said to be the democratic branch of our Constitution, being supposed to
be chosen by the people. One thing, however, I take it for granted few
will deny: that, in order to form a counterpoise to the power of the
aristocracy, or to be itself any thing but an aristocracy, it is
necessary not only that it should be supposed to be chosen by the
people, but moreover that it should actually be chosen by them. Now when
I look to things, which in general are of more importance than the names
which they are called by, I find that there are not more than four or
five members of the House of Commons, of whom it can be said with any
colour of truth that they are chosen by the people. A majority of that
House, including the members for the greater part of the counties, and
for all the smaller towns, except those which are called rotten burghs,
are chosen by about 180 families, most of them great landed proprietors.
The remainder of the county members are chosen by the smaller
landholders, and Edition: current; Page: [333] the rotten burghs, which
in my opinion are the least bad part of the system, are disposed of by
purchase and sale, to those who can afford to pay for them, the electors
selling their consciences once in seven years or oftener, at so much per
conscience. About 99 therefore out of every 100 members hold their seats
either at their own pleasure, or at the pleasure of a lord or country
gentleman, or at the pleasure of several lords or country gentlemen:
they are either themselves a part of the aristocracy, or they are the
tenants at will, the mere servants of the aristocracy: and to talk of
them as a counterpoise to the power of the aristocracy in the state is
much the same sort of absurdity as if Mr. Canning’s butler and footman
were said to be a counterpoise to him in the family.

Now, if I were acquainted with any arithmetical process by which 1 could
be proved to be greater than 99, or of any rhetoric by which the
hundredth man in an assembly could persuade the other ninety nine to act
as he pleased, and not as they pleased, I might admit that the influence
which the people enjoy in the House of Commons, by means of the five or
six members whom they elect, is a sufficient counterpoise to the
influence of the aristocracy: always supposing that those five or six
members were not, by reason of the long duration of parliaments,
rendered very nearly as independent of their constituents as those
members who never had any constituents at all. But until some such
wonder working process be made known to me, I hope to be pardoned for
adhering to the opposite opinion.

As for the other supposed check, the influence of the Crown, it is but
the influence of the aristocracy in disguise. The King indeed is not
responsible to Parliament, but his ministers are; and he can do nothing
without ministers. Can any ministry stand against a hostile Parliament?
No one now ever imagines that they can. By offending the Parliament, a
ministry incurs the risk of impeachment—that however is a trifle—but at
any rate the loss of their places—which is no trifle. Now although, by
means of what I believe are called the Treasury burghs, they can put a
certain number of members into Parliament, they cannot put many;6 so
that their influence over the Parliament is in reality very small: and
instead of being, what they are so often represented to be, the masters
of the Parliament, they are in reality its slaves bound hand and foot
and under an utter impossibility of acting otherwise than according to
the will of Parliament, that is, of its constituents the Aristocracy.
The power of the King is therefore subordinate to that of the
Aristocracy, and cannot be exercised except in subservience to them.
What then is the King? A mere officer of the Aristocracy: environed
indeed by external splendour, because his splendour is their splendour,
but in reality nothing more than a carver, who is permitted by them to
carve the wealth and power which they have jointly extracted from the
people giving a piece to one, and a piece to another, Edition: current;
Page: [334] and the large pieces to whomsoever he likes best. It is
strongly the interest of the aristocracy to have a carver. If they did
not entrust the division of the precious matter to some fixed
individual,—if the whole were left to be settled by a general scramble,
the disputes and tumults and civil wars that would ensue would be
troublesome. This the aristocracy know; and they prefer to take their
chance of getting what they can from the carver: while those who are not
served to their liking rail at those who are, and call themselves a
Constitutional Opposition.

For these reasons, the supposed balance of the British Constitution
appears to me to be a nonentity. For my part I never had much faith in
these mathematical governments. The hopes and fears of men, the
materials of which political power is made, do not admit of being cut
out into equal parts, or measured out by a rule and a pair of compasses,
with geometrical precision. Besides in the perpetual mutability of human
affairs, the nicest equilibrium of powers would require to be readjusted
before it had been established a twelvemonth. And after all—if the
balance be not really, what to me it appears, visionary and chimerical:
it still remains to be proved that it would be good. That a government
compounded of the three simple forms must unite all their excellencies,
surely is not self-evident. It is at least a possible case that it may
unite all their defects. But it has usually been deemed sufficient to
point to the British Constitution, and to beg the three following
questions in relation to it: 1. that it is a balance, 2. that it is
good, and 3. that it is good, because it is a balance: which three
premisses being taken for granted, the conclusion, that a balance must
be good, follows, it must be owned, quite easily and naturally.

If I have succeeded in proving that as far as depends upon institutions,
the aristocracy of this country are possessed of unlimited power and
that we are indebted to their fears alone, to their fears of popular
resistance, for that share of good government which we enjoy, all that
remains is to examine what this security amounts to: and we shall not
fail to perceive, that it amounts to very little. Any resistance, short
of a general rebellion, would expose the aristocracy to no material
danger. But those great convulsions which overthrow established
governments; those gigantic efforts of physical strength by which a
people that has been sunk for ages in slavery shakes off its fetters and
rids itself of bad rulers and bad institutions, are of rare occurrence
and when they do occur, they are in general called forth by striking
instances of individual oppression, by those crimes which awaken
sympathy, and shake each man’s confidence in his own personal security.
From such crimes it costs the aristocracy but little to abstain: and
then, what has it to fear? The people may cry, but if they only cry, who
will attend to their cries? In this country, fortunately, the fears of
the aristocracy are out of all proportion to their danger. They tremble
at the very thought of facing public opinion. All their actions prove
how ill at ease they are when they fancy that public opinion is against
them: yet as often as the temptation is tolerably strong, they do
encounter it point blank: and their fears, on these occasions, make them
only the more dogged in their resistance. Of this we have a striking
exemplification in the pertinacity with which Edition: current; Page:
[335] they cling to the Corn Laws and to the Game Laws. Public opinion
is unanimous on these two questions, or it never was unanimous upon any
thing: and to make the matter still more remarkable, there is not the
same unanimity among the aristocracy: for these laws are as obnoxious to
the manufacturing and commercial part of the aristocracy, as they are
even to the people themselves. It is the landed interest alone which
upholds them. From this we learn the plenitude of the power of the
aristocracy, since even when they are divided, one portion is strong
enough to maintain these laws against the other portion and the body of
the people combined. The use they make of their power is also strikingly
illustrated by these same laws: in the one case, they tax the people to
the extent of several millions a year, for the disinterested purpose of
putting a few hundred thousands of pounds, for it is positively no more,
into their pockets; in the other case, the amusements of the aristocracy
having to be protected, protection is afforded to them by establishing
in every village a nursery of crime where persons are first made fit for
the gallows and then sent to it, besides stocking the hulks and the
plantations, which however as it is for the service of his Majesty is on
that account the less to be regretted.

Having pointed out, as I conceive, the nature and magnitude of the evil,
I think it best not to enter upon the controverted subject of the
remedy. The discussion would take up much time; and the present question
may be fully and satisfactorily answered without it. There is no one
here, I imagine, who thinks that any government can be good, which is
purely aristocratic, without any mixture of popular: Now it has been my
endeavour to shew that our government is so: whoever, then, disapproves
of a pure aristocracy must disapprove of ours, if I have made out my
case. Everything turns upon the mere question of fact. I have
endeavoured to make that question as plain as I could: if I have failed,
I have no doubt that some gentleman will refute me: but if I have
succeeded, I hope to induce the partizans of a mixed as well as those of
a purely popular government, to join with me in negativing the question.


15.: Primogeniture
 20 JANUARY, 1826

Typescript, Fabian Society, headed: “Speech intended to have been
spoken, and in part actually spoken at the London Union, 20th January
1826.” The Laws and Transactions confirm the date of this, the third
debate, “That the Law and Custom of Primogeniture are detrimental to
Society,” proposed by Mill, who spoke third in the affirmative, which
carried the vote, 16 to 12. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not
listed in his bibliography.

i do not intend, Sir, to trespass very long upon your patience. The
merits of the question seem to be within a narrow compass. We have
experienced this evening Edition: current; Page: [336] how obscure and
intricate one of the simplest questions in ethics and legislation may be
made. If we look at the subject of property with the eyes of
commonsense, and without that kind of superstition which seems in this
country to have stamped it as one of those subjects to which commonsense
ought not to be applied, we shall see that there are two, and but two,
great ends to be looked to by the legislator in regard to property; the
greatest possible production and the best distribution. By establishing
the laws of property, by securing to the possessor of it during his
life, and to those to whom he chooses to give it at his death, the full
and unmolested enjoyment of the advantages which it yields, the
legislator gives encouragement to the production of wealth. This done
his next consideration is what distribution conduces most to human
happiness. This distribution it is his business to find out, and when
found out, to encourage as far as is consistent with the other great
object, the encouragement of production.

I suppose I may be permitted to assume that the distribution which
conduces most to the general happiness is the distribution which the
legislator ought to favour, not but that there are gentlemen in this
room who would gladly dispute it, but because those gentlemen are
probably not quite prepared to make answer to the question what other
end it is the business of the legislator to look to.

Now the proposition on which I am content to rest my opposition to the
law and custom of primogeniture is this; that the distribution of wealth
which tends most to the general happiness is that which approximates the
nearest to equality. If this proposition be true, it will follow as a
consequence that the legislator ought to favour the equal distribution
of wealth in every way not inconsistent with that security of property
but for which there would be no wealth to distribute.

Everybody knows that the same sum of money is of much greater value to a
poor man than to a rich one. Give £10 a year to the man who has but £10
a year, you double his income, and you nearly double his enjoyments. Add
£10 more, you do not add to his enjoyments so much as you did by the
first £10. The third £10 is less valuable than the second, and the
fourth less valuable than the third. To the possessor of £1,000 a year
the addition of £10 would be scarcely perceptible; to the possessor of
£10,000 it would not be worth stooping for.

The richer a man is the less he is benefited by any further addition to
his income. The man of £4,000 a year has four times the income of the
man who has but £1,000; but does anybody suppose that he has four times
the happiness?

Let us therefore put the case of a man who dies intestate leaving four
sons and an estate of £4,000 a year. Divide it equally among the four
sons, and whatever quantity of happiness a £1,000 a year are capable of
yielding is produced four times over. Will it be pretended that the
whole £4,000 in the hands of one of the brothers would produce anything
like so great a sum of happiness? Where no undue power is annexed to the
possessor of wealth, the difference in point of enjoyment between an
income of £1,000 a year and an income of £4,000 is a trifle. That the
eldest brother may add this trifle to his enjoyments, are the remaining
Edition: current; Page: [337] three to be deprived of the whole of
theirs? Not if the general happiness be the proper end of legislation.
To produce inequality where without infringing any rights you might
produce equality, to make one man rich where you might make four men
comfortable, is bad economy; it is squandering the means of happiness,
nor do you give the slightest additional stimulus to the production of
wealth by thus vitiating its distribution.

It is probable that some gentlemen may not relish this pounds, shillings
and pence mode of reasoning, this application of the rules of arithmetic
to the computing of human feelings. They may think all such calculations
very dull; I cannot help it. They will readily believe me when I declare
that I should have been very glad if what I say had been at once amusing
and useful. There are many persons I am aware whose zeal for truth is of
that kind that they would rather at any time abandon the search than
pursue it at the hazard of being tiresome. For my part I am very little
accustomed to consider any means as dull which conduce to that great
end. I cannot follow some of the speakers of this evening in their
flights. I must go to work in my own way, and with my own instruments.
With these instruments, such as they are, I have satisfied myself that
equal distribution, failing special reasons to the contrary, is the one
arrangement dictated by a regard for the general happiness. Nor is this
principle any secret to ordinary persons on ordinary occasions.

A person who has ten loaves of bread to give away in charity, and ten
persons starving at his door, never thinks of singling out one of the
ten, giving him the whole, and leaving the other nine to perish. A
father if he had a basket of oranges or sugarplums to bestow upon a
family of five children would never imagine that he was best consulting
the happiness of them all by giving the whole basket to one child and
none to the other four. People in general are in the habit of thinking,
or at least of saying, that when there is no difference in point of
desert between two sons, to make any difference in favour between them
is injustice. Under what limitations (if any) is this maxim to be taken
true as applied to oranges, true as applied to sugarplums, but false as
applied to estates?

“Oh, but,” say these gentlemen, “what would become of the large
fortunes? Where would be our Devonshires, where our Fitzwilliams?1 But
for the law and custom of primogeniture all these princely fortunes
would be broken down.” So they would, and it is this idea of breaking
down a large estate which imposes upon men’s minds; their attention is
wholly fixed upon the diminished grandeur of one branch of the family,
and the immense number of moderate fortunes which would be cut out of
these gigantic ones is entirely overlooked.

Edition: current; Page: [338]
The existence of immense fortunes, if it be good at all, must be good
either as an end or as a means. If there be any person in this room who
says that it is good as an end, I cannot argue with one with whom I have
no principles in common, and must content myself with putting it to the
Society whether they are content to assume any such end or any other end
than the general happiness. I do in my conscience believe that there are
persons in the higher ranks of society who think that law and government
exist for the sole purpose of securing them in the possession of great
masses of property. In their language, however, they are in general more
moderate, and instead of holding up the preservation of large fortunes
as the end, they are satisfied with representing it as an absolutely
necessary means for the furtherance of a certain undefinable and
undescribable end termed the good order of society. What is meant by the
good order of society I never could find anybody who could tell, but one
may guess the end from the sort of means which they represent as
essential to its attainment.

If we confine our attention to the mere enjoyments of wealth, I have
already observed that the keeping together of large fortunes by no means
tends to increase the sum of those enjoyments. It augments them in
degree to nothing like the extent to which it narrows their diffusion. I
certainly do not desire that there should be no rich men. I heartily
wish that there were no other sort of men. I by no means agree with that
tribe of moralists who would have us believe that great riches are an
evil. But we ought to look at both sides of the question: if the law and
custom of primogeniture make a few rich, it ought not to be forgotten
that they make many poor. The contrary practice, the practice of equal
distribution, would not be equally favourable to the maintenance of
large fortunes. Few men would then possess large fortunes except those
who had earned them. But if there were few large fortunes, there would
be many moderate ones: where we now see one man with £20,000 a year we
should perhaps see twenty men with £1,000 a year each.

But we have been told that there is another use in large fortunes which
is to maintain an aristocracy, by which is meant a body of rich men
possessing power, or as it is called influence, more or less over the
great body of the people. The existence of such a body, we are given to
understand, is of the greatest possible moment, and some gentlemen have
been very eloquent on the subject of the evils which they conceive we
should suffer were no such body in existence.

I agree with these gentlemen thus far. I think it highly desirable that
persons possessed of property should exercise considerable influence
over the body of the people. My reason is that they are the only class
which has the means, that is to say the money and the time, to acquire
that degree of knowledge which is necessary for qualifying them to take
the lead in public affairs. To have the means, however, of acquiring
knowledge avails a man very little unless he has an adequate motive. The
man of £1,000 a year has a motive. The man of twenty times that amount
has none: with such an instrument of power in his hands as £20,000 a
year, what need has he Edition: current; Page: [339] of intellect? Why
should he take trouble? What has he to gain by it? Where is his
inducement? There are exceptions doubtless to this rule, but without
wishing to push it to any extravagant extent I think it must be allowed
me that out of equal numbers of persons born to £1,000 and of persons
born to £20,000 a year, we might expect a priori that the proportion of
intellectual and instructed men would be much the greatest in the former
class, a conclusion which it is almost unnecessary to say experience
amply confirms. And if we add to this that every large fortune would
break down into several of that moderate extent which affords the
greatest possible combination of the means and the motives for the
acquisition of intellectual eminence, we shall see that under a system
of equal distribution the possessors of property, whether they would
have more influence or not, would at any rate deserve it more.

But if it be answered that the men of small fortunes, though abler and
better educated, would not carry with them that weight of influence
which it is of absolute necessity that the possessors of property should
have, I beg leave to ask what sort of influence it is that is meant.
Since it is not the influence of superior education and talent, is it
the mere influence of a longer purse? Since it is not the influence
which works by reasoning and persuasion, is it the influence which works
by bribery and terror? If this be the sort of influence that is meant I
must in candour acknowledge that under bad institutions it is among the
attributes of large fortunes to carry this sort of influence along with
them. At the same time I must be permitted to doubt whether this be a
sort of influence which deserves much encouragement, or whether it be
saying much in favour of primogeniture to say that a sort of power of
which bribes and threats are the instrument owes its existence to that
institution. Where such are the means I look with some suspicion upon
the end. I know we are taught to believe that we are greatly indebted to
the rich for being so kind as to bribe us and intimidate us for our
good, to the end that having by these means acquired a complete command
over our acts they may with paternal solicitude force us to pursue our
own happiness which we should otherwise be in danger of losing sight of.
To expect any other than this disinterested line of conduct from men who
have a large stake in the country,2 who are interested in keeping all
establishments on their bottoms, and in maintaining the stability of the
existing order of things; to expect anything but good from so efficient
a drag chain so admirably fitted to obviate all danger of too rapid a
movement on the part of the political machine would be jacobinism. A
little election bribery and a little election terrorism are a small
price to pay for so much stability.

Edition: current; Page: [340]
It is certainly true that stability in a government is desirable, but it
is first desirable that the government should be good. If it is not
good, the more unstable it is, the better. If while you are making the
government as stable as possible you at the same time take care that it
shall be as bad as possible, here are two evils instead of one: and if
it be the interest of the rich to make the government a bad one, it is
small matter of congratulation that it is also their interest to keep it
so.

But it is by no means true that men with large fortunes are for that
reason interested in the stability of the existing order of things. If
the existing order of things be of such a sort as to give to them all
the power which they can possess or desire, i.e. power to dispose at
their pleasure of all the rest of the community and of all that belongs
to them, then indeed they have an interest in the stability of the
existing order of things. But if their power falls short of this by one
atom, they are interested in subverting the existing order of things the
very moment that they think they have the least chance of succeeding in
the attempt. That there should be a stable government therefore, which
is so much better a thing than a good government, is their interest only
so far forth as the government is bad.

There are then two kinds of influence, the one the source of all evil,
the other of all good; the influence of will over will, and the
influence of understanding over understanding. In regard to these two
kinds of influences, what is the effect of the law and custom of
primogeniture? Instead of a large number of moderate fortunes which
would exercise the good sort of influence without the bad, it gives us a
small number of large fortunes which exercise the bad sort of influence
without the good. For a class of men who would be able to instruct, but
who could not bribe or intimidate, it substitutes a class who are able
to bribe, who are able to intimidate, but who simply because they can
bribe and intimidate have never learned to instruct.

If it be good that men should be so raised above their fellowmen as to
be almost wholly independent of the favourable or unfavourable
sentiments which may be entertained towards them by those fellowmen; if
it be good that great power should be entrusted to those who are the
least capable of employing it well and who are under the strongest
inducements to employ it ill; if the being born heir to a large fortune
be talent and education, or if it be a better qualification for
governing a state than talent and education; or if the possession of
power independently of merit be an apt encouragement to the acquisition
of merit, then it is good that there should be large fortunes, and that
these large fortunes should be kept together by the law and custom of
primogeniture. But if the reverse of all this be the case, and if
besides this it be proved that moderate fortunes are more favourable to
intellectual and moral excellence, and afford the enjoyments of wealth
in a higher degree than those gigantic ones; then instead of the law and
custom of primogeniture the law and custom of equal division ought to
prevail.

Edition: current; Page: [341]


16.: Catiline’s Conspiracy
 28 FEBRUARY, 1826

MS, University of Toronto Library, MSS 3074. Headed in Mill’s hand,
“Speech / delivered at the / London Debating Society / Tuesday 28th Feby
/ 1826 / on the character of Catiline.” As there is no Fabian Society
typescript, this is probably one of the two MSS that Laski sold
immediately after acquiring them in 1922. The Laws and Transactions
confirms the date of this, the sixth debate, “That the Character of
Catiline has been calumniated by the Roman Historians.” Roebuck proposed
the subject and opened in the affirmative; Mill replied. They are the
only speakers listed in the debate, which was carried by the negative,
15 to 12. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

it is a remark of condorcet, that he is a public benefactor, who
questions the authority of received opinions: and this not only when the
received opinions are wrong, but sometimes even when they are right.1 If
they are wrong, it is of course an advantage to get rid of an error: if
they are right, it is still no small advantage, to believe upon evidence
what we had hitherto believed upon trust.

If there be as much merit in propounding a paradox in history, as
Condorcet says there is in propounding a paradox in philosophy,2 my
honourable friend3 the opener of the debate may lay claim to a
considerable share of our approbation. He is certainly entitled to
whatever praise may be due to those who impugn the reigning opinion: and
thus much may be conceded to him; that we are in general too apt to give
implicit credence to everything which is asserted by historians,
particularly by classical historians: in as much as we have not only
read it in print, but what is still more conclusive, we have read it at
school. Till within a short period, no one seems to have suspected, that
ancient historians had their passions; that ancient historians had their
prejudices; that the evidence which they had before them was not always
of the best kind, nor their powers of weighing evidence, always of the
highest order: in short, we are only now beginning to conceive it
possible, that a historian who wrote in Greek or Latin, could be a
deceiver or deceived. We are really indebted, therefore, to any one, who
by boldly setting himself up against the authority of nineteen
centuries, raises doubts, and provokes enquiry.

I know not whether my honourable friend really entertains the opinion in
defence of which he has displayed so much ingenuity and research; or
whether he Edition: current; Page: [342] has any other purpose than by
exemplifying the uncertainty which hangs over the best established
historical facts, to shake that unbounded confidence which we are so
prone to repose in whatever has been handed down to us under the name of
history, and send us back to reperuse our books and reconsider our old
opinions. If this be his purpose, he has chosen his subject well, and
the Society will I am sure agree with me that the subject has not lost
any thing, by his manner of treating it.

To me, who, in history as in most other things, look chiefly to that
which is practical, which bears upon the present situation of the human
race, for which alone I concern myself, questions of this sort, I
confess, are not very interesting. It is criminal in wives to murder
their husbands, whether Mary Queen of Scots murdered her husband or no;4
and in forming a resolution to be an honest man, I shall not wait till I
have ascertained whether Catiline was a rascal. If therefore my
honourable friend had done no more than throw doubts upon the reality of
the criminal actions imputed to Catiline, I should have suffered his
speech to produce what effect it might upon the Society, and left it for
other gentlemen to answer it if they could. But he has done more than
deny those actions; he has attempted to justify them: and it is for this
reason that I intend to oppose him. History, which resembles a novel in
so many other respects, resembles it also in this, that it matters
little whether the actions which the historian or the novelist relates
ever really happened or not, but it matters very much that the moral
judgment which we form of those actions should be correct. It is of very
little consequence whether Catiline was a rascal, but it is of very
great consequence that every rascal should be treated as such, whether
in the situation of Catiline or in any other; and consequently, that a
man who did what Catiline is acknowledged to have done, should be
estimated as he deserves. Without therefore touching upon those actions
in the private life of Catiline, the evidence of which may appear
questionable, I shall confine myself to the consideration of that one of
his actions which can neither be denied nor explained away: his
conspiracy.

My honourable friend has contributed to our instruction and
entertainment by a dissertation on the vices of the aristocratic
government of Rome. It is not my wish to extenuate those vices; I do not
fall short of my honourable friend in my contempt of those shallow and
superficial politicians who see no despotism but where they see a single
despot; who imagine that a government with popular forms must be a
popular government, and who when they have played off one turbulent
faction against another, imagine that they have secured liberty. I
trust, Sir, that without being numbered among such persons, I may be
permitted to see more points for consideration in this question, than my
honourable friend seems to have been aware of. I must acknowledge indeed
that his argument is recommended, if not by Edition: current; Page:
[343] its conclusiveness, at least by its beautiful simplicity: The
Roman government was not the best government conceivable: ergo, it was
lawful to subvert it at any time, by any means, and to substitute any
other government in the place of it. I must confess myself dull enough
not to feel the force of this reasoning; and sufficiently bigotted to
certain notions of morality, to think that civil war is a tremendous
evil, and not to be hazarded but when the prospective good preponderates
over the immediate evil: and that the existence of abuses is no pretext
for a revolution unless it be the object of that revolution to remedy
them.

There is one question which does seem to me to deserve more
consideration than my honourable friend has apparently thought necessary
to bestow upon it: and this is, what were Catiline’s designs? The
existing government was bad, we will grant: but would Catiline have
established a better? This to say the least my honourable friend has not
proved. He appears to have reckoned upon finding in us a disposition to
believe any thing in behalf of the unfortunate, and to have thought that
our imaginations could not harbour the idea of two parties cutting each
other’s throats, and neither of them in the right. I grant that in
reading the pages of history, which are so often the annals of human
misery and human guilt, it is with difficulty that the lover of virtue
can force himself to believe that all was equally black. It is painful
to dwell on the dull detail of crime after crime, and see nothing to
love, nothing to admire, but every thing to execrate. The imagination
must have something to sympathize with: and what it cannot find in the
successful, it seeks in the unsuccessful party. They at least were no
tyrants: they have not shocked us by their proscriptions and their
confiscations: in our abhorrence of the crimes which were perpetrated
against them, we forget those which they sought to perpetrate, we think
only of the suffering of men who were more sinned against than sinning;5
and vainly flatter ourselves that those virtues which we see but too
clearly were not found in the victors, would have been found in the
vanquished if they had prevailed. I might perhaps condemn this illusion
of the imagination, if I myself could boast of being free from it: but I
still read the stories of Cato and Brutus6 with the same intense
interest as if I had not known them to have been among the most selfish
of mankind; and I bestow on an ideal Cato and Brutus that love and
admiration which I feel that the real Cato and Brutus did not deserve. I
would gladly if I could, regard Catiline too in the light of a
persecuted patriot, a hero and a martyr: but my principles compel me to
pass the severest condemnation upon a man who would subvert an
established government without substituting a better, and plunge his
country into the horrors of a civil war, for no nobler purpose than the
gratification of his own rapacity, or his own selfish ambition.

Edition: current; Page: [344]
If Catiline had succeeded, he would have had his choice of three things.
He might have retained the old constitution, placing his own party in
power, that like Marius or Sylla he might have glutted himself and his
followers with the blood and riches of the opposite party:7 or secondly,
he might have established a military despotism, or thirdly and lastly a
good government. Let us examine into the comparative probability of
these three suppositions, beginning with the last.

I am ready to give Catiline all the advantage of the plea that what we
know of him comes to us solely from his enemies: but when we make all
the deductions, which this circumstance requires, from the value of
their testimony, or even were we to reject that testimony altogether,
the utmost that we could conclude would be, that there is no evidence
against him. The absence of evidence against him is not evidence in his
favour: thought it were not proved that his designs were bad, this is no
proof that they were good. My honourable friend will not probably carry
his disbelief in history so far as to contend that we ought always to
believe the contrary of what historians tell us, and to infer at once
that Catiline was an honest man, because Sallust says he was a
profligate.8 Now I ask, Is the thing itself so intrinsically probable,
that we should believe it without evidence? Is disinterested patriotism
so very common a thing, a quality of such vulgar, such every day
occurrence, that we should ascribe it without proof to a man of whose
moral character the very best that can be said is that we know nothing
about it? My honourable friend must have a very good opinion of mankind.
He has surely lived in some country where moral virtues are like
blackberries, and patriots grow upon every bush. It is not so I fear in
London: I am sure it was not so in Rome: and till I have some better
evidence of Catiline’s honesty, than his own word and my honourable
friend’s, I will at the risk of sacrificing my own character for charity
and liberality, consider him as a knave.

But if, on the one hand, my honourable friend may with reason require of
us to make the due abatement from the degree of credit due to Catiline’s
enemies because they were his enemies he should on the other hand
reflect that this abatement does not amount to a total rejection of
their testimony, and that even a man’s enemies do not load him with
accusations which every man has it in his power to contradict. At the
hazard then of incurring the contempt of my honourable friend, I will
say, that little as we know of Catiline, and that little only from his
enemies, we know enough to pronounce with some confidence that he was
every thing which a political reformer should not be. I see no reason to
doubt that he was a needy adventurer, reduced to penury by what to avoid
the sarcasms of Edition: current; Page: [345] my honourable friend I
will call by no worse name than extravagance: that when he had
squandered his fortune, he still retained the habits which that fortune
had engendered, and though without the means of satisfying his natural
wants, was still tormented by artificial wants which it required a large
fortune to supply: that he was deeply in debt, that he had no honest
means of livelihood, and that he had gathered round him a multitude of
men whose wants like his own were pressing and their fortunes spent. Now
there are many instances in history of conspiracies in which such men
have been the leaders: they are indeed the stuff of which conspirators
are made: but I do not think there is one instance of a conspiracy led
by such persons, which has had any righteous purpose or which has turned
out well. A man who has been ruined by his vices is not a man to reform
the government of his country. A political reformer should be a man who
can resist temptation—who can command his passions—who looks to distant
and durable enjoyments rather than to those which are immediate and
transitory and who can toil half his life thankless and unrewarded,
undervalued and perhaps abhorred by the majority of mankind with nothing
to support him but the cheering consciousness that his labours and his
sacrifices will one day be appreciated. Can we expect this from a man
who, reckless of the consequences, is a slave to the pursuit of
immediate gratifications, neglecting all others? No: it is a fatal error
to imagine that public virtue and private vices are ever allied, or that
he who has sacrificed fame, fortune and liberty to his ungovernable
passions, will have more regard for the happiness of his fellow citizens
than he has had for his own. It is too much to suppose that he who is an
enemy to himself, will be a friend to the rest of mankind, or that he
whom prudence cannot restrain from vicious indulgence will be restrained
from it by forbearance towards others or by love of his country.

I conclude therefore, that if Catiline had succeeded, he would either
after a series of massacres and proscriptions, have ended by leaving the
government as it was before, or he would have established a military
despotism. I am sure there is no one here who would have attempted to
justify him, had he adopted the former alternative. But as my honourable
friend appears to have some hankering after a military despotism, and to
think that it would have been at least an improvement upon the Roman
aristocracy, I must not dismiss this part of the subject without
observation.

I am no very vehement admirer of an aristocratic government: and the
Roman aristocracy had its full share of the vices to which that form of
government is liable. But an aristocracy, be it ever so bad, if composed
of a considerable number of members, seldom or never reduces the human
mind so completely to the level of the brutes, as a military despotism.
An aristocracy—at least a numerous aristocracy—has more points in common
with the people: it has at least an interest in establishing a regular
government, and letting its subjects know all the evil which they are
liable to suffer at its hands. It is the interest of an aristocracy that
personal security should be inviolable; for their own persons may one
day be in Edition: current; Page: [346] danger. It is the interest of an
aristocracy that there should be protection to property: for the time
may come when their property may stand in need of it. In short though an
aristocracy might and would have the will to oppress in at least as
great a degree as a monarch, it would in general oppress by means of the
laws, rather than against them. Now a government of law is always
preferable to a government of arbitrary will. However oppressive the
laws might be, they might at any rate be known. Though the law might
take from us nine tenths of the produce of our industry, it would be
something to know, that the remaining tenth would be secure. I can
hardly imagine any laws so bad, to which I would not rather be subject
than to the caprice of a man: whose ever varying will could never for an
instant be known—who would punish me today for executing his yesterday’s
commands,—who would load me today with riches and honours and send me to
the scaffold tomorrow. I would rather if I must choose, be habitually
overtaxed, than live in constant fear that the whole of my property
might be taken from me at a moment’s warning by the fiat of a despot. I
would rather have every action controlled—every movement chained up by
restrictive laws which iniquitous as they might be would not destroy my
security, since I should only have to obey them and be safe: than lead a
life of incessant anxiety lest by some of my acts I should unwittingly
infringe against a will which had never been made known to me, and
violate prohibitions which had never existed any where but in the royal
bosom. Nor is this utter insecurity, this constant sense of alarm,
confined to those who are sufficiently conspicuous to attract the notice
of the despot, and sufficiently wealthy to excite his cupidity or his
jealousy. If the great body of the people is not the prey of the despot,
it is the prey of his subordinate instruments: petty tyrants, whom
experience has proved to be the worst of tyrants and who are but the
more likely to be tyrants because they themselves are slaves. My
honourable friend has expatiated on the tyranny which the proconsuls
exercised over the provinces, because having but a year to reign they
made haste to plunder as much as they conveniently could in that short
time. But if this be true, what may we not expect from the agent of a
despot, who has no security that his power will continue so long?
History affords some remarkable examples in point; and I am inclined to
think that the government of a Turkish Pacha would form but a
disadvantageous contrast even with that of a Roman proconsul.

But what contributes most of all to sink the minds of the unhappy
subjects of a despotism into the lowest state of brutality and
degradation of which human nature is susceptible, is that merit, instead
of being the road to distinction, is more dangerous to its possessor
than even wealth: that every quality which adorns a man is dreaded and
persecuted, while the only qualities which recommend to favour are those
of a sycophant and a slave. From this general corruption, an extensive
aristocracy is exempt. There it is not by the arts of fawning and
flattering and cringing and pandering and backbiting and slandering,
that men raise themselves to the head of the state: there are no court
intrigues, no favorites, no royal Edition: current; Page: [347]
mistresses: the meanest of vices, those of a courtier, are unknown.
Talents and intellect are in honour, because these are the qualities
which are really serviceable, and because, where the possessors of power
are too numerous to be acted upon by private favour, the qualities that
are really serviceable, are the qualities that are preferred. And at
Rome, where the lowest citizen, if a man of talent, was not excluded by
his birth from those public situations which are the proper reward of
talent, the human mind could not become utterly degraded. Where the
great prizes fell to a Marius or a Cicero, Marius’s and Cicero’s would
not be wanting. Under a despotism such men, if they had ever arisen,
would have been crushed in the beginning of their career. It has been
remarked that nothing contributed so much to the unequalled grandeur of
the Roman state as the succession of great men who ruled its councils
and commanded its armies for century after century.9 And to what cause
is it to be ascribed that a state which from so small a beginning had
raised itself to so much grandeur not suddenly and by the individual
talents of one great captain but gradually through a succession of ages
and by a succession of statesmen and warriors, should first have stopt
short, then fallen gradually into decay, until with the whole
civilization of the world at its beck, it was unable to defend its own
existence against a few hordes of savages? Could this have happened
under a government under which merit was rewarded—under which it was
even tolerated—but it has been truly said by a historian whose authority
indeed does not go for much with my honourable friend, Regibus boni quam
mali suspectiones sunt, semperque his aliena virtus formidolosa est.10

Bad then as the Roman aristocracy was (and I neither palliate nor deny
its badness) he who had sought to subvert it with the intention of
erecting a military despotism on its ruins, is not entitled to plead the
end, in justification of the means, and it is not any ordinary end which
would justify such means. Though it would be too much to say that civil
war is the worst of evils, since the evil of misgovernment is worse;
there is scarcely an imaginable horror which is not included in it.
Rapine and murder on the largest scale and in the most aggravated form,
are but a specimen. There are occasions, it is indeed true, when
humanity itself commands us to risk even these evils to effect a greater
good. But though the friend of mankind may despise the pusillanimity or
execrate the hypocrisy of those who would persuade us to endure the
perpetual evils of tyranny rather than expose ourselves to the temporary
hazards of a political convulsion; it does not become him to give a
handle to the eternal enemies of all reforms from the greatest to the
least for accusing him of insensibility to the tremendous evils by which
such convulsions are but too often accompanied. An indifference to those
evils is precisely what those who do not wish to see the people happy
are in the constant habit of charging upon those who do; and it is of
the highest importance that the Edition: current; Page: [348] language
and conduct of the friends of freedom should be such as to give no
colour to so serious an accusation. Let them acknowledge that the man
who like Catiline produces these evils for his own selfish purposes, and
with no intention of effecting a permanent improvement, is a most
atrocious criminal: but let them add that there is a degree of guilt
still more atrocious than his: it is the guilt of those who by upholding
bad institutions when the spirit of the age imperatively calls for
reform, expose their country to the same calamities for purposes equally
selfish, and if the extent of the evil sought to be produced be the test
of wickedness, still more detestably wicked.


17.: The Universities [1]
 7 APRIL, 1826

Typescript, Fabian Society. Headed: “Speech, the latter part of which
was spoken at the London Debating Society in the Spring of 1826.” The
only relevant debate listed in the Laws and Transactions is the eighth,
on 7 April, “That the System pursued at our Universities is adapted to
the Ends of Education,” proposed and opened by Octavius Greene; Mill
spoke fifth in the negative, which carried the debate 24 to 13. It seems
likely that No. 18 replaced the early part of this speech, with the
“latter part” of this speech (perhaps from 352.9) providing the
conclusion. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

the system of education at our Universities has been so ably criticised
by former speakers that I should perhaps better consult my credit as
well as my ease if I were to remain this evening a silent listener.
Among the many topics, however, which the question embraces there is one
which has not received in this debate that measure of attention which is
its due. Although the deficiencies of the University scheme of education
have been exposed with no unsparing hand, the examination has almost
entirely confined itself to effects; it has not extended itself to
causes. We have been left without any explanation of the extraordinary
fact that while in other countries public education has generally been
on a level with the actual state of the human mind, has grown with its
growth and expanded with its expansion, in this country it has remained
far behind, and instead of going hand in hand with civilisation has not
even condescended to follow. It will perhaps be found that if our
institutions of education have not answered the purposes of education it
was because they never had those purposes in view, and that this great
public trust has been ill-executed for the same reason for which public
trusts in general are so ill-executed, because it has been confided to
persons who have no interest in executing it well.

Our Universities may be regarded for all practical purposes as
ecclesiastical Edition: current; Page: [349] establishments, and
education in so far as it depends upon those institutions may be
considered as being in the hands of the clergy. To this circumstance
more than to any other I am inclined to attribute the defectiveness of
our University education considered as a means to those ends which I
have been accustomed to consider as the ends of education. Without
professing (for I do not feel) any hostility to the established clergy,
nor insinuating that their conduct is different from what that of any
other men would be in their situation, it appears to me that there are
circumstances in that situation which render them peculiarly unfit to
have the direction of the national education in their hands.

The most important quality of the human intellect is its
progressiveness, its tendency to improvement. That there is such a
tendency in man is certain. It is this which constitutes his superiority
among animated beings. If mankind were to be judged merely by what they
are and not by what they are capable of becoming, we should not perhaps
have so much reason to be proud of the comparison with a well-educated
horse or dog as we are fond of imagining. It is evident then that one of
the grand objects of a really good education would be to promote to the
utmost this spirit of progression, to inspire an ardent desire of
improvement, and that a mode of education which does not encourage this
disposition is radically defective, much more if it does anything to
check it. It is also evident that if there be a body of men who have
made a solemn renunciation of the attribute of progressiveness for
themselves they are not likely to exert themselves with much spirit for
the promotion of that attribute in others. This, however, is what every
clergyman does by entering into the established church. As far as
regards religious opinions he engages to remain stationary, to preserve
the purity of the established faith against any modification, whether
for the better or for the worse, and experience has shown that he who
has taken a resolution to remain inaccessible to conviction on this most
important of all subjects generally becomes so on all others. Now a body
of men who do not improve are necessarily the bitter enemies of all who
do.

That my meaning may not be mistaken I will observe that the hostility to
improvement which I have imputed to the clergy does not by any means
belong to them as clergy; it arises merely from their incorporation. A
clergyman, that is to say a teacher of religion, is not as such
necessarily an enemy to improvement more than any other teacher, and it
would be extremely unfair and unjust to bring such an accusation against
him. But any teacher of any science would be an enemy to improvement if
he had made a vow never to improve, if he had bound himself never to
yield to conviction, never to adopt any new discoveries to which the
progress of the human mind might give birth, but to continue always
teaching the same doctrines to the end of his days. I only ask that what
would be true of any other sort of teachers may be supposed true of the
clergy. Their business, the business for which they are paid, is not to
make the human mind advance but so far as religious opinions are
concerned to keep it where it is.

Edition: current; Page: [350]
If there were a corporate body of physicians, or a corporate body of
engineers paid by the state, rewarded with honours and wealth, on this
condition, that they should always teach a certain set of doctrines in
physic or mechanics, it cannot be doubted that such a body would be
interested in preventing improvement. Happily this is not the case.
Neither the physician nor the engineer is bound down to a particular set
of opinions in their respective sciences; the clergyman is. Wherever
there is a hierarchy, wherever there is such a thing as church
government, adherence to certain tenets is the condition on which he
holds both his emoluments and his power. If there be not only a
hierarchy but a hierarchy connected with the ruling powers in the state,
it becomes the interest of its members to uphold certain political as
well as religious opinions, and to uphold them whether they are right or
wrong.

Now I might say that it would be a considerable stretch of arrogance in
mankind to suppose that they had already reached the pinnacle of
knowledge either in religion or politics; that it is highly probable
that there is still room for improvement in both, and that if our old
opinions on these subjects were thoroughly investigated the
investigation might not terminate favourably to them all. If this be the
case it is easy to see how strong would be the interest of the
established clergy in resisting improvement, since the effect of
improvement would be to leave them behind and deprive them of a part of
their consideration. I shall not however choose to rest my case upon any
argument which implies that it is possible for an established opinion to
be wrong. I will suppose that every teacher of the established religion,
and every political doctrine which the church, as connected with the
government, is interested in inculcating will stand the test of the most
rigorous examination. It is not the less true that in the progress of
human improvement every one of these opinions comes to be questioned.
The good of mankind requires that it should be so. The very idea of
progressiveness implies the questioning of all established opinions. The
human intellect is only in its right state when everything that is
believed is believed on evidence. This supposes enquiry. The interest of
the established clergy requires that the established opinions should be
believed, but it does not require that they should be believed upon
evidence. Now our experience of human nature justifies us in affirming
that whatever is done by a body of men is done in the way which promises
to give least trouble. The least troublesome way of making people
believe is to make them believe upon trust, and not upon evidence. If
the minds of men could be brought into such a state that they would
believe all established opinions merely because they were established,
the end would be attained in the easiest possible way. That love of ease
therefore which is the characteristic of an established clergy is of
itself sufficient to make them enemies to all enquiry, to improvement,
to progression.

It is now evident what are the habits of mind which if an established
clergy are entrusted with the business of education they are sure to
inculcate. The grand desideratum is to produce a confirmed habit of
taking opinions upon trust; in other Edition: current; Page: [351]
words, of believing without evidence, of blindly acquiescing in all
reigning opinions and regarding it as impious to call for the proof of
them. For this purpose it is necessary to divert the attention of the
pupils from all studies calculated to strengthen their intellects or
render them capable of thinking for themselves. It will therefore be a
grand object to provide them with other occupation, occupation of such a
kind that while they are doing nothing useful they may flatter
themselves that they are doing something. The exercises upon which they
will be put will not be such as shall accustom the mind to weigh
evidence, or shall infuse any originality or vigour of thought, or
soundness of judgment. They will either be mere exercises of memory or
will be directed towards the acquiring of a sort of acuteness and
dexterity about trifles, that the most active minds may still find
something to engage them which shall neither shake their faith in any
established opinion nor turn their attention to any one subject which is
of importance to mankind.

That the whole scope of the Cambridge and Oxford education conforms as
nearly to these ends as the occasional infirmity of human purposes will
allow remains to be shown. It will not be a difficult task.

The only things which are taught at our Universities, except divinity,
are classics and mathematics. At Oxford indeed ethics and rhetoric are
studied in Aristotle,1 with a very little of the school logic, which by
the way they learn in Aldrich,2 one of the worst books of logic extant.
In classics, besides the technicalities of the language, all that they
do is to get up certain authors, that is, to learn very accurately what
these authors have said so as to be able to answer any questions. They
are never once called upon to exercise their judgment either upon the
matter or manner of a work; they are merely taught to say it as they
would say their catechism. And this is the way in which Aristotle’s
Ethics and Rhetoric are learned. As for mathematics, it is a great
mistake to suppose that it is learned at Cambridge. If a man chooses to
learn it, Cambridge will reward him. But the quantity of mathematics
which it is necessary to know in order to obtain a degree is no more
than what a boy of fourteen of ordinary capacity may easily learn in six
months. And even the mathematical attainments to which the honours of
that University, from the senior wranglership downwards, are
appropriated are very little more than exercises of memory. One man
laboriously crams his head with the demonstrations and calculations
which another has invented, and when he has done this his attainments
stop. His greatest stretch of intellect is to be dexterous in the
application of certain technical rules. He can repeat the same process
over and over with fresh materials; so can a journeyman carpenter; and
in going over the same series of operations in problem after problem he
need know no more of the general principles of his science than the
journeyman carpenter need know of his. Edition: current; Page: [352] As
for discoveries, everybody knows whether or not it is from the senior
wranglers that they come. I believe in point of fact there is scarcely
an instance of a senior wrangler who has contributed anything worth
speaking of to the improvement of his own science. The men who during
the last century have improved the science of mathematics have been the
Eulers, the Lagranges and the Laplaces. From the time of Newton
downwards our mathematical reputation has been declining, and the few
men who have prevented it from sinking into utter contempt have almost
without exception been educated in Scotland.3

It may however be thought that in studying the classics even as they are
studied at our Universities, it is difficult not to imbibe some
liberality of sentiment and some valuable information. So one would
think, and if our Universities had not existed it would probably to this
day have remained a problem whether it was possible for great bodies of
young men to study the classics in such a manner as not to derive one
particle of advantage from them. Our Universities however have so nearly
succeeded in this attempt that the possibility of the thing is now
placed beyond the reach of doubt. So far indeed as regards Aristotle’s
Rhetoric and Ethics it must be confessed that although nobody is
required, or even encouraged, to read them with any profit, there is
nothing to hinder him from doing so if he be so disposed; and so far as
this goes Oxford is one degree above the zero of Cambridge. Of Plato
there are, I suspect, very few persons at either place who have ever
heard: certain it is that he is never read, which as he is a highly
instructive author is not at all surprising. As for the orators, I
believe there have been a few instances of late years at Oxford in which
an undergraduate has chosen to be examined in Demosthenes. Whether or
not Cicero is read I am not informed. Remain the poets and the
historians. Of these the poets, being the least useful, are the most
cultivated, and as the dramatists are hardly of any use at all it may
easily be conceived with what ardour they are studied. The historical
works, particularly those of the Greek historians, possessing in
themselves some natural aptitude for being useful, the end would not
have been attained if pains had not been taken to neutralise whatever
useful impressions those writings might, if left to themselves, have
been calculated to produce. For this end a happy resource presented
itself. An English antidote to the Greek poison—Mitford’s History of
Greece4—a work in which, together with everything that is slavish in
principle, everything that is false in fact with regard to the history
of Greece, is unremittingly inculcated; a work the Edition: current;
Page: [353] reputation of which is a national disgrace, a standing proof
of our utter ignorance of Greek literature, since we have given credit
for accuracy and research to a man whose research has never extended
beyond the common circle of authors, and who if making any assertion
that suits his purpose were accuracy, would possess that attribute in an
unrivalled degree. I am informed that this work is one of those which
are most frequently put into the hands of the younger members of the
University by the older as a corrective to the mistakes into which they
would be liable to fall if left to interpret the Greek historians by the
mere light of unassisted human reason.

It is true that at Oxford an undergraduate may choose the authors in
whose works he will stand an examination. True, but by the time he
thinks of taking his degree he has breathed the University air long
enough to know what sort of attainments are there prized. He knows that
at Oxford a scholar means a man who is familiar with Aeschylus and
Euripedes,5 and that even a little of these authors will bring him
nearer to a degree than a great deal of many more instructive writers.
Meanwhile he is told, and perhaps believes as a speculative truth, that
he is at liberty to choose his authors, while he looks round and sees
that those above him who have gone through the University with most
éclat have been chiefly eminent for their proficiency in choruses, and
that the crack men who are quoted as the great ornaments of the
University in this line are the men who have put their names in the
title page of a Greek play. It is indeed a remarkable fact, and
strikingly illustrative of the nature of what our Universities cultivate
and call Greek literature, that those who have amended the text or
furnished critical annotations on the philosophers, the orators, and
even the historians, or who have done anything towards helping us to
understand them, have almost every man of them been Germans. But then we
have the Hecuba and the Agamemnon, and the Prometheus Vinctus,6 and we
fancy that we have found out the metre of some of the Choruses in
Sophocles,7 and for this we are indebted to our Universities. We are
unrivalled in these attainments, and so jealous am I of our national
fame that I sincerely hope we may ever continue so.

Such is the mode of education at our Universities. Whether it is well
adapted to the ends of education it is for the Society to judge. History
presents us with one other example of an ecclesistical corporation which
has had the education of a great nation in its hands: I mean the
Jesuits. The mode of education under the Jesuits very much resembled
that of our Universities. They taught a little mathematics, a little of
the school logic, a little of belles lettres, and some Greek Edition:
current; Page: [354] and Latin: the poetry of these languages was what
they chiefly cultivated, and the reason is given in an admirable passage
of a celebrated work, the Lettres Juives.8 They knew that a man might
read the ancient poets all his life and not have one idea the more, nor
the capacity of acquiring one; but the minds which had been strengthened
by the study of the orators and philosophers were likely to push their
enquiries into subjects with which it suited the Jesuits much better
that they should not meddle.


18.: The Universities [2]
 7 APRIL, 1826

Typescript, Fabian Society. Headed: “Speech on the Universities, spoken
in 1826.” See No. 17 for the date and the likely relation between the
two texts. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

as i have not, like some of the gentlemen who preceded me, the advantage
of a practical acquaintance with the system pursued at our Universities,
I shall not enter into those minute details which I do not know, and
which perhaps if known would conduce but little to a correct estimation
of the general effect of the system. Happily this is not one of those
questions of which no one but an eye-witness is qualified to be a judge.
The system of our Universities must be very good indeed if we are
obliged to look close in order to find the blemishes; and I will add, it
must be very bad indeed if in defending it against attack its partisans
can only say that certain of its minutiae are as good as could
reasonably be expected.

In enquiring whether our Universities are or are not conducive to the
ends of education we are trying them, I must observe, by a very hard
test, and perhaps not altogether a fair one. It is fair to presume that
the Universities are supported and eulogized, and that young men are
sent there for some end, and it is possible that this end may be an
extremely good one; and indeed I have no doubt of it as those
institutions are the objects of such unceasing eulogy to loyal and pious
persons, who to be sure can aim at no other than loyal and pious ends.
But it is nevertheless possible that these ends may not be the ends of
education after all, and that our Universities, though they may be
something better than places of education, may not be places of
education. But whether they are places of education or no, they are at
any rate places where something is taught, or professed to be taught;
and some, Edition: current; Page: [355] though I believe but a small
proportion of the young men who are annually sent there, are sent in
order that they may learn, or seem to learn. In common parlance, to have
received a good education means to have been at one or other University.
If to have been at the University be the end of education there is no
doubt but that by going to the University that end may be most
effectually attained. It is probable however that in the sense attached
to the word education by the opener of this question,1 a young man would
not be considered to have received a good education unless he had
learned something though it were but to leap a five-barred gate. The
question is, therefore, whether those who go to our Universities learn
anything, and what they learn.

The only things which our Universities profess to teach are divinity,
classics and mathematics. I lay this down broadly without fear of
contradiction. The honourable opener has given us, it is true, a long
list of lectures: he should rather have said lectureships. Lectureships
there unquestionably are; lectures in many cases there are not: but
suppose there were, what then, since nobody is obliged to attend them,
obliged nor even encouraged, since if a man knew everything which these
lectures or any other lectures in the world could teach him they would
not give him so much as a Junior Optime2 nor even bring him the tenth
part of a step nearer to the degree of Bachelor of Arts. The lectures
then may be divided into two classes, lectures delivered and lectures
not delivered. Those which are not delivered of course are not attended:
those which are delivered anybody may attend if he choose, nobody unless
he choose: that is to say, he can find instruction if he wants it, which
is exactly what he could do anywhere else, with this difference, that in
London or any other considerable place he would probably find much
better lecturers and much better lectures.

Divinity, classics and mathematics may therefore be considered to be the
substance of University education, as they are certainly the only
studies that are either exacted or encouraged. Of these three I shall
confine myself to the two last. The theological branch I do not propose
to meddle with. It is sufficient for me that it has the approbation of
the Church of England which is the only proper judge in these matters,
and which must be presumed infallible, at least in its own sphere. The
system moreover of theological instruction at our Universities is all
bottomed upon the Thirty-nine Articles,3 a subject on which I should be
extremely sorry to observe any scepticism, as I am informed that society
would be in danger of dissolution if there were only thirty-eight, or if
any one of the thirty-nine were altered from what it now is. Theology,
however, is only for the clergy; at least it is only the clergy who are
expected to study it. The remainder of the young men who Edition:
current; Page: [356] receive what is called their education at Oxford or
Cambridge, that is to say the future lawyers, physicians, surgeons,
merchants, engineers, army and navy officers, and idlers, are fitted for
their several occupations by the study of Greek, Latin and mathematics.
It has been found out after some centuries that medicine, law, commerce,
are not to be learned either in Euclid or Euripides, and that anybody
who has anything to do, if he wants to learn how to do it, must begin
his apprenticeship after he leaves college. There are therefore only two
pleas set up for our University education; one is that however
ill-calculated to be of use to those who have anything to do, it is
extremely well-adapted to the wants of those who have not, and who are
therefore called the higher classes. The other is that although it does
not give to professional men the sort of knowledge which is peculiarly
requisite for their several professions, it gives them a sort of
knowledge which is of great use in forming their understandings, in
purifying their taste and qualifying them to acquire any knowledge and
pursue any studies with success.

In this last proposition I so far agree as to think that a certain
knowledge of the Greek and Latin languages and of mathematics forms an
important part of a liberal education, but not, in my opinion, the most
important part; and I also maintain that the culture of these branches
of knowledge, if exclusive and if carried to the length to which they
are carried at our Universities, has a tendency much rather to pervert
the understanding than to improve it.

I will begin with mathematics, and allowing that Euclid’s Elements, with
something of algebra and enough of the properties of curve lines to
understand the more common of their practical applications, should form
part of every good education. I think it will be allowed that here is no
more than may be acquired by any boy of ordinary capacity by the age of
fourteen. If we suppose, as we reasonably may, that his time has been
profitably spent up to that age, the question is whether a young man who
is to pursue any profession, or even a young man of no profession who
does not mean to devote his life to the cultivation of the mathematical
sciences, can derive any advantage from pushing these studies farther
commensurate to the labour that it will cost. Practical utility the
higher branches of mathematics have none, unless in so far as they may
lead to new discoveries in physical science, and these are made by the
philosopher who devotes his life to such pursuits, not by the man who
learns mathematics as a branch of general education.

We are told, indeed very frequently, that mathematics teach men to
reason; and truly they do, but it is to reason on mathematics and
nothing more. The truth is that mathematical evidence and moral evidence
are so entirely distinct from one another that they are to be judged of
by rules altogether different, and the man who is most familiar with the
one may be a mere child in the other. Nor is this less the case with
physical science. Both in the moral sciences and in the physical errors
arise from two causes, incorrect observation and ambiguities of
language. To neither of these errors is the mathematician less liable
than the common man. He Edition: current; Page: [357] has not learned to
observe, for his science is not a science of observation. He has not
acquired the faculty of detecting ambiguities of language since all his
terms being exactly defined that faculty has never been called into
exercise. It is not however his only disadvantage that his mathematics
have not been to him a logic, that sort of logic which is of use in
common affairs. He is not simply on a level with the ordinary man, he is
below him. When he might have been acquiring the knowledge that he needs
he has been acquiring that which he needs not. That time and labour
which might have made him a reasoner have been spent in making him a
mathematician, and while he has been studying x’s and y’s, others have
been studying names and things; they have been learning to observe by
observing and to reason well by examining bad reasons as well as good.
When it is said, however, that the young men either at Cambridge or
elsewhere learn to reason by learning mathematics we are to understand,
I suppose, that this is when mathematics are so learned as to bring the
reasoning faculty into play. Now this is certainly not the case at
Cambridge. It is universally known that the mathematical attainments to
which the honours of that University, from the senior wranglership
downwards, are directed, are very little more than exercises of memory.
One man laboriously gets up the demonstrations and calculations which
another has invented, and when he has done this his attainments stop.
His greatest stretch of intellect is to be dexterous in the application
of certain technical rules. He can do the same process over and over
with fresh materials; so can a journeyman carpenter; and in repeating in
problem after problem the same series of operations he need know no more
of the general principles of his science than the journeyman carpenter
need know of his. A man utterly ignorant of mathematics would be as
likely to make a new discovery in that science as a senior wrangler who
is but a senior wrangler: and I believe in point of fact there is
scarcely an instance of a senior wrangler who has contributed anything
worth speaking of to the improvement of his own science. The men who
during the last century have improved mathematics have been the Euler’s,
the Lagrange’s and the Laplace’s. In our own country the few men who
have raised us to the little position of mathematical fame which we
enjoy have, since the time of Newton, almost without exception been
educated in Scotland.4

But after all, if the utility of the higher branches of mathematics as a
branch of education, and the excellence of the mode in which they are
taught at Cambridge were ever so unquestionable, how much of mathematics
is really learned at that University, learned I do not mean by the few
who take honours, but by the many who take their degree of B.A. and
their degree of A.M. and go forth to the world stamped with the mark of
Alma Mater’s approbation as men who have learned all which she thinks it
necessary that a well-educated man should know? I put the question
plainly; do the majority of these men know anything of mathematics
beyond what they can cram in the last month or six weeks of the three
and a quarter Edition: current; Page: [358] years which they have passed
in making believe to learn mathematics at Cambridge? Let any advocate of
the University of Cambridge as an institution of education answer this
question if he can, and let him not cavil at a quadratic equation more
or less, but let him at once answer whether a boy at ten would not
richly deserve the birch if after six months real, not sham, teaching,
he did not know more of mathematics than an average bachelor of arts.


19.: The British Constitution [1]
 19 MAY [?], 1826

MSS, University of Hull Library, JK 318 M6 (main part), and University
of Toronto Library (conclusion). The Hull MS is headed in Mill’s hand:
“speech never spoken on the British Constitution”; the Toronto MS has
upside down after the conclusion, in Mill’s hand: “Peroration written
for a speech on radical reform.” Typescript, Fabian Society, of the Hull
MS. The two MSS connect in mid-sentence at 369.32. The speech would
appear to have been prepared for the tenth debate at the London Debating
Society, on 5 May, 1826, “That the practical Constitution of Great
Britain is adequate to all the Purposes of good Government,” proposed by
J.H. Lloyd and opened by William O’Brien. The debate was adjourned till
the next meeting, at which Mill delivered a revised version (see No.
20). Mill’s references to the remarks of the opening speaker and to
other speeches indicate that this unspoken speech was also prepared for
the adjourned debate. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in
his bibliography.

i cannot agree, Sir, in the objection which has been urged by my
honourable friend1 against the wording of the question. I think it
tolerably well worded, and of all possible faults those with which, in
my opinion it is least chargeable are those which he has imputed to it.
The proposer2 distinctly prepared us, by the wording of his resolution,
for what we afterwards learned from his speech, that he intended to
defend the practice of the Constitution, and not its theory, and though
he admitted that the Constitution is not, what it pretends to be, he
maintained what is more to the purpose, that it is better than it
pretends to be. For my part, I care as little about the theory of the
Constitution as he does. I care not by what machinery my pocket is
picked: picked or not picked is the essential point, all the rest is of
small moment. If we are well governed, I agree with the honourable
opener,3 that it does not matter one iota how we came so. All I complain
of is, that we are not well governed; and that from the manner in which
the House of Commons is constituted, it is absolutely impossible we ever
should be. With this exception, I am happy to acknowledge myself a
perfect disciple of the honourable opener.

Edition: current; Page: [359]
Confining myself then to our practical Constitution, I originally
intended to have given a few practical specimens of that practical
thing: and to have shewn by a few striking examples, how regularly, the
interest of the many is sacrificed to the interest of the few. But this
exposure has already been made, by my honourable friend who spoke
third:4 and though it would be easy to double his list of grievances,
and to colour the picture still more highly than he has done, I chuse
rather to expose the futility of the excuses which are set up for
keeping things as they are,5 than seek any farther to aggravate the
apparent magnitude of the evils attempted to be excused.

But before I examine the arguments of honourable gentlemen, I must take
notice of what is sometimes more difficult to be answered than
arguments, I mean vague accusations. Not that I think so meanly of the
understandings of those whom I am addressing, as to suppose that there
is one of them who thinks it at all material to the question, whether
those members of the Society who oppose it are or are not republicans,
or whatever other names of ill omen the pure love of truth may have
induced any honourable gentleman to affix to them; but because I really
feel for the terrors which these words excite in certain minds, and as I
do not like to see a human creature suffering, I will tell the
honourable gentleman the extent of my republicanism. The form of
government which I seek; and with which I will be satisfied, is that
which will secure, at the smallest expense, an identity of interest
between the governed and the governors. This identity of interest does
not now exist. The reason is, that an immense majority of the House of
Commons who are the real governors, are chosen by a narrow oligarchy.
The proof of this fact I took a former opportunity of stating.6 Nobody
then denied it; nobody denies it now. To any person who is capable of
putting two ideas together, it is unnecessary to say that a House of
Commons which is in complete dependance upon persons who have a sinister
interest7 will act in subservience to that sinister interest, when they
dare. The question is, how to compose a House of Commons which shall not
be in subservience to any sinister interest. This question has been
answered, by a noble Lord, a member of this Society, in his late speech
to the Electors of Northumberland.8 As long as the House of Commons has
a sinister interest of its own, or is dependant on persons who have, bad
government is certain. Good government can only be secured, by making it
dependant upon persons who have Edition: current; Page: [360] no
sinister interest: and the only persons who have no sinister interest
are the people. Dependance upon the people, therefore, is the only
security. Let the House of Commons be dependant upon the people, and I
am satisfied.

If I be asked, whether with such a House of Commons there would be a
king, I answer that I neither know nor care. The difference between the
words King and President, or between a hereditary first magistrate and
an elective one is hardly worth disputing about. I do not think the
quantity of power which the king now possesses, as king, sufficiently
great to be any obstacle to good government: and as for the expense, I
have little doubt that a competent person might be found to perform all
the duties of king for so very moderate a remuneration, that to an
otherwise cheap government it would be hardly worth saving. Or if any
difficulty were felt in the matter, Mr. Maelzel has an automaton,9 which
I make no doubt he might be induced to part with at a reasonable price,
which might hold levees and drawing rooms for the benefit of trade, and
execute either in person or by commission all the other functions of
sovereignty.

I shall now examine the principal arguments which have been urged by the
supporters of our practical Constitution in this Society. They may be
distinguished into two classes; those which are relevant and those which
are irrelevant: in other words, those which have something, though but
little to do with the question, and those which have nothing to do with
it at all. The former are drawn from the actual composition of the House
of Commons and I will enumerate them presently. The latter belong to
that class of arguments which would apply with as much propriety to any
other measure, as to parliamentary reform. And these I shall begin with.
I omit those arguments which seem to have a more immediate reference to
persons than to things, such as the accusation of being enemies to
institutions, of being theorists, and so on, and I shall merely touch
upon the assertion that we have flourished and are flourishing under the
Constitution and in short that we are well as we are.

Now as to former times, I cannot pretend to speak. I do not know whether
our grandfathers were well as they were, or what sort of persons those
may have been who flourished under our Constitution a hundred years ago.
But I know very well what sort of persons flourish under it now. The
ministers flourish—they have plenty of money, patronage, and power. The
country gentlemen also flourish: since they have not only plenty of
money of their own, but a considerable quantity of that of other people,
which they have contrived to appropriate to themselves, as the
legislators of the country, by means of the Corn Laws. Nor have I any
objection to concede to the honourable opener that the higher ranks of
lawyers and clergy are well as they are, since fees continue to flow in
and tithes to be paid as usual: and as Edition: current; Page: [361] for
the lower ranks, the vulgar herd of both professions, they hope to be
well, which is nearly the same thing as if they were well. It cannot be
denied therefore that some of us have flourished, whatever may be said
of the rest. But I would suggest that there are perhaps some others who
may have claims on our attention, and that among these it is just
possible there may be some who are not quite so well. The tax-payers for
instance do not always see the blessings of taxation in so clear a light
as the receivers, and the 5 or 6000£ which are wrung from the poverty
stricken million to pay some noble lord for doing nothing who is not fit
for doing any thing, may be less pleasant in the giving than it is in
the receiving.10 It may be, too, that the old man who has pined in
poverty all his days while the vultures of the Court of Chancery have
been preying upon the estate which his father inherited when an infant,
might wish that the country were a little less prosperous and that he
had bread to eat: and he who has been ruined by a lawsuit which he has
gained with costs may wish his money out of the pockets of the Lord
Chancellor and his imps. The peasant too, who has been torn from his
family and sent to herd with felons in a gaol, for breaking a twig of
the value of two pence, or treading on a partridge’s egg,11 may
peradventure be less satisfied than his game eating persecutor with the
order of things under which the latter tenders his services gratis to
imprison the former. When England, Sir, is called a free country, a
slight mistake is made of a part for the whole: we are free as Sparta
was free: the Helots are overlooked.

If, Sir, I could overlook the whole of our peasantry, and all who are
unhappy enough to need any service at the hands of what are denominated
courts of justice, I might admit that we are on the whole subject to
less oppression than any other nation in Europe. But that this is owing
to the nature of our Constitution is not only a theory, but, I will take
leave to say, a theory which has not been proved.

This may serve to shew what gentlemen mean, when they condemn theory.
Every general principle which they do not like they call a theory: and
when they have called it a theory, we, it is to be understood, are to
reject it without examination. Now the sort of theories which I condemn
are those which are founded upon an insufficient number of facts. I
condemn the person who, on a subject that supposes a knowledge of 100
facts, should generalize on ten or twelve. I condemn still more the
person who generalizes on five or six: and the theorists who generalize
on four, three, or two facts respectively, must be considered to be
characterized by the positive, comparative, and superlative degrees of
imbecillity. But what shall we say of him who generalizes on one—who
takes a single instance for the foundation of a theory? who on a single
coincidence grounds a general rule? Surely he is the king of theorizers.
Surely if any body is a visionary speculatist, he is. That man is the
honourable opener.

This country has a peculiar Constitution, it has also a great many other
peculiar Edition: current; Page: [362] things. This country has
prospered in a peculiar manner, ergo, its prosperity is owing to its
Constitution, and to nothing else. Is this theorizing? Is the honourable
gentleman a theorist? Or is that appellation to be confined to those who
theorize on evidence, reserving the praise of practical wisdom for him
who theorizes without evidence?

I too have a theory, and it is this: that the commercial prosperity of
London is owing to the Monument by which it is overlooked. As no
powerful person has any interest in upholding this theory, it will I
doubt not be called a theory. Of the two theories, however, this is
considerably the more plausible: for if the Monument has not done much
good I do not think that it has done any harm, nor is it at all probable
that our commercial prosperity would have been greater, if the Monument
had been built in a different shape, or of different materials. But
there are persons who think that with a Constitution of different shape
and of different materials, we should have been more prosperous.

I do not however charge the honourable gentleman merely with theorizing
on insufficient evidence, but with overlooking part of the evidence
which exists. Though our specific experience of the British Constitution
is confined to a small portion of the globe, it is not altogether so
scanty as the honourable gentleman would seem to make it; and although
for reasons best known to himself, he has thought proper to theorize
upon one fact, the circumstances of the case happily afforded two. Of
the British isles, the only part of the empire which can be said to be
under the British Constitution; of these isles, though Great Britain is
one, Ireland, let me inform the honourable gentleman is another. It has
sometimes been disputed whether the evils of anarchy or those of
despotism be the worst: but I never heard it disputed that the two
together are a greater evil than either of them singly: From one half to
the whole of Ireland has been suffering under the two together, ever
since it was admitted to the blessings of the British Constitution.12
With all that insecurity of person and property which had been supposed
peculiar to a state of anarchy, is combined a degree of arbitrary power
in the functionaries of government which has scarcely been exceeded
under the most absolute monarchy. Yet Ireland is in full enjoyment of
our excellent Constitution, and not only of that but of an excellent
system of law, enforced by an excellent unpaid magistracy, all combined
to uphold an excellent established Protestant reformed church,13 and an
excellent landed aristocracy. I wonder why, having so many excellent
things in common with us, she should not be equally flourishing? Perhaps
it is because we have a better people: a more civilized, a more
instructed, and a more moral people; or perhaps it is to the greater awe
which this people inspires, that we are to look for the cause of our
comparative exemption from gross Edition: current; Page: [363]
misgovernment. But if you wish to see the British Constitution in its
unadulterated state, read the Evidence before the Irish Committees, and
see how Ireland is governed.14

It sometimes happens, Sir, that nobody cries stop thief, stop thief,
louder than the thief himself. It will now perhaps be admitted that the
theorist himself was the first and loudest to cry stop theory, stop
theory.

I will do the honourable gentlemen opposite the justice to admit that
they have not confined themselves to such trashy arguments as this. They
have advanced others and much more plausible ones. But they have not
stated them very distinctly or explicitly or in a manner which indicated
much confidence in them. They have mixed up their propositions with
their proofs, and one of their propositions with another, and have
skipped backwards and forwards from one part of the subject to another
without dwelling long enough upon any one to give us time to scrutinize
it accurately. As my object is not to confound them but to go to the
bottom of the question, I will do for the honourable gentlemen what they
have failed to do for themselves. I will attempt to separate their
different arguments from one another, and state them, fairly and
distinctly one by one. It will then appear that their cause is not so
desperate as one would be led to suppose from their manner of defending
it: and the honourable opener may learn that even when he is in the
wrong, a little logic will do him no harm.

It is alleged, then, first, that if the right men get into the House of
Commons, it is of very little consequence how they come there: and that
the right men do get into the House of Commons, since it would be
difficult to shew how a body of men could be composed which should
comprise a greater quantity of talent and education. This is the first
argument.

The second is, that to form a representative assembly, it is not
necessary that the representatives should be chosen upon any uniform
plan: it is sufficient if every interest has its representatives in the
house: the landed interest, the mercantile interest, the army, the navy,
professional men, and so on. The great body of the people, it is said,
should have its representatives also, but these need not amount to more
than a small portion of the whole. It is contended that this state of
things is realized in our practical Constitution, and it is added that
there is not a shade of opinion, not a variety of political sentiment,
which does not find advocates in the House of Commons, which is quite
sufficient for the ends of good government. This is by far the most
plausible argument which they have urged.

The third argument, and the last which I shall notice, is this: that our
government is a government of mutual check: that the people appoint some
members of parliament, the king and aristocracy others: that the people
by means of the members whom they elect, have just as much power as they
ought to have, that is, Edition: current; Page: [364] enough to keep the
king and the aristocracy in check, while the king and aristocracy have
also power enough to keep the people in check, and prevent the country
from being brought to ruin, as it infallibly would be if the people had
the full control of the government. And hereupon we were entertained
with a multitude of accusations against the people, none of them it is
true very specific, which I shall for the present represent by the
monosyllables fools and knaves, as being the only words comprehensive
enough to include them all.

There are the three arguments. There was a fourth, which is hardly worth
noticing: I mean, the division of the House of Commons into two parties,
which was treated as a conclusive proof that the supposed conspiracy
against the people did not exist. Surely nobody can be deluded by this
appearance. It is nothing new that two dogs should fight, they always do
wherever there is a bone. Even a band of robbers always splits into
parties, except when they are under the iron yoke of a single leader:
and I had an opportunity of shewing on a former occasion15 that the
aristocracy has divided itself under the action of the same interests
which divide the robbers and the dogs. They too have a bone to pick:
they too have booty to divide: and the quarrel is to settle who shall
have the picking of the bone, the largest share of the spoil, and the
division of the rest.

Without wasting more time on this argument, I will attempt to answer the
three others, as shortly as possible, for I have much to say.

We are told that there is talent and education in the House of Commons.
And of what use to the people are talent and education which are sure to
be directed against them? It is not customary for a player at cards to
congratulate himself upon the trump card in his adversary’s hand. A man
of talent in parliament is a trump card in your adversary’s hand, and
your adversary is the borough holder, or if such be the case, the county
aristocracy, whose nominee he is, and whose game he is put there to
play. Talent, indeed, in such a situation there will be plenty: but what
sort of talent? Not that of taking an enlarged and comprehensive view of
the bearing of public measures upon the happiness of the bulk of his
countrymen, for the bulk of his countrymen are nothing to him, nor to
his master the parliament maker: he is not sent there to serve them and
were he to serve them he would be sent there no more. Occasionally,
indeed, this sort of talent is accidentally met with in the House of
Commons and how is it treated? It is called
theory—abstraction—metaphysics—and the other cant words by which the
many who do not think are in the habit of expressing their contempt for
the few who do. The talent which abounds in the House of Commons is the
talent of the advocate—the talent of making out a case—of misstating a
question, of making little things appear great ones, and a part of the
subject appear to be the whole, of taking the greatest possible
advantage of the oversights of an unskilful opponent, of battering down
with a tremendous logical artillery some inconsiderable outwork of his
Edition: current; Page: [365] argument, and persuading your audience
that you have driven him from the stronghold. All the branches, in
short, of the much cultivated and richly rewarded art of
misrepresentation, are carried to the highest pitch of perfection in the
House of Commons. And this, with the art of rounding a sentence and
balancing a period, of confounding your adversary by irony and sarcasm,
of disguising the flaw in an argument with the varnish of rhetoric, and
dressing out assumptions in the tinsel and frippery of the harlot
eloquence, till the gaudiness without conceals the rottenness
within—this constitutes the sort of talent in which I am ready to admit
the House of Commons abounds. As for education, truth constrains me to
admit that most of the members have been taught, some time in their
lives, to make nonsense verses, though it must be said for their credit
that they are in general wise enough to forget that sublime art before
they take their seats.

The second argument, about the representation of interests, comes next
to be considered.

That the House of Commons represents all interests, is in one sense
true: but as it is not true in the sense in which it is meant to be
understood, whenever this argument is used an imposture is practised by
the common instrument of imposture, an ambiguous term.

They tell us and truly that interests are represented, but they do not
tell us, which interests. Every man and every set of men have two sets
of interests which are not only different but incompatible: one interest
which is common to them with the rest of the community, the other which
is not only not the same with the general interest but opposed to it. An
example may make this clear. A sinecurist, being a payer of taxes, has
an interest that the taxes should be no greater than the real purposes
of good government require, and thus far his interest corresponds with
the general interest. But inasmuch as a necessary condition of this
state of things would be the abolition of his sinecure, he has also a
separate interest, opposed to the general interest. A country gentleman,
as a consumer of bread, has an interest in cheap corn, but as a receiver
of rent, he has an interest in dear corn, thus he too has his separate
interest and his share of the general interest. A lawyer, again in
common with the rest of the community, is liable to be under the
necessity of seeking redress at the hands of a court of justice, and he
has therefore an interest, in common with the rest of the community, in
having a cheap and expeditious form of judicial procedure. But in as
much as such a form of procedure, if introduced, would dry up most of
the sources from whence lawyers’ profit is drawn, he has also a separate
and sinister interest which impels him to resist any such innovation to
the utmost of his power.

Now the assertion that the House of Commons represents interests, is
true in this sense, that it represents the separate and sinister
interests of an immense number of classes: so much so indeed that there
is hardly ever a job proposed for the benefit of any set of persons at
the expense of the community which does not find in that assembly a
large number of supporters. Sir, this is precisely what the reformers
Edition: current; Page: [366] acknowledge and complain of. According to
their notions, the House of Commons ought to represent only one
interest—the general interest—the joint interest of all classes, not the
separate interests of any.

As for the assertion that every shade of opinion finds an able advocate
in the House of Commons, this would be very well if the House of Commons
were a debating Society; I should be sorry if this Society were
constituted as I think a legislative assembly should be. No doubt, if
every member consulted the public interest exclusively, the debates
would be much duller than they now are, and many shades of opinion which
now find many advocates, might possibly not find one. But the House of
Commons is something more than an arena for discussion: it is a
legislative assembly: and it is amusing to be told that such an assembly
is well constituted because there is no measure so bad as not to find
somebody to support it, as if security for their distinguishing the good
from the bad, and adopting the good, were nothing; it is plain that it
is every thing. If the best measures were always adopted, we need not
care if there were nobody to advocate the bad ones. The best measures,
we know, cannot from the nature of man, be always adopted; but they will
at any rate stand a better chance of being adopted, by persons who have
no sinister interest, than by persons who have: and it is on this ground
that I place the question of parliamentary reform.

This brings me to the third argument of the defenders of our practical
Constitution, the necessity of a check upon the people, who are supposed
to be unfit to have a control over their own affairs. And because
persons who have an interest in good government are apt nevertheless to
govern ill, the remedy is to give power to persons who are interested in
bad. The remedy, Sir, appears worse than the disease. The many can act
wrong only from mistake—they cannot act wrong from design, because they
have no sinister interest. The few have a sinister interest, and
therefore act wrong from design. The idea of checking the many who may
go wrong by giving power to the few who must go wrong, is a curious
idea. The absurdity of supposing that the few can have power enough to
check the many in doing wrong, without having enough to check them in
doing right, is what I have not time fully to expose. It is evident
however that if the few nominate part of the House of Commons and the
many another part, the practical question is merely this, which part is
the most numerous: for whoever commands the majority commands the
government, and will exercise it for his own benefit as far as his fears
of a popular insurrection will let him. Who it is that commands the
majority, let the divisions on the Corn Laws tell.16

From the length to which my remarks have already extended, I have left
myself but little time to comment on the assumptions which have been
made against the people, and popular governments: yet assumptions of
this nature are so much the Edition: current; Page: [367] ordinary
weapons of the enemies of reform, that I cannot leave them altogether
without reply. In the language of the corruptionists, one always hears
the many, who have an interest in good government, represented as the
enemies of good government, and the only persons who are spoken of as
its friends are the few, who have an interest against it. There is a
pretty large class of persons, who are always fearing evil to the many
from the many, never from the few. We are always ready to believe what
we fear, and if a man can but frighten us sufficiently, we are not nice
about his proofs. This is a great advantage to an orator. It is very
convenient to be believed upon our bare word. One of the advantages of
being believed upon our word is, that we are not compelled to be prolix.
Assertion without proof, takes up little time: misrepresentation is
always beautifully brief. There are sentences in the speech of the
honourable opener each containing half a dozen assumptions, each of
which it would require a long train of reasoning or detail of facts to
refute.

Thus when he talks of Athens or Rome, it would require a volume to prove
that the Athenian government was the best government of its time: yet
the fact was so. If honourable gentlemen who have such a horror of the
Athenian democracy would take the trouble to read its history, not in
Mitford, but in the authors whom Mitford quotes,17 they will find that
of all the governments of antiquity that in which person and property
were most secure was the Athenian democracy. Yet after all, if the
Athenian democracy had been ever so bad, what would it prove? Merely
that the people are not fit to act as a deliberative body, and manage
the details of government with their own hands. But nobody says they are
fit for any such purpose: it is only asserted that they are fit to chuse
their governors not that they are fit to govern. Yet surely if so ill
constituted a popular government—a government in which the people
exercised a function for which it is on all hands acknowledged that they
are radically unfit—was yet, as it unquestionably was, the best
government of its time, the fact speaks volumes in favour of a well
constituted popular government. And so we shall find it in every age.
Every thing that there has been of good in any government has arisen
from the share which the people have had in it. In every stage of
society the governments in which the people have had most power have
been the best governments which that stage of society has afforded. The
Grecian and Roman governments are cases in point. As soon as the people
ceased to have power the Grecian and Roman governments became the vilest
governments in the world. The Italian republics, and the free cities in
Germany, are an instance in one age; the United Provinces of Holland in
another age. Our own government is an instance: it has become better and
better just in proportion as the power of public opinion over it has
become greater.

If those who are so much afraid of the people would tell us exactly what
it is they are afraid of, we should perhaps know how to meet their
fears. Are they afraid that Edition: current; Page: [368] the people
would destroy property? then let them point out one instance, one single
instance in which the people have shewn hostility to the general laws of
property. Even amidst the excesses of the French revolution, with the
exception of the property of the emigrés, no private property was
touched. Do they say that the people are turbulent, and fond of change?
when if there is a single fact to which history, and not history only
but every day’s experience, bears uniform testimony, it is the rooted
aversion of the people to change, and attachment to every thing that
they have been accustomed to from their infancy. Robertson speaks of
abhorrence of innovation and attachment to ancient forms, as strikingly
characteristic of popular assemblies.18 Every Athenian orator whose
speeches are preserved,19 laid particular stress in addressing the
people upon the wisdom of their ancestors,20 and the infinite
superiority of every thing ancient, and particularly of ancient laws and
institutions, topics insisted upon with an earnestness and frequency
which leave no doubt that with the bulk of the people they were as
popular as ever Lord Eldon could have desired.21 What is there to oppose
to this mass of experience? The excesses of the Parisian mob, in the
crisis of a revolution and the bloody irregular proceedings of the
terrified Convention, when the knife was at their throats.

I do not find that those who think the people so bad act as if they had
much desire to make them better. I do not find that they exert
themselves very much to inform the people. We do not often find them
establishing schools and colleges and circulating cheap and useful
publications among the mass of the people. Sir, it is these things which
are the test of sincerity. A man may doubtless be sincere in thinking
the people, as yet, unfit to manage their own affairs, and may resist
parliamentary reform from this motive. But if he be not foremost in
every undertaking the object of which is to make them fit, he has some
other motive for his resistance than the pure love of good government.
Now everybody knows, that those from whom these accusations against the
people chiefly proceed are the same who have opposed, and do oppose with
an inveteracy and fury which has scarcely ever been paralleled, every
thing that has ever been proposed for making the Edition: current; Page:
[369] people fit to manage their own affairs: and whose avowed object is
to keep the people in a state of intellect not superior to that of the
beasts, on the express ground that if allowed to attain any higher
degree of intellect it would be impossible to prevent them from being
dissatisfied with existing institutions. They are to have bad
institutions because they are unfit for good; and they are to be kept
unfit lest they should desire better. One may fairly say, therefore,
that if the people were not unfit, those who complain of their unfitness
would have taken much trouble to little purpose.

For my part, I do not pretend to say, that those who profess to think
the people incapable really think the contrary. But one cannot help
picking up a few observations: and I observe that my Lord, though he is
extremely ready to ease the public from the management of the public
estate, yet when it comes to the management of his own, he invariably
selects one of the people to manage it for him. Of course this is not
because he considers such a person more competent than himself to the
task, but because not being able to divide himself into two halves, and
to serve the public and himself at the same time, he generously offers
himself up a sacrifice to the public weal, and lets his private affairs
go to ruin rather than confide the helm of the state, to hands less
trustworthy than his own. I observe too—I do but throw it out as a
casual remark—that although they always speak their real sentiments,
those sentiments somehow always conform themselves to their interest.
They can flatter as well as rail, when they have a point to gain. Twenty
or thirty ragamuffins from the lowest ranks of the people, are the
worthy, patriotic, and independent electors of a rotten burgh. When the
high and the low, the rich and the poor, the intelligent and the stupid,
are spoken of collectively, then it is that no expression of contempt is
too strong.

Sir, it has been so much the practice of the powerful in all ages, to
carry out the proverb, Give a dog a bad name and hang him, to begin by
defaming those whom they seek to oppress; and the powerful have till
lately been so exclusively in possession of all the organs of public
sentiment, that a general opinion against the people, got up by such
means, is very poor evidence against them. There is a passage in
Machiavel, so much to the purpose, and so concisely and forcibly
expressed, that I will even hazard the ridicule22 of quoting it in the
original: “L’opinione contra aì Popoli nasce, perchè de’ Popoli ciascun
dice male senza paura, è liberamente ancora mentre che regnano.”23 The
opinion against the people arises from this cause, that of the people
every one may speak ill without danger, even where the people reign.
Most true it is that where the people reign, they have never curtailed
the liberty of speaking ill of themselves. At Athens Aristophanes was
permitted to hold up the collective body of the people, in the Edition:
current; Page: [370] character of Demos, to the most poignant ridicule
on the stage, and with impunity.24 In this country there are gagging
bills,25 and penalties enough for those who speak ill of the
aristocracy, and places and pensions enough for those who speak ill of
the people. While railing against the people is rewarded as it is, there
will always be railers enough: but we must look not to what these
railers assert, but to what they prove, and by that standard we must try
not only their aims but themselves. To calumniate an individual, to cast
imputations upon his character, unsupported by evidence, for the purpose
of taking away his liberty, is a baseness which is in general estimated
as it deserves. Every one is sensible of the injustice of condemning an
individual without proof. And is there no injustice in condemning the
great body of the people without proof? Is there no baseness in
calumniating them, in casting imputations upon their character,
unsupported by evidence, for the purpose of taking away their liberty? I
leave it to honourable gentlemen on the other side, to26 find an answer
to this question as they can.

I have now said, not all that I have to say, but all that I have time
for: and I know not how to excuse myself to the Society for the great
portion of their time which I have taken up. I am grateful, Sir, for the
patience with which they have heard me: the more so as I have spoken of
persons and things in a manner which many of them are but little
accustomed to, and which I cannot expect that all of them will approve.
The occasion however was not of my seeking: we know from which party the
question came: and when it did come, I thought it best to appear what I
am, straightforward and uncompromising. It would have been easy for me
no doubt, if I had been so minded, to have done better for myself,
though I might have done worse for my cause. It would have been easy for
me to have dealt in compromise, and trimming, and equivocation, to have
talked a little on one side of the question, and then a little on the
other. I might have conceded a point on this side and a point on that; I
might have given up half of every important truth; I might have made one
nice distinction after another, and offered to barter the whole
inheritance of good government for a little more of the forms. I might
have frittered and refined away every thing in parliamentary reform that
is disagreeable to the ruling few, and have made an attack upon the
Constitution which should almost have been taken for an apology. I might
thus have had the satisfaction (if a satisfaction it could be deemed
when thus purchased) of hearing every tongue sound the praises of my
moderation and my candour: and I might have been pardoned even the
odiousness of my opinions in favour of the lukewarmness with which I had
defended them. But Edition: current; Page: [371] playing fast and loose
with opinions is not to my taste; and it is an ill compliment to any one
who professes to serve the people, to be praised by those who if he had
served them effectually would have heaped curses on his name. If those
who profit by abuses are sometimes willing to gain the spurious credit
of an easy liberality by applauding those who have no objection to the
existence of misgovernment but find fault with the colour of its cloak,
they know their own interest too well to regard those who wage war
against the monster misgovernment itself with any feeling but that of
the most deadly hatred: but I had rather be in the latter class even at
this price, than in the former.

I might, too, have followed the example of the honourable opener, and
been the indiscriminate and unblushing eulogist of things as they are. I
should not have despaired of acquitting myself tolerably well: to
succeed in this line, transcendent talents are not necessary. It only
requires a tolerable command over the two great instruments, assumption
and abuse. Practice renders men singularly perfect in these things, and
after a twelvemonth’s tuition under the honourable gentleman, I have
little doubt that I should even have rivalled my master. But I leave
these weapons to those who like them, or to those who can hope to be
paid for them. I at least shall be acquitted of having any thing to gain
by my opinions: unquestionably they are not the road either to
preferment or to popularity. If we except men of knowledge and
intellect, who are never numerous, these opinions are no favourites with
any class except the lower; and to gain their favour would require
habits and pursuits very different from mine. The reward I look to, and
it is no small one, is of another kind—a kind which the honourable
opener and his fellow labourers in the same vineyard will never know: it
is the consciousness that these opinions are daily gaining ground; and
that the time is approaching, though we who are now living may not see
it, when every intelligent and disinterested Englishman shall be a
radical reformer.


20.: The British Constitution [2]
 19 MAY, 1826

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/6 (first part); typescripts, Fabian
Society (three parts). The MS and typescript of the first part are not
headed; the typescript of the second part is headed: “[A fragment of one
page]”; that of the final part is headed: “Speech on the British
Constitution / containing an apologue against the class representation /
spoken in 1826.” Edited by Harold J. Laski: the first part is in his
edition of Mill’s Autobiography, pp. 275-87, entitled, “Speech on the
British Constitution”; the third, with the same title, in Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, LXII (1929), 460-6. This speech is
a revised version of No. 19, both having evidently been prepared for the
second session on 19 May, 1826, of the debate that began on 5 May, “That
the practical Constitution of Great Britain is adequate to all the
Purposes of good Government.” The text of No. 19, which Edition:
current; Page: [372] contains passages paralleling all parts of No. 20,
justifies, with the continuity of argument, linking the three parts of
the latter, which are joined at 380.2 and 380.21. The first version (No.
19) was evidently not used, but this, the second, was delivered by Mill
as the fourth speaker in the negative; the vote was 9 to 9. Because the
manuscript of the third part has not been located, the typescript and
printed versions have been collated; so too has the portion of the
speech reprinted in Mill’s “Rationale of Representation,” London Review,
I (July 1835), 29n-30n (CW, Vol. XVIII, pp. 44n-5n). As not published in
Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

by the word constitution, Sir, I understand, the institutions which
exist for the purpose or with the supposed effect of affording
securities for good government. The question, therefore, concerning the
goodness of our Constitution, is the question whether, in so far as
depends upon institutions, good government is practically attained. It
will I think be allowed that as long as we suffer under any evil of
which government is the cause, good government in the practical sense of
the word is not attained. The first question, therefore, is, Do any
evils exist; the second, are any of them to be imputed to our
government.

To most persons it would appear very unnecessary to prove that evils of
some sort or another do exist, and impossible to suppose the contrary
opinion capable of being entertained by any rational being. So much
language has however been held which if it has not this meaning has none
at all, that I am compelled to regard even this point as not out of the
reach of controversy. If we believe some gentlemen, England is a perfect
Utopia. The happiness of the golden age was nothing to that we enjoy.
Luxury pervades the upper classes, comfort and knowledge diffuse
themselves among the middle, competence and contentment among the lower.
We are great in war, honoured and powerful in peace, no man in his
senses could hope for any thing better, and no honest man would. If this
be true, it certainly puts an end to the question. If no evils exist,
none, it is evident, can be occasioned by our practical Constitution. If
we are already enjoying the whole of the happiness which we are to look
for in this world, it is very obvious that we have nothing better to do
than just to remain as we are. I must confess however that my
aspirations do not stop short at that degree of felicity to which we
have at present attained, and that rather a higher standard of
competence and contentment than six shillings a week will afford, seems
to me greatly to be desired for our agricultural population. Prosperity,
Sir, is the test of good government, but the prosperity must first be
proved.

We have flourished under the Constitution. Who has flourished under the
Constitution? These gentlemen are apt to fall into the mistake, a very
natural one I admit, of supposing that all the world has flourished
because they have. Do they mean to allege that the great body of the
people has flourished? But the people is not a word in their vocabulary.
Instead of the people, they talk of the country: the wealth power and
glory of the country: by which is to be understood the wealth power and
glory of one man in a hundred, and the misery of the remaining 99. By
Edition: current; Page: [373] this word country, they always mean the
aristocracy. Whenever they talk of the prosperity of the country, it is
the prosperity of the aristocracy that is meant. When they say country
read aristocracy, and you will never be far from the truth. They tell
you that the Constitution has worked well: you ask them particulars, and
they answer that it has brought us a great deal of money and a great
deal of glory: So much the better for those who have got it, I am sure
we have got none: They may talk as they please about our being the
richest nation in the world. The richest nation, in one sense of the
word, we certainly are, but then it is like Mr. Alexander Baring and me:
between us, we certainly have a very handsome fortune. But what
illustrates more than any thing else the peculiar view which they take
of national prosperity, is their talk about military and naval renown.
They have particularly selected as a proof of good government exactly
what I should have chosen as a specimen of bad. I have as little
respect, Sir, for a fighting nation as I have for a fighting individual,
and I am by no means anxious that my country should be considered the
Tom Cribb of Europe.1

They talk of the last war, and seem to think it highly honourable to our
Constitution that having first got us into what they call an arduous
struggle, it afterwards at the expense of many myriads of lives got us
out again. But let me ask, what was gained by the last war, and who
gained it? We knocked down one despot, and set up a score; this was
their concern not ours. Then as to the substantial part of the gain, the
money and glory. The generals and admirals and colonels and lieutenant
colonels and all the rest of them got money, and most of them a little
glory, some a great deal. The poor privates who took the disagreeable
part of the business, and who were sent home when it was over to loiter
about Chelsea hospital with one leg2 or follow the plough with two, they
got no glory; any more than those at home who paid the piper. The
contractors who had the fingering of the loans got no glory, but they
got what was much better, many millions of pounds sterling which made
them very comfortable at our expense. Sir, I grudge nobody his glory, if
he would pay for it himself. I have a great respect for Sir Arthur
Wellesley, and ceteris paribus I would much rather that he should be, as
he is, a hero and a duke, than not:3 but when I consider that every
feather in his cap has cost the nation more than he and his whole
lineage would fetch if they were sold for lumber, I own that I much
regret the solid pudding which we threw away in order that he might
obtain empty praise.

Those who have called in question the goodness of our Constitution never
thought of denying that it was good for some persons. The British
Constitution is the Constitution of the rich. It has made this country
the paradise of the wealthy. It Edition: current; Page: [374] has
annexed to wealth a greater share of political power, and a greater
command over the minds of men, than were ever possessed by it elsewhere.
It has given us rich merchants, and extensive landholders. It has given
to those who have money already, great facilities for making it more. It
has produced a fine breed of country gentlemen, and to support the
breed, it has charged us with an additional 3d. on the quartern loaf.
All this, Sir, is very fine, but I cannot help reflecting that the
peasant of Languedoc eats his three meals of meat a day and cultivates
his vineyard, he has cheap justice at his doors, he may go where he
pleases, engage in any trade that he pleases, and tread upon as many
partridge eggs as he pleases,4 and need not fear to find himself next
day on the treadmill, a victim of the unpaid patriotism of a game-eating
squire. We are a free country, Sir, but it is as Sparta was free: the
Helots are overlooked.

Whenever the honourable opener5 sees so much as a scrap of good, he
gives the credit of it to the Constitution. By this rule, we ought to
impute to it our evils likewise. I might say that our manufacturers are
starving by reason of the Constitution. I might say that our peasantry
is the poorest in Europe, because our Constitution is the worst. I
believe a greater number of individuals suffer capital punishment in
this country than in all the rest of Europe put together, and I might
thence infer that our Constitution is a complication of all the vices of
all the Governments in Europe. But I do not think myself justified in
reasoning unfairly because the honourable opener has set me the example.
I impute to the Constitution no evils which do not naturally follow from
the interests to which it has given birth. But when there is an obvious
connexion between the evil suffered, and the interests of the governors,
I think it reasonable to place the evil to the account of the
Constitution, because it is the Constitution which suffers the interests
of the governors to be paramount to those of the governed. Such is the
case with those evils which were depicted in perhaps more unmeasured
language than was necessary by my honourable friend opposite6 on a
former evening and if I were to swell the list as I might do I should
perhaps be betrayed into language still more intemperate than his. But
as this part of our case has already been so well stated, I shall allow
it to rest upon his statements and proceed to another.

I thought, Sir, that the question related to the practice of the
Constitution, but the defenders of the Constitution have thought
otherwise: they seem determined to prove à priori the goodness of the
Constitution, finding themselves unable to prove it à posteriori: and
they have been good enough to reveal to us their several theories of the
Constitution, with the view as I suppose of convincing us that if we are
not very well off, yet upon correct principles we ought to be. Now
though I myself care very little by what machinery my pocket is picked,
the beauty of the machinery has sometimes the effect of persuading
people that their pocket is not picked when in Edition: current; Page:
[375] fact it is: and it may therefore conduce somewhat to the
understanding of the question if their theories be cleared away. The
commonplace theories have all had their supporters in the Society. We
are told by one, that our Constitution is a balance, by another that it
is a representation of classes, by a third that it is an aristocratical
republic, sufficiently checked by public opinion. To this I will add my
theory, that it is an aristocratical republic, insufficiently checked by
public opinion. If I seem to dismiss these theories in a summary manner,
want of time must be my apology.

The class representation theory requires most words, as it is the most
modern, and the most plausible. It has been very fully, though not very
distinctly, stated this evening, and amounts to this, that if the landed
interest, the mercantile interest, the army, the law, the manufacturing
interest, and all the other great interests are represented, and the
people represented, enough is done for good government, and that under
our Constitution this is actually the case.

Now it seems to be forgotten in this view of the subject, that every one
of these classes has two interests, its separate interest and its share
of the general interest. That which ought to be represented is the
latter. What really is represented is the former. Most true it is that
the separate interests of a great number of classes are represented in
the House of Commons: and so perfectly is the system adapted to ensure
the predominance of these interests, that there is hardly any class of
plunderers (pickpockets and highwaymen excepted) which has not a greater
number of representatives in the House of Commons than the whole body of
the plundered. The consequence is that there is hardly ever a job
proposed for the benefit of any set of persons at the expense of the
community, which does not find in that assembly somebody or other who is
interested in supporting it; and as there is a natural alliance among
jobs of every description, one interest plays into the hands of another,
hodie mihi cras tibi is the word,7 and the upshot of it is, that taking
the great jobs with the little ones there is not on the face of God’s
earth such another jobbing assembly as the House of Commons. Sir, this
is the very thing we complain of. The amount of misrule is not
diminished by the multitude of the sharers. According to our notions,
the House of Commons should represent only one interest—the general
interest. As for those particular interests which are opposed to the
general one, as nobody ought to attend to them, I suppose nobody need
represent them.

Fable, Sir, as we are taught by the ancients, sometimes throws light
upon truth. I will tell you a fable and you shall judge for yourself
whether or not it is in point.8

Once upon a time there happened an insurrection among the beasts. The
little Edition: current; Page: [376] beasts grew tired of being eaten by
the great ones. The aswinish, goatish and sheepisha multitude9 grew
weary of the sway of the bintellectual and virtuous.b They demanded to
be governed by cjust andc equal laws and as a security for dthesed laws,
to ebe subject toe a representative government. The Lion, finding
himself hard pressed, called together the aristocracy of the forest, and
they jointly offered a rich reward to whoever could devise a scheme for
extricating them from their embarrassment. The Fox offered himself, and
his offer being accepted, went forth to the assembled multitude, and
addressed them thus. “fSurely my friends you would not deny to others
the advantage which you seek to partake of yourselves. The only true
representation is representation by classes.f The tigrish interest
should be represented, the wolfish interest should be represented, all
the other ginterestsg should be represented, and the great body of the
beasts should be represented. hMy royal master has an objection to
anarchy, but he is no enemy to a rational and well regulated Freedom:
iany other sort of representation he never will agree to, but a class
representation he consents to granti.” The people, delighted to have got
the name of a representation, quietly dispersed, and writs were issued
to the different interests to jchusej their representatives. The tigers
chose six tigers, the panthers six panthers, the khyaenas six hyaenask
and the wolves six wolves. The remaining beasts, who were only allowed
to chuse six, chose by common consent six dogs. The parliament was
opened by a speech from the Lion, recommending unanimity. When this was
concluded, the Jackal, who was Chancellor of the Exchequer, introduced
the subject of the Civil List: and after a llongl panegyric on the royal
virtues, proposed a grant, for the support of those virtues, of m1,000m
sheep a year. The proposition was received with acclamations from the
ministerial benches. The Tiger, nhappening to be in then opposition,
made an eloquent speech, in which he enlarged omucho upon the necessity
of Edition: current; Page: [377] economy, inveighed pbitterlyp against
the profusion of ministers, and qended by movingq that His Majesty
rmustr be humbly requested to content himself with s999s. The Dogs
declared that as kings must eat, they had no objection to His tMajestyt
devouring as many dead sheep as he pleased; but usolemnlyu protested
against his consuming any of their constituents alive. This remonstrance
vhad its natural effectv. The first impulse of the representatives of
the aristocracy was to fall tooth and nail upon the representatives of
the people. The Lion however representing that such conduct would be
dishonourable, and the Fox that it might provoke a renewal of the
insurrection, they abandoned the intention of worrying these demagogues,
and contented themselves with always outvoting them. The sequel may be
guessed. The Lion got his wthousandw sheep; the Fox his pension of x100
ducksx a year, yandy the Panthers, Wolves, and the other members of the
aristocracy got as many kids and lambs in a quiet way, as they could
devour.z

With this allegory, which is worth a thousand syllogisms, I shall
dismiss the subject of the class representation.

The gentleman10 who first propounded to us the theory of the balance,11
will forgive me for saying that he seems to have studied the
Constitution chiefly in the writings of its panegyrists. The balance of
King Lords and Commons I have met with in books, and it has a very
pretty appearance upon paper: but even those who maintain that it
existed once acknowledge that it has no existence now: the Commons, it
is allowed, have complete possession of the Government, and the only
balance now contended for, is a balance in the House of Commons itself.
That there is such a balance, I do not deny, since a balance is still a
balance, although the weights may be unequal. But if anybody maintains
that the weights are equal, he should first find means of explaining
away the fact, that the aristocracy alone commands twice as many members
of parliament as the King and the people together. The parliament is
just as effectual an instrument of the aristocracy, if they have a
majority of the votes, as it would be if they had the whole. With the
fact that the parliament is made by the aristocracy staring us in the
face, it would be useless Edition: current; Page: [378] to enter into
the speculative question whether the balance is possible, or whether if
possible it would be good. Possible or not, at any rate it does not
exist. If there be any counterpoise to the power of the Aristocracy, it
cannot come from within the House of Commons, it must come from without.

With that class of the defenders of our Constitution, who consider
public opinion as expressed by petitions, public meetings, and a free
press, as the one and sufficient check, I am less widely at issue. The
question between us is merely a question of degree. We both allow that
the House of Commons requires a check, we both agree that public opinion
is the proper check. They think that the check is sufficient if the
public are allowed to speak freely, I think that it is not sufficient
unless they are allowed to act as well as speak. Now I do not see how
the question between us can be tried, except by looking about us and
seeing what this free speaking has done. That it has done much I allow.
It is probably the cause that we are not at this moment the slaves of a
military despotism. But has it abolished the Corn Laws? Has it abolished
the Game Laws? Did it prevent the Six Acts? Did it prevent the
Manchester Massacre12—or did it prevent the House of Commons from
approving of it? Has it cut down our civil, military, and naval
establishments? Has it reformed the Magistracy, the Church, and the Law?
It has been said by the gentleman who started this theory, that the laws
of England are deserving of absolute condemnation. If this be true, what
a satire is it upon the Constitution which he applauded! For my part, I
do not think the laws of England deserving of absolute condemnation, but
I think that they require many and great ameliorations; ameliorations
which I am persuaded that none but a reformed parliament will have the
courage, I will not say the inclination to make.

What is the influence of public opinion? Nothing at bottom, but the
influence of fear. Of what consequence is it to a minister what the
public say so long as they content themselves with saying? When it comes
to blows it becomes a serious matter. I do not deny the influence of
character, of the opinion of others, even independently of fear. The
opinion of others is a powerful check upon every man, but then it must
be the opinion of his own class. Experience has shewn that there is no
action so wicked that even an honest man will not do, if he is borne out
by the opinion of those with whom he habitually associates. Was there
ever a more unpopular minister than Lord Castlereagh?13 Was there ever a
minister who cared so little about it? The reason was that although he
had the people against him, the predominant portion of the aristocracy
was for him, and all his concern about Edition: current; Page: [379]
public dissatisfaction was to keep it below the point of a general
insurrection. Things are a little better now, because we accidentally
have a ministry14 who knowing themselves to be no favourites with the
bulk of the aristocracy, and feeling that to use a homely expression it
is touch and go with their places, court the people as a sort of
makeweight, though an inconsiderable one, to that portion of the
aristocracy who are on their side. But should they be turned out and
should we for our sins be visited with another Castlereagh, we shall be
governed by the new one exactly as we were governed by the old, in spite
of the public opinion check, the dread of insurrection, which it seems
we have, and which the Turks have likewise. The Constitution of Turkey
may be defined to be the fear of the bowstring: and the Constitution of
Great Britain it seems according to this view of it, may be defined to
be the fear of the guillotine. Let who will be satisfied with this
check: I, for one, have a most decided objection to it.

I fear that my observations on the theories of the Constitution have
been dull: but I must crave the indulgence of the Society for a short
time longer. There is another subject which must not be altogether
passed over. Gentlemen have not merely enlarged upon the goodness of our
Constitution, they have expatiated upon the exceeding badness of every
other. More especially a popular government has been the theme of their
invectives, nor have they by any means spared the people themselves.
This, Sir, is the way with them. If we believe some people, the many who
are interested in good government are the determined enemies of good
government, and the only persons who are its friends are the few, who
are interested against it. They are always fearing evil to the many from
the many, never from the few. Now I beg you to remark how many
advantages these gentlemen have over me. We are always ready to believe
what we fear. The orator who has the fears of his audience on his side,
has only to awaken the emotion by a few frightful words, and persuasion
follows of itself. Very different is the task of him who has the fears
of his audience against him. Having to work conviction by means of
evidence, in minds ill prepared to receive it, to have any chance of
success he must heap proof upon proof—he must add argument to
argument—his discourse lengthens into prolixity, he has wearied the
patience of his audience before he has triumphed over their
apprehensions, and to the misfortune of failing in his object, he adds
that of being voted a bore. Sir, it is among the disadvantages of my
present situation, that I am compelled to be prolix. Misrepresentation
is always beautifully brief; refutation always tediously long. There are
single sentences in the speech of the honourable opener, each containing
half a score of Edition: current; Page: [380] assumptions, each
assumption requiring a long detail of facts or train of reasoning to
refute it.15

He asserts that the people are desirous of destroying property. I shall
not enter into this question for I consider it to be irrelevant, but I
cannot refrain from saying if the people desire to destroy property why
do they not destroy it now? Have they not the physical power that they
must always have? It must be then because they see that it is not their
interest: and will they not see it still? It must be because you teach
them not to meddle with it: and cannot you teach them so still?

The honourable gentleman endeavours to work upon our fears. So it is
always with the political party of which the honourable gentleman seems
to have constituted himself the representative in this Society. Is
anything proposed to benefit the few at the expense of the many, they
are bold enough. Is anything proposed to take away any of the power
which the few have of injuring the many, then is the time for fear. Sir,
I cannot have confidence in those whose fears always seem to me to lie
in the wrong place. Nothing is so much to be feared as a habit of
fearing whenever anything is proposed for the benefit of mankind. Fear,
Sir, is a bad counsellor, and it is no great proof either of wisdom or
of virtue to take counsel from nothing but fears when any good is to be
done. But the honourable gentleman seems to be one of those who are
always apprehending evil to the many from the many, never from the few.
Such a man appears to me to be an object of very rational fear.16

Sir, I am no admirer of popular wisdom. The bulk of the people at least
who have arrived at the age of manhood are stupid, obstinate and
incurably ignorant. I would back Sir Edward Knatchbull17 for all those
qualities against the most unlettered clown, and I am acquainted with a
weaver who for talents and understanding would leave the first names in
the House of Commons but little to be proud of. Nonsense verses, it is
true, he cannot write, but if he is inferior to the country gentlemen in
prosody and fox-hunting, in all useful attainments he far excels them.
There are individuals in the higher class inferior to any in the lower,
but the inferiority does not extend to the class. The elite of them all
is in the House of Commons, and we see what stuff they are made of. If
Hercules may be known ex pede, much more may he be known ex acapitea. An
average carpenter has no ideas beyond the workshop, an average merchant
has none beyond the counting-house, nor an average country gentleman
beyond the dog kennel.

Sir, I am not partial to stupid, obstinate and incurably ignorant
persons of any Edition: current; Page: [381] description. It is
satisfactory to think that there are fewer of them now than formerly. It
is satisfactory to think that knowledge and intelligence are making
their way even to the lowest of the species, and that the time is
coming, though I fear it is far distant, when even the Irish peasant and
his landlord shall partake of the attributes of humanity. Until,
however, this millenium shall arrive I fear we must resign ourselves to
be governed by incapables of some sort: do what we may, our only choice
is whether we will be governed by incapables who have an interest in
good government, or incapables who have an interest in bad. Now I could
point out more than one reason for chusing rather to be governed by the
former sort of incapables than by the latter, by an incapable people
than by an incapable aristocracy. One reason is that an incapable people
are in general guided by the wisest persons among them; an incapable
aristocracy never is. Nor is this wonderful. The people are in earnest
about the interest of the people. What a man is really in earnest about,
if it be not very difficult, he generally succeeds in. To chuse a good
representative is not very difficult. The aristocracy are not in earnest
about the interest of the people, and they therefore have no occasion to
look for that wisdom by which the interest of the people may be served.
It is enough for them if they can hire a man of talent to make out the
best case he can for them and their abuses. Of any higher kind of talent
than this they have no idea. It would be of no use to them if they had
it. Not being wanted, it is not produced; and if it grows up among them
by accident, it is not valued. The country gentlemen do not vote with
Lord Milton and Mr. Whitmore, they vote with Sir Thomas Lethbridge and
Mr. Holme Sumner.18

Another reason for preferring stupid, obstinate and ignorant persons who
have not a sinister interest, to stupid, obstinate and ignorant persons
who have, is that the former acting under the dictation of their
interest will do as much good as their limited faculties will permit,
the latter as much harm. And though it requires some capacity to do
good, unfortunately it requires none to do mischief. The veriest reptile
that ever crawled can consume as much of other people’s beef and bread,
turbot and turtle soup, as Solomon or Sir Isaac Newton himself. The most
drivelling dolt who can set a spring gun, or sign an order of commitment
for a man who is poor enough to be deemed a vagrant, has talents
sufficient to be the tyrant and the scourge of his neighbourhood. On the
other hand the United States of Edition: current; Page: [382] America
are a standing proof that under democratic ascendancy a country may be
very well governed with a very small portion of talent. For all that I
can learn of that country leads me to the conclusion that the first men
in it are far inferior to men of the same relative superiority in this
country. It requires but little talent to be honest, and the cases are
few in politics in which plain honesty is not a sufficient guide. The
man who aims steadily at the public good will rarely have much
difficulty in attaining it. The fundamental principles of politics lie
on the surface, and it requires no genius to apprehend them.

I have a third reason for preferring the government of the people,
however stupid and ignorant they may be. I am persuaded that a stupid
and ignorant people cannot be a happy one, and I am therefore desirous
that they should be stupid and ignorant no longer. There is a natural
tendency in the human mind to improve, and no government but the very
worst can counteract this tendency altogether. But it is easily proved
that under an aristocratic government the progress of the human mind
must necessarily be slow.

It will not, I think, be disputed that those who acquire talent acquire
it chiefly for the consideration which it brings. But talent cannot be
acquired without trouble. Now it is with consideration as with most
other things, the greater share of it a man can get without trouble, the
less trouble will he be disposed to take in order to get more. Rank we
know gives consideration. Property we know gives consideration; and when
these two sources of consideration, rank and property, carry along with
them the great source of consideration, political power, the
consideration resulting is in general sufficient to take off the edge of
any ordinary appetite. When a man can have as much consideration,
without deserving it, as he could if he did, if his stupidity is no bar
to his consideration, depend upon it he will cling to both with equal
pertinacity. Now it is a fact, and a well-known one, that people who are
not stupid are not apt to have much consideration for people who are.
When the great body of the people emerge from stupidity their betters
are obliged either to deserve consideration or to sacrifice it. The
latter alternative is mortifying; the former troublesome. One might
therefore predict without the gift of prophecy that if the man of rank
or property observes in the people any tendency to improvement, the
whole energies of his body and of whatever portion of mind he possesses,
with whatever other bodies or minds he can set in motion, will all be
exerted to keep the people stupid in order that he, on his side, may
revel without disgrace in all the luxury of stupidity. So accordingly it
has been, and is to this day, and every step which the people have
gained in intelligence from one end of the world to the other has been
gained in spite of the most strenuous resistance which the stupid part,
that is the bulk of the aristocracy, could oppose.

Thus stands the case if the people are as bad as is represented. But the
people are not so bad as is represented, and this piece of imposture is
exactly upon a level with the rest. True, they are bigoted and
prejudiced and stupid and ignorant enough. With all the pains that have
been taken to make them so, it would be wonderful Edition: current;
Page: [383] indeed if they were not. But their prejudices, as might be
expected from the tuition which they have been under, are all of them on
the contrary side to that which is asserted. They are prejudiced in
favour of things as they are, not prejudiced against them. I deny that
they have any of the mischievous propensities which are imputed to them.
I deny that the people of this country, or any country, have or ever had
a desire to take away property. If it be maintained that they had, let
any one show me one instance, as much as one single instance, in which
such a desire has been manifested by them. The gentleman19 who talked
about the Agrarian law20 only showed his utter unacquaintance with
history. The Agrarian law had nothing to do with private property: it
was a law for the resumption and division among the poorer citizens of
the property, the usurped property, of the public, the conquered lands
which by law ought to have been divided, and which by a flagrant
violation both of property and of law the patricians had taken to
themselves. It is remarkable too that even amid the horrors of the
French Revolution, though blood was shed like water, property was
untouched. Except the property of the emigrés, who almost to a man had
emigrated in order to make war upon their country, not a rood of land,
not a sixpence of private property was touched. So much for the
hostility of the people to property. It is the same with the other
charges against the people. They tell you that the people are jealous of
rank and fortune, and I tell you that a blind confidence in men of rank
and fortune has always been the chief failing of the people. Celebrated
demagogues, from the Gracchi to Mirabeau,21 have almost always been men
either of rank or fortune. In democratic Athens a rich man could commit
excesses which even in aristocratic England would drive him from
society. They tell you next that the people are prone to change and fond
of throwing down one thing and setting up another. I deny the fact. It
is contrary to the most extensive experience of human nature. In the
crisis of a revolution the people may be prone to change, because having
once begun they are hurried on and know not when to stop. But at all
other times they are proverbially attached to old usages, however
absurd, and to everything which existed when they were born. Dr.
Robertson was aware of this. In his Charles V he speaks of attachment to
ancient forms and aversion to innovation as being strikingly
characteristic of popular Edition: current; Page: [384] assemblies.22
Dr. Robertson lived before the days of Pitt and Burke and Wyndham and
the alarmists.23 In his time people had not been frightened into
dishonesty, and it was the fashion to speak the truth. Every Athenian
orator whose speeches are preserved was accustomed in addressing the
people to lay particular stress upon the wisdom of their ancestors,24
and the excellence of their old laws and institutions; topics insisted
upon with an earnestness and a frequency which leave no doubt that they
were as popular as Lord Eldon himself could have desired.25 Those who
think the people fickle and inconstant have observed a mob and not the
people. A mob is fickle, unsteady, inconstant. The people individually
are not so. And a multitude, though it were composed of Newtons, must be
a mob. There is not now time, nor is it necessary, to enquire into that
principle of human nature in consequence of which men who individually
seem so rooted in old habits that a tempest cannot shake them are blown
about by every breath of wind when assembled together. But the fact is
unquestionable. Let him who doubts it go among the people; let him see
them, hear them, talk to them. Let him try to persuade the Surrey
peasant who ploughs the sandy soil of the vale of Albury with three
horses, that in Scotland they plough with two, and if he succeed in
convincing him that to plough as his forefathers did is not a law of
nature, an immovable part of the scheme of providence, bI will say he is
a conjuror. The people capricious!

For my part I do not say that those who think the people incapable think
themselves still more incapable. But one cannot help picking up a few
observations, and when one does, there is no harm in stating them. I
observe then that my Lord, though extremely ready to relieve the public
from the management of the public estate, yet when it comes to managing
his own he invariably selects one of the people to manage it for him. I
do not pretend to say that it is because he considers such a person more
competent to the task than himself: of course he must be aware that his
own concerns, like those of the public, cannot fail of going to ruin in
such hands. But he is a disinterested citizen and knows how vastly more
important the public affairs are than his own, and how ill his abilities
can be spared from the management of these; and he generously consents,
even at some risk to himself, to leave his private affairs in the hands
of the plebian while he condescends to look after those of the state. I
have made another observation on these persons, which is that their
sentiments seem to veer round with every turn of their interest. They
can flatter when they have a point to gain, as they can rail when
Edition: current; Page: [385] they have not. Twenty or thirty
ragamuffins from the very dregs of the people are the worthy, patriotic
and independent electors of a Cornish burgh. While praise is thus given
to the worst of the people, the abuse and scorn are heaped upon the
people collectively.

Sir, it has been so much the practice of the powerful in all ages to
carry out the proverb “Give a dog a bad name and hang him,” and the
powerful have till lately been so exclusively in possession of all the
organs of public sentiment, that a general opinion against the people
got up by such means is very bad evidence against them. There is a
passage in Machiavel so much to the purpose that I will quote it, though
quotations have become so ridiculous that I shall not venture upon the
original. “The opinion against the people arises from this cause, that
of them everyone may speak ill without danger, even where the people
reign.”26 Most true it is that where the people reign they have never
curtailed the liberty of speaking ill of themselves. At Athens
Aristophanes was permitted to hold up the collective body of the people,
in the character of Demos, to the most poignant satire on the stage, and
with impunity.27 In this country there are gagging bills28 and penalties
severe enough for those who speak ill of the aristocracy, and places and
pensions enough, God knows, for those who speak ill of the people. And
the consequence is that men who have no other earthly merit daily make a
merit of insulting the great body of the people; and there is not so
drivelling an idiot with a good coat upon his back, though inferior in
every valuable quality to the man who blacks his shoes, who does not
think himself entitled to sneer at a working mechanic. There will be
abundance of railers against the people where it is the fashion to rail,
and where railers are so well paid. But we must learn to look, not to
what these railers assert, but to what they prove.


21.: The Influence of Lawyers
 30 MARCH, 1827?

Typescripts, Fabian Society; Laski, Economica; MS, Mill-Taylor
Collection, II/1/4 (fragments). The two typescripts, the first headed,
“Speech on the Influence of Lawyers,” and the second (in pencil)
“Lawyers,” form the opening and closing portions of the version edited
by Harold J. Laski, “A Hitherto Unprinted Speech on the Influence of
Lawyers (1825),” Economica, V (Mar. 1925), 1-6; in that version they are
connected by a passage not known in another form. (See 388.9 and
389.10.) The MS fragments, included here at 391, are clearly related to
the other parts. Though Laski dates the speech to 1825, the Laws
Edition: current; Page: [386] and Transactions list no relevant topic
for that session. Henry Cole’s diary, however, gives as the subject for
30 March, 1827, “Whether Lawyers Influence is not pernicious to Morals
Jurisprudence & Government—Yes.” (He does not mention any speakers.)
Other possible but less likely debates (both listed by Cole) occurred on
24 April and 19 June, 1829: “That the profession of a practical lawyer
is morally & intellectually pernicious”; “That an efficient
administration of the law can only be obtained by a code.” Internal
evidence supports the inference that the debate of 30 March, 1827, is
the one for which Mill prepared these materials. The two versions of the
part for which there is no manuscript have been collated. As not
published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

i shall not imitate my honourable friend, the proposer of the question,1
in his historical details, but shall state as briefly as possible some
general considerations which induce me to concur in his opinion.

The range of the question includes three of the great interests of a
country, its government, its morality, and its jurisprudence. That the
influence of lawyers over the jurisprudence of a country cannot be
beneficial seems too obvious to be denied. We cannot expect much aid in
making good laws from those whose daily bread is derived from the
defects of the laws. If the law were so clear and intelligible that its
import could not be mistaken, and if the administration of justice were
so cheap and expeditious that no one could benefit himself by contesting
a just claim, lawyers must starve. This ideal perfection in a system of
law may be attainable, or it may be unattainable; but every improvement
in the law is an approach to it, and every improvement in the law so far
forth as it is an improvement can scarcely fail to encroach upon the
profits of lawyers. In our own system of jurisprudence it is now very
generally admitted that the most flagrant abuses prevail: there is not
one of these from which the lawyers as a class do not derive enormous
profits. The uncertainty of the law is a source of endless litigation,
and thereby of endless fees; the same uncertainty gives an extensive
latitude of discretionary power to the judges who are a clan of lawyers,
and whose stations most practising advocates hope one day to fill: the
same uncertainty gives rise and support to that flourishing branch of
our national industry, the opinion trade, or chamber practice, which
means paying a lawyer for making the best guess he can from previous
decisions which way a future judge will be most likely to decide. The
needless and useless expenses of the administration of justice even in
the courts of common law, and still more in the courts of equity, is
made up of items almost the whole of which go to fill the pockets of
some description of lawyers. The delay of the administration of justice
conduces to their benefit by the numerous pretexts which it affords for
additional expense. The complicated and yet awkward and inartificial
manner in which the Statutes are worded, insomuch that while no mortal
man can read them through, a lawyer can put any one in the way of
evading them who will come up to Edition: current; Page: [387] his
terms, likewise conduces greatly to the advantage of lawyers. The
Statute Book swarms with bad laws, bad sometimes only because they are
useless, but often because they are highly oppressive, which partly by
the litigation which they occasion and partly by the absolute necessity
of devising some means of evading them, are a mine of profit to lawyers.
Not a word is spoken or written in the course of a suit at law for which
some lawyer or another is not paid, and what is more, they are paid for
a much greater number of words than are actually spoken or written; they
are paid for pretending to speak or write something which is never
spoken or written at all, as for example when counsel are afeeda for
pretending to make something which is called a motion of course, but
which might with greater propriety be denominated a sham motion. Yet if
anyone were to suggest that justice could possibly be administered
without pretending to make these fictitious motions he would be
denounced as a visionary, a theorist and a madman, if not a jacobin and
a blasphemer.

But without dwelling upon the pecuniary advantages which lawyers derive
from all the vices of the law, sufficient reason for their constant
opposition to all improvement in it is to be found in that professional
narrowness of mind which is a uniform effect of the exclusive study of
one system. When a man is accustomed to see the ends of law and of civil
society in some measure attained by one set of means, and has never
bestowed a thought on any other, it is quite vain to attempt to persuade
him that any other means can effect the same end effectually. A man who
has never seen a thing done but in one way learns to consider that as
the natural way, and every deviation from it as not only visionary and
theoretical, but absurd. A man who has never heard of any language but
his own thinks that the natural language, and regards all who talk any
other as a sort of monster; like the man who on landing at Calais
expressed his surprise that the children in the street should talk
French, and another man I have heard of who never could comprehend how
the French could be so foolish as to say pain instead of saying bread
like a Christian. The Irish who had always been in the habit of tying
the plough to the horse’s tail regarded the very idea of employing
harness with horror. I heard lately of a solicitor who I think is a fit
companion for the Irishman. On learning for the first time that in the
Dutch law there was no distinction between real and personal property,2
he expressed his utter astonishment and could not conceive how the
people of Holland could possibly go on without it. Yet this man had the
example of Bank stock before his eyes as an example with how little of
technical forms the most valuable property might be secured; but he
probably never thought of asking Edition: current; Page: [388] himself
for a reason why a man’s title to a farm might not be secured by a set
of formalities which were found sufficient to secure his title to the
stock upon it. He thought that the classifications in Blackstone were
classifications in the nature of things.3 All who have studied only one
system, be it a system of philosophy, theology, or law, must feel more
or less as this solicitor felt. Now the peculiar misfortune of our law
is that to be even moderately versed in it requires the study of a whole
life. It is but rarely therefore that an eminent lawyer has had time to
extend his knowledge bfartherb, or to render himself capable of forming
a judgment on anything which is unlike his own system of
technicalities.4 He does not inquire whether the diseases he meets
cannot be cured, whether the objection cannot be obviated; to suggest
means for obviating it with the least possible prejudice to the
principle itself, all this requires a sort of wisdom which the advocate
has not cultivated, and which he lies under no motive to cultivate. It
is not his business to give arguments and objections their right value,
but to make them appear either of the greatest value or of no value at
all, according as they make in favour of his side of the cause or
against it. There is a very happy expression of Locke which seems to me
applicable to the subject under discussion, and which I will therefore
take the liberty to mention. It is in one of his letters—I forget
whether to Collins or Molyneux, or to what other of those whose names
have been immortalised by the friendship which united them with that
great man. “I am glad,” said he to this individual, “when my works fall
into the hands of readers like you, for you seize the scope of my
speculations without sticking in the incidence.”5 These few words seem
to me to delineate with great force and exactness the habit of mind
which peculiarly distinguishes the statesman and the philosopher. The
man who can seize the scope of a speculation without sticking in the
incidence is the only man whose opinion of it can be trusted, whether it
be a favourable or an adverse opinion. The intellectual habits of a
lawyer are the reverse of this; he can never seize the scope of a
speculation, he is always sticking in the incidence. A mere inaccuracy
of expression, a trifling error in any matter of detail, the employment
of one inapposite illustration are sufficient in his mind to decide the
rejection of the most valuable ideas. The merest petty cavil at some
collateral and non-essential appendage of a doctrine or plan, a cavil
which any man of common candour who was not a lawyer would be ashamed
of, a lawyer urges in sober earnest and with an air of triumph as
decisive of the whole question, for he never had occasion to ask
Edition: current; Page: [389] himself what is essential and what not;
his business was to make the most of all the arguments which could be
found in favour of that side of the case to which considerations totally
independent of its merits had previously determined him to attach
himself. We may judge how far the influence of such men is likely to be
useful in matters of government and general policy. That there is much
information necessary to the statesman which few besides lawyers can
give, I am far from disputing, nor do I deny that all their objections
should be heard, provided that there are wiser men to weigh them. I only
contend that however useful to the statesman in a subordinate capacity,
they are not fit to be statesmen, or to be the guides of statesmen.6

cThe terms of the question direct our attention to the influence of the
lawyers on the morality of the country as well as on its jurisprudence
and on its government. And here, although I say it with fear and
trembling, I cannot give a verdict much more favourable to the lawyers
than on the two former heads. Without entering into a very minute
enumeration of the modes in which a particular class may exercise an
influence, beneficial or otherwise, upon public morals it will perhaps
be allowed me in the gross that the utility of the influence which they
exercise in respect of morality in some measure depends upon the degree
in which their own conduct is marked by an habitual observance of its
precepts. Now it must be allowed that the lawyers generally avoid very
scrupulously all offences against morality by the perpetration of which
they would incur any danger of the gallows. But a man who squares his
conscience by the law dwould not be exacting;d and if our standard of
morality includes any of the more exalted virtues, it appears to me as
difficult for a lawyer to practise them as it is for a rich man to enter
the Kingdom of heaven:7 there is no denying the possibility of both, but
neither I am afraid is often realised. We hear lawyers continually
talking of themselves as the guardians of justice, the defenders of
innocence, and so forth, and they are right to put the best face upon
the thing as people usually do when they are giving an account of
themselves. It would not quite do to stand forward and say “I live by
roguery.” But amid all this fine language one thing is always forgotten,
that to every cause there are two sides, and that of these one only can
be the right. At least one half therefore of a lawyer’s business is
deception, and avowedly so. And even when they are on the right side of
the cause it is not their business to consider what arguments are
conclusive, but what will appear so; not what assertions are true, but
what will answer their purpose. Even when a cause is good a lawyer has
not done his duty by it unless he has given it all the gloss and varnish
of which it is susceptible, disguised all its weak parts and heightened
its strong ones by artificial colouring. Edition: current; Page: [390]
Not one half only but three-fourths at least of his business is
deception. Sir, it is not easy for a man who gets his bread by
insincerity to remain entirely free from it in his other concerns; it is
not easy for him one half of whose life is spent in making the worse
appear the better cause,8 and the other half in making the good cause
appear better than it is, to retain that simplicity and singleness of
purpose, that passionate love of truth and abhorrence of artifice and
deceit without which, in my estimation at least, there can be no perfect
character. Supposing even the purity of his intentions to remain
unimpaired, yet the habit of making falsehood plausible begets a
coolness with regard to the interests of truth. The mind becomes pleased
with itself for the ingenuity with which it has made the rightful cause
appear the wrong, till eit at laste learns to take pleasure in the
exercise itself. And when they find, as they do by practice, that there
is something plausible to be said in favour of the worst cause however
unfounded, while no part of their daily occupation tends to strengthen
those faculties of their minds which would enable them to distinguish
falsehood from truth, they soon begin to fancy that they cannot be
distinguished, that when we go beyond the immediate range of the senses
one side of a question may always be made as plausible as another, and
that truth is placed beyond the reach of the human faculties. This state
of the intellectual part of their minds co-operating with the diminished
sensibility of the moral part, they soon learn to be utterly indifferent
what opinions they take up and advocate; and where their interest is not
concerned they are determined by mere vanity and choose that side of a
question which affords the greatest scope for their ingenuity in
defending it, that is most commonly the wrong side. It is not very
favourable to the higher moralities that their vocation brings them into
close and constant contact with human nature in its most degraded shape,
with everything that is mean and selfish and unfeeling and unprincipled
in human conduct and in human character and disposition, while it very
rarely brings them acquainted with the best and most exalted specimens
of human nature. Generalizing, therefore, as almost all men do, and as
lawyers are peculiarly prone to do upon their own confined experience,
it is obvious that their situation is far from conducive to their
forming that favourable opinion of human nature which universal
experience shows to be a necessary foundation of all the active virtues.
It is notorious that the doctrine of the universal selfishness of
mankind finds the greatest proportion of its partisans among the
lawyers, in which respect I will not say they judge from themselves, but
will treat Edition: current; Page: [391] them more charitably and say
that they judge from that portion of mankind with whom in their
professional pursuits they are most peculiarly conversant.

Sir, I promised not to trouble you with many words, and I am afraid that
I have already broken my promise. I will therefore preclude myself from
any further violation of it by sitting down.

9But it is not only on these subjects with which they are professionally
conversant that the influence of lawyers is rather likely to mislead
than to guide the legislator and the politician. There seems to be
something in the exercise of their profession which renders them utterly
incapable of taking a comprehensive view of any subject. The habits of
an advocate are admirably calculated to render a man a dexterous
controversialist wonderfully skilful in finding flaws, and starting
objections, to any doctrine or to any plan which is advanced: to weigh
the validity of an objection; to compare the difficulties on the one
side with the difficulties on the other; to distinguish whether the
objection affects the doctrine or plan in whole or only in part, in
principle or only in detail, to consider whether the flaw10

11Malice must be proved—e.g. the case of murder. If a man adulterates
wine, indict him.

Objects that I have made it a question of calculation—of probable good
and probable evil.

Objects to the sort of reports—like the Herald.12

Hayward.13—Ex parte, and prejudice the jury.

Witnesses should be obtained by the office advertising for them.

The guilty are warned—magistrate should have power of excluding.

Information does not aid in getting apprehension since apprehension
generally by police officers. A—Who gets it?

No check if the magistrate can remove it at discretion.—A fallacy.

Let the public in to check the judge, then there will be witnesses to
attest if he previously14

Edition: current; Page: [392]


22.: The Use of History
 1827

Manuscript, John M. Robson. Typescript, Fabian Society. Edited by Harold
J. Laski as “Speech on the Use of History,” Bermondsey Book, VI
(Mar.-May 1929), 11-17. In a note, Laski says the speech “was delivered
by Mill to a meeting of the Utilitarian Society,” and he gives the date
as 1823. On the manuscript, however, Mill has written: “SPEECH on the
USE OF HISTORY / Spoken in 1827” and “Speech on History.” The debate was
probably in the first half of 1827, before Cole became a member of the
London Debating Society in May; up to that date he records only two
debates, one in January and one in March, on other topics, and he does
not mention the first debate in June. As not published in Mill’s
lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

i come here, Sir, with my mind not fully made up on this interesting
question: but as the balance of the evidence as far as I have examined
it, seems to me to be on the side of my honourable friend the proposer
of the question1 and as, though I may perhaps hesitate to go the full
length of the question on the paper, it is my decided opinion formed on
mature consideration, that the importance of history as a source of
political knowledge has been greatly overrated, I will briefly submit,
if the Society will honour me with their patience, the reasons which
have led me to embrace a sentiment so greatly at variance with the
received opinions of the world. That common notions are on the other
side, must be confessed; and though I may surprise some honourable
gentlemen by the assertion, I do think it primâ facie evidence against
any opinion that it is paradoxical. But it is a common fate of
paradoxical opinions, to be thought much more paradoxical than they are:
and I think it must have already appeared to any one who has attentively
listened to the very luminous speech of the opener, that the opinion he
maintains has more the appearance of a paradox than the reality.

Sir—we are not now assembled here to discuss, whether we ought to be
guided by experience. No one has yet appeared in this Society to deny
that we ought to judge of the future from the past. This remark is
perhaps required, because several of the defenders of history appeared
to be of opinion that their opponents were chargeable with some such
doctrine—and it would seem that according to their ideas the world is
divided into two portions, whereof the one, the larger, and therefore I
need scarcely say the wiser are votaries of experience, while the rest
are followers of theory. Sir, if honourable gentlemen will point out in
the whole world a single individual who believes a theory for any reason
except because he considers it to be founded upon experience, the
justness of this classification may be admitted. No such theorist
however can be pointed out, because none such exists. All mankind
recognize experience as the sole guide of human affairs, the Edition:
current; Page: [393] past as our sole criterion for judging of the
future, and if there were to be found a man who thought otherwise which
there is not even within the walls of Bedlam we have something better to
do than to give ourselves the trouble of refuting him. But there is a
right way of consulting experience, and there is a wrong way—And the
question now is, which is the right way, and which is the wrong. Our
opponents hold that the oracles of experience are written legibly in the
page of history—we say that they are not, or, if they are, that like
other oracles they are so ambiguous that they might be read to eternity
and never understood. We may be wrong; but let us not be accused of
despising the precepts of experience, when our whole aim is to discover
the rightful interpretation of those precepts which are so much oftener
talked of than understood.

All arts have their instruments, and their materials: The instruments
and the materials of the art of the politician are the same: they are
men. Whatever the politician seeks to effect, on men, and by means of
men, it must be effected. Now as soon as this is stated, it appears
self-evident, that the knowledge which is necessary to the statesman is
knowledge of men: that the experience which he stands in need of, is
experience of men: that he who knows mankind best, if he have integrity
of purpose, is the best qualified to be a statesman, and that the volume
which should be his guide is not the book of history but the book of
human nature. I do not here allude to that intimate acquaintance with
the darkest recesses of the human heart—that familiarity with the petty
passions of petty minds, a familiarity scarcely to be acquired but by
him whose own heart reflects to him the image of those secret workings
which he seeks to penetrate—in short I mean not what is termed a
knowledge of the world by those slaves of avarice and ambition to whom
indeed no other world is known. Nor do I mean that nobler knowledge of
human nature which consists in a knowledge of the outward signs by which
the stronger passions display themselves and which gives to the
dramatist all his power over our emotions and to poetry itself the
greater part of its charm. But I mean, a knowledge of the causes, rules
or influences which govern the actions of mankind, since the actions of
mankind are what it is the business of the statesman to regulate, and of
those other principles of human nature upon which depends the influence
of the social arrangements over their happiness. These principles are
far from being obscure or mysterious; they are such as a diligent study
of our own minds, together with a careful observation of a few others,
are adequate to disclose to us. For it is sufficient to him who designs
laws and constitutions, to know well those things in which all mankind
agree: though to him who is to administer them and therefore to
accommodate his conduct to the peculiar dispositions of the men among
whom he is thrown, a knowledge likewise of the varieties of human
character is essentially necessary. But all this knowledge is the fruit
of experience, and it remains to be seen whether what honourable
gentlemen can get from history is more truly the result of experience
than this, or safer in the application.

It is scarcely necessary to say that in history no one instance can be a
rule for Edition: current; Page: [394] another. One instance might be a
rule for another if all the circumstances were the same: but they never
are the same. Even those circumstances which we know to exist are never
in any two cases the same: and besides these there may be a hundred
others which we do not dream of. It may be said that though all the
circumstances be not the same, all the material circumstances may. But
how can we ever know this? We see the results, only in the gross: We see
that under particular laws the people are or seem contented and
tranquil, that under particular systems of commercial policy the country
seems prosperous, under particular systems of financial policy affluent.
But do we see how many hidden causes have contributed to this result, or
is there any one circumstance in the physical moral or political state
of a nation which without other evidence than this we could boldly
pronounce to be totally unconnected with it? The analogy which some
honourable gentlemen have attempted to find between a historical fact
and a chemical experiment is more plausible than well grounded. In a
chemical experiment we can distinguish the cause of an effect from what
are merely the surrounding circumstances, for we can alter the
surrounding circumstances, and the effect is still produced. We know
that the action of the air has nothing to do with the freezing of water,
for water will freeze in vacuo. But can we try these experiments in the
political world? Can we place a nation in vacuo, and try whether our
frigerific mixtures will freeze it and dry it up? No, Sir, the great
instrument by which we have penetrated the arcana of the physical world
fails us in the political, at least when history is our guide. We cannot
there combine and vary the circumstances as we will, we must rest
content with the few and unsatisfactory experiments which nature has
made. There was a time when our physical knowledge was thus bounded—when
we studied outward nature too by mere observation without experiment,
when without any artificial arrangement of circumstances we took things
in the gross as the hand of nature had left them, and drew from the
pages of natural history the whole of our natural philosophy. And what
happened? Scarce one of the great laws of nature were ascertained and
all mankind floated in the regions of fancy from one airy hypothesis to
another, not interrogating nature but their own wild imaginations,
adopting and believing as truth anything which would plausibly explain
the phenomena which they beheld. So it was during a long succession of
ages during which not one spark of true philosophy glimmered on the
earth. Then men proceeded upon history. There is only one branch of
physical science now in which from the impossibility of experiment we
have nothing better than history to go upon, I mean geology: and
accordingly there is scarcely one fact in it which is precisely
ascertained. It would be a great concession were we to allow to any
system of politics which has only history for its basis, as much
certainty as is now possessed by geology.

I have thus briefly set forth the grounds of the opinion which I
professed in the commencement—that the importance of history in a
political point of view is inconsiderable. Weighty however as these
reasons appear—and to me they do Edition: current; Page: [395] appear
weighty, weightier than the Society at the first glance, will probably
esteem them—notwithstanding these reasons, and notwithstanding all the
other arguments which were so ably set forth by the opener of the
debate, he nevertheless shall not have my vote. And the reason is that
however much the political importance of history has been overrated it
appears to me utterly impossible to overrate its moral importance.

It is history alone which preserves from oblivion the deeds of the great
ones of the earth, of all those who have exercised a direct influence
over the destinies of large masses of their fellow creatures. I need not
say how vastly it imports those who are subject to these men, those
whose happiness depends upon the deeds of these men, that their deeds
should be good and not evil. All experience however bears testimony to
the extreme difficulty of supplying motives sufficient to keep such men
within the line of virtue—it is the grand problem of political science,
a problem which not more than two or three nations in the world were
ever pretended to have solved. What then would the difficulty be were it
not for the consciousness which these men cannot escape from—the
consciousness that they live if I may so speak in the presence of
posterity? We do not live in so good a world, Sir, that any of the
existing inducements to virtue can be spared, nor is the conduct of the
rulers of mankind always so exemplary and pure, that we could do without
any of the motives which might render it more so. Sir, whatever may be
the other failings of statesmen and warriors, it cannot I think be
justly complained that they are too patriotic, too disinterested, too
just, too modest, too indifferent to pleasure, to power or to wealth.
But if they cannot be accused of an immoderate share of virtue although
they know that their good and bad actions will be recorded and
remembered and that their vices will be detested or their virtues
admired to the very latest posterity, what would be their conduct if
this check were taken off, if as soon as they had ceased to live their
deeds were to pass at once into utter oblivion? I may be told, Sir, that
I over-estimate the effect of these motives on bad men. I may be told
that such men are indifferent to posthumous fame, and that this delicate
sensibility to the opinion of future ages is not to be found in men who
can disregard those more palpable inducements to virtuous conduct which
their own times afford. Sir, I can afford to concede this point though
it is not without many deductions and modifications that I can concede
it. I will give up the influence of posthumous fame upon bad men. Upon
the good however its influence is not to be disputed. To them at least
the esteem and veneration of an endless succession of ages does appear a
prize worth struggling for. Short and scanty is the catalogue which
history affords of human actions which were at once great and good, but
of these were we to omit all such as would not have been done if the
doers had not desired a reputation beyond the grave, the residue would
be small indeed. Perhaps it is not possible for us—who live in an age
where that which deserves moderate praise is generally certain of
obtaining fully as much praise as it deserves, and few of whom can
probably boast the unenviable distinction of being before our age,
Edition: current; Page: [396] with the consequent fate of being
persecuted, spurned and treated as ruffians or madmen for holding truths
of which when the public mind has opened to receive them some quack of a
future century will possibly go down to posterity as the discoverer—it
is not for us I say to judge of the feelings of the great men of other
times. Most of the men to whom human nature is most deeply indebted,
were far above being influenced by the opinions of contemporaries who
were unworthy of them. Their reward was prospective—it was sufficient
for them to know that one day they would be appreciated, and their
exertions were sufficiently stimulated by the proud anticipation of the
feelings with which we now regard them. This hope it was which animated
Bacon in the execution of his gigantic task—which sustained Galileo in
the dungeons of the Inquisition and would have sustained him at the
stake.2

But it is not only in this point of view that history renders services
to morality which it would not be easy to compensate if history were to
be annihilated. It is no trifling aid to all the better principles of
our nature to be brought acquainted with those bright examples of
sublime virtue joined to the rarest endowments of intellect which,
though in small number and at long intervals, history affords, and which
it can fall to the lot of few to know familiarly otherwise than in
history. The world perhaps has not produced twelve men who have attained
to that exalted degree of wisdom and virtue, of which I speak. Yet still
it is unspeakably cheering to know that there have been such men. But
for them, we should never have known of how high a degree of excellence
our species is susceptible. But for them we should never have known how
much we have to be proud of, how much to love, how much to admire. It
matters not though the Swifts and Bolingbrokes3 and twenty other
disappointed candidates for human grandeur, should vent their spleen in
reviling human nature because it had not given them all which their
ambition grasped at, and because it would not pardon their profligacy in
favour of their talents. The ravings of a hundred such men will not
disgust the philosopher with his species since it has produced a
Turgot.4 That sublime character, whose whole soul was so strictly under
the dominion of principle that he had not one wish which did not center
in the happiness of mankind—for whose elevated, comprehensive and
searching intellect no speculation was too vast, no details too minute,
provided they did but conduce to his great and generous purposes—who
called from a private station to the councils of his sovereign,
sacrificed every personal object in order to free his countrymen from
the oppressions under which they groaned, and who actually did more to
free them from those oppressions during a few short Edition: current;
Page: [397] months than they had ever before ventured even to wish
for—who after bearing the bitter and undissembled hatred of the
privileged classes and what is yet more difficult to bear, the clamours
of a misguided people, rather than abandon those measures which he knew
to be good for that people—resigned his office when he found those great
objects unattainable, for the sake of which alone he had ever desired
it, and who after beholding the ruin of his own prospects with unwet eye
wept for the reimposition of the corvée—is it a trifle to know that such
a man has been? But a small satisfaction to pay that reverence and
adoration to his memory with which he was regarded while living by all
that was great and good among his contemporaries? This man was hunted
down by one of the most worthless aristocracies which ever existed, as a
visionary and a theorist—those epithets by which presumptuous and
besotted ignorance never fails to stigmatize all who are wiser than
itself, and political profligacy all who are more honest—those epithets
by which they who know nothing endeavour to make it appear that the mere
fact of knowing something renders a man unfit to be a statesman, and by
which those who hold that there ought to be no such thing as public
virtue express their cool contempt for those honest fools who are so
extremely ignorant as to suppose that there ought.

But I am wandering from my subject on which in truth I have little more
to say. But I must repeat that the favorable estimate which cannot but
be formed of a species to which such men belonged, is both an incentive
to virtue and a source of happiness which no true moralist or
philosopher will despise. Imagine who will, that mankind can be happy
without thinking well of one another, or that all the excitement which
can be afforded by purely selfish pursuits is sufficient to render a man
happy who has no others. He who is just starting in his worldly career,
and before whose enraptured sight visions of earthly grandeur and the
applause of men are now for the first time floating, he may think that
these things are sufficient for happiness. But it is he who has obtained
these things, or he who even without having obtained them (and there are
such men) has sickened of the pursuit, it is for him to feel that it is
all hollow, and that it is necessary to the happiness of human beings to
love human beings, and therefore necessary to think them deserving of
love.


23.: The Coalition Ministry
 29 JUNE, 1827

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/7. Typescript, Fabian Society. Edited
by Harold J. Laski, “Speech on the Coalition Ministry,” Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, LXII (1929), 449-60. MS headed in
Mill’s hand: “Speech on the Coalition Ministry.” The speech was
undoubtedly prepared for the affirmative in the debate in the London
Debating Society on 22 June, 1827, identified by Henry Cole, “That the
Coalition of the Whigs was Edition: current; Page: [398] natural
honourable and conducive to the best interests of the State.” The debate
was adjourned to 29 June (the last meeting of that session), and Mill
(see the second paragraph) probably spoke then, in what Cole says was a
“very good” debate. The variant notes record problematic readings. As
unpublished in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

it appears to me that the time is not come for the decision of this
question. The evidence is not yet before us. Until I know upon what
principles or with what intentions the coalition was formed, I can
neither approve nor condemn it.1 Coalitions in themselves are neither
good or bad. Their merit or demerit must wholly depend upon the mutual
understanding which takes place among the parties concerned, regarding
the line of conduct which is to be pursued by them thereafter: and as of
this we can have no direct information whatever beyond what those
individuals think fit to afford us, it is their subsequent conduct which
must itself decide whether their personal animosities have been
sacrificed to principle or to place.

In this view of the question I have the fortune, whether good or ill, to
differ from all those gentlemen who have attacked the ministry in the
last and present debates: as well those, with the general tenor of whose
political opinions I coincide, as those, to whom I am diametrically
opposed. They all of them appear disposed to form their judgment of the
coalition, not from the future conduct of the parties, but from the past
conduct: and their principle goes to this extravagant conclusion, that
any two persons who have ever differed on any important question of
public policy, can never honestly, at a subsequent period, become part
of the same ministry. Against this proposition, and any other
approaching to it, I must enter my entire and unqualified dissent. I
contend, that there always ought to be, and that it would be greatly to
be regretted if there were not, a certain difference of opinion in every
ministry. Let any one consider, what the effect would be, if the
contrary maxim were received as a rule of political morality, and if it
were thought necessary that a ministry should consist of persons who
were unanimous on all questions. It is a mistake to say, that such a
ministry could not be formed; no doubt such a ministry could be formed;
but of whom would it be composed? Among hacks who would not scruple to
sell their opinions for place, or tools who being either too ignorant or
too cowardly to think for themselves, pin their faith upon Edition:
current; Page: [399] some idol, whether that idol be a sect, a party, or
an individual, this perfect unanimity might be found. But men of
knowledge and talent, men of stored and cultivated minds, who avail
themselves of the aids afforded by the understandings of others without
surrendering their own, men who inquire for themselves, observe for
themselves and judge for themselves, such men cannot, like mere passive
machines, be formed after a model. Such men will differ and must
necessarily differ, and a ministry, be it what it may, must either be
composed of persons who differ, or it cannot be composed of such men.
The coincidence of opinion which ought to be required in a ministry is
not absolute coincidence; it is sufficient if they coincide more nearly
with one another than any part of them do with their common opponents.
That this degree of coincidence really exists between Mr. Canning and
his Whig colleagues, if it could be doubtful before, has been made as I
conceive tolerably clear by the recent divisions on the Corn Laws, and
the Dissenters’ Marriage Bill.2

Neither does it follow, as was asserted by an honourable friend of mine3
on the former evening, that the two parties who have coalesced have
either of them sacrificed even the principles on which they differ. And
here again I am at issue with the new opposition though not more so, I
will take leave to say, than they themselves are at issue with their
former professions. It is no new thing for two cabinet ministers to
speak and vote on opposite sides of the same question. Neither Mr. Peel
nor Mr. Canning, although colleagues in office, sacrificed their
respective opinions on the Catholic claims, nor, I will venture to
affirm, will Mr. Canning and Lord Lansdowne though colleagues in office,
sacrifice their opinions on the Test Act.4 A gentleman5 who spoke on the
last night justly observed, that this question must come on next year,
and that neither the Whigs nor Mr. Canning can sacrifice the opinions
they have expressed, and therefore, said he, how can the ministry hold
together? I should rather ask, why should they not hold together? If
they cannot agree, why should they not agree to differ? Any ministry may
hold together, who prefer one another and whom the majority of the two
Houses prefer Edition: current; Page: [400] to any other ministry which
could be formed out of the existing materials; and it is right that it
should be so. The question is really too plain to stand in need of any
further argument. Without standing here as the advocate either of Mr.
Canning or the Whigs, and certainly differing most widely in my
political principles from either, I must say it seems to me quite
ridiculous to suppose that the mere fact of their coalescing as they
have done implies any sacrifice of principle on either side.

Whether there has been any sacrifice of principle or not is a question
fairly open to discussion: a question, as I have already observed which
their subsequent conduct must determine. And it appears to me that in
this view no part of their subsequent conduct is immaterial. It is all
evidence: evidence to shew, on what principles the government is
hereafter to be conducted: and though the evidence is not yet complete,
there is no harm in summing it up as far as it goes. aIn foreign policy,
for example, Mr. Canning’s earlier history suggests that he may go toa
far greater lengths than even the most liberal of their measures. Will
the present ministry imitate so noble an example? Will Mr. Canning and
his friends maintain the integrity of these principles inviolate? I
confess my fears. Three months ago I should have felt no doubt that they
who had persevered so long would persevere still. Up to this junction
they have with a stedfastness and constancy most unusual in public men,
adhered to their principles, through good report and bad, in defiance of
the most bitter hostility from a large majority of that section of the
aristocracy which was then the predominant section, and with which they
were politically allied.6 They have now, however, connected themselves
with a party, Edition: current; Page: [401] which contains many men of
talent, many accomplished men, many eloquent men, and a majority, as I
believe, in respect to personal objects, pure in intention: but a party,
however, whose leaders have this unfortunate infirmity, that they never
in their lives ventured except in an unguarded moment, to express more
than half a principle at a time—they never dared to utter a liberal or a
generous sentiment without qualifying it with something base and
servile—their speech of today always explains away the speech of
yesterday—they now are by turns the servants of God and of Mammon,7 and
now endeavour to be both at once. It was to be feared that when these
two sets of men came together, the better of the two would catch the
infection from the worse. And so it has been. Whether truckling be
really infectious, or whether Mr. Canning and his friends are grown more
afraid of the aristocracy because they see that the aristocracy is more
afraid of them, I know not, but for some reason or another, their
character is totally changed. When any bad principle—any aristocratic
principle—any principle favourable to abuses had to be put forward, it
has been uttered in a bold, unflinching uncompromising tone: but as for
principles of an opposite cast, principles to which those personages owe
all their reputation, and but for which they would not be at this moment
in office, since the late junction they have never been mentioned but to
be compromised. Lord Goderich, for example,—once the manly and
straightforward Frederic Robinson,—was so overcome by those brutal
attacks at which, directed as they were against the mildest and most
inoffensive of men, every man of common feeling must have been
indignant, but which he would have treated as they deserved by simply
despising them—he felt these attacks so bitterly that he condescended to
make the most humble and submissive apologies for being in the
right—hastened to explain away his high and honourable
principles—reduced free trade to a better sort of preventive service—a
mere scheme for the suppression of smuggling—and in terms with which
even Sir Thomas Lethbridge8 must have been satisfied, declared his
abhorrence of theory, that is of thought—of the application of
philosophy to politics—of all which distinguishes him and his colleagues
from the vulgar orators and vulgar statesmen of this and of former
days.9 Mr. Huskisson10—but it will be better to begin at the beginning,
and take a view of the conduct of the new ministry, from their accession
to office.

Let me observe, then, once for all—if I should be less warm in my
eulogiums on the present ministry, less indiscriminate in my panegyrics
upon their wisdom and virtue, than some of their old and some of their
new friends, it is by no means to be Edition: current; Page: [402]
imputed to any dislike of the individuals, and still less to any
insensibility to the services which they have already rendered. Those
services would be inestimable, were it only that they are the first
British ministers who have pronounced the words improvement, reform,
liberality, philosophy. Indeed Mr. Canning may be convinced by the
disapprobation with which the reformers now view some parts of his
conduct, of the sincerity of the praise which they have bestowed on him
heretofore. Most assuredly if that praise had emanated from the base
motives to which it has been ascribed; if as has been more than
insinuated by men utterly incapable of comprehending principles of
action so greatly above their own level—they had attacked the Whigs
because they were not in place, applauded the ministry because they
were,—had such been their motives they would hardly have begun to
qualify their applause from the time when the men whom they had
applauded became all powerful, and ceased to flatter as soon as their
flattery might possibly be profitable to themselves.

I would first advert to Mr. Canning’s nonsensical declaration upon the
subject of Parliamentary Reform and the Test Act.11 I call it
nonsensical because I know no other term which will express its
character so exactly. If Mr. Canning had said that his opinion on these
subjects was unchanged, and that while it was so he should continue to
act upon it as he had done previously,—however the fact might have been
regretted its avowal could have excited no disapprobation in any
reasonable mind. But to hear a man gravely pledge himself to be always
of the same opinion—bind himself by a solemn promise that the arguments
which convince him now, upon his honour shall convince him to his dying
day—that what he thinks advisable now he will think advisable always
howsoever circumstances may change, and although the evidence of the
contrary should be as clear as day,—as he promises what it is not in his
or any man’s power to perform, the promise is utterly ludicrous. I wish
I could say that it were not also something worse than ludicrous. For
although it is in no man’s power to resolve before hand that he will
always be of the same way of thinking, it is in any man’s power to
resolve to say he is of the same way of thinking, whether he is or is
not. It is in any man’s power also to resolve to be disingenuous with
himself—to resolve that he will never look at the evidence but on one
side—that nothing but what makes on one side shall ever enter into his
mind. But the man who can form such a resolution is in a state of mind
than which one more immoral is not to be found in human nature. A
resolution to be regardless of evidence implies on any subject,
indifference to truth. But indifference to truth where the alternative
of truth or falsehood involves that of justice or injustice, benevolence
or cruelty, doing our duty or not doing it—causing the happiness or the
misery of our country, is indifference to every human virtue.
Parliamentary reform is a measure of which it is not criminal in any one
to disapprove. But it is a measure which sincere men, Edition: current;
Page: [403] virtuous men, aye and wise men, have approved of; and most
certainly, if it is to be approved of, it is of such tremendous moment
to the happiness and virtue of countless myriads, that hardly any human
interest can compare with it in magnitude. And that this should be the
question which a man chuses in order to resolve that he will never grow
wiser—that because he, a fallible man, thinks that he is in the right,
sooner than be convinced of the contrary he will practise every species
of dishonesty upon himself—that on this subject his intellect shall be
hood winked, his reason chained down—Sir, I can never believe that this
was what Mr. Canning intended. The words must have been uttered in the
warmth of the moment, and without due reflection on their import. Not
that I would asser that such a declaration is viewed by general opinion
in the light which it deserves. Indeed were we to take our notions of
right from what we see and hear, we should suppose there was something
heroic in swearing that if we were wrong, wrong we always will remain,
and that a man who pledges himself to adhere right or wrong to the very
opinions which correspond with his private interests, he is to be
treated as if he had nobly immolated himself to the welfare of his
country.

Mr. Canning has declared his hostility to the repeal of the Test Act.
But what is become of those who called themselves the friends of that
measure? Were they its friends only when the agitation of it might
befriend them? The more I reflect upon the postponement of this
question, the greater difficulty I find in attributing to it any
creditable motive. What is the reason assigned? It would embarrass the
government.12 Gentlemen were not wont to be so scrupulous about
embarrassing the government. If the repeal of the Test Act were like the
Catholic question,—a measure there was any chance that the government
would ever support,—it might be fairly said, Do not bring it on until
the government can support it: but when the head of the government has
positively declared his determination to oppose it, in what way, I would
ask, would its discussion embarrass the government, unless exhibiting
them in their true colours be the sort of embarrassment that is so
earnestly deprecated? It could not be carried this year. But does any
man in his senses suppose that it could be carried next year, or the
year after? If it is not to be discussed until it can be immediately
carried, it is abandoned indeed. There seems to be universally among
public men a disposition to stave off discussion. They always seem to
think that by a free discussion it is truth which suffers, and not
error. They always chuse rather to put their trust in tricks and
stratagems for the success of a good cause than the gradual effect of
plain, open, manly and repeated discussion, upon the reason of the well
intentioned and upon the prudence of the corrupt. This is a fatal
weakness, but it is not a criminal one, and to this I am Edition:
current; Page: [404] disposed to ascribe the temporary abandonment of
the Dissenters. But if this be the motive, why not openly avow it? Why
attempt to varnish it over by a flimsy, a hypocritical pretext? Why seek
to ward off the too plausible charge of tergiversation by pretending
that the Dissenters wished to postpone their claims, and that the
postponement was to please them? I admit that the body of Dissenters
did, at their meeting, yield a reluctant consent: but is it not known by
whose persuasions, by whose earnest entreaties—by whose threats that
consent was extorted? Is it any secret what distinguished member of the
Whig party declared to them that if they insisted on pressing their
claims at this moment he himself in the House of Commons would move the
previous question;13 and what other member of parliament, though this
latter far from being a distinguished one, cried out with the air of a
man astonished to find himself so important a personage, that he would
second it?14 Is it imagined that these things can be kept from the
public? Do not at this moment a large body of the Dissenters believe
themselves to have been sold—profligately bartered for place and
power—sacrificed to appease those whom no sacrifice ever appeased, the
Church and the Aristocracy.—I differ from them, as to the motives which
they impute, and I am convinced that there is at present no deliberate
purpose of sacrificing them—but yet I cannot but expect the Dissenters,
if they expect to succeed, to trust to themselves, and not to men who
have played fast and loose with every cause which they ever undertook.

In justice to the noble Lord who gave notice of the motion,15 I am bound
to state the profound respect with which his plain and straight forward
conduct has inspired me. It contrasts as strikingly with that of the men
I have alluded to, as Dr. Lushington’s manly and honourable conduct on
the Chancery question with that of Mr. Brougham16—a man whom I would not
willingly mention in any terms but those of praise—a man whose noble and
disinterested services to the cause of education acquit him of all
errors except errors of judgment, and should induce us the more readily
to forgive his numerous failings, but not to overlook or disguise them.
But I need add nothing to what has been said of the conduct of the Whigs
Edition: current; Page: [405] both on this question, and on the Six
Acts.17 On the latter question I must confess that their conduct in some
degree surprised me. I was little prepared to expect from them any thing
heroically disinterested, any very obstinate perseverance in the right
after their hopes and their fears began to point to the wrong. But I did
expect that the transition would have been more gradual. I did think
that some little respect would have been shewn to public opinion, some
little pains taken to smooth the downhill path that is trodden by
reformed patriots whose exertions in the cause of liberty have at length
earned the well-merited reward of a place. But no! they who had opposed
the Act when the danger which it provided against was real, have turned
round and supported it when that danger is universally allowed to be
imaginary and when there is no longer the slightest pretext of its
necessity. I thank them for it! This single fact will do more to open
the eyes of the people of England than abstract truths though they were
enforced by the eloquence of a Demosthenes. Believe me, the people will
not be turned round at their pleasure. The people are generally in the
main correct, in their judgment of public men, and it would be very
imprudent to let them suppose that the premier can find Whigs to
undertake any work which is too dirty for himself, even although it
should be to support a ministry which will go along, as Mr. Brougham
says with the spirit of the age,18 for which good end the Whigs are
ready to run counter to that spirit every day of their lives.

The conduct of the Whigs on this question has been censured, often, and
deservedly. But I have never heard Mr. Canning’s speech on the same
occasion,19 properly commented upon. I am not disposed to scrutinize too
closely all the acts of a ministry, which is compelled as the condition
of its existence to secure a majority in two assemblies wholly
independent of popular control. I can forgive so much, that I can almost
forgive the screening of Lord Charles Somerset, though to my mind, there
is scarcely a more humiliating spectacle than that of Mr. Wilmot Horton,
benevolent and patriotic as we all know him, upright and sincere,—as we
would so gladly believe him,—not only shielding from enquiry the conduct
of that individual, who if he be not the most criminal is certainly the
most ill used of men, but seeking a feeble protection for his client
against the most serious charges by endeavouring to excite a prejudice
against his accuser, and carping like a mere caviller against the time
and manner of urging the accusations, instead of Edition: current; Page:
[406] ascertaining that the accusations themselves are ill founded.20
Sir, I can make so great allowances that I would not condemn even this
very severely. But if they are compelled to do wrong, they are not
compelled to defend by disingenuous artifices, the wrong which they do.
I would ask Mr. Canning—if I were at this moment in his presence I would
ask him whether it was worthy of his character—worthy of his
talents—worthy of his candour in replying to Mr. Hume on the twopenny
trash act, as it was formerly called, to affect to consider it as aimed
against blasphemous publications—an act which as every child knows was
enacted for the avowed purpose of putting down Cobbett21—an act which
when it was passed was expressly grounded upon the existing disaffection
to government, and which included all publications touching upon Church
or State or any subject connected with them. Does Mr. Canning presume so
much upon our want of memory? Does he think that he can trifle with that
to which he cannot but be conscious that he owes his present
elevation—public opinion? Let him not presume too much upon his
individual popularity; it will desert him as rapidly as his former
unpopularity, when he ceases to deserve it. Let him not place his trust
in newspaper praise—the hacks of the press always bow the knee to the
idol in vogue. Does he imagine that the Times newspaper, for example,
which now worships him as a God,22 would not turn and exhort the people
to imbrue their hands in his blood if it thought that by so doing it
would add 500 to its 15,000 subscribers?

But I must now pass to a still more painful subject. One week ago, the
name of Mr. Huskisson stood higher with the nation for honesty and
courage, combined with great talent, and the only really valuable
knowledge, the knowledge of principles, than any living—I must almost
say any minister. In the teeth of the most rancorous opposition, he had
adhered nobly to his own course, had braved clamours, to which almost
any other minister would have succumbed, and had braved them
successfully. Even his enemies—and few men had more enemies, for few
have so well deserved the enmity of the ignorant and the worthless—but
the honest even among his enemies, while they disapproved of his
principles, honoured the constancy with which he adhered to them. I use
no rash expression when I say that the character of Mr. Huskisson did
more to give dignity and Edition: current; Page: [407] respectability
and public confidence to the ministry than any other single
circumstance. And now—one short month after the most signal of triumphs
over the strongest division of his opponents23—after having refuted
every argument and disproved every fact which they alleged—he has
covertly, by a clause in the new Customs Act,24 conceded the whole of
his principle together with much of its practical results to these
vanquished and prostrate adversaries. Where were the Whigs then,—they
who when credit was to be gained by it, claimed to themselves the merit
which they had not, of originating these measures—where were they, that
they did not resume their thunder when he who had usurped it had laid it
down? We are apt, Sir, to suppose public men wiser than they are, and
then to suppose them greater rogues than they are because we cannot
otherwise explain how such wise men come to do such foolish things. But
I cannot pay so poor a compliment to Mr. Huskisson’s understanding as to
suppose him unaware of any inconsistency between his conduct now and on
the reciprocity bill. No, it is truckling: it can be nothing but
truckling, and all that is left to his previously enthusiastic admirers
is to hope that although the instrument he is not the cause. But
regarding it as the act of the entire ministry, I would ask is this the
course which they intend to persevere in? Do they mean to undo when they
have obtained power all the meritorious acts by which they gained it?
They cannot be so blind to their real situation as to suppose that they
were raised to their present elevation by any thing except public
opinion, or that they will keep it one week longer than while public
opinion strongly supports them. Do they suppose that they can ever be
favourites with the aristocracy? Do they really imagine that they can
ever outstrip their competitors in servility, or that men of genius can
ever rival fools in self abasement? Do they think that the awkward
sycophancy of men conscious of superiority, of men fit for and who have
a taste for better things, men who detest the odious work, to whose
whole nature it is alien, can ever equal that of creatures to whose base
souls it is congenial, the hacks of office, the hirelings of power, who
have not one idea that is not commonplace, one purpose that is not mean,
and who swallow servility with greater gusto than their daily bread? No,
to whatever degree these men may be so unhappy as to degrade themselves,
the Church and the Aristocracy will still find others more degraded.
Prostitution is not the game for them. It was no wisdom, not even
worldly wisdom, to throw away the high reputation for principle, which
they Edition: current; Page: [408] had acquired, and which it is not yet
too late to retrieve. But it is not to be dissembled that a few more
acts like this last will efface the distinction which the public has
hitherto made between them and their opponents. They are in a difficult
situation. The public already expected more from them than they could
do, and had they even done all that was in their power, it would have
been difficult to keep alive the enthusiasm which was at first excited
by the change of ministry, but which their defeat on the Corn Bill alone
retains in existence.25 And if once the people cease to value them—if it
once becomes a matter of indifference to the public whether they are
ministers or not,—their reign is over. The hatred of the Tory
aristocracy towards them is at this moment kept down only by their
fears. Let those fears cease and their majority in parliament will not
stand by them for a month, they will fall, and we shall see rushing into
office, the rabble rout26 of Tories headed by an apostate Whig.27 The
reign of dulness28 will recommence: it will become the fashion, (as
before the late change it was rapidly becoming) to affiche29 ignorance,
and boast of it as if it were a merit—every thing which savours of mind
will again become an object of scorn and opprobrium—it will be criminal
to possess any knowledge except the knowledge of routine, or to aim at
any thing in public life except to make profit by pandering to the
selfish and malignant passions of others—and diligently will that war be
prosecuted which a noble personage has recently declared against the
people in defence of the right and privilege of spoliation, and the
other rights and privileges of his order.30 When this would be the
infallible consequence of the dissolution of the ministry, I need not
say how earnestly I desire that it may continue. To ensure its
continuance nothing is required but constancy. Let their actions be only
worthy of their high character, and that country for which they have
hazarded so much will most assuredly stand by them. The next session of
parliament will finally decide their fate and ours: till then I must
delay forming a deliberate opinion, and till then, therefore, I must
decline voting upon the question before us.31

Edition: current; Page: [409]


24.: The Present State of Literature
 16 NOVEMBER, 1827

MS, University College London, C.K. Ogden Library. Published as “Speech
on the Present State of Literature,” Adelphi, I (1923-24), 681-93. The
manuscript, which is incomplete, is written on the verso of sheets of
one of Bentham’s manuscripts of his Rationale of Judicial Evidence
(1827), which Mill had been editing in the preceding years. It is headed
in Mill’s hand: “Speech on the present state of literature,” and
inscribed on the last folio with the same title and “spoken in 1827/8.”
As the first sentence indicates, Mill had proposed and now opened the
question; Henry Cole mentions Mill as speaking, and gives the topic:
“That the Literature of this Country has declined and is declining,”
debated on 16 November, 1827, the first meeting of the London Debating
Society in that session. (Cole himself spoke for the first time in this
debate.) There being no Fabian Society transcript, this may be the
second manuscript sold by Harold J. Laski immediately after his
purchase; if so, he must have borrowed it back from C.K. Ogden, or else
it was edited by Ogden rather than Laski. The variants record
alternative manuscript readings. As not published in Mill’s lifetime,
not listed in his bibliography.

when i proposed this question, I considered rather what subject it might
be useful to the Society to discuss, than what I myself was equal to—not
to mention other deficiencies. Extent of my reading never adequate to so
vast a question, and now after a lapse of six months I have entirely
lost the train of thought which suggested it. Fortunately the duty of an
opener rather to indicate the topics than to discuss them. Leave to
others to institute an elaborate comparison between our old and our new
writers, or between our own and those of any other country. Myself
rather hint at the principal vices which appear to me to distinguish the
literature of the day, and the circumstances peculiar to our own times
by which those vices seem to me to have been generated.

The word literature has several acceptations: in its most confined sense
it means poetry and novels, in its widest every written or spoken
composition. Conformably to what I think the established usage, I shall
use it in a sense intermediate between these two extremes, not confining
it to works of imagination only, nor yet extending it to comprehend
works of pure science and philosophy in which I confess we rank higher
than at any former period. Include in literature all which Edition:
current; Page: [410] can be denominated popular publications: all which
address themselves to the general reader, whether they are intended for
amusement only, or profess to contain discussions on political, moral,
or, in the narrow sense of the word, literary subjects. In these
compositions, we are to distinguish two things, the matter and the
manner. The literature of any country may be properly said to have
deteriorated, if its tendency, in regard to the opinions and sentiments
which it inculcates, has grown worse, and if it is less distinguished
than formerly by the beauties of composition and style. In both these
respects I am inclined to think, that our literature has declined and is
declining. In order to establish this, it is not necessary that I should
deny that we possess at present writers of merit, perhaps equal in their
respective lines to any who have preceded them. When we speak of the
character of our literature, we do not mean that of particular writers,
but the general spirit and quality of the mass: if this has degenerated,
our literature has degenerated, and my case is made out.

Say little about poetry because nobody will contest. No one poet of the
first rank, unless Wordsworth.1—he will probably never write any more—No
new poets have arisen or seem likely to arise to succeed those who have
gone off the stage or speedily will. I am not sure that I am able to
assign any cause of our being thus left without poets, as it seems
probable that we soon shall be, and to attempt it would lead me into a
longer discussion than the Society would be disposed to listen to. I
therefore leave the fact to speak for itself, and shall confine myself
to our prose writers of whose degeneracy I feel myself more capable of
divining the cause.

The influence of literature upon civilisation is a topic which has
frequently been insisted upon, and certainly not oftener than its
importance deserves. The influence of civilisation upon literature,
though not less remarkable, has not perhaps received from philosophers
all the attention which is its due. We all see how individuals (the
writer) act upon masses (the reader); but it is not so obvious at first
sight, to what a prodigious extent masses react upon individuals: and we
aare perhaps too readya to ascribe the peculiar modes of thinking which
are prevalent in every age, to its literary men, bnotb considering that
the majority of literary men take their colour from the age in which
they live.

Every man is a man, long before he is a poet or a philosopher. Thousands
of impressions are made upon the mind from without before it acquires
the power of originating a single one from within. Every man, long
before he begins to think or to write, has imbibed more or less of the
opinions, the sentiments, the modes of thinking and acting, the habits
and associations of that portion of mankind among Edition: current;
Page: [411] whom his lot is cast. We all know the power of early
impressions over the human mind and how often the direction which they
give, decides the whole character, the whole life of the man. The
greatest men of every age, generally bear a family likeness to their
contemporaries: the most splendid monuments of genius which literature
can boast of, bear almost universally in a greater or less degree the
stamp of their age. But over the vast majority of literary men the
spirit of their age2 rules absolutely supreme, because they studiously
endeavour to resemble it, and not only imitate but are apt to caricature
its leading peculiarities.

It is the demand, in literature as in most other things, which calls
forth the supply. Among mental as well as among physical endowments,
that is most cultivated which is most admired. When the public bestowed
so much of its admiration upon skill in cutting throats, that it had
very little to spare for any thing else, all the ardent characters
betook themselves to the trade of blood, and made it their pride to be
distinguished chiefly by the warlike virtues. At other times, when the
chief source of reputation was oratorical or poetical merit, every body
who possessed, or thought he possessed genius, was an orator or a poet.
There have always been men, who without much aiming at reputation, wrote
chiefly to please themselves or to improve their readers. But the grand
object of writers in general is success. The qualities most calculated
to ensure success, constitute the sole idea they have of merit: they
cultivate in their own minds a habit of being pleased with that which
they find pleases those to whom they address themselves: their aim is to
be read and admired, and the degree in which that aim is successful, is
the test by which they try their own merits, and those of others. The
weaker minds cannot resist the contagion of the common opinion or the
common taste: and such of the stronger as prefer the honour and profit
of pleasing others to the satisfaction of pleasing themselves, set the
example to their numerous imitators of sailing with the stream.

Assuming therefore as an indisputable truth, that the writers of every
age are for the most part what the readers make them, it becomes
important to the present question to consider who formed the reading
public formerly, and who compose it now.

The present age is very remarkably distinguished from all other ages by
the number of persons who can read, and what is of more consequence by
the number who do. Our working classes have learned to read, and our
idle classes have learned to find pleasure in reading, and to devote a
part of that time to it, which they formerly spent in amusements of a
grosser kind. That human nature will be a gainer, and that in a high
degree by this change, no one can be more firmly convinced than I am:
but it will perhaps be found, that the benefit lies rather in the
ultimate, than in the immediate effects. Reading is necessary; but no
wise or even sensible man was ever made by reading alone. The proper use
of reading is to be Edition: current; Page: [412] subservient to
thinking. It is by those who read to think, that knowledge is advanced,
prejudices dispelled, and the physical and moral condition of mankind is
improved. I cannot however perceive that the general diffusion (so
remarkable in our own day) of the taste for reading, has yet been
accompanied by any marked increase in taste for the severer exercises of
the intellect; that such will one day be its effect, may fairly be
presumed; but it has not yet declared itself: and it is to the immense
multiplication in the present day of those who read but do not think,
that I should be disposed to ascribe what I view as the degeneracy of
our literature.

In former days the literati and the learned formed a class apart: and
few concerned themselves with literature and philosophy except those who
had leisure and inclination to form their philosophical opinions by
study and meditation, and to cultivate their literary taste by the
assiduous perusal of the most approved models. Those whose sole
occupation was pleasure, did not seek it in books, but in the gaieties
of a court, or in field sports and debauchery. The public for which
authors wrote was a small but, to a very considerable degree, an
instructed public; and their suffrages were only to be gained by
thinking to a certain extent profoundly and by writing well. The authors
who were then in highest reputation are chiefly those to whom we now
look back as the ablest thinkers and best writers of their time. No
doubt there were many blockheads among the reading public in those days,
as well as in our own, and the blockheads often egregiously misplaced
their admiration, as blockheads are wont: but the applause of the
blockheads was not then the object aimed at even by those who obtained
it, and they did not constitute so large and so influential a class of
readers, as to tempt any writer of talent to lay himself out for their
admiration. If an author failed of obtaining the suffrages of men of
knowledge and taste, it was for want of powers, not from the
misapplication of them. The case is now altered. We live in a refined
age, and there is a corresponding refinement in our amusements. It is
now the height of mauvais ton to be drunk, neither is it any longer
considered decorous among gentlemen, that the staple of their
conversation should consist of bawdy. Reading has become one of the most
approved and fashionable methods of killing time, and the number of
persons who have skimmed the surface of literature is far greater than
at any previous period of our history. Our writers therefore find that
the greatest success is now to be obtained by writing for the many; and
endeavouring all they can to bring themselves down to the level of the
many, both in their matter and in the manner of expressing it.

It is notorious that half instructed persons can never appreciate the
highest order of excellence either in thought or in composition. Of deep
thought, no one can properly judge but those who think: Profound and
original ideas can only be properly understood by him who will take the
trouble to go through in his own mind the process of thought by which
they were arrived at: and a book which gives the trouble of thought, is
by those unused to think, speedily laid aside as incomprehensible and
dull. In like manner, the beauties of the highest order in a Edition:
current; Page: [413] literary composition are such as cannot be
apprehended and felt without the exercise of the thinking faculty. I may
instance the works of two of the most highly gifted minds which their
respective nations have produced, Demosthenes, and Milton. Of these may
indeed be affirmed what Quintilian has said with somewhat less justice
of Cicero: Sciat etc.3 In neither of them is there any thing to
captivate a vulgar mind: and if not overawed by their reputation, the
dunces and coxcombs would unanimously agree in voting Demosthenes common
place, and Milton a bore.

A literature therefore of which the chief aim is to be read and
applauded by the half instructed many, is altogether precluded from the
higher excellencies both of thought and of composition. To obtain the
character of a sound or brilliant thinker, and a fine writer, among
superficial people, it is a very different set of qualities which must
be cultivated.

People are in general much better pleased with the man who persuades
them that they have always been right, than with the man who tells them
that they are wrong. No one except the very few with whom truth is a
consideration paramount to all others, is pleased with any person for
convincing him that he has been in error: and if to think is always, to
most people, a labour too irksome to be borne, more especially will they
turn a deaf ear to the man who bids them think when the consequence
intended is their being disabused of their favourite opinions, opinions
too, which they perhaps have an interest in sticking to. There remain
two paths to reputation and success. One is, to advocate strenuously and
if possible enthusiastically the reigning opinions, all, but especially
those in which any influential part of the community has an interest: to
heap insult and opprobrium on all who dissent from those opinions, and
to keep those who profess them well supplied with reasons to make
themselves and others still better satisfied with those opinions than
before. Of the class of writers who pursue this plan, a class comprising
the great bulk of our moral and political writers, the greatest living
example is Dr. Southey.4 The other, for there is another mode of
obtaining among half instructed persons, a reputation for talent, is by
dealing in paradoxes. There are two ways of being a paradox monger. One
is, by professing opinions, which were not likely to occur to any body.
But a still better way, is by maintaining opinions so perfectly silly,
that they are at once rejected by every body. The source of reputation
in this case, besides the strangeness of the opinion, is the surprise
which every one feels on finding that there is any thing plausible to be
said in behalf of so very gross and palpable an absurdity. If a man
shews any talent in the defence of it, he is accordingly set down as at
least a very clever and ingenious person; and if he has managed well,
and made choice of a paradox which flatters Edition: current; Page:
[414] any of the passions or inclinations common to mankind, or to any
influential class or party among mankind, he makes a crowd of proselytes
and at once establishes his reputation as a profound and original
thinker. Among those who in our own day have most distinguished
themselves in this field, it would be unjust to refuse the first place
to the celebrated Mr. Jeffrey or whoever else etc. who has shewn by his
celebrated argument against the progressiveness of human nature,5 and by
many other paradoxes besides, that he stands foremost among mankind in
the art of saying something very plausible in a case so bad, that hardly
any body besides himself would have fancied that any thing could be said
for it at all.

So much for the matter of our modern writers: now as to their stile. It
is sufficiently notorious that the kind of writing which is preferred by
instructed and cultivated minds, is not that which pleases the
half-instructed and pseudo-refined; and although whatever gives pleasure
to any body is so far good, our standard of taste if we have one, must
be founded on what it is incident to minds of the highest degree of
cultivation to approve and admire. Now it has always been laid down by
them as a rule, that the chief excellence of stile is to express the
meaning exactly, and without any appearance of effort, to express it in
short as a man of sense and education, filled with his subject and quite
indifferent to display, might be supposed to express it spontaneously.
Every one who has been accustomed in writing to make this unaffected
simplicity his model, knows how prodigiously it transcends every other
style in difficulty: he knows that really to write without effort, is by
no means the way to appear without effort, and that when even a man of
talent gives the reins to his imagination, and uses the first
expressions which occur to him, what he writes will either be feeble and
vapid in general with a brilliant passage now and then, or else such
stuff as is in Blackwood’s Magazine.6 A practised writer knows the
immense labour of the ars celandi artem:7 how much more art it requires
to speak naturally than to speak affectedly; in what rude and
inappropriate language a thought first suggests itself to the mind, and
what pains are necessary to make the word suit the idea so exactly, that
the one shall appear to have been immediately suggested by the other. It
is when this attempt is most completely successful, that common readers
are least capable of appreciating it. It is when a thought is very
felicitously expressed, that every dunce who reads it thinks he could
have expressed it as well. The vulgar taste in style is like the vulgar
taste in most other things: every thing is admired in proportion as it
deviates from nature; and therefore from what the dunce who pretends to
judge of it, thinks Edition: current; Page: [415] would have occurred to
himself. A ranting player, who tears a passion to rags, is generally
more admired by persons unacquainted with the external indications of
real passion than a chaste and natural actor, because in him the art is
not perceived, his imitation of nature appears nature itself, and where
they can perceive no difficulty they ascribe no merit. So in stile, a
half cultivated taste is always caught by gaudy, affected, and
meretricious ornament, contributing nothing either to the clearness of
the idea or the vividness of the leading image; the effusion of a mind
not in earnest; the play of an imagination occupied with every thing in
the world except the subject. The writers whom the vulgar admire are
those who deal in conceits with Mr. Moore,8 or commonplace metaphors
with Mr. Jeffrey, or extravagant and farfetched metaphors with Mr.
Hazlitt or the rev. Mr. Irving.9 And those who do not aim at this kind
of stile become careless, and aim at no stile at all. We have at this
time many tolerable writers, but scarcely one who has attained
distinguished excellence in stile. I must except indeed Sir W. Scott,10
who in his peculiar department, description of external nature, is
without a rival, though in descriptions of human emotions and passions
Richardson far excels him.11 But whom have we to compare, in wit and
idiomatic English with Dr. South, in easy, quiet, unaffected humour with
Addison and Goldsmith, in grave, Cervantes-like irony with Fielding, in
nervous simplicity and poignant satire with Swift, in pathos though
stained by much affectation with Sterne?12 Whom have we who can equal
Hume in graceful narrative, Bolingbroke in brilliant and animated
declamation, Mandeville in copious, and appropriate though homely
illustration,13 and which of our authors, can rank with Berkeley for the
felicitous expression of abstruse thoughts, or can match, in exuberance
of fancy corrected by the severest judgment, that wonderful master of
figurative eloquence, Lord Bacon. I say nothing of what are commonly
called our old writers, because my knowledge of them is not extensive,
but the writers I have named are sufficient to exemplify the
superiority, in point of mere writing, of other ages to our own.

It remains to mention one feature which particularly marks the
literature of the present day, and which I think has contributed more
than any other to its degradation: I mean the prevalence of periodical
publications. This has operated Edition: current; Page: [416]
unfavourably upon our literature in a variety of ways. In the first
place periodical works are written, more exclusively than any others,
for the day. They are therefore under still stronger inducements than
other works, to chime in with the tastes of the day, and the prejudices
of the day. All other writers though they cannot attain immediate, may
hope for ultimate reputation and success by being above their age.
Periodical writers must have immediate success, or none at all. I hate
journals, says Göthe, somewhere, because they are the slaves of the
day:14 and ample experience confirms the truth of the observation.

It has been said in favour of periodical publications, that they promote
a taste for reading,15 and this praise they undoubtedly deserve: but it
may be doubted whether they occasion the reading of much besides
themselves. If they cause many to go on to books, who begin with
newspapers and reviews, they also induce many to satisfy themselves with
reviews who would otherwise have read books. And they contribute much to
diminish the number of good books. Formerly a young writer appeared
before the public under his own colours: if he made his way it was by
having sufficient merit to gain a reputation of his own, and he was
therefore anxious to make his productions as perfect as he was able
before he suffered them to see the light. In this manner the taste for
literary distinction, not being early or easily gratified, grew into a
passion, became deeply rooted in his mind, and if he really possessed
talent, rendered him probably for the whole of his life a distinguished
literary character. But now every young writer who possesses the
moderate degree of cleverness necessary to enable him to compose a
readable article for a review, finds he can turn his small capital of
intellect to so good an account by writing for periodicals, that it
would be labour lost to wait till he had made that capital larger:
especially as that accuracy of research, that depth of thought and that
highly finished style, which are so essential to a work destined for
posterity, would not only not contribute to his success, but would
obstruct it, by taking up his time, and preventing him from composing
rapidly. Writing anonymously, he is not afraid of compromising his
reputation, and the first crude offspring of his brain, poured forth in
a style which will always be good enough if it is grammatical and runs
pretty smoothly, passes from hand to hand by virtue of the reputation of
the review, and if it have any merit at all gains for the writer such a
moderate portion of celebrity as generally appeases the first cravings
of his appetite, and leaves him lukewarm about the attainment of a
higher degree of distinction, and averse to the severe application which
it would require. I cannot help ascribing partly to this cause, the very
small number of good prose works which have been published for many
years past, except indeed novels, a branch Edition: current; Page: [417]
of literature which pays so well that there is always a sufficient
motive for producing it.

16[I ha]ve a still heavier charge against periodical literature. [It is
t]his which has made literature a trade. Nothing else [could h]ave
rendered the literary profession sufficiently [lucra]tive, to tempt men
into it for the mere sake of pecu[nia]ry profit. We read in Pope and our
other satirists of many dunces whose evil genius persuaded them to
write, to the great grief of their relations, and injury of their
worldly concerns; and who, from a real fondness for the occupation,
preferred starving upon the scanty produce of their pen to earning a
comfortable livelihood in any honest trade.17 But we do not find mention
made by these authors of any, who chose authorship as an advantageous
investment of their labour and capital in a commercial point of view,
contracted for a stipulated quantity of eloquence and wit, to be
delivered on a certain day, were inspired punctually by 12 o’clock in
order to be in time for the printer’s boy at one, sold a burst of
passion at so much per line, and gave way to a movement of virtuous
indignation as per order received. That a literary man should receive a
remuneration for his labour is no more than just, provided he writes in
every respect as he would have done if he had no remuneration to expect.
But whatever is a gainful occupation becomes the occupation of many who
have nothing beyond the pecuniary gain in view. What is carried on as a
trade, soon comes to be carried on upon mere trading principles of
profit and loss. When literature is upon this footing, it is of all
trades almost without exception the most degraded and vile, on account
of the insincerity and hypocrisy with which it is necessarily connected.
Written composition, like any other form of human discourse, is only
endurable so far forth as the opinions and sentiments which it
promulgates, are supposed to be the real opinions and genuine sentiments
of the writer. The hack author who considers not what sentiments the
subject ought to inspire, but only what are the sentiments which are
expected of him, and who after having on due enquiry and examination
settled to the satisfaction of his own mind which side of the question
will be the marketable side, proceeds thereupon to brandish his
mercenary thunders, and burst forth into the artificial transports of a
bought enthusiasm; the occupation of a street walking prostitute is
surely far more respectable. The present times have brought forth a
plentiful harvest of this kind of handicrafts. It is fortunate indeed if
scribes of this sort do nothing worse than this, in the way of their
profession. There are literary18

Edition: current; Page: [418]


25.: The Church
 15 FEBRUARY, 1828

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/9. Typescripts, Fabian Society: the
text of the first typescript parallels that of the manuscript; the
second, headed “[A fragment of one page]” is evidently a passage for
insertion, as the context indicates (421.27). Edited by Harold J. Laski
in his edition of Mill’s Autobiography, pp. 310-25, who dates it to
1829. MS headed in Mill’s hand: “Speech on the Church.” Undoubtedly
prepared for the debate beginning on 1 February, 1828, described by
Henry Cole: “England derives no benefit from its Church
Establishment—[proposed] by Roebuck who made a most excellent speech . .
. Mr. Sterling a new member. . . .” The debate was adjourned to the next
meeting, 15 February, of which Cole says: “Continued Discussion upon the
Benefits of Church Establishment;—Mssrs. Mill, Ellis, Taylor, Shee,
Smith and Conclusion by the Opener, Roebuck.” As not published in Mill’s
lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

my honourable friend the proposer of the question1 has observed in his
speech, that it is difficult to speak against the church, because men
will not listen to the evidence. The experience of the preceding evening
has shewn that there is another difficulty, viz. that when they do
listen to it, they are very much disposed to fritter it away. It would
indeed be difficult to compose a speech on any subject that would stand
the test which these gentlemen seemed disposed to apply to it. If you
rest your case upon the universal principles of human nature, and shew
that from the situation in which the Church of England is placed,
certain actions are the natural consequences, this is called declamation
and assumption, and you are asked for facts: when, in obedience to this
demand, you bring forward facts, drawn from different periods of church
history, these facts are exhibited singly, and you are triumphantly
informed that each one, if there were only that one, might be a singular
instance and was no proof of a general rule. If you allude to
persecuting statutes enacted long ago, you are told that they were
evidence of a spirit which no longer exists: if to shew that the spirit
survives you observe that the laws still subsist even although it is not
possible to execute them, you are told by way of reply that as the
spirit is not strong enough to surmount an impossibility, no such spirit
exists. If you cite a flagrant instance of direct persecution in what
are considered by churchmen to be the best times of the church, you are
told with much indignation that the church has changed. If you quote a
modern instance, which fortunately happens to be universally known, they
then at last stand at bay, drop all artifice and evasion, turn round
upon the man who dares to condemn the persecution, and accuse him of
sympathizing with the impious. And here, Sir, I cannot help blaming my
honourable friend, not indeed for the warmth with which he repelled this
accusation, for most assuredly if it was a charge to be repelled at all,
it was a charge to be repelled warmly. But I blame him because the
accusation, Edition: current; Page: [419] coming from the quarter it did
and on the occasion on which it did, was one which he had reason to be
proud of. I am thankful to the honourable gentleman for the term—I
invite the honourable gentleman to apply it to me—I should blush to be
that which the honourable gentleman would not call a friend of the
impious.2 I thank heaven that my heart is not so hardened by bigotry nor
my understanding so perverted by lawyercraft but that I can sympathize
with an oppressed man, whatever may be his religious opinions. The man,
be he Christian or Atheist who endures torture and ignominy because he
will not swerve from his convictions is to me a martyr, and I should
detest myself if I could not venerate him as he deserves. What is it to
me if Mr. Carlile is not a good reasoner?3 I never thought him a good
reasoner: but he is what I respect infinitely more, he is a man of
principle, and a man who will stand to his principles though he should
stand alone, and though to be merely supposed to sympathize with him is
tantamount to an accusation of impiety, shall I, because this man is not
a good logician,—a man who is as ready to die at the stake for what he
thinks the truth, as any clergyman of the Church of England can be ready
for what he thinks the truth to conduct him thither,—shall I knowing how
few such men there are and how much is due to those few when they arise,
be deterred from expressing my disapprobation of their persecutors by a
cry of impiety? Let the honourable gentleman keep such stuff for the
House of Commons: there he will find in hundreds of bosoms a chord which
will respond to that which vibrates in his own: but I much mistake the
tone of feeling in this Society, if it contains one man, Tory or
Churchman though he be, to whom such feelings as the honourable
gentleman gave utterance to, on the preceding evening, are not entirely
unknown.

With regard to the question in hand, it would certainly be a waste of
words to discuss, whether or not the Church of England is a persecuting
church, with a gentleman who thinks that to immure Mr. Carlile and about
twenty of his coadjutors in dungeons for terms of two, three, and five
years is not persecution.4 If a man squares his conscience by what the
church does to him of course the church can never be in the wrong; and
if the good old practice of burning heretics were revived, no doubt some
persons would be still found who would maintain that Edition: current;
Page: [420] even this was not persecution. But my honourable friend who
spoke fourth on the preceding evening5 is not of this stamp, and to him
a somewhat different answer is due. He had discretion enough to admit
the iniquity of these persecutions but affirmed that they are not
imputable to the clergy of the Church of England. I am glad, Sir, that
this is the line of defence now resorted to by the more able advocates
of the Church of England because, in the first place, it shews that in
their opinion the time is now come when such proceedings as those which
have taken place against Mr. Carlile no longer admit of being openly
defended: but further, I rejoice to learn that these are the sentiments
of my honourable friend, because as he seems on this occasion to
exculpate the church, not because such proceedings are defensible, but
because the church has no share in them, I am led to conclude that if it
could be proved to his satisfaction that these persecutions are in any
degree imputable to the church, he would no longer consider the church
capable of being defended on this ground. Now I shall easily be able to
adduce evidence, which will satisfy even my honourable friend’s
scepticism on this point. I do not pretend that the church alone is to
blame; there is enough of religious bigotry, God knows, both in other
professions and in other sects, although the existence of a powerful
body who are bound by interest to work up that baneful spirit, to the
highest pitch cannot have much tendency to mitigate it, at least: But
there is a good deal to be said in respect to the part which the Church
of England has actually taken in the persecution. My honourable friend
in speaking on this subject, has shewn (to parody an expression of Mr.
Sheridan) a very pious ignorance on some topics:6 he has buried all
transactions of this description, anterior to the late prosecution of
the Rev. R. Taylor,7 in discreet oblivion. In that proceeding he says
that Dissenters were the chief agents, and seems not to be aware that
the prime mover in the affair, Mr. Alderman Atkins, is no Dissenter but
a most orthodox highchurchman.8 Although, however, my honourable friend
cannot carry his recollection any further back I can, and I can state
for the benefit of his rather short memories, that more than one-half of
the prosecutions of Mr. Carlile, his family and his coadjutors, were at
the prosecution of the Society for the Suppression of Vice.9 Edition:
current; Page: [421] Now although I give my honourable friend credit for
a very considerable degree of ingenuity, I do not suppose him to possess
so great a share of it as to be able to explain away the list of
subscribers to that Society: a list comprising nearly as great a number
of bishops, and dignitaries of the church as subscribed to that other
creditable establishment, the Bridge Street Association,10 which last
attempt to revive the execrable tyranny over political opinion, the good
sense and virtue of this country crushed in the bud. As I have alluded
to this final ebullition of feelings which, though as far as ever from
being extinguished, no man now dares avow, I cannot help saying, that I
find it difficult to decide which aspect of the affair tells most
against the reverend subscribers; the odiousness of the design, or the
contemptible imbecility of the execution. The whole funds of that
Association sufficed only for, I believe, nine prosecutions—and these in
every, or almost every instance, directed against mere accessories and
not principals in what they pretended to call an offence. But the
Association is gone, where all such Associations ought to go—gone, I
should say for ever, were it not that clergymen, who according to the
well known remark of Lord Clarendon, understand the least, and take the
worst measure of human affairs, of all men who can read or write,11 are
likely enough to suffer themselves to be hoaxed out of a little more of
their money by some cunning attorney, who if he can succeed in
persuading them that his object in asking for it is to make use of it
for the purpose of helping to degrade the human mind, can make himself
sure of raising, among a large portion of them at least enough to make
his own fortune by law expences, which is generally the purpose of the
more prominent agents in such transactions.

But if this institution is now no more, the Vice Society still exists;
and by this Society were most of the prosecutions against Carlile and
his followers instituted. Here introduce the agloatinga.

bMy honourable friend has told me that the clergy gloated over his
sufferings: this was perhaps going a little too far since there are
persons to be found, and very likely some of them may be subscribers to
the Vice Society, who, as is reported on one occasion of Napoleon, can
with maudlin sensibility weep for the evils they inflict.12 This however
is small consolation to the sufferer.b The very fact, that Edition:
current; Page: [422] such proceedings could emanate from a Society so
named, is a pregnant proof of the spirit which prevails among its lay
and clerical members. Suppression of opinions they term suppression of
vice: the honest promulgation of doctrines different from what they
consider right they have the audacity to term a vice, an act of
immorality: I do not affect surprise at this; it is far better to say
plainly that he who does not believe as they do, is ipso facto a vicious
and profligate man, than to impute all manner of other vices to him, as
they have almost invariably done. The common vice of partisans, that of
heaping calumnies upon the head of an opponent, is one by which it is
matter of common observation that priests of all religions whether from
blind credulity or from a still worse principle have been distinguished
beyond all other men. The clergy of the Church of England have not, it
is true, come quite up to the mark of the Roman Catholic clergy in this
respect, because they have never had so much power of making false
statements uncontradicted; but they have carried the practice of
defamation as far as it could with safety be carried, and have by their
calumnies embittered the lives of men among the brightest ornaments of
human nature.

If my honourable friend has made so lame a defence of the church on the
subject of religious prosecutions, his coadjutor13 has made a still more
feeble one on the subject of those badges of a more widely spreading
spirit of persecution which exist on our statue book under the name of
the Test and Corporation Acts.14 The honourable gentleman says that
those Acts were not intended for the support of the church: the
honourable gentleman is a good lawyer; but Blackstone was a better; and
if the honourable gentleman is right, Blackstone is wrong; for
Blackstone says expressly that these Acts exist for the support of the
church.15 But, when I find the honourable gentleman ignorant of the
tricks by which the Protestant Dissenters were persuaded not to oppose
these Acts, under the pretence that they would not be enforced against
them, tricks which are wittily typified by Arbuthnot under the emblem of
Don Diego persuading Jack to hang himself, under pretence that Sir Roger
would cut him down;16 when I likewise find the honourable gentleman
ignorant, at least apparently so, of the too celebrated Act of
Uniformity;17 when I find him equally ignorant of the equally celebrated
statute termed the Occasional Conformity Act18 passed to keep out those
who, although Dissenters, yet not considering the service of the Church
of England to be profane or idolatrous, Edition: current; Page: [423]
thought that they could conscientiously attend it occasionally and
thereby escape the disabilities of the law—when I see all this and when
I find him absolutely astonished that Hume should be considered a good
witness against the church, a man who sold his conscience for them, a
writer who violated every law of historical veracity in order to screen
the church,19—I am tempted to ask, under what High Church cparsonc, in
what obscure corner of the kingdom remote from all access of books and
converse of men, the honourable gentleman imbibed his knowledge of
history. The battle of the church really is not to be thus fought—we all
know how great allowances ought to be made for an extemporaneous
effusion but it really is a fact, that some knowledge of the subject is
necessary even to make a defender of the church; and until the
honourable gentleman shall have acquired such knowledge or at least
shall have it more under his command than he appeared to have on the
former evening, it would be much wiser in him were he to leave the cause
of the church in the hands of my honourable friend who so ably followed
on the same side.20

I have now concluded by far the greater part of what I intend to trouble
the Society with on this evening. It was in fact only in order to
support and vindicate my friend the proposer of the question, that I
felt desirous of taking any part whatever in the discussion, since I do
not consider the question to be one which admits of being discussed with
much prospect of advantage in a debate, at least if the end in view be
mutual persuasion. The difference between us is too deeply rooted, and
is connected on both sides with too great a number of extensive and
important principles, each of them far more than sufficient to form in
itself the subject of an animated and protracted discussion. How, for
instance, can we agree in our estimation of the church in respect of the
support which it lends to the aristocratic institutions of this country,
so long as there is one portion among us who disapprove of these
institutions, and think that every support which they possess is one too
many, while the remainder so far from thinking that any support should
be taken away, are of opinion that those institutions require, and ought
to have still stronger supports than they possess? Or how again can two
of the ablest speakers on the last evening,21 agree in their estimate of
Hume’s argument in favour of a church establishment, that it diminishes
the activity of the clergy; when the one is a warm admirer and partaker
of religious enthusiasm, and the other condemns it under the name of
fanaticism? There is a great deal more involved in this question than
can be stated in a debate, and I should despise the man who, having
previously been of a different opinion, could be convinced in an evening
by Edition: current; Page: [424] my honourable friend’s arguments or by
mine. I believe it is perfectly well understood between my other
honourable friend and me, that his opinion is the legitimate consequence
of his principles, and my opinion of mine. I do not however think that a
discussion of this sort is wholly useless. Though it does not enable us
to compare our several views, it enables all of us to know what they
are; which I cannot but consider as a point gained in favor of truth and
fair dealing, since I think I have observed that much of the
misrepresentation and misunderstanding which take place both in public
and in private life, and very serious impediment to the fair and
legitimate collision of opinion arises from real bonâ fide ignorance on
one side, of the views and principles of the other. It is so important,
that a perfect mutual understanding should exist on this point, that I
think I shall be justified in occupying five minutes more of the
Society’s time for that purpose. As my object is only that gentlemen
should know the reasons, not that they should be convinced by them, five
minutes will suffice for that purpose as well as an hour. My honourable
friend has given us an able statement of his reasons, and I freely admit
that several of them are deserving of grave consideration. I do not at
present intend to contest those reasons; I have only to state my own;
and I shall be satisfied with one grand one, but that indeed may be said
in a certain sense to include all the rest. I am an enemy to church
establishments because an established clergy must be enemies to the
progressiveness of the human mind.

I hold, that it is of the nature of the human mind to be progressive.
But stop: I must not forget that there are persons in this country, and
for aught I know in this Society, to whom the march of intellect, which
is another word for the progressiveness of the human mind, is a subject
of laughter and derision. I know indeed that this feigned laughter is in
reality a cloak for the most abject fear, and that it would be a most
delightful relief to the minds of many of these laughers if they could
really feel towards the march of intellect, all the contempt they
express. Still, however, since there are such persons, I think it
advisable not to use any expression at which they are likely to cavil. I
hold then, that it is of the nature of the human mind to profit by
experience. As the aggregate of our experience is every day increasing,
this of itself has a tendency to render the species progressive: but
besides this we become better qualified to profit by experience in
proportion to the culture of our intellectual faculties, and of that
culture there are two great instruments, education and discussion. I
hold that wherever mankind have been qualified to profit by experience,
by possessing even in a moderate degree, these two great instruments,
they have, as the mass of experience has increased, constantly grown
wiser and better; and that this progressive advancement has never been
interrupted but when these two means of instruction have been prevented
from existing by despotism as in the Roman empire, by anarchy as in
feudal Europe, or by superstition and priestcraft as in Spain and
Portugal. I further hold, that from the present state and future
prospects of Great Britain, France, and Edition: current; Page: [425]
North America, there is, humanly speaking, no probability that these
causes of retrogression should ever again recur, and that from the
increasing diffusion and growing power of the two great instruments,
education and discussion, it is to be expected that the human mind in
these countries will continue to advance, not only with an unretarded,
but as it has done during the last twenty years, with a rapidly
increasing pace.

Now it is to this great tendency of the human mind, and to education and
discussion as the promoters of it, that in my view of the matter, an
established clergy by a sort of moral necessity must be, and at any rate
always is, the bitter enemy. When I say an established clergy I mean any
clergy, which is paid on condition of teaching a particular creed, but
more especially a clergy connected with the governing powers of the
state, and bound by that connexion to the support of certain political
tenets as well as religious ones.

If there were a corporate body of physicians or a corporate body of
engineers, paid by the state, rewarded with honours and wealth, on
condition that they should always teach a certain set of doctrines in
physic or mechanics, it can scarcely be doubted that such a body would
be interested in preventing all improvement in physic or mechanics, lest
the public should get beyond their particular tenets, and having done so
should cease to regard these their teachers with due veneration. Happily
this is not the case. Neither the physician nor the engineer is bound
down to a particular set of opinions in their respective sciences; the
clergyman is. Wherever there is a hierarchy—wherever there is such a
thing as church government, adherence to certain tenets is the condition
on which he holds both his emoluments and his power. If there be not
only a hierarchy but a hierarchy connected with the ruling powers in the
state, it becomes the interest of its members to uphold the existing
government with all the political and moral, as well as religious
prejudices, which may conduce to their holding that government in
veneration. It will perhaps be said, that these opinions are the right
opinions. This may be true; but it likewise may be false. It would be a
considerable stretch of arrogance in mankind to suppose that they had
already attained the pinnacle of knowledge either in religion or
politics; it is highly probable that there is still room for improvement
in both: I am sure there is much need at least so long as our perfect
government finds it very difficult to prevent half our population from
dying of hunger and our perfect religion has not yet found the means of
preventing our jails from being constantly full. I shall not however
chuse to rest my case upon any argument which implies that it is
possible for an established opinion to be wrong. I will suppose that our
clergy teach no opinions but such as are right, either in religion or
politics. It is not the less true that in the progress of human
improvement, every one of these opinions comes to be questioned. The
good of mankind requires that it should be so. The good of mankind
requires that nothing should be believed until the question be first
asked, what evidence there is for it. Edition: current; Page: [426] The
very idea of progressiveness implies not indeed the rejection, but the
questioning of all established opinions. The human intellect is then
only in its right state when it has searched all things, in order that
it may hold fast by that which is good. Now when this spirit of
universal enquiry arises, it must extend to those two most important
subjects: the experience of all ages warrants the assertion that when
the human mind once begins to improve, men will discuss religion and
politics and no force, which does not go the length of crushing the
spirit of improvement altogether, can prevent it. In consequence of this
discussion persons are sure to arise who dispute the established
opinions. These persons are listened to, they are allowed at least a
patient hearing. This the clergy will never voluntarily allow. It is of
no use to say that the clergy may defend their opinions; so they may;
and if the opinions be true, and be defended with as much ability as
they are attacked, they will be defended successfully. But this would
give an immensity of trouble. It is well known that richly endowed
bodies are never very fond of trouble: it is allowed both by the friends
and the enemies of opulent church establishments, that the love of ease
is always their predominant infirmity. Besides the trouble there is
moreover always a lurking apprehension, lest after all their endeavours
to keep the people in the right path should not succeed, or if it
should, people should no longer duly venerate their pastors for
communicating to them truths which, as they had examined into the
evidence, they would seem to owe to their own understandings alone. How
much easier and how much safer would it be, if they could be prevented
from enquiring at all—if they could be made to regard the very act of
enquiry, nay the very thought of questioning an established opinion, as
involving the deepest guilt. It is true that they will not then hold
these opinions like rational creatures, but it is of no consequence to
the clergy that they should hold them like rational beings, provided
they only hold them strongly enough: and no opinions are held so
strongly as those which we are taught that it is impious even to demand
a reason for.

Such are the motives which induce an endowed clergy to be the enemies of
discussion, and as discussion always accompanies improvement they are
the enemies of improvement. In order to prevent discussion, they have
not scrupled wherever they had the power to debase the human mind down
to the level of the brutes. In all countries where they could get the
civil power to side with them, that is in almost all the Catholic
countries of Europe, they have succeeded in their nefarious purpose, and
mankind are still grovelling at their feet. It is very idle to say that
these are Catholic priests, and therefore not to be quoted against the
Church of England. That the Catholic priests perpetrated these things is
not owing to any peculiar perversity in the nature of the men, it is
owing to their interests as priests, aided by a religion which gave them
more power to effect their purposes, but did not give them a stronger
motive. In England at the reformation it became the interest of the
civil power to raise public feeling against the church, and the latter
consequently had no longer much power either moral or political of
effecting Edition: current; Page: [427] its ends, but as soon as, under
Charles I,22 it found the civil power ready to renew the alliance, it
recommenced its war against the progress of the human mind, and nearly
succeeded in throwing us back to the condition of France and Spain.
Fortunately the habit of free enquiry had in the preceding years been
too strong to be checked, and we were saved by a revolution from the
double consummation of civil and ecclesiastical tyranny. Though this
grand conspiracy had failed the Church of England has never ceased its
resistance23 in the detail. Not one step has been made from persecution
to religious liberty but in the teeth of their most strenuous
opposition; never have they suffered one particle of discussion in
religion and politics which it was in their power to prevent; not a step
has been taken with their good will for the diffusion of education. I
speak of them as a body. They have never originated any one plan for
spreading or improving it—and whatever plans have been prepared by
others, from the Lancastrian and Infant Schools up to the University of
London24 they have, as a body, most violently opposed except that in
most of these instances when they at last found that the thing would go
on in spite of their opposition, they have, as the next best thing to
preventing the improvement altogether, attempted to keep it in their own
hands for sectarian purposes. As people would read, they might read the
Bible and the Prayerbook: but as for reading the Bible without the
Prayerbook, No, no, that was not to be endured. Their only doubt was
whether the persons who proposed it were Atheists, Deists or Dissenters.
The word of God was not fit to be read, unless that of man was
administered along with it: and their account of what God said, or what
in their opinion he should have said, was to be forced down the throats
of babes and sucklings25 avowedly on the ground that unless a belief in
it were firmly fixed in the mind at an age previous to that at which the
reasoning faculty begins to operate, in all probability the habit would
never establish itself at all. But I have exceeded the time which I
allowed myself for stating the grounds of my disapprobation of the
church. I have stated them sufficiently for purposes of information. It
was not my object to state them for purposes of argument—Here therefore
I shall stop.

Edition: current; Page: [428]


26.: Perfectibility
 2 MAY, 1828

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/8. Transcript, Fabian Society. Edited
by Harold J. Laski in his edition of Mill’s Autobiography, pp. 288-99.
MS inscribed in Mill’s hand: “Speech on / perfectibility / spoken in
1828.” Undoubtedly prepared for the debate in the London Debating
Society on 2 May, 1828, described by Cole: “Perfectibility by Mr Hayward
followed by S. Carey—Sterling—Shee & Mill.” The debate was adjourned
until the next meeting on 9 May, when Ellis and Roebuck were among the
speakers. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

mr. president, if I had much anxiety to save my credit as a wise and
practical person, I should not venture to stand forth in defence of the
progressiveness of the human mind. I know that among all that class of
persons who consider themselves to be par excellence, the wise and the
practical, it is esteemed a proof of consummate judgment, to despair of
doing good. I know that it is thought essential to a man who has any
knowledge of the world, to have an extremely bad opinion of it: and that
whenever there are two ways of explaining any fact, wise and practical
people always take that way which attributes most folly, or most
immorality, to the mass of mankind. Sir, it is not for me to dispute the
palm of practicality with these sage and cautious persons. Howsoever it
may be with all other aberrations of the human intellect, there is one
description of errors from which it would be uncandid to deny that they
are wholly free, viz. all those which arise from immoderate benevolence,
or ill regulated philanthropy. It behoves those who have discarded
errors so pleasing, so encouraging, so ennobling to every virtuous mind,
to be very certain that they have discarded them in favour of truth.
Those who have stripped themselves so philosophically of every prejudice
which acts as a stimulus to our duty, should be very sure that they have
left no other prejudices of a more discreditable description behind.
They may be assured that the errors of benevolence are by no means those
from which human prosperity has most to apprehend, and however desirable
it may be for the good of mankind that the love of virtue should never
rise above temperate, we must be careful not to go on cooling it till it
sinks to the freezing point. Sir, I do not feel my virtue to be of so
warm and impetuous a character as to need any cooling, neither have I
that confidence in my own judgment which would induce me to set up my
opinion of truth in opposition to hopes and feelings which at least
serve as a counteracting force against hopes and feelings far less pure,
and I cannot but think far more pernicious. If we must err, at least let
our errors not be on the side of selfishness; it is not that part, that
element of the human constitution, which needs strengthening; there is
not the slightest danger that it should ever be weaker than the good of
human society requires.

But is it indeed an error to suppose mankind capable of great
improvement? And is it really a mark of wisdom, to deride all grand
schemes of human amelioration as Edition: current; Page: [429]
visionary? I can assure honourable gentlemen that so far from being a
proof of any wisdom it is what any fool can do as well as themselves,
and I believe it is the fools principally, who have attached to that
mode of proceeding the reputation of wisdom. For as I have observed that
if there is a man in public or private life who is so impenetrably dull
that reason and argument never make the slightest impression upon him,
the dull people immediately set him down as a man of excellent judgment
and strong sense, as if because men of talent and genius are sometimes
deficient in judgment, it followed that it was only necessary to be
without one spark of talent or genius in order to be a man of consummate
judgment, because people are sometimes deceived by rash hopes in the
same manner. I think I have observed that not the man who hopes when
others despair, but the man who despairs when others hope, is admired by
a large class of persons as a sage, and wisdom is supposed to consist
not in seeing further than other people, but in not seeing so far. I
mean no disrespect to some highly estimable persons, who are of a
different opinion from myself on this question, but I am persuaded that
a vast majority of those who laugh at the hopes of those who think that
man can be raised to any higher rank as a moral and intellectual being,
do so from a principle very different from wisdom or knowledge of the
world. I believe that the great majority of those who speak of
perfectibility as a dream do so because they feel that it is one which
would afford them no pleasure if it were realised. I believe that they
hold the progressiveness of the human mind to be chimerical, because
they are conscious that they themselves are doing nothing to forward it
and are anxious to believe that great work impossible, in which if it
were possible they know it would be their duty to assist. I believe that
there is something else which powerfully helps many persons to the same
conclusion, a consciousness that they do not wish to get rid of their
own imperfections, and a consequent unwillingness to believe it
practicable that others should throw off theirs. I believe that if
persons ignorant of the world sometimes miscalculate from expecting to
find mankind wiser and better than they are, those persons who most
affect to know the world are incessantly miscalculating the opposite
way, and confidently reckoning upon a greater degree of knavery and
folly among mankind than really exists. These last indeed differ from
the others in not being so ready to correct their error, since the same
utter incapacity of taking any generous and enlarged views which caused
their mistake, prevents them from discovering it, and makes them impute
those effects of the better part of man’s nature which they did not
calculate upon, only to a different species of selfishness. I will even
say, that so far from its being a mark of wisdom to despair of human
improvement there is no more certain indication of narrow views and a
limited understanding, and that the wisest men of all political and
religious opinions, from Condorcet to Mr. Coleridge,1 have been
something nearly Edition: current; Page: [430] approaching to
perfectibilians. Nay further, that the anti perfectibility doctrine, far
from having the sanction of experience, is brought forward in opposition
to one of the clearest cases of experience which human affairs present,
and that by all just rules of induction we ought to conclude that an
extremely high degree of moral and intellectual excellence may be made
to prevail among mankind at large, since causes exist which have
confessedly been found adequate to produce it in many particular
instances.

In the little which I intend to say, I shall attempt little more than to
expand and develope this last remark. There are others in this Society
far more competent than myself to discuss in detail the past progress of
the human mind, and the stages through which it is likely to pass in the
road to further improvement. I leave it to them to point out how the
difficulties are to be struggled with—it is enough for me if I can
establish, on the ground of solid experience, that these difficulties
may be overcome.

I shall confine myself in the first instance to the question of moral
improvement. I shall not ask you, Sir, to expect among mankind any
degree of moral excellence that is without parallel. My standard shall
be one which we all know, which we all believe in, with which we are all
familiar in our own experience. I suppose it will not be denied that
there are and have been persons who have possessed a very high degree of
virtue. Now here I take my stand: there have been such persons. I do not
care how many; nor who they were. If I were to name any person, any
historical character, to whom I think the designation applicable,
without doubt that person might be cavilled at, and something raked up
to throw a doubt upon his virtue, for it is difficult to adduce evidence
on such a point that shall leave no possibility of cavil; but will those
persons who say that this man or that man was not virtuous go farther
and say that nobody was ever virtuous? I should think not. All they can
say is that in the most virtuous there has been some frailty, some fault
or weakness which has rendered even the best of them less than perfect.
Certainly all this may be safely admitted. I shall not affirm that men
in general can be made better than the best men whom the human race has
hitherto produced.

Well then, here is a fact: there have been virtuous men: Now, what made
them virtuous? I call upon the gentlemen on the other side to answer
this question, for if it should turn out that those who are virtuous are
so from causes which though they now act only upon a few, can be made to
act upon all mankind, or the greater part, it is within the power of
human exertion to make all or most men as virtuous as those are. I
therefore challenge honourable gentlemen to say to what they attribute
the superior moral excellence of some persons. If they do not answer, I
will. It is to the original influence of good moral education, in their
early years, and the insensible influence of the world, of society, of
public opinion, upon their habits and associations in after life. Here
then is specific experience. It is distinctly proved that these two
forces, education and public opinion, when they are both of them brought
fairly into play, and made to act in harmony with one another, are
Edition: current; Page: [431] capable of producing high moral
excellence. And yet the greater part of the arguments which have been
advanced against us this evening are intended to prove that moral
education and public opinion are not capable of producing these effects.

Why then have these causes not produced the same effects upon all, which
they have upon some? Why but because they have not acted upon all. No
pains have been taken with the moral education of mankind in general.
The great business of moral education, to form virtuous habits of mind,
is I may say entirely neglected: the child is indeed punished for
certain immoral acts, but as for going to the root of the evil, and
correcting the dispositions in which these acts originate, the thing is
never thought of, or if it is thought of, nothing can be more
ridiculously inefficacious than the means which are taken to effect it.
And all this from sheer ignorance: for it is not that people do not set
a sufficient value upon those habits of mind which lead to good habits
of conduct; it is that they really do not know how such habits are
generated, what they depend upon, and what mode of education favours or
counteracts them. While that education which is called education is in
this deplorable state, that insensible education which is not called
education is still worse, for almost every where the great objects of
ambition, those which ought to be the rewards of high intellectual and
moral excellence, are the rewards either of wealth, as in this country,
or of private favour, as in most others; and it is an established fact
in the nature of man that whatever are the means by which the great
recompenses of ambition are to be obtained, the person who possesses
these means, and can therefore pretend to those recompenses, is the
person who exercises influence over the public mind; he is the person
whose favour is courted, whose actions are imitated, whose opinions are
adopted, and the contagion of whose feelings is caught by the mass of
mankind.

It is a very poor and ill divided public opinion, which can be formed
out of an aggregate so ill composed. And yet that public opinion which
is the result of so bad a moral education, is sufficient whenever it is
combined with a better moral education to produce all the virtue which
we see realized in some individuals of mankind as they now are.

It will of course be said that although good moral education and the
operation of public opinion produce so much excellence in some persons,
it does not follow that they can in all. I maintain on the contrary,
that there is much less difficulty in producing it in all than there has
been to produce it in some. Whatever of moral excellence now exists, has
been produced in spite of a thousand obstacles: in spite of systems of
education which if the names were altered and they were reported to us
as existing in some far distant country would be considered incredible
from the absolute fatuity, the utter abnegation of intellect which they
exhibit; in spite of laws which in a hundred ways inflict evil upon one
man for the benefit of another, and generate a spirit of domination and
oppression on one side, of cringing and servility, mixed with bitter and
vindictive resentment on the other; in spite of systems of judicial
procedure which seem devised on purpose to give right and Edition:
current; Page: [432] wrong an equal chance, and in which every possible
encouragement is held out to the vice of insincerity—in spite of
political institutions which in this at least, the most civilized
country in the world, render wealth the only acquisition which is
desired, poverty almost the only evil that is dreaded. All these evils
might be remedied by the hand of God. If notwithstanding all these
things the best moral education which the present circumstances of
mankind admit of has produced, in those to whom it is given, so much
excellence, what may not be expected if we remove these obstacles, and
when they are taken away, give even as good a moral education to the
greater portion of mankind—why not to all mankind: for moral excellence
does not suppose a high order of intellectual cultivation, since it is
often found in greatest perfection in the rudest minds.

With respect to such doctrines as have been advanced this evening on the
other side, some of them I must confess have surprised me. We have been
told that it is impossible to diminish the amount of vice, because vice
arises from the passions, and it is impossible to vanquish the passions.
Now, Sir, I demur to this, first, that it is taking a very narrow view
of the principles of morals and the nature of the human mind to suppose
that it is necessary for any good purpose to vanquish the passions.
There is not one of the passions which by a well regulated education may
not be converted into an auxiliary of the moral principle: there is not
one of the passions which may not be as fully and much more permanently
gratified, by a course of virtuous conduct than by vice. And if this be
the case surely it would be the worst of policy even looking to moral
excellence without regarding happiness in the least, to eradicate the
passions, because it is they which furnish the active principle, the
moving force; the passions are the spring, the moral principle only the
regulator of human life.

But further, this very assertion that the passions cannot be vanquished
may be taken as a specimen of the shallow philosophy of these gentlemen
and their very superficial experience of mankind. They who profess to
know human nature so well, seem to be very little aware what it is
capable of. Have we not seen that men have lain for their whole lives
upon beds of spikes; that they have stood all their lives upon the tops
of pillars; that they have remained all their lives without stirring for
one moment from a certain posture because they have willed it? Have they
not swung by hooks drawn through their backs, and suffered themselves to
be crushed by chariot wheels, and laid themselves voluntarily on funeral
piles to be burned? Have not these things been done not by heroes and
philosophers, but thousands and millions of common men, commonly
educated? And then let gentlemen come and give us arguments which, if
they prove any thing, prove the impossibility of all this. We could do
none of these things: why? because we have never been accustomed to fix
our imaginations on these things long enough for our first horror of
them to wear off: but what caused these surprising achievements? It must
have been either religion, conscience, or public opinion; gentlemen may
choose, it shall Edition: current; Page: [433] be any one of the three:
we have heard the force of each of the three separately explained away,
and very plausible arguments adduced to prove that no one of them is
strong enough to produce these effects. And yet the effects are
produced. And let me ask these gentlemen the reason why? I will give up
any two of the forces to them, if they grant me the third. If they ask,
my own opinion is that all helped, but that the proximate motive had
most influence, that derived from public opinion: and some honourable
gentlemen who have sometimes wondered at hearing public opinion spoken
of in this Society as the immense force that it is, may perhaps now see
from these instances why it is so spoken of. (Introduce a passage from
Combe.)2

But if such is the force of public opinion, what is wanting to produce
that high state of general morality which we aspire to? Simply that
public opinion should be well directed in respect of morality: that such
a system of education should exist, as will give to the mass of mankind,
not learning, but commonsense—practical judgment in ordinary affairs,
and shall enable them to see that a thing is wrong when it is wrong, as
shall make them despise humbug and see through casuistry and imposture,
not to accept subterfuges and excuses for neglecting a duty, and not
think the same thing laudable under a fine name and blamable under a
vulgar one, for instance, not to think, like some persons in this room,
that giving a man money, or money’s worth, for voting against his
conviction, is criminal when called bribery, but laudable when called
legitimate influence of property: to judge of men by the manner in which
they act, not by the manner in which they talk; not to estimate a man’s
moral excellence by the quantity of grimace which he exhibits in his own
person, or by the quantity of hypocrisy which he exacts from his family
and dependants; not to give men any credit for making great sacrifices
at other people’s expense, or for being philanthropic at a distance and
prudent at home; not to think that charity consists in making laws to
take away bread from the poor, and subscribing a few pounds annually to
some institution for giving it to them; and in short not to see a great
many other nice distinctions which the refined and cultivated people of
the present day are able to see, and very ready to act upon. And there
is another thing that is requisite—to take men out of the sphere of the
opinion of their separate and private coteries, and make them amenable
to the general tribunal of the public at large—to leave no class
possessed of power sufficient to protect one another in defying public
opinion, and to manufacture a separate code of morality for their
private guidance; and so to organize the political institutions of a
country that no one could possess any power save what might be given to
him by the favourable sentiments, not of any separate class with a
separate interest, but of the people.

Edition: current; Page: [434]


27.: Wordsworth and Byron
 30 JANUARY, 1829

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/11. The manuscript, which consists more
of notes towards a speech than a finished address, is inscribed in
Mill’s hand: “Speech on Wordsworth / 1829.” The speech was undoubtedly
prepared for the debate at the London Debating Society described by
Cole: “That Wordsworth was a greater poet than Byron,” opened on 16
January, 1829, by Sterling (“who made a long rambling speech”), followed
by Roebuck in the negative; the debate was adjourned until 30 January,
when Mill “delivered a most excellent essay which from its length (2
hours) caused some squabbling at the end of the debate.” The first two
folios of the speech, evidently a first draft, are printed here as a
footnote to the opening sentence. As not published in Mill’s lifetime,
not listed in his bibliography.

remark on the manner in which the debate has been conducted.1

Persons who are not entitled to give an opinion on this question—viz.
those who regard poetry as a mere elegant amusement, which is to give
them a momentary pleasure, but to leave no permanent impression. Shew,
that Poetry is an important branch of education. Education is 1. the
education of the intellect. 2. that of the feelings. Folly of supposing
that the first suffices without the last. Of the last, so far as
influenced by literature, the great instrument is poetry. Why therefore
if the end of poetry be so, should not he be considered the greatest
poet who has best fulfilled this end? Not unreasonable to suppose that
far from philosophy and poetry being unconnected, he ought to be called
the greatest poet who is the greatest master of that branch of
philosophy, which respects the education of the feelings, and has
practised it most.

But waive this as being too little consonant to ordinary ideas and
because the Edition: current; Page: [435] side I mean to espouse can be
sufficiently vindicated without it. This the more necessary because at
any rate I must call upon the Society to adopt what to many of them is a
new mode of judging of the merits of a poet. In most persons criticism
is not an affair of thought but of mere feeling: They read a writer and
the one who moves them most they pronounce the greatest poet. Therefore
as it is in the nature of different minds to be affected with any given
emotion by different things, men scarcely ever agree in their
criticisms, and men generally despise all poetry but that which is
written for and addressed precisely to them. No doubt, the immediate
purpose of all poetry is to move: and no doubt also, that the merit of a
poet, his subject being given, is in proportion to the degree in which
his means are well chosen for that end. What I desire is, that men would
not take their emotion in the gross, and ascribe it to the poet, but
would so far analyse it as to endeavour to find out for how much of it
they are indebted to his genius, and how much to the previous state of
their own minds. It is only thus that beauties, which depend upon the
casual and transitory associations of a particular nation or a
particular age, would be distinguished from those which derive their
power to please, from the original constitution of human nature itself.
Persons habituated to this exercise, would hesitate to treat as puerile
and absurd, what other persons of minds equally cultivated with
themselves admire, until they had first considered whether it was
Edition: current; Page: [436] not possible that there might be some
deficiency in their own minds which prevented them from being affected
by poetry of a particular kind: and on the other hand, if on a close
examination of that poetry which they most admired, they found that a
great part of the effect it produced upon them was the effect of a not
very enviable or creditable state of mind in themselves, they would
perhaps find some reason for suspecting, that the very cause, which made
them so admire, must make them incapable of feeling and appreciating the
highest kind of poetry: for the highest kind of poetry, is that which is
adapted to the highest state of mind: as a man of knowledge is superior
to an ignorant one, a man of strong social affections to a malevolent
one, a gentle and modest to a proud and scornful man, a man of regulated
to a man of uncontrollable passions, a man of a joyful to one of a
melancholy disposition, in the same proportion the poetry which delights
the one is of a superior kind to that which is adapted to excite the
emotions of the other.

By this test the superiority of Wordsworth obvious—but not fair to try
by this test because not the usual sense of the words great poet which
refer to the degree of power solely as the test of greatness without
thinking of the kind. But Byron had advantages which make him appear to
have more power than he has. 1. The prestiges of a story. Illustrate the
immense effect of this—how it upheld Scott’s poems—upholds bad
novels—believe the number of Byron’s admirers swelled immensely by those
who think only of the story. 2. Next, the interest turns upon the more
intense feelings—with which we more readily sympathize than with the
calmer: and among these chiefly upon love—almost the only passion, not
of the selfish kind, which the present arrangements of society allow to
attain its natural growth. Proof of the effect of this—the poems from
Giaour2 to Parisina most admired from Marino Faliero3 downwards scarcely
read. Wordsworth nearly precludes himself from these.

Criticize Roebuck’s method.

Now the test. Not to fetter myself by any arbitrary narrowing of the
word poetry I shall make it include all it ever includes. They may be
judged by the mode in which, 1. they describe objects. 2. feelings. 3.
the felicitous expression of thoughts. This poetry, provided the
thoughts are of a nature to excite emotions, or are made to do so by the
manner in which they are expressed.

1. Describing objects. Here observe that describing objects is not
poetry except in so far as they are presented in some light or viewed in
some manner which makes them excite different emotions from what a naked
delineation would. Example—leaps the live thunder4—and the stockdove
broods.5

Edition: current; Page: [437]
Immense superiority of Wordsworth. Extreme rarity of accurate
description of nature. Pope’s false imagery. Contrasted with
Coleridge—The amber clouds6 and Wordsworth orange sky.7 Immense number
of such passages in Wordsworth. His description of yew trees—of
nutting.8 Read the first two stanzas of his “Resolution and
Independence,” and the three beginning “as a huge stone”9 giving the
reason for omitting the others; reason why not quote the “Intimations of
Immortality.”10 In Byron nothing of this sort worth remembering,
scarcely one new image drawn from external nature, and his descriptions
vague and unimpressive. Nearest approach in the Siege of Corinth11 but a
reminiscence of Christabel.12 Then an entire genus of Wordsworth not
known to Byron—that which adorns and renders interesting ordinary
objects. The “Morning Exercise”—“The Kitten and Falling Leaves”13—etc.
which entitle him to rank next to Milton—Nothing of this sort in Byron
and why.

2. Describing feelings. It is here that Byron will be supposed the
superior; and here I must allow that he comes nearer to Wordsworth than
in any thing else.

There are certain feelings which they both have aimed at describing, and
others which may be considered peculiar to each.

What they have both described, are those feelings which are produced in
ordinary persons, by causes which in the ordinary course of events, many
persons are exposed to, not perhaps in the same degree, but in a
sufficient degree to know perfectly what the feelings are, and to be
able to recognize a just description of them. In this genre, both poets
are so admirable, that it is difficult to pronounce which has displayed
greatest power. The Prisoner of Chillon14 is certainly equal to the
finest poem of the kind in the language: but Wordsworth has produced
twenty poems, each for its length quite equal to it. Difference
illustrated by Scott and Coleridge in their descriptions of nature.
Wordsworth’s pathetic poems each comprise some very deep and delicate
touch of nature. Byron’s touches separately of less value, but many of
them very skilfully put together; producing a whole at once consistent
and true. Difficult to state which the greatest merit. “The Mad Edition:
current; Page: [438] Mother”—“The Female Vagrant”—“Complaint of an
Indian Woman”—“The Last of the Flock”—“The Sailor’s Mother” (a very good
instance)—the “Reverie of Poor Susan”—and “Adam of Tilsbury Vale.”15—But
Wordsworth has a much wider range—Byron paints merely painful
feelings—Wordsworth in addition to this presents a greater number of
delightful pictures of tranquil enjoyment than any poet perhaps who ever
wrote. Read what he can make of so little a subject as the “Miller and
two Dames”16 the people listening to a musician in the street17—but
above all the “Highland Girl”18—the “Solitary Reaper”19—etc. Byron only
tumultuous pleasures—which can only be described in frenzy and have been
so often.

Now as to the feelings peculiar to Byron. And here I must enter a little
into what may be called the metaphysics of criticism.

Must be granted that those feelings which we describe from observation
only, must necessarily be described superficially. There is no depth, no
intensity, no force, in our descriptions of feelings, unless we have
ourselves experienced the feelings we describe: But yet, to readers who
have never experienced the feelings, a superficial description may
appear sufficient: and an attempt at a profound one, but thoroughly
false, may be taken for true and profound both. This is the secret of
their admiring bad poetry and bad acting. Say Byron has described
more—but it is like the “Lioness and the Fox.”20

Three kinds of feelings which Byron has described: Wordsworth could—a
very acute observer of character. Tumultuous passion, of love or hatred,
as in the Giaour etc. Scorn of mankind and dissatisfaction with all
human enjoyment, as in Childe Harold, Lara, Cain, and Don Juan.21 And in
his dramas, all the passions and feelings of minds of a high order. The
second set of feelings only I imagine him to have experienced, and
therefore they are the only ones that he has shewn much power in
delineating.

From what we know of Byron’s life we have no reason to suppose that he
was ever in the Giaour state—we know he was in the Childe Harold very
early. I Edition: current; Page: [439] believe the Giaour pictures are
entirely from imagination. Whether they are true or not I say candidly I
do not know—persuaded none of the Society do. In the South there may be
such persons—none here. No man in the Society will pretend he ever was
in the Giaour state—else he would have come to the same end as the
Giaour. Burns’22 love poems represent the passion better as it is in
this country. But I am sure it is very easy to paint all this from mere
imagination—Easy to paint men of one idea. You leave out all other ideas
and then you have only to exaggerate—which you may easily do—for we have
all experienced enough of the same feelings to have some notion of what
they are, and we have only to magnify them.

Next as to the personages in his dramas. Dramatic poetry the easiest of
all and almost the only one in which men can be true to nature from mere
observation—People are made to shew their feelings by what they speak.
Now all who have ever experienced deep feelings of any kind, know that
the least and most insignificant part, the part nearest the surface, is
all which shews itself in talk—at the same time this part is that which
most obviously appears to the observer.

There remains then, as the only feeling which Byron has painted with any
depth, the feeling of dissatisfaction with life and all which is in it:
which feeling he has painted in a great variety of forms—in one form and
that a very weak and commonplace and uninteresting one in Childe Harold
and Don Juan—that is obviously the form in which it existed in himself:
the same feeling is delineated in three other different shapes and in
all these instances very powerfully, in Lara, Manfred,23 and Cain, in
each of which he seems to have exceedingly skilfully fixed and embodied
in a permanent character, feelings which had only passed through his own
mind at certain times, but did not permanently exist in him, and it is
upon these three works, in my opinion, that his claim must rest to the
honor of having done what a poet cannot I think be called great unless
he does, viz. to have enlarged our knowledge of human nature. And those
only who are or have been in this unhappy state of mind can thoroughly
sympathize in or understand these poems.

We next see what are the feelings which Wordsworth has described and
Byron not.

Certain in the first place, that whatever he has described, he has felt.
No poet in whom you have the same certainty. Every poem of Wordsworth
almost, except his great one,24 was written on the occasion of some
thing or other which affected his feelings at the time, and gave him a
desire to fix and recal these feelings by putting them into verse. Now
he is a remarkable man and his feelings consequently of a remarkable
kind: and people who only read one poem only having a single case of
Edition: current; Page: [440] the feeling presented to them, cannot
sympathize in it and think it mere affectation. But this is a
disadvantage which every poet who has feelings that are not common ones,
must labour under, viz. the necessity of in some measure educating his
reader’s mind to make him susceptible of those feelings. For this reason
no one can appreciate him who does not read his writings consecutively.

Objected to Wordsworth that he represents feelings as excited by objects
which are not in themselves capable of exciting such feelings. Finds
human sympathies everywhere every object speaks to him of man and of his
duties. That they do not excite such feelings in all persons, and in
very few in the same degree is true. I cannot say they always excite the
same feelings in me. But he who should pronounce them unreal or
unnatural on this account would prove himself to have a very contracted
knowledge of the powers of the human mind. Wordsworth is a man of
extremely meditative habits: and the habitual subjects of his
meditations are two: 1. natural objects. 2. the feelings and duties of
man: shew how by meditating on these two subjects and constantly as a
poet illustrating the one by the other each becomes capable of exciting
the other. If people tell me then of his exaggeration and mystification
of this, his talking of holding communion with the great forms of
nature, his finding a grandeur in the beatings of the heart25 and so
forth, I allow that this is nonsense but the introduction of this into
the present question is charging Wordsworth the poet with the faults of
Wordsworth the metaphysician. Shew the difference between describing
feelings and being able to analyse them—the tendency of a man who by a
long indulgence of particular trains of association, has connected
certain feelings with things which excite no such feelings in other men,
if he then attempts to explain is very likely to go into mysticism—to
think that there is a natural connexion between those objects and those
feelings, and as he knows there is not in the objects as they appear to
the world, any thing to excite such feelings, he looks beyond them and
conceives something spiritual and ideal in them which the mind’s eye
only can see—witness the mysticism of devotion—communion with God etc.

What is bad then in Wordsworth’s account of his own peculiar feelings is
not where he describes them, nor where he gives the history of them, but
where he philosophizes over them and endeavours to account for them as
in certain parts of the Excursion,26 and some of the published passages
of the Recluse.27 He must be considered as having enlarged our knowledge
of human nature by having described to us most powerfully and movingly a
state of feeling which very few if any of us previously knew to exist.
You may tell me that on my own shewing, as these feelings can only exist
in the mind of a person of very peculiar habits—and scarcely in any but
a poet—it is of very little importance and the knowledge of it Edition:
current; Page: [441] conduces very little to human happiness. I allow
that there is much of it which can hardly exist in the many, but there
is much that can. I have learned from Wordsworth that it is possible by
adwelling on certain ideasa to keep up a constant freshness in the
emotions which objects excite and which else they would cease to excite
as we grew older—to connect cheerful and joyous states of mind with
almost every object, to make every thing speak to us of our own
enjoyments or those of other sentient beings, and to multiply ourselves
as it were in the enjoyments of other creatures: to make the good parts
of human nature afford us more pleasure than the bad parts afford us
pain—and to rid ourselves entirely of all feelings of hatred or scorn
for our fellow creatures. Immense importance of this state of
mind—difficulty of painting it because no prototype. My own change since
I thought life a perpetual struggle—how much more there is to aim at
when we see that happiness may coexist with being stationary and does
not require us to keep moving. This state of feeling to be looked to as
an end, for I fear in the present state of society something stronger is
required. Quote Wordsworth’s “Ode to Duty.”28

This not the only state of feeling that Wordsworth has painted better
than any one else. He has painted all the successive states of his own
mind. 1. the mere animal delights received from the beauties of nature.
2. the decay of those feelings, and their being replaced by those others
which have been described. Quote from his “Tintern Abbey”29 and his
“Intimations of Immortality.” He has also painted many other feelings
but this will come better under the third head—because it is the
peculiarity of Wordsworth that his feelings are excited by thoughts more
than those of poets usually are—which is a test of the highest state of
a mind.

3. Felicitous expression of thoughts which either are in themselves or
are made by the expression, capable of exciting emotions.

What valuable thoughts are there in Byron? All negative and therefore
will cease to be valuable. Wordsworth’s thoughts comprise a better and a
more comprehensive morality than all other poets together—and alone of
all poets he seems to be able to make moralizing interesting. Other
moralists merely tell you what not to be: to avoid certain acts, or
certain dispositions, and by way of directions as to what you are to be
they tell you something vague, to turn your heart to God and so on.
Wordsworth illustrates all the most important features of the happiest
and most virtuous character and unfolds most recondite truths in morals
and mental philosophy—while the poems in which he does this are by far
the most delightful as mere poems that he ever wrote.

Edition: current; Page: [442]
1. A philosopher’s scorn of scorn—the lines under a yew tree30—and the
series of sonnets on scandal.31

2. The propriety of diffusing and not concentrating our
sympathies—“Laodamia.”32

3. The influence of certain acts in producing habits of benevolence and
virtue—the “Cumberland Beggar.”33

4. The poem beginning “We talked with open heart and tongue”34 also
“Michael.”35

5. “A Poet’s Epitaph.”36 “The Happy Warrior”37 etc. “Ode to Duty.”

Under the head of common feelings defend Wordsworth from the charge of
painting only the emotions of rustics with whom we cannot sympathize.

Answer. He has painted men.—abstracting from their education.
Uncultivated—yes—but not morally only intellectually and not even
intellectually, for they have no prejudices or vulgarities of thought
and those other things which disgust us in uncultivated men. You may say
rustics are not such—but they may be, and his object was to shew that.
By chusing a virtuous character from a village, you do not imply that
there are no vicious ones. He has painted vicious rustics: Most
powerfully in “Peter Bell”38—also in “Andrew Jones,”39 the “Two
Thieves”40 and sundry others. Not deceived by it—let him read Crabbe41
as an antidote.

Under the head of Wordsworth’s feelings:

That Wordsworth tends to make men quietists, to make them bear. This
only a just charge, if men were to read nothing but Wordsworth. Allow
that at present great struggles are necessary and that men who were
nourished only with his poetry would be unnerved for such struggles.
What then? Is a poet bound to do every thing? Allow that the habit of
bearing those evils, which can be avoided, is a bad habit. But because
there are some things which ought not to be borne, does it follow that
there is no use even now, in learning to bear many evils even now which
must be borne—hope the time will come when no evils but those arising
from the necessary constitution of man and of external nature.

Edition: current; Page: [443]


28.: Montesquieu
 3 APRIL, 1829

MSS, Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/10; and University of Toronto Library
(fragment). Transcripts, Fabian Society (all but a fragment). Edited (in
part) by Harold J. Laski as “Notes of My Speech Against Sterling, 1829”
in his edition of Mill’s Autobiography, pp. 300-9. The manuscript in the
Mill-Taylor Collection is inscribed in Mill’s hand: “Notes of my speech
/ against Sterling / 1829.” The subject of the debate at the London
Debating Society, on 27 March, 1829, proposed and opened by Romilly, is
given by Cole as “Montesquieu as a political and philosophic writer is
not worthy of the character he usually bears”; it was adjourned to the
next meeting, 3 April, at which Mill was the first speaker (see the
opening sentences). The speech as printed by Laski omits the matter
between 445.18 and 450.15; two passages (445.18-446.34 and 446.35-449.8)
are found in Fabian Society transcripts, headed respectively: “[A
fragment]”, and “[On corrupting influence of change]”; another
(449.34-450.15) in the manuscript in the University of Toronto Library.
It appears likely that the manuscript folios from f. 6 to f. 9, plus the
Toronto fragment, were separated from the manuscript before the Sotheby
sale or by Laski, and reunited (except for the Toronto fragment) when
the manuscripts were returned to Laski by the Fabian Society. The
variants record the readings in a rejected manuscript version of the
passage beginning at 445.18. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not
listed in his bibliography.

before i commence, it is proper to explain to those who were not present
at the last debate, the reasons which will induce me to occupy their
attention with other topics and in another manner than what the terms of
the question would suggest, or perhaps, in most cases, justify.

An honourable gentleman1 who spoke towards the conclusion of the
previous debate, and whose speech, I imagine, most of those who heard it
will not easily forget, has thought proper to ground his defence of the
merits of Montesquieu chiefly upon the demerits of those who have
adopted a method of philosophizing opposite to that of Montesquieu in
politics and legislation. Whether this be the proper basis to rest the
discussion upon, is a question which will probably be answered
differently by different persons: at all events I do not mean to contend
that it is not, as it is my intention to imitate the honourable
gentleman in making this, whether it be a branch of the subject or a
digression from it, the principal topic of my speech. I am impelled to
this by what, indeed, forms my only motive for troubling the Society at
all on this question, and especially for undertaking the task, for which
I feel myself wholly unfit, of opening the debate: I mean the desire of
taking with as little delay as possible what appears to me the proper
notice of the fierce attack which the honourable gentleman was pleased
to make upon the principles and practice of those who think as I do on
this question. The honourable gentleman was not content with
stigmatizing their opinions as false. He ascribed to Edition: current;
Page: [444] those opinions, all manner of demoralizing effects—there was
no end to the expressions which he heaped, indicative of the odious or
disagreeable habits of mind, which were connected with those opinions,
and of which, as he told us, the character and lives of the persons who
held them were a practical illustration. The persons of whom these
things were alleged were generally all those the current of whose
speculations on government and laws, runs in a different channel from
that in which he tells us, Montesquieu’s did; but more particularly
those, who profess the principles of Mr. Bentham. Sir, I do not profess
to be a follower of Mr. Bentham: partly because no person, who thinks
for himself, will ever call himself the follower of any one, and partly
because I altogether dissent from many of the opinions which those, who
are ignorant enough to fancy that there is a Benthamite sect, are also
ignorant enough to suppose to be the opinions of that sect. And I
believe, that of the far too great number of speeches which the
indulgence of this Society has permitted me to make during this and the
last two years, a majority would be found to have been made in
opposition to some one or other of what are vulgarly considered to be
the Benthamite doctrines. In those opinions of Mr. Bentham, however,
which have been the object of the honourable gentleman’s invective as in
most of the opinions really professed by that great man, I have the
misfortune to agree; and I consequently feel myself a party concerned in
the honourable gentleman’s denunciations, and as such, I do not feel
disposed to sit down quietly under them. I am far from denying that
among the countless aberrations of the human understanding it is
possible that a person might think all which the honourable gentleman
has said, and might think that it was his duty to say it. I take it
however for granted that in resorting to this mode of controversy, the
honourable gentleman did not reckon upon having the use of it entirely
to himself. I conclude, that in dealing with his opponents after this
fashion, he was alive to the possibility that those whom he attacked
might one day come to the conclusion that the employment of this
description of weapons on his part, justified a recourse to it on
theirs. They have indeed hitherto remained tolerably passive under the
animadversions which the honourable gentleman is in the habit of pouring
forth against them, for various reasons, and among others probably
because they did not consider it very dignified to evince an overanxiety
to stand forth in defence of themselves on slight occasions. But they
have entered into no compact with the honourable gentleman that he shall
fight with daggers and they with foils: and they will probably think
that it is now time for the honourable gentleman to be reminded that the
censorial authority which he has assumed over us is one to which he has
no title but by his own election of himself to that office. On the
contrary I believe that the sense of the Society will go along with me
when I say, that while we do justice to the honourable gentleman’s
talents, and are ready to submit to any moderate pretensions which he
may set up to authority among us on that ground we yet do not recognize
in him any such vast and immeasurable superiority to ourselves, as
should entitle him to pronounce dictatorially upon the Edition: current;
Page: [445] moral tendency of our principles and of our minds. Above
all, we do not discern in him that calmness of temperament, that
impartiality in collecting and care in weighing evidence, that power of
representing to himself the feelings and the ideas of other men, or that
accurate knowledge of the systems and opinions that he condemns which
are necessary for executing so high a judicial office faithfully.

I believe the honourable gentleman does not seek to conceal, that he
once held the opinions, which he now so strongly censures. Now I by no
means wish to insinuate, that these opinions, as they existed in his
mind, may not have been attended with every absurd and every immoral
consequence which he deduces from them. From the apparent incapacity of
the honourable gentleman to rest any where but in extremes, that was
probably the case. But I would beg the honourable gentleman to remember
that if in his mind, these opinions were really as absurd and as immoral
as he represents them, the case is far otherwise in ours; and that we do
not think it absolutely necessary that we should be bound by his
inferences from our opinions: nay more: that we think ourselves fully as
well qualified to judge what are the legitimate consequences deduceable
from our principles as he is, having probably considered them much more;
and that we do not precisely see why our morality should be made
responsible for the errors of his logic. It has probably never aentered
into the mind ofa the honourable gentleman to reflect what a blargeb
assumption in favour of his own cdiscernment is involved in the
assertion thatc any set of philosophical opinions dhave a demoralizing
tendency. For my part, eI do not profess to understand all the bearings
of an opinion, better than those who hold the opinion, and who have
therefore so much stronger an interest than I have in discovering to
what conclusions it leads. I know that those immoral Edition: current;
Page: [446] consequences which may appear to me to follow from an
opinion, may not follow from it considered in itself, but only when
combined with some other erroneous opinion of my own. I know that there
is no principle whatever which being conjoined with a sufficient number
of sufficiently important errors of fact will not lead to immoral
consequences. I know, that no conclusion can ever follow from a single
premise; that two at least are requisite, and that very probably those
to whom I am opposed may not acknowledge that other premise which is
necessary to make the immoral consequence follow; that very possibly it
is one which no rational person would acknowledge; and so the whole
scheme of imaginary immorality may be futile. But though there is so
much assumption in pronouncing any opinions to be essentially attended
with immoral consequences, there is no assumption at all in supposing
that an individual may have afforded ample evidence, with what
consequences they are attended in his mind. And I will tell the
honourable gentleman that if we are to judge what his opinions lead to,
or what would result from them in a mind of a more austere or
supercillious disposition, by the effect they seem to have produced even
on a mind so much the opposite of those bad qualities as his own,
principles more calculated to make men bigots and fanatics, and amidst
the greatest external contempt for sects, to foster a spirit of mere
exclusive sectarianism, never were promulgated among men. The honourable
gentleman may think this very extraordinary; but what is a bigot, or
what is a sectarian, except a person who is incapable of being just to
men or opinions out of a certain pale, and who is perpetually ascribing
evil qualities to them without ground? I am well aware that we are not
entitled to impute these consequences to the honourable gentleman’s
opinions, which may be very true and very useful notwithstanding: and
that all opinions have in themselves a certain tendency to sectarianism.
But yet, it does appear to me that if there be any difference according
to the nature of the opinion, that tendency must belong in rather a
superior degree to those opinions, be they true or false, which elevate
and swell men with the idea that they possess a superfine, a
double-distilled virtue unknown to others, which teaches them, let us
understand, not to detest the vices of other people but to despise their
virtues as not being sufficiently lofty and refined. Enthusiasm we know
is a powerful principle: And Vanity also is a powerful principle: but
when Enthusiasm and Vanity are combined there is no limit to the lengths
to which men are hurried, or to that injustice which they are capable of
doing to other people.

I imagine that it will hardly be required of me by the Society that I
should enter very particularly into the details of the honourable
gentleman’s charges of immorality, but I shall advert to one of the most
curious of them, not assuredly with any purpose of repelling it, but
because it illustrates a little of the nature of the honourable
gentleman’s own ideals of virtue, and renders it pretty easy to see what
cause is likely hereafter to have the benefit of his support. He
asserted with great emphasis that there is hardly any thing which has so
corrupting an effect upon the mind as to be always looking with
impatience and anxiety for some external change, and to be unquiet and
uneasy because it does not happen. Now he cannot Edition: current; Page:
[447] mean, that at no time, and in no place, and in no state of things
is any external change necessary. I should suppose even the honourable
gentleman’s ardent optimism, his fervent liberality, will not carry him
thus far: and indeed it does appear to me that when people are without
bread they are likely enough to imagine that they would be the better
for some external change which should feed them, and that when men are
in the dungeons of the Bastille or of the Inquisition it is not
unreasonable to suppose that they would be benefitted by any external
change which should have the effect of letting them out. We must
therefore conclude that in the honourable gentleman’s opinion men may be
suffering every extremity of misery for want of some external changes,
but that nothing can be more degrading or more contrary to true virtue
than to be rendered at all uneasy by the contemplation of this misery.
It is not the man who causes the misery, upon whom the honourable
gentleman’s wrath is poured forth: he is protected by the honourable
gentleman’s reverence for whatever is hoary and venerable, and ancient
of days, and there is nothing so ancient, nothing so hoary, and
therefore I suppose nothing so venerable as sin: accordingly it is not
the sin which calls forth the honourable gentleman’s indignation, but
the avenger. If this is to be the upshot of the honourable gentleman’s
supersublimated virtue, if it is to render men indifferent spectators of
other men’s misfortunes—if by its influence they shall not suffer with
those whom they see suffer, if the spectacle of men bowed down by
tyranny or worn out by privation is to give them no uneasiness and to
inspire them with no desire to behold the tyranny overthrown and the
privations alleviated, then it is impossible to conceive any system of
morals more admirably adapted to serve as a cover and an apology for the
vilest of selfishness. This is at least a new view of the nature of
virtue, which places those who have too much feeling for other people in
the foremost rank of vice. It is most true that any more than ordinary
sensibility to the evils of others, or any very impatient anxiety for
the amendment of the world is sufficiently apt to sour the temper and
embitter the existence of the disappointed philanthropist, and that
those who have spent their lives in protecting the feeble and righting
the wronged have commonly enough a thankless office: but it is something
new to hear them openly stigmatized as immoral themselves and the causes
of immorality in others. I shall not stop to enquire how far this is
consistent with the doctrines of One whom the honourable gentleman
professes to reverence, of Jesus Christ, nor whether it was under the
influence of such opinions as these that Howard spent his life in
effecting external changes in the prisons of Europe2 and Hampden and
Sidney met their death by endeavouring to effect them in the government
of England.3 I shall bring the honourable gentleman to a less high
Edition: current; Page: [448] standard by comparing him with himself.
The time certainly was, nor is that time long gone by, when the
honourable gentleman thought that great external changes were necessary.
Does the Society remember the debate on the disfranchisement of Penryn?4
Does it remember the honourable gentleman’s memorable peroration in
which he described to us one after another in sounding sentences and
with the most emphatic delivery, the great and crying evils of the
external order of things in this country, and closed each successive
article of the long catalogue by contemptuously declaring, that as a
cure for these evils, the government would disfranchise Penryn? Nay,
even the miserable contrivance of a ballot box did not in those days
seem to the honourable gentleman a security absolutely to be despised.
Let me ask, then, was it precisely from the honourable gentleman that
those who held these same opinions were to expect a strain of
intemperate abuse, on the same topics precisely which are employed
against them by the most vulgar hirelings of the Tory faction? Those who
think that the social arrangements of this country contain much
requiring amendment are well aware that they have to reckon upon the
bitter and unscrupulous hostility of all who make the vulgar objects of
a low selfishness the end of their lives, from the prime minister5 down
to him who furnishes penny a line slanders to the Age newspaper.6 But
how happens it that for some time past the only persons towards whom the
honourable gentleman has seemed to feel with any bitterness are those
who pursue the same ends with himself for different reasons? What means
this coalition in which he whose head rises so far above the clouds that
whatever he may perceive that is to us invisible of the pure resplendent
aether beyond, his vision as respects the affairs of this world seems to
be sufficiently dim and misty, is side by side and arm in arm with the
reptiles who grovel upon the earth? Is it the alliance—unnatural as some
may esteem it, but as it appears to me the most natural and legitimate
alliance that ever existed, between the extreme of spirituality and the
extreme of worldlinesss, a virtue of pure speculation being the only one
which is compatible with the very furthest extremity of practical vice?
Or is it because one whose forte7 lies in invective and declamation is
in the long run almost always found on the side of vulgar antipathy,
because it is on that side chiefly and almost entirely that invective or
declamation tells? Or is it, as I fear it is, because the pure light of
transcendentalism, which had only dawned upon him when he made his
peroration on Penryn, having since illuminated his mind with its
Edition: current; Page: [449] meridian splendour, he has now become
convinced that those external changes which he formerly wished for are
not necessary? If so, keenly as we must regret the loss of the
honourable gentleman’s support to our cause, we perhaps ought to
congratulate him in a worldly point of view, that he no longer holds any
opinions which need at all stand in the way of his temporal advancement:
that while his premises have been constantly receding farther and
farther from vulgar apprehension, his conclusions, like the other pole
of the needle, have all the time been veering round in the opposite
direction, and that he now sees all practical questions with the same
eyes as the persons who have nothing but the light of their own
self-interest to guide them. It is true, that of the many points on
which the honourable gentleman once differed from that description of
persons, he still differs from them on one. He still thinks that
Manchester and Leeds ought to be represented, that is to say the
property and intelligence of those places, words which he habitually
joins together, as if there were any connexion between the two; as if
intelligence, and what he calls property, that is to say large property,
were not much oftener found apart, than in combination. Now as I am
sincerely desirous of the honourable gentleman’s worldly welfare, which
even this solitary relic of his former radical opinions may materially
impede, perhaps he will permit me to suggest to him that having
proceeded thus far, he may just as well go one step farther. It has been
again and again unanswerably urged by Mr. Canning that the property of
Manchester and Leeds does not need representation;8 it is already
virtually represented, a phrase which here at least involves no
imposture. The men of property in Leeds are represented by the
representatives of the men of property elsewhere between whose interest
and theirs there is the most perfect identity. Have we not the men of
greatest wealth in Leeds and Manchester already in Parliament for other
places? Who ever heard that the interests of Manchester had been
sacrificed to those of Liverpool, or that Manchester, meaning thereby
the men of property in Manchester, had ever suffered in the most minute
particular for want of a representative? All descriptions of property
are abundantly, and more than abundantly represented in the legislature,
they have not only full protection for themselves but a great deal of
undue power over other people. It is the men of no property as they are
called who are not represented: it is the body of the people who are the
owners of the small masses of property which being nothing to their9
superiors, and supposed to be nothing to them and who are not
represented either actually or virtually in the House of Commons, while
all the interests most decidedly opposed to them are. But it is not this
portion of the inhabitants of Manchester and Leeds, that the honourable
gentleman would admit to the benefits Edition: current; Page: [450] of a
representation. I trust therefore that on further reflexion he will see,
that he and his Tory allies are now quarrelling about a trifle, and that
it is a pity such good friends should be divided by a hair’s breadth and
that he will be induced by what I have now said to review and alter this
only survivor of his old opinions. He will then be fully qualified as a
candidate for that bad eminence which Burke attained towards the end of
his career when after having talked sense and virtue all his life to the
powerful classes with as little effect as sense and virtue usually have
upon the possessors of power, he all at once became their idol by
furnishing them with a theory to their practice, with a philosophy to
the measure of their inclinations by urging them for the love of virtue
to do all manner of injury to those whom they hated for the sake of
vice, by giving them fine new reasons why they ought to do those things
to which they were already urged by every selfish and every malignant
passion in their nature. Such is likely to be the fate of the honourable
gentleman. He will never carry any person with him, but when he is
attacking those whom his audience have far more substantial reasons than
any he gives them, to dislike.10

With respect to the merits of Montesquieu, the honourable gentleman has
told us very little about them. But it appeared that the historical
school of jurists, of which he told us that Montesquieu was the
founder,11 stood very high in his estimation; not so much however for
any thing which they did, but for something which they have not done:
they did not fall into the error, which he says has been committed by
Mr. Bentham, of imagining that there is a universal science of politics,
applicable with certain modifications to all countries. They think on
the contrary that every country ought to have its separate science of
politics, founded on an attentive consideration of its history, and in
which the conservation of all the principal institutions of that country
and of all the habits and feelings of its people should be received as a
fundamental axiom.

Now, Sir, these may be the honourable gentleman’s opinions but it is
altogether a mistake to suppose that they were Montesquieu’s.
Montesquieu did not undertake to treat of the science of politics or of
legislation. It is only incidentally that we learn from his book any of
his opinions on these subjects. Montesquieu’s book is essentially a
treatise on a branch of the philosophy of history: he treated of
l’esprit des lois;12 i.e. the pervading principle of the laws of any
country: his object was to enquire what are the circumstances which give
to the whole body of the institutions of any country that peculiar
character, which distinguishes them from the institutions of other
countries. In doing this he of course had frequent occasion to shew not
only why an institution had been established, but why it should be by
adducing the reasons of expediency which had led to its establishment in
different states: but what I wish to point out is that by the very
nature of his design he was Edition: current; Page: [451] confined to
the circumstances of difference in the situation of different nations,
from which it by no means follows that he was insensible to the more
numerous and far more important circumstances of agreement. Although his
notions unquestionably were very often obscure and confused on various
topics of what may be termed the metaphysics of law, I believe him to
have been altogether guiltless of the absurdities to which the
honourable gentleman, his defender, lays claim on his behalf. Doctrines
which when we come to analyse them, amount to this, that there are no
tendencies which are common to all mankind. For if there are any
tendencies, common to all mankind and in particular if all the stronger
tendencies of human nature are such, both those which require to be
regulated and those whose agency you must employ to regulate them, it
surely is not an irrational subject of enquiry, what are the laws and
other social arrangements which would be desirable, if no other
tendencies than these universal tendencies of human nature existed. And
this, when ascertained, merely constitutes pro tanto a universal science
of politics, although before we apply it to any particular nation we
must also ascertain what are the tendencies peculiar to that nation, and
correct the abstract principles of the science by the modifications
which those tendencies introduce.

I was surprised at first to find that the honourable gentleman,
professing to discuss the merits of two opposite schools of law, one of
which was that of Mr. Bentham, should have adverted only to Mr.
Bentham’s opinions on constitutional legislation, omitting his much more
original and valuable labours in other branches of the field of law: but
the fact is that if the honourable gentleman had not acted in that
manner, he would not have found any thing to differ from Mr. Bentham
upon. Nobody ever supposed that the detailed provisions of the civil and
penal code were to be the same for any two countries, or for the same
country at different periods of its history. What is universal in this
branch of the science consists chiefly in what I have already termed the
metaphysics of law, which belongs equally to all nations because it is
in truth nothing more than the explication of the fundamental ideas
which are involved in the very conception of a law, or a body of laws of
whatever description. And this of which Montesquieu was absolutely
ignorant, to which the Roman jurists made but a very distant
approximation, and which by the way it would do the honourable gentleman
no harm to study, is a branch of science which we owe entirely to Mr.
Bentham and to those who have followed in his footsteps.

The honourable gentleman, however, confined his animadversions to Mr.
Bentham’s opinions on constitutional law: of which he seems to have
formed rather a curious idea. He says that a tribe of North American
Indians is the exact type and representation of Mr. Bentham’s
republic—for there we may see universal suffrage, daily parliaments, and
the total absence of all such pernicious institutions as a church or an
aristocracy, to which Mr. Bentham ascribes all the evils which exist.
Now I really do not know, that the honourable gentleman in the Edition:
current; Page: [452] days of his radicalism may not have had the
egregious folly to think, that a good government might be constructed
out of negatives: but of this he may perfectly assure himself that Mr.
Bentham does not: that in Mr. Bentham’s estimation, there go some
positive conditions to the making up of a good state of society as well
as some negative ones, and that the negative conditions are only
required in order to give to the positive conditions full effect. In
order that the honourable gentleman may be enabled better to comprehend
the nature of the blunder which he has been committing, I will beg him
to suppose that he were a writer on medicine, of which I dare say that
he knows a great deal more than he does of Mr. Bentham’s philosophy; and
that in this character he had composed and given to the world a treatise
on poisons: and suppose that having read this book, I were to walk up to
the honourable gentleman, present him with a bag of sawdust and to say,
“Look here. Behold the type, the beau idéal of your system of diet.
Observe this sawdust: there is no arsenic in it, no verdigris, not one
particle of corrosive sublimate is here, you are bound to give this to
all your patients and make it their daily food.” Let the honourable
gentleman consider what answer he would give to a person who should thus
address him, and suppose himself answered in the same way.

With respect to universal suffrage and short parliaments which the
honourable gentleman has most unaccountably found among a people who
have no parliaments and no representative system at all, I will tell the
honourable gentleman that he has himself done precisely what when it is
done by any other person makes him so excessively indignant. He has
taken the mere accidents of Mr. Bentham’s system, those very parts of it
which Mr. Bentham himself would allow ought to vary with difference of
circumstances, and has insisted upon judging of the whole system by
those accidents, keeping its great and leading principle wholly out of
view. Universal suffrage and annual parliaments, let me tell the
honourable gentleman, are in Mr. Bentham’s apprehension nothing more
than a particular set of means for giving effect to his system. The one
great principle of Mr. Bentham’s system is, that that body which like
the House of Commons in this country, holds substantially in its own
hands the governing power, should be chosen by, and accountable to, some
portion or other of the people whose interest is not materially
different from that of the whole.13 Now this, I am ready to maintain in
the face of the honourable gentleman, is a universal principle in
politics, a principle which he may add if he pleases to the two other
principles respecting slavery and Christianity, which he says are not
inconsistent with any form of government which ought to exist. And Mr.
Bentham, of whose pretended universal science of politics the honourable
gentleman has such a horror, gives so moderate an extent to that
science, that he does not require the honourable gentleman to do more
than add a third universal proposition to the two which he has already
conceded; for wherever this one principle is in operation, Edition:
current; Page: [453] there is Mr. Bentham’s system: and in all the other
parts of the social system the honourable gentleman is perfectly at
liberty as far as Mr. Bentham is concerned, to determine himself by
circumstances. Whether this principle is or is not in operation among
the North American Indians I am not sufficiently conversant with that
people to know. The honourable gentleman however might have found
another people in North America, on the banks of the Ohio, and likewise
a people on the other side of the British channel, in both of which, by
various means, and among others by the miserable contrivance of a ballot
box, this sole principle of Mr. Bentham’s system has been brought
happily into operation; and either of which, I can assure the honourable
gentleman is a much nearer approximation to the beau idéal of Mr.
Bentham’s republic, than the example which he suggested to us. And I am
perfectly willing that the merits of Mr. Bentham’s system should be
tried by the effects with which it is attended in either of these cases,
being persuaded, that these two nations considered as entire nations,
are by many degrees the happiest and the most virtuous nations on the
face of the earth: and that although the form of their government would
not of itself have sufficed to make them so, yet if it had not been for
the form of their government those other circumstances which have
cooperated in producing the effect would many of them never have had
existence, and such as did exist being entirely controlled and stripped
of their beneficial effect might as well, for the happiness and virtue
of the people, have likewise been nonexistent.

1

11
[An earlier version of this Notebook entry reads:] 8 Octobre. Tout le
monde arriva de Muret, et nous partîmes de Toulouse pour aller à
Montpellier dans deux voitures, dont l’une était nouvelle, de
l’invention de M. Bentham, très legère, et point cahotante, appellée la
commode. Nous traversâmes le Canal du Midi et quittâmes la ville par le
faubourg Guillemery. Après deux ou trois montées et descentes douces,
nous descendîmes jusqu’à un plâteau où se trouve le petit village
appellé les Bordes; les arbres, soit isolés, soit en bois, produisant un
contraste très frappant avec les champs arides et couverts de chaume qui
entouraient la ville, fesaient le charme de ce petit endroit. Nous
suivîmes notre cours par une petite plaîne, laissant à droite le chemin
de Caraman et d’Auriac. Puis nous montâmes et descendîmes une colline
fort longue: près du sommet se trouve un château fort grand. Nous
montâmes ensuite une autre longue colline. Un orage, accompagné de
grêle, nous atteint en route. Au sommet de la colline ést Saussens,
petit village de trois ou quatre maisons, où nous nous arrêtâmes pour y
passer la nuit, et trouvâmes de bons lits à un prix médiocre. 36 francs
en tout.

12
[An earlier version of this Notebook entry reads:] 9 Octobre. Nous
partîmes de bon matin dans un brouillard si épais que nous ne pûmes rien
voir: ce que nous regrettions, puisque la vue du haut de la colline sur
le vallon de dessous dut être très joli. Nous traversâmes pendant
quelque tems le plâteau du sommet; puis commençâmes à descendre. Ici
nous observâmes le grand nombre de chaussées, dont quelques-unes étaient
fort élevées. Elles ont été faites sans doute à grand frais, pour
épargner aux voyageurs les petites montées et descentes. Quand nous
étions en bas nous traversâmes une espèce de plâteau, ne pouvant presque
rien voir. La route était boueuse, et fatigante pour les chevaux. Enfin
le ciel s’éclaircit. C’était alors que nous montâmes une longue colline;
après une petite descente, nous en montâmes une autre, au haut de
laquelle ést la ville de Puy-Laurens. Nous longeâmes les remparts
pendant quelque tems, puis nous detournâmes de la route et descendîmes
par un petit chemin très étroit jusqu’à la meilleure auberge, le Lion
rouge, où nous dejeunâmes, et trouvâmes l’auberge très passable. Prix 23
francs. Après déjeûner nous remontâmes un peu, et parvînmes au sommet de
la colline, où nous nous rejoignîmes à la grande route. Nous descendîmes
ensuite par un chemin très serpentin, d’où nous jouîmes d’une très belle
vue sur la plaîne du pied de la chaîne des Cevennes, qui commençe à se
lever près de la petite ville de Sorèze, à quelque distance sur la
plaîne, et prend, peu après, le nom des Montagnes Noires. Après être
descendu, nous traversâmes la charmante rivière d’Agout, (qui ést très
considérable, et se jète dans le Tarn à Saint-Sulpice de la Pointe).
Près du pont se trouve une enceinte fortifiée, je ne sais pour quelle
raison. Puis, toujours en longeant l’Agout, nous passâmes par un
plâteau, et arrivâmes à Castres. Nous traversâmes toute la ville pour
parvenir à l’auberge, qui était très bonne. Cette ville, jadis chef lieu
du département du Tarn, n’ést à présent qu’une simple sous-préfecture.
Elle ést très grande, bâtie en pierre, et des plus jolies que j’aie
vues: l’Agout en parcourt le milieu, et il y a deux beaux ponts sur
cette rivière. Les rues ne sont pas très larges. Prix 49 fr. 10 cent. 4
francs chacun pour le souper et pour les lits. On fait donner
quelquefois 6 francs.

13
[The text breaks off here. An earlier version of the Notebook entry
reads:] 10 October, Nous quittâmes Castres du long de la promenade, et
suivîmes une fort bonne route, en traversant un plâteau entre deux
rangées de collines. Une petite rivière arrose ce vallon en coulant pour
se jeter dans l’Agout. Les prairies doivent à ses eaux bienfaisantes
cette verdure charmante qui donne un tel soulagement à l’oeil, las de
regarder les champs couverts de chaume et la terre nouvellement remuée
par la charrue. Les fleurs élegantes du Colchicon autumnale se montrent
en grande quantité parmi le gazon. La route ést bordée pendant une demi
lieue par de beaux arbres, principalement des chênes et des peupliers:
un petit bois où la lavande croît en abondance se trouve sur une colline
immediatement au dessus de la route. Après avoir traversé ce plâteau,
nous descendîmes un peu, puis montâmes une colline qui présente le
contraste le plus frappant avec le vallon qu’on vient de parcourir. La
verdure de celui-ci, si agréable aux yeux, l’ést encore plus à l’ami des
humains par l’idée de l’utilité de ses productions: dans celle-là, on ne
voit que des cailloux produisant av[ec] difficulté, dans deux ou trois
endroits plus favorisés que le reste, une pauv[re] récolte de blé. Enfin
on croirait quitter pour un desert aride le demeure favorisé d’une
bienfaisante divinité. On n’ést guère arrivé à la cime de cette montagne
qu’on ne trouve à quel dégré on s’ést trompé. Les sombres pensées
qu’inspirent la vue de la montagne se dissipent comme une nuage par la
vue de la vallée du Thoré dont on jouit au dessous de [soi.] Nous
descendîmes par une route coupée quelquefois dans le rocher, et
parvînmes dans la vallée. Au lieu de décrire particulièrement cette
vallée, je me bornerai à dire qu’elle réunit tous les agrémens du vallon
que nous venions de parcourir, avec le beau spectacle des montagnes de
tous les côtés, et la [beauté] des châtaigniers, qui s’y trouvaient en
abondance. Nous traversâmes en bacq la rivière de Thoré. Nous
traversions maintenant la chaîne des Cevennes, non certainement dans la
plus haute partie mais assez haute pour donner [MS torn] l’effet [MS
torn] péculier à ceux des pays montagneux. Elles n’étaient que très
basses jusqu’au village de Labastide Saint-Amand, où elles commencaient
un peu à s’élever. Nous nous arrêtâmes pour dejeûner à l’auberge de la
Croix Blanche, où l’on nous donna un dejeûner à la fourchette pour 4
personnes avec du pain, du lait et du fruit pour sept; les cinq chevaux
et les deux domestiques y mangèrent aussi; nous payâmes 19 francs. Les
environs de ce village sont fort jolis. Saint-Amand de [word missing]
ést situé de l’autre côté de la rivière. Le village de Labastide a un
Octroi, et 4 ou 5 hôtels; celui-ci ést, je crois, regardé comme le
meilleur.—Il ne faut pas omettre la notice d’un pont sur lequel nous
traversâmes la rivière à peu de distance de Saint-Amand. Ce pont était
tout couvert de lierre, et, resemble parfaitement à Ivybridge en
Devonshire, excepté dans la grandeur des rochers qui l’entouraient. A
peu de distance au delà de Saint-Amand, nous commençames à monter une
montagne par un chemin très serpentin: puis descendîmes par une pente,
un peu rapide. Le vallon du Thoré n’ést ici qu’un ravin entre deux
hautes montagnes. Nous parvînmes à un pas très étroit entre la rivière
et les rochers. Le chemin, fort bon jusqu’ici, ést détestable dans ce
seul endroit. Nous fîmes ensuite deux ou trois petites montées et
descentes, et arrivâmes au village de Labastide Rouairrouze qui ést
assez grand; puis nous montâmes un autre côte, et arrivâmes à la cime de
la chaîne, où les eaux coulent de l’un côté dans l’Atlantique et de
l’autre dans la Mediterranée. Nous fîmes ensuite une descente très
longue, et après avoir traversé une autre colline, descendîmes jusqu’à
Saint-Pons, chef lieu d’arrondissement; ville considérable au fond d’une
gorge, et apparemment jolie: mais il fesait nuit quand nous y sommes
arrivés. L’auberge était bonne, mais elle n’était pas égale à celle de
Castres: prix 4 francs par tête à la Croix Blanche. En tout [text breaks
off here].

14
[An earlier Notebook entry for this date reads:] 11 Oct. Nous quittâmes
Saint-Pons de bon matin et suivîmes le vallon d’une petite rivière qui
joint ses eaux près de Saint Pons, à celles de la rivière qui y coule
appellé Jean. Les montagnes qui bornaient cette vallée é[levaie]nt leurs
têtes majestueuses à une hauteur bien au dessus des montagnes [du
v]ersant septentrional de la chaîne. La rivière coulait au fond de la
vallée. La route était pour quelque distance immédiatement au dessus de
la rivière, et extrêmement pittoresque. De tems en tems nous apperçumes
quelqu’immense rocher perpendiculaire qui s’élevait au fond de la gorge
et semblait borner le champ de l’éminence hautaine sans aller plus loin:
mais en nous en approchant nous vîmes s’ouvrir à droite ou à gauche, un
nouveau vallon qui renfermait de nouveaux beautés. Partout où se
trouvait le plus petit morceau de terrain isolé au milieu des vastes
rochers, fertiles seulement en buis, la main industrieuse du laboureur y
avait touché. Quelques plantes, cueillies dans les rochers, nous firent
voir quelle récolte nous aurions pu faire si nous avions passé l’été à
herboriser dans ces montagnes. Il ést à regretter que cette chaîne, si
fertile en plantes rares, même dans les Pyrénées, n’ait été l’objet des
recherches d’un Tournefort, d’un Ramond, d’un Picot de Lapeyrouse.
[Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (1656-1708), like Picot de Lapeyrouse a
celebrated botanist, and Louis François Elisabeth de Carbonnière, baron
Ramond (1753-1827), geologist.]

Après avoir traversé une longue colline, nous nous trouvâmes sortis des
plus hautes montagnes; nous longeâmes pendant une demi heure une vallée
riante, puis traversâmes une montagne élevée. Au bas de cette montagne
près du village de Bardailhan, se trouve un château, ayant un grand et
beau jardin, et une petite maison au fond du jardin, dont je ne pouvais
pas comprendre l’usage. Elle semblait plutôt un pigonnier qu’une maison.
Nous traversâmes ensuite une haute montagne, appellée la montagne des S,
parceque la route serpente dans la forme de cette lettre en descendant.
Du sommet nous apperçûmes la mer, les collines de Cette et d’Agde, etc.
Nous nous trouvâmes ensuite au pied du versant méridional de ces
montagnes. Les productions végetales étaient parfaitement changées. Nous
vîmes des oliviers et enfin des amandiers la Daphne cnidia, &c. Nous
arrivâmes à déjeûner a Saint Chinian. 25 francs 5 cent.

Beziérs pont, colline, H du Nord, canal écluses, etc. promenade Chemin
d’Agde, détruit par l’Hérault route provisoire bonne long du canal à d
Villeneuve emb de l’orbe Vias Agde dirty place inhabitants bridge of
boats inn indifferent vintage not over hill volcanic products château
fort de Brescou seashore shells seaweeds oysters fishing-boats road to
Pezenas cut up by the Her. vue de Pezenas long de la riv pretty great
road inn La Paix Aloux [actually Alaux, the name of the inn-keepers]
market place M Rébouls le Parc, figs grapes, wood rivulet wall ponds dry
olives climate of Pezenas winepress ac. copper road to Meze pretty,
causeway cross the Hérault Montagnac very ugly rocks Meze étang vue de
Cette