Law of Libel and Liberty of the Press

the two publications which we have chosen to head this article, possess
considerable merit, and we do not hesitate to recommend them to our
readers, as worthy of an attentive perusal.

The first, though no name appears in the title-page, is the acknowledged
production of a known and tried friend of the people.[*] It consists of
a series of essays, all of which, except the last, appeared nearly two
years since in a weekly newspaper. It comprises a summary exposure of
many of the abominations contained in what is called the Law of Libel,
as well as in the administration of that Law; and a brief review of the
acts of a body of men, now sunk into obscurity, who were at one time
notorious under the name of the Constitutional Association. We will not
say that the author has completely exhausted the subject, but we
consider no small praise to be his due, for having said so much, and so
much to the purpose, in the narrow compass within which, by the original
design, he was unavoidably confined.

Mr. Mence’s work attracted our attention, from being advertised as
dedicated to the Constitutional Association. What might be expected from
a work, appearing under such auspices, our readers have no occasion to
be informed. We, however, had not proceeded far in the perusal, before
we found Mr. Mence to be, not a humble aspirant after ministerial
patronage, content to lend himself to the purposes of those who would
keep the human mind in perpetual bondage; but one who does not shrink
from exposing, even at the risk of his professional success, the vices
of existing institutions; one who dares give utterance to great and
important truths, however little acceptable, to the rich and powerful,
and who would be, for that reason alone, deserving of high praise, had
he executed his task with far less ability than he has displayed.

Without entering into a critical examination of the merits and defects
of these two works, we embrace this opportunity of delivering our
sentiments upon the highly important subject to which they refer:
availing ourselves of the language of either or both of them, as often
as it appears peculiarly adapted to our purpose.

We shall divide our remarks into two parts; in one of which we shall
discuss the Edition: current; Page: [4] general question, to what extent
restraints upon the freedom of the press can be considered as warranted
by sound principles of political philosophy; and in the other, we shall
take a brief review of the English Law, and of the doctrines of English
Lawyers, on this subject; and we pledge ourselves to prove, that the Law
of England is as unfavourable to the liberty of the press, as that of
the most despotic government which ever existed; and, consequently, that
whatever degree of that liberty is enjoyed in this country, exists, not
in consequence of the law, but in spite of it.

The general question has usually been disposed of in a very summary way.
It has, in fact, been regularly assumed, first, that to employ the press
in any other than a certain manner, is inconceivably wicked; and
secondly, that, for this reason, it is the duty of the magistrate to
prevent it, by fine and imprisonment, if not by means still more
certainly and more promptly effectual.

The author of the article “Liberty of the Press,” in the Supplement to
the Encyclopaedia Britannica, has, however, set the example of rather a
different sort of reasoning; and (what was never completely or
consistently done before) he has pointed out the considerations on which
this question really turns. We have no higher ambition than that of
treading in his steps; and, taking his principles as our guide, we shall
endeavour to unravel the sophistry, and expose the mischievous designs
of the enemies to free discussion.

That the press may be so employed as to require punishment, we are very
far from denying: it may be made the instrument of almost every
imaginable crime,

There is scarcely a right,* for the violation of which, scarcely an
operation of government, for the disturbance of which, the press may not
be employed as an instrument. The offences capable of being committed by
the press are indeed nearly coextensive with the whole field of
delinquency.

It is not, however, necessary to give a separate definition of every
such violation or disturbance, when committed by the press, for that
would be to write the penal code a second time; first describing each
offence as it appears in ordinary cases, and then describing it anew for
the case in which the press is the particular instrument.

If, for the prevention of the violation of rights, it were necessary to
give a separate definition, on account of every instrument which might
be employed as a means of producing the several violations, the penal
code would be endless. In general the instrument or means is an
immaterial circumstance. The violation itself, and the degree of alarm
which may attend it, are the principal objects of consideration. If a
man is put in fear of his life, and robbed of his purse, it is of no
consequence whether he is threatened with a pistol, or with a sword. In
the deposition of a theft, of a fraud, or a murder, it is not necessary
to include an account of all the sorts of means by which these injuries
may be perpetrated. It is sufficient if Edition: current; Page: [5] the
injury itself is accurately described. The object is, to prevent the
injury, not merely when produced by one sort of means or another sort of
means, but by any means.

As far as persons and property are concerned, the general definition of
the acts by which rights are liable to be violated, has always been held
sufficient, and has been regarded as including not less the cases in
which the instrumentality of the press has been employed, than those in
which any other means have been employed to the same end. Nobody ever
thought of a particular law for restraining the press on account of the
cases in which it may have been rendered subservient to the perpetration
of a murder or theft. It is enough that a law is made to punish him who
has been guilty of the murder or theft, whether he has employed the
press or any thing else as the means for accomplishing his end.*

There are some species of acts, however, of which the press if not the
sole, may, at any rate, be regarded as the most potent instrument: these
are, the publication of facts, and the expression of opinions; and to
one or other of these heads belong those uses of the press, against
which the Law of Libel is principally directed.

It is not pretended that, in the language of English Law, the word Libel
is strictly confined to one meaning. It includes, on the contrary, a
number of acts, of a very heterogeneous nature, resembling one another
scarcely at all, except in having penalties attached to them by the
authorized interpreters of the law. A threatening letter, demanding
money, is a libel. An indecent picture is a libel. For the present,
however, we may confine our remarks to the question regarding the
publication of facts and the expression of opinions.

To begin with the latter. If the magistrate is to be intrusted with
power to suppress all opinions which he, in his wisdom, may pronounce to
be mischievous—to what control can this power be subjected? What
security is it possible to take against its abuse? For without some
security all power, and of course this power, is sure to be abused, just
as often as its abuse can serve any purpose of the holder.

It is the boast of English lawyers that the offence of treason is
defined; so strictly defined, that nothing is ambiguous, nothing
arbitrary, nothing left to the discretion of the judge. This, they tell
us, is one of the chief bulwarks of our liberty, implying, that if it
were left to the judge to say what should, and what should not be
Edition: current; Page: [6] treason, every thing would be treason which
the government did not like. Yet why should definition be required in
the case of treason, not required in the case of libel? Is the
government less interested in misdecision? Is the judge less dependent
on the government? Is a packed special jury less subservient? Or are the
judge and jury angels when they judge of libel, men only when they judge
of treason?

It would be hardy to assert, that to give the right of pronouncing upon
libels to the judge, is any thing more than another name for giving it
to the government. But there are many subjects, and these the most
important of all, on which it is the interest of the government, not
that the people should think right, but, on the contrary, that they
should think wrong: on these subjects, therefore, the government is
quite sure, if it has the power, to suppress, not the false and
mischievous opinions, but the great and important truths. It is the
interest of rulers that the people should hold slavish opinions in
politics: it is equally so, that they should hold slavish opinions in
religion: all opinions, therefore, whether in politics or religion,
which are not slavish, the government, if it dares, will be sure to
suppress. It is the interest of rulers that the people should believe
all their proceedings to be the best possible, every thing, therefore,
which has a tendency to make them think otherwise, and among the rest,
all strictures, however well deserved, government will use its most
strenuous exertions to prevent. If these endeavours could succeed, if it
could suppress all censure, its dominion, to whatever degree it might
pillage and oppress the people, would be for ever secured.

This is so palpable, that a man must be either insincere or imbecile to
deny it: and no one, we suppose, will openly affirm that rulers should
have the power to suppress all opinions which they may call
mischievous—all opinions which they may dislike. Where, then, is the
line to be drawn? At what point is the magistrate’s discretionary power
of suppressing opinions to end? Can it be limited in such a manner as to
leave him the power of suppressing really mischievous opinions, without
giving him that of silencing every opinion hostile to the indefinite
extension of his power?

It is manifest, even at first sight, that no such limit can be set. If
the publication of opinions is to be restrained, merely because they are
mischievous, there must be somebody to judge, what opinions are
mischievous, and what the reverse. It is obvious, that there is no
certain and universal rule for determining whether an opinion is useful
or pernicious; and that if any person be authorized to decide,
unfettered by such a rule, that person is a despot. To decide what
opinions shall be permitted, and what prohibited, is to choose opinions
for the people, since they cannot adopt opinions which are not suffered
to be presented to their minds. Whoever chooses opinions for the people,
possesses absolute control over their actions, and may wield them for
his own purposes with perfect security.

It thus appears, by the closest ratiocination, that there is no medium
between perfect freedom of expressing opinions, and absolute despotism.
Whenever you Edition: current; Page: [7] invest the rulers of the
country with any power to suppress opinions, you invest them with all
power; and absolute power of suppressing opinions would amount, if it
could be exercised, to a despotism far more perfect than any which has
yet existed, because there is no country in which the power of
suppressing opinions has ever, in practice, been altogether
unrestrained.

How, then, it may be asked, if to have any power of silencing opinions
is to have all power—since the government of Great Britain certainly has
that power in a degree—how do we account for the practical freedom of
discussion, which to a considerable extent undoubtedly prevails in this
country? The government having the power to destroy it, why is it
suffered to exist?

Why? For the same reason for which we have a habeas corpus act,[*] with
a government possessing the power to suspend or repeal it: for the same
reason for which a jury is sometimes allowed to acquit a prisoner, whom
the aristocracy wish to destroy, for the same reason for which we are
not taxed up to the highest amount which could be extorted from us,
without impairing our power of being useful slaves. The aristocracy do
not submit to these restraints because they like them, but because they
do not venture to throw them off. This is conformable to the theory of
the British constitution itself.

Even a Turkish Sultan is restrained by the fear of exciting
insurrection. The power of shackling the press may, like all other
power, be controlled in its exercise by public opinion, and to a very
great, though far from a sufficient, extent, it has been and is so
controlled in Great Britain. By law, however—notwithstanding the
assertions of lawyers, which assertions, when it suits them, they never
scruple to contradict—liberty of discussion, on any topic by which the
interests of the aristocracy can be affected, does not exist at all in
this country, as we have already shewn, upon general principles, and
shall prove in the sequel from the actual words of the highest legal
authorities.

The preliminary inquiry, however, would not be complete, unless, having
discussed the consequences of restraining the press, we were also to
inquire what would be the consequences of leaving it free.

It is evident, at first sight, that, whatever might be the evils of
freedom, they could not be worse than the evils of restraint. The worst
that could happen, if the people chose opinions for themselves, would
be, that they would choose wrong opinions. But this evil, as we have
seen, is not contingent, but unavoidable, if they allow any other person
to choose opinions for them. Nor would it be possible that the opinions,
however extravagant, which might become prevalent in a state of freedom,
could exceed in mischievousness those which it would be the interest,
and therefore the will, of rulers, to dictate, since there cannot be
more mischievous opinions, than those which tend to perpetuate arbitrary
power. There would, however, be one great difference. Under a free
system, if error would be Edition: current; Page: [8] promulgated, so
would truth: and truth never fails, in the long run, to prevail over
error. Under a system of restraint, the errors which would be
promulgated from authority would be the most mischievous possible, and
would not be suffered to be refuted.

That truth, if it has fair play, always in the end triumphs over error,
and becomes the opinion of the world, is a proposition which rests upon
the broadest principles of human nature, and to which it would be easy
to accumulate testimonials from almost every author, whatever may be his
political leanings, who has distinguished himself in any branch of
politics, morals, or theology. It is a proposition which the restrictors
themselves do not venture to dispute. They continually protest, that
their opinions have nothing to fear from discussion; the sole effect of
which, according to them, is, to exhibit their irrefragable certainty in
a still stronger light than before. And yet they do not scruple to
punish men for doing that which, if their own assertions be correct,
merits not punishment, but reward.

Although, however, the worst enemies of discussion, do not deny, as a
general proposition, its tendency to unveil the truth, there is a
certain number of subjects on which, if they are to be believed,
discussion tends, not to enlighten, but to mislead. Among these are all
the subjects on which it is the interest of rulers that the people
should be misled; the political religion of the country, its political
institutions, and the conduct and character of its rulers.

On the first of these topics, we have delivered our opinions so fully in
our third number,[*] that we shall in the present confine ourselves
principally to the three latter: all of which substantially resolve
themselves into one.

That there is no subject of greater importance, no one needs to be told:
and to say this, is to say that there is no subject on which it is of
greater importance that the people should be rightly informed. As the
stability of a good government wholly depends upon its being
acknowledged by the people to be good, so, on the other hand, the reform
of a bad one wholly depends upon its being believed by the people to be
bad. In the correctness of the estimate which the people form of the
goodness of their government, their whole happiness is involved; since
misgovernment includes every misery which is capable of afflicting
mankind: and misgovernment is alike the consequence, whether the people
believe a good government to be a bad one, or a bad government to be a
good one.

We have been thus particular in laying down first principles, because
the language held on this subject by rulers implies, that it is indeed
the greatest of calamities, for the people to believe a good government
to be bad, but that their considering a bad government to be good, is no
evil at all, or at most a very trifling one. The evil, however, as we
have already observed, is in both cases the same; or rather, the one is
an evil, chiefly because it leads to the other: that the people should
Edition: current; Page: [9] think ill of a good government is
principally to be lamented, because it may occasion their acquiescence
in a worse.

If, therefore, there be any subject on which the people cannot, without
the greatest danger, trust the power of choosing opinions for them out
of their own hands, it is this. And if such power cannot safely be given
to any one, least of all can it be given to the rulers of the country.

If the people were compelled to take their opinions implicitly from some
one who might have an interest in persuading them that their government
is worse than it is, the greatest evils, it is admitted, would be the
consequence. To think ill of a good government, and well of a bad one,
are evils of equal magnitude. If, therefore, the privilege of dictating
opinions to the people, on the subject of their government, be intrusted
to persons interested in persuading them that their government is better
than it is, the mischief cannot consistently be affirmed to be less.
That rulers are so interested, will not be denied. What inference, then,
are we to draw? or rather, how can the inference be evaded, that, if
rulers are suffered to choose what opinions the people shall hold
concerning their government, all the evils of misrule are rendered
perpetual?

Such a choice, however, is made by rulers, as often as they inflict
punishment upon any person for criticizing institutions, or censuring
the conduct of government: unless they are willing to prohibit, under
equal penalties, the expression of praise.

To forbid the expression of one opinion, and give encouragement to that
of another, is surely to make a choice. To punish censure of rulers,
while praise is permitted, is to say, ’tis fit that the people should
think well of their government, whether good or bad; and to take the
most effectual mode of compelling them to do so.

Against this reasoning it is impossible that any rational objection can
be urged. Cavils, indeed, may be brought against it: but there are few
conclusions of equal importance, the proof of which affords so little
hold even for cavil.

When it is asserted, that to restrain discussion is to choose opinions
for the people, and that rulers, if permitted to dictate opinions to
their subjects, having an interest in choosing the most mischievous of
all opinions, will act as that interest directs; there is only one
objection which can by possibility be raised. It cannot be said, that to
fetter discussion is not to choose opinions, nor that rulers are not
interested in making a bad choice. But, it may be said, that our rulers
are men in whom the confidence of the people may be reposed; and that,
although it be confessedly their interest to make a bad choice, they
will disregard that interest, and make a good one.

To such a pinnacle of absurdity men may always be driven, when they
attempt to argue in defence of mischievous power. They begin by boldly
denying the possibility of abuse: when this can no longer be maintained,
they fly for refuge to the characters of the individuals, and insist
with equal pertinacity, that in their Edition: current; Page: [10] hands
power may be trusted without fear of being abused. This is a compliment
of which the rulers for the time being, be they who they may, always
receive as much as they can pay for: dead rulers are not so fortunate.
That all rulers in time past abused their power when they could, is
allowed: but an exception is made in favor of the present. This is a
species of reasoning, however, which will pass current with nobody in
the present day: we cannot be forced back to the times when rulers were
thought not to be made like human beings, but to be free from all the
passions and appetites by which other men are misled. If uncontrolled
power can exist, and not be abused, then away with the British, and all
other constitutions, and let us return to the despotism of our wise and
venerable ancestors. But if men will abuse all other powers, when
unrestrained, so they will that of controlling the press: if rulers will
avail themselves of all other means to render themselves despotic, they
will not pass over an expedient so simple and effectual as that of
suppressing, in as far as they dare, all opinions hostile to the
extension of their authority. And perfect freedom of discussion is, as
we have already proved, the only alternative.

The objections which have been urged against the principle of free
discussion, though infinitely diversified in shape, are at bottom only
one assertion: the incapacity of the people to form correct opinions.
This assumption is indeed the stronghold of all the disguised or
undisguised partisans of despotism. It has been the unremitting, and
hitherto, unhappily, the successful endeavour of rulers, to make it be
believed that the most dreadful calamities would be the effect of any
attempt to obtain securities that their power should be employed for the
benefit, not of themselves, but of the community. With this view, it has
been their uniform practice to vilify those whom they are striving to
enslave. If the people were permitted to choose opinions for themselves,
they would be sure, it is alleged, to choose the most mischievous and
dangerous opinions. Being utterly incapable either of thinking or of
acting for themselves, they are quite sure, unless kept in awe by
priests and aristocracies, to become blind instruments in the hands of
factious demagogues, who would employ them to subvert all
establishments, and to throw every thing into the wildest anarchy and
confusion. This language, by the way, is a practical illustration of the
impartiality of the Law of Libel. It restrains all declaration, even of
unfavourable truth with regard to the aristocracy: it gives full
indulgence, and there is plenty of encouragement, to the propagation of
all manner of unfavourable lies against the people. The conspiracy have
thus all that is necessary for their purpose. Give a dog a bad name, and
hang him, so they try with the people. Whether the object be to coerce
them by standing armies, or to muzzle them by libel law, the motive
always is pure loving-kindness, to save the unoffending, that is, the
aristocratic part of mankind, from the jaws of those ravenous wolves and
tigers, the people.

Such a language is calculated to act upon men by their fears, not by
their reason, otherwise a little reflection would show, that the
incapacity of the people, were it admitted, proves nothing, or, at
least, nothing to the purpose. The practical Edition: current; Page:
[11] conclusion would be the same, even if the people were so destitute
of reasoning power, as to be utterly incapable of distinguishing truth
from falsehood: since there is no alternative, but to let them choose
their own opinions, or to give the choice to persons interested in
misleading them.

An ignorant man, even if he decide at hap-hazard, has at least a chance
of being sometimes in the right. But he who adopts every opinion which
rulers choose to dictate, is always in the wrong, when it is their
interest that he should be so, that is, on the most momentous of all
topics.

Another question, which it does not suit those who make the ignorance of
the people a plea for enslaving them to put, is, why are they ignorant?
because to this question there can be only one answer, namely, that if
they are ignorant, it is precisely because that discussion, which alone
can remove ignorance, has been withheld from them. And although their
masters may find it convenient to speak of their ignorance as incurable,
we take the liberty of demurring to this conclusion, until the proper
remedy shall have been tried. This remedy is, instruction, and of
instruction, discussion is the most potent instrument. Discussion,
therefore, has a necessary tendency to remedy its own evils. For the
evils which spring from an undue veneration for authority, there is no
such cure and the longer the disease continues, without the remedying
influence of discussion, the more inveterate it becomes.

But, the assertion itself, by which so many terrors have been conjured
up—the incapacity of the people to choose correct opinions—upon what
evidence does it rest? Upon history? No for history proves, that just in
proportion as the people have been permitted to choose opinions for
themselves, in that proportion have they been moral, intelligent, and
happy: and it is precisely in those countries in which the greatest
pains has been taken to shut out discussion, that the people, when once
roused from their habitual apathy, have proved themselves to be most
ignorant and ferocious. No people which had ever enjoyed a free press,
could have been guilty of the excesses of the French Revolution. By what
artifices, then, have governments contrived to spread a vague
apprehension of danger from discussion so widely among the unthinking
part of mankind? By availing themselves of that universal law of human
nature, by which men are prone to dread whatever they do not understand,
and they who foresee the least, uniformly fear the most. The evils which
they endure, habit has rendered tolerable but change, because they
cannot foresee its consequences, is the object of their terror and
aversion. And though history does not prove that discussion produces
evil, but the contrary, there is abundant proof from history, that it
produces change: change, not indeed in any thing good, but in every
thing that is bad, bad laws, bad judicature, and bad government. That it
leads to such changes is the very reason for which it is most to be
desired, but it is also the reason why short-sighted persons hold it in
terror.

Nor is there any difficulty in convincing the understanding of any one
who will coolly apply his attention to the subject. The real difficulty
is, to quiet fears. We Edition: current; Page: [12] cannot confide in
persons whose fears appear to us to fall always in the wrong place.
Nothing is more to be feared than a habit of fearing, whenever any thing
is proposed for the good of mankind. The man who is always fearing evil
to the many from the many, never from the few, appears to us an object
of very rational fear.

The ignorance of the people is a mere pretext for a line of conduct
which would have been equally pursued without any such pretext. This
appears from the little regard paid to it in the practice of rulers
themselves. The proper course in regard to ignorant persons, they say
truly, is to guard them against deception: now, as rulers dare not
openly lay claim to impeccability, they cannot deny that there may be
deception on both sides: on the side of praise, as well as on the side
of blame. To praise, however, both of rulers and of institutions, the
most unlimited latitude has been given: censure alone has been
restricted. Every one is free to represent the government and its
functionaries as better than they are; and that to any extent: but woe
to him who presumes, with whatever truth, to cast any blame upon either!
Does this look as if it were believed that the people are ignorant? No!
it looks as if it were feared that they would be too clear-sighted.

It seems not very consistent, in those whose case rests wholly upon the
people’s incapacity of judging, to propose as a remedy for that
incapacity, that nothing but an ex-parte statement should be presented
to them. Is incapacity to judge cured by hearing only one side? Is
ignorance remedied by placing it in a situation where the most perfect
wisdom could scarcely escape being misled? To make the ignorance of the
people a pretext for refusing them the means of judging, when it is
precisely on account of their ignorance that they stand most in need of
those means, would excite laughter, if it did not excite indignation. In
other countries, it is maintained that the people ought not to judge of
public affairs. To prevent them from hearing evidence, therefore, is, at
any rate, consistent. In this country it is admitted that the people
should judge; and it is, nevertheless, asserted, that they should hear
only one side!

To support this monstrous absurdity, there is, in addition to the grand
assumption of the incapacity of the people, another question which it
has been customary to beg. This is, that the people hate their rulers,
and are strongly disposed to judge unfavorably, both of them and of
their actions. So utterly false is this assumption, that, on the
contrary, there is no fact to which the testimony of experience is more
unvarying, than to the strong disposition of the people, to think much
better of their rulers and of their institutions than they deserve. The
love of ease, perhaps the strongest principle of human nature, and
beyond all comparison stronger, in the majority of mankind, than the
hope of any remote and contingent advantage, is constantly urging them
to avoid innovation, and rest satisfied with things as they are;[*] with
what success, every one has it in his power to observe. Who Edition:
current; Page: [13] is there that has not seen a hundred instances of
evil needlessly endured, for one of good wantonly abandoned and evil
adopted? Is there, then, no inconsistency in supposing that in public
matters the case is directly reversed? Nor is the love of ease the only
principle which is constantly in operation, to warp the judgments of the
people in favour of their rulers. He must have looked at mankind with a
resolution not to see the truth, who can be blind to the excessive
veneration of the poor for title, rank, and riches, a veneration arising
from the habitual propensity of mankind to over-estimate advantages
which they do not possess, and which was enumerated by Adam Smith among
the most fertile sources of false judgments in morality which could be
named.[*] With these two principles strongly on one side, and nothing
but reason on the other, knowledge must be far advanced among the people
before they learn to venerate rulers only as far as they deserve
veneration. Accordingly, all history bears testimony to the constancy
with which the most dreadful mis-government has been suffered to prevail
in almost every country of the globe: but the advocates of restriction
may safely be challenged to produce one instance from history, in which
the people have risen against a good government and overthrown it.

So strong, and so durable, is the veneration of the people for their
rulers: nor has it ever yet been eradicated by anything short of the
most grinding oppression. What epithet, then, can be too severe for the
conduct of those who would prevent this feeling from giving way, like
all other mischievous feelings, with the progress of civilization; who
would deny a hearing to opinions and arguments which tend to weaken the
inordinate reverence of the people for every ruler, good or bad, and
give free scope to those which tend to render that blind reverence, and
all its consequent miseries, everlasting!

Although our sentiments on the subject of free discussion in religion
have already been fully stated, we will quote one passage from an essay
to which we have before referred, merely to show that the same arguments
apply to religion, which we have already stated with a more immediate
reference to politics.

Religion, in some of its shapes, has in most countries been placed on
the footing of an institution of the state. Ought the freedom of the
press to be as complete with regard to this, as we have seen that it
ought to be in regard to all other institutions of the state? If any one
says that it ought not, it is incumbent upon him to shew, wherein the
principles which are applicable to the other institutions, fail in their
application to this.

We have seen, that, in regard to all other institutions, it is unsafe
for the people to permit any but themselves to choose opinions for them.
Nothing can be more certain, than that it is unsafe for them to permit
any but themselves to choose for them in religion.

If they part with the power of choosing their own religious opinions,
they part with every power. It is well known with what ease religious
opinions can be made to embrace every thing upon which the unlimited
power of rulers and the utmost degradation of the people Edition:
current; Page: [14] depend. The doctrine of passive obedience and
non-resistance was a religious doctrine. Permit any man, or any set of
men, to say what shall and what shall not be religious opinions, you
make them despotic immediately.

This is so obvious, that it requires neither illustration nor proof.

But if the people here, too, must choose opinions for themselves,
discussion must have its course; the same propositions which we have
proved to be true in regard to other institutions, are true in regard to
this; and no opinion ought to be impeded more than another, by any thing
but the adduction of evidence on the opposite side.*

The argument drawn from the unsafeness of permitting governments to
choose a religion for their subjects, cogent as it is, ranks only as one
among a host of arguments, for leaving the people to follow their own
reason, in matters of religion, as in every thing else.

In an age when the slightest difference of opinion on such a subject was
deemed a perfectly sufficient reason for bringing the unhappy minority
to the stake, it was not wonderful that Infidelity also should be
considered a crime. But now, when a Churchman no more thinks of
persecuting a Calvinist, or a Calvinist of persecuting a Churchman, than
we think of punishing a man because he happens to be taller, or shorter,
than ourselves; it is truly strange that there should be any one who can
so blind himself as not to see, that the same reasons which make him a
friend to toleration in other cases, bind him also to tolerate
Infidelity.

The expression of opinions having been disposed of, it remains to be
considered, whether in any case there is sufficient reason for placing
restrictions upon the statement of facts. It must be admitted that the
case of facts, and that of opinions, are not precisely similar. False
opinions must be tolerated for the sake of the true: since it is
impossible to draw any line by which true and false opinions can be
separated from one another. There is no corresponding reason for
permitting the publication of false statements of fact. The truth or
falsehood of an alleged fact, is matter, not of opinion, but of
evidence; and may be safely left to be decided by those, on whom the
business of deciding upon evidence in other cases devolves.

It is maintained, however, by lawyers, that there ought to be other
restrictions upon the statement of facts, besides the punishment of
falsehood: there being some facts, as they allege, which, even if true,
ought not to be made public. On this it is to be observed, that the same
reasoning which proves that there should be perfect freedom of
expressing opinions, proves also that there should be perfect freedom of
expressing true facts. It is obviously upon facts, that all true
opinions must be founded; if rulers, therefore, have, on any subject, on
their own conduct, for example, the power of keeping from the knowledge
of the people all facts which it does not suit them to disclose, they
do, in fact, choose opinions for the people on that subject, just as
completely as if they assumed the power of doing so, by a positive
enactment.

There is one case, and only one, in which there might appear to be some
doubt of Edition: current; Page: [15] the propriety of permitting the
truth to be told without reserve. This is, when the truth, without being
of any advantage to the public, is calculated to give annoyance to
private individuals. That there are such cases must be allowed; and also
that it would be desirable, in such cases, that the truth should be
suppressed, if it could be done by any other means than law, or
arbitrary power. It must, however, be borne in mind, that, if there are
cases in which a truth unpleasant to individuals is of no advantage to
the public, there are others in which it is of the greatest; and that
the truths which it most imports to the public to know, are precisely
those which give most annoyance to individuals, whose vices and follies
they expose. Tory lawyers, indeed, for whom no doctrine is too
extravagant which tends to uphold their power, or that of their
employers, have asserted that one man has no right whatever to censure
another: that to do so is an act of judicial authority which no
individual is entitled to exercise: and that to expose vices and
follies, instead of being one of the most important of all services to
mankind, is a gross and unwarrantable usurpation of superiority.* We
hope that none but Tory lawyers are hardy enough to profess concurrence
in doctrines like these. Since, then, there is no one who can be trusted
to decide which are useful, which the unimportant truths; and the
consequences of suppressing both would, beyond comparison, exceed in
mischievousness the consequences of allowing both to be heard; the
practical conclusion needs not to be stated.

We have yet to notice a shift, to which recourse has frequently been
had, since the spread of liberal opinions has rendered it scarcely safe
to acknowledge the same degree of enmity to discussion, which was
formerly avowed. We allude to the doctrine, that calm and fair
discussion should be permitted, but that ridicule and invective ought to
be chastised.

This is so much the doctrine which has been fashionable of late, that
most of our readers probably believe it to be the law: and so, according
to the dicta of judges, it is; but according to other dicta of the same
judges, it is also the law, that any discussion, unless it be all on one
side, and even a bare statement of acknowledged facts, is a libel.

The doctrine, however, being as we have said, a fashionable one, it is
necessary to say something on it; and we observe, in the first place,
that if argument may be permitted with safety, there can be little
hazard in tolerating ridicule and invective; since, on all questions of
importance, it is, in the long run, the balance of argument which always
determines the decision of the majority. First, from the very nature of
the weapons themselves: the operation of invective and ridicule being in
a great measure limited to those whose minds are already made up. They
may stimulate partizans, but they are not calculated to make converts.
If a man does not renounce his opinion from conviction, it is scarcely
by hearing himself laughed at, or reviled Edition: current; Page: [16]
for holding it, that he will be prevailed upon to give it up. Such means
usually have no effect but to make him adhere to his opinion still more
pertinaciously than before. And secondly, because ridicule and
invective, if they may be used on one side, may be used also on the
other; and against falsehood, for obvious reasons, with greater effect
than against truth.

In the next place, if exclusion is to be put upon ridicule and
invective, why is it not impartial? If any advantage can be derived from
the employment of such weapons, why is it permitted to one set of
opinions, withheld from another? Or is it that ridicule and invective
then only tend to mislead, when they are employed on the side adverse to
rulers? To deny any advantage to censure, which is extended to praise,
is the same thing, though in a less aggravated degree, with the total
prohibition of censure. Its effect, in as far as it has any, is to give
an undue preponderance to praise: its tendency is, to make the people
think better of their rulers than they deserve; and, to that extent
rulers are enabled to oppress with impunity.

Suppose, for instance, that a writer is permitted to say, in as many
words, that ministers or parliament have acted improperly, have engaged,
for instance, in an unjust war; but, if he says this, and moreover
expresses indignation that it should be so, he is punished. By
expressing indignation, he gives it to be understood, that the evil, in
his opinion, is great, and its authors deserving of punishment. If he
refrains from expressing indignation, he virtually says, that the evil
is not great, and its authors not deserving of punishment. Is it of no
consequence, then, that the public should be informed, whether an evil
is great or small? whether its authors are criminal, or the reverse? We
fully subscribe to the manly and liberal sentiments of Mr. Mence on this
subject. “It is not only no crime, but a positive duty, never to state
crimes drily and coldly, and without the language of just and honest
indignation. And our law, or supposed law of libel, by repressing the
exercise of this duty, ministers to and encourages every kind of vice;
and corrupts and undermines the manners and morals of the people.” (Vol.
I, p. 162.)

Great as are these evils, they are not the greatest which the
prohibition of ridicule and invective carries along with it: nor is it
for the mere purpose of securing exclusively to themselves any advantage
which such weapons can bestow, that rulers cling so closely to the
privilege of putting them down. It is because they know well that, if
they are permitted to suppress ridicule and invective, they have it in
their power to suppress all unfavourable representation. Who is to
judge, what is invective, and what is fair and temperate discussion?
None but rulers themselves: for no line can be drawn. All censure is
invective. To censure is to ascribe misconduct. Even error is
misconduct, in those to whose management the great affairs of a
community are intrusted. When to err is to put to hazard the welfare of
a nation, it is a crime for those who cannot avoid error to remain at
the helm. To impute even error, therefore, is equivalent to invective,
and might be construed as employing it. The mere statement of a great
crime is itself Edition: current; Page: [17] invective. It implies, and
is meant to imply, moral guilt: if it fails of doing so, the statement
is so far imperfect. It is impossible, therefore, to prohibit invective,
without prohibiting all discussion, or leaving it to rulers to decide
what sort of discussion shall be punished, and what left free.

The question is, whether indecent discussion should be prohibited? To
answer this question, we must, of course, inquire what is meant by
indecent

In English libel law, where this term holds so distinguished a place, is
it not defined?

English legislators have not hitherto been good at defining, and English
lawyers have always vehemently condemned, and grossly abused it. The
word “indecent,” therefore, has always been a term under which it was
not difficult, on each occasion, for the judge to include whatever he
did not like. “Decent” and “what the judge likes,” have been pretty
nearly synonymous.*

And while indecent discussion is prohibited by law, they always will be
synonymous.

The doctrine which we have now exposed, is merely one of the shifts to
which English rulers, from their peculiar situation, have been compelled
to have recourse.

In other countries, where the system to be upheld is one of undisguised
despotism, the utter incapacity of the people to judge rightly, and the
unspeakable wickedness of their presuming to judge at all, on the
subject of government, are the avowed doctrines of rulers. The people,
it is there contended, have no business to form any opinion on the acts
of government. They have nothing to do with their rulers except to obey
them.[*] The magistrate, as he ought to have absolute control over the
actions of all under his dominion, ought likewise to have power equally
unlimited over their opinions. And this doctrine, if it has no other
merit, has at least the recommendation of consistency.

The language of English rulers, down to the Revolution in 1688, was
precisely similar. At that period, however, a new government was
established, and this government, having come in upon the popular ground
of resistance to kings, could not avoid admitting, that the people ought
to be permitted to judge both of rulers and of institutions; since to
deny this, would have been to give up the principle upon which its own
dominion was founded. At the same time, having the same interests as any
other government, it was desirous of suppressing, as far as possible,
all censure upon its proceedings. Accordingly, the course which, since
that time, it has pursued, has been one of perpetual compromise. It has
admitted, in the fullest and most unequivocal terms, that discussion on
all subjects of government and legislation ought to be free. It has even
maintained, that the privilege of canvassing the acts of their
government, is the birthright of Englishmen: that we owe to it all that
we hold dear, that, without it, there can be no Edition: current; Page:
[18] security for good government. At the same time, in the teeth of
these large professions, it has maintained, that censure of established
governments ought not to be permitted; and it has assumed to itself, in
practice, the privilege of visiting such censure, as often as it has
thought fit, with some of the severest penalties of the law.

In this see-saw, English rulers have been followed by English lawyers.
We shall select our first instances from Mr. Holt’s celebrated treatise
on the Law of Libel: a work which, having been declared by the late Lord
Ellenborough from the bench to contain an accurate expression of his own
sentiments, and being now generally received among lawyers as one of
their standard works, may be considered unexceptionable authority, both
for the law itself, and for the sentiments of rulers upon it. Observe
what he says of the unspeakable importance of free discussion:

Our constitution, in fact, as it at present exists, in a church reformed
from the errors of superstition, and in a system of liberty equally
remote from feudal anarchy, and monarchical despotism, is almost
entirely, under Providence, the fruit of a free press. It was this which
awakened the minds of men from that apathy in which ignorance of their
rights, and of the duties of their rulers, left them. It was by these
means that moral and religious knowledge, the foundations of all
liberty, was refracted, multiplied, and circulated, and instead of
existing in masses, and in the single points of schools and
universities, was rendered the common atmosphere in which we all live
and breathe. It was from the press that originated, what is, in fact,
the main distinction of the ancient and modern world, public opinion. A
single question will be sufficient to put the importance of this subject
in the strongest point of view. In the present state of knowledge and
manners, is it possible that a Nero or Tiberius would be suffered to
live or reign?

(1st ed., pp. 39, 40.)

Judging from this passage, who would not conceive it to be the doctrine
of English lawyers, that mankind are indebted for all that is of
greatest value, to censure of existing institutions: such censure as
tends to produce the most radical changes, both in church and state, and
even the dethronement and destruction of a bad sovereign?

Now mark the language of the same writer, only a few pages afterwards.

“In every society, therefore, the liberty of the press may justly be
restricted within those limits which are necessary to maintain the
establishment, and are necessary to maintain its exercise.” (Pp. 45-6.)

“Every society” admits of no exception. It includes the worst governed,
as well as the best. According to Mr. Holt, therefore, in this passage,
all governments, no matter how bad, should be maintained. They are
establishments, and that alone is a sufficient recommendation. It is to
a free press, indeed, that we owe “a church reformed from the errors of
superstition, and a system of liberty equally remote from feudal anarchy
and monarchical despotism;” but as these were obtained by overthrowing a
former system, and as “the limits necessary to maintain the
establishment” are by no means to be passed, the writings which led to
the Revolution ought to have been suppressed, and that great event, with
all its glorious consequences, ought never to have been suffered to take
place.

Edition: current; Page: [19]
The difference, therefore, between the doctrine of rulers in England,
and that of rulers elsewhere, exists only in name; and is not indicative
of any difference in their real sentiments, but only in their power of
giving expression to them without danger.

If there be any truth in the great principles of human nature, or any
validity in the reasoning, upon which the British constitution is
founded, there is no ruler who would not, if he could, suppress all
censure of himself, of his measures, or of any of the arrangements which
contribute to this authority. The British constitution supposes, that
rulers always wish to abuse their power, and, of course, wish to remove
every check which has a tendency to prevent them from abusing their
power. But the great check to abuses of all sorts, is a free press. It
is of the utmost importance, therefore, to observe, that all rulers have
the strongest possible interest in destroying the freedom of the press:
that they are under an absolute necessity of hating it; and that
although they may not, at any one moment, have a fixed and regular plan
for effecting its destruction, they are obstinately averse to any, even
the most trifling, extension of it; and are eager to seize every
opportunity for restraining it within the narrowest practicable limits.

The necessity for veiling this disposition by the tricks of language,
has taught our rulers to devise a number of artful phrases, by the help
of which they contrive, in the same breath, to give and take away the
right of free discussion, and which, as often as they have occasion for
the punishment of an obnoxious writer, serve them to beg the question in
favour of their object. A trick of this kind, which has done them much
good service, is the well-known profession, that they are friends to the
liberty of the press, but enemies to its licentiousness.

Let us examine what this means. The liberty of the press, we are told,
is good, that is, as we suppose, discussion, if not in all cases, at any
rate in some cases, ought to be free. But the licentiousness of the
press, it seems, is an evil; which we must presume to mean, that there
are certain other cases in which discussion ought not to be free: but
what cases? Of this we are not informed, for the word licentiousness,
far from marking the distinction, is merely a vague epithet of blame.
Their meaning, therefore, must be, that they are to judge what is the
liberty of the press, and what is licentiousness. But this is to have
the whole power of choosing opinions for the people. Allow them to
decide what is, or is not licentiousness, and every thing will be
licentiousness which implies censure of themselves, which involves any
doctrine hostile to the indefinite increase and perpetual duration of
their power. With them, indeed, to use the language of Mr. Mence, “the
liberty of the press is a liberty of flattering, fawning, trifling,
prosing, but not of writing freely, or fairly, or usefully, or in a way
to engage attention, or have a chance of exciting interest, upon men or
manners, or upon political, or legal, or religious, or moral subjects.”
(Vol. I, p. 206.)

It now remains to exhibit the actual state of the law of this country,
with respect to the liberty of the press.

Edition: current; Page: [20]
It is proper here to take notice of a very elaborate attempt made by Mr.
Mence, to prove that the law really is not so unfavourable to free
discussion as is commonly supposed.

The whole of the law by which the offence of libel is created, exists
only in the state of common or unwritten law, of precedent, or custom.
But this circumstance is so far from being peculiar to libel, that more
than one half of the law of England exists in no other shape.

Mr. Mence alleges, and endeavours to prove—perhaps (for we shall not
enter into so unimportant an inquiry) he has succeeded in proving, that
the precedents on which the law of libel is founded, are not older than
the star-chamber (printing itself, indeed, was not older); and from this
he infers, that they are not, to use a legal phrase, good law; that
there is, therefore, no law of libel, and that the punishments which
have been inflicted upon alleged libellers are illegal.[*] Mr. Mence,
however, is not the interpreter of the law. It belongs to the judges,
and to them alone, to say what is, and what is not law. It is true, that
the instances of omission are far more numerous than the instances of
execution, and in the eye of reason, are equally entitled to be
considered as precedents. It is true, that the judge hears a case, or
refuses to hear it, as he pleases, and, therefore, makes the law, toties
quoties, under the guise of declaring it. Nothing, indeed, can be more
shocking, more grossly inconsistent with all ideas of good law, or good
judicature, than this; but it is an evil inseparable from a system of
common law, and if the law of libel be not, technically speaking, good
law, we can scarcely be said to have any law at all, since even statutes
are for the most part built upon the common law, and taking the offence
for granted, confine themselves to regulating the punishment.

It is of little importance in itself, what the law is, if the practice
be bad: but it is of the greatest importance that the public should not
be made to believe that the law, if it were executed, would afford a
security, when in reality it would afford no security at all; and it is
because Mr. Mence has taken, as we conceive, so erroneous a view of this
question, that we think it necessary to caution our readers against
being misled by an author, from whom, in other respects, they may derive
so much information.

Our own view of the state of the law will be collected, partly from Mr.
Holt’s work, which is a digest of the cases, and which, as we have
already observed, carries with it all the weight of Lord Ellenborough’s
authority,[†] partly from the dicta of judges themselves.

The object being to asertain, what meaning the English law attaches to
the term libel, it is natural to begin by asking, what definition of
libel it affords? To which we answer, none: nothing which deserves the
name of a definition ever having been adduced.

Edition: current; Page: [21]
Mr. Holt says, “A libel is a malicious defamation, expressed either in
printing or writing, or by signs, pictures, &c., tending either to
blacken the memory of one who is dead, with an intent to provoke the
living, or the reputation of one who is alive, and thereby exposing him
to public hatred, contempt and ridicule.” (P. 50.)

What can be more absurd than to put forth such a definition as this,
with great parade too of exactness, and fortified by references to no
less than six legal authorities;[*] and in the very next sentence,
enumerating the species of libel, to talk of libels against religion,
against morality, against the constitution.[†] Mr. Holt’s definition, by
whomsoever devised, was obviously intended only for private libel; and
if applied to any thing else, is unintelligible. It necessarily supposes
a person libelled. Religion, morality, &c. are not persons, either dead
or alive, but abstract terms. Considered only as a definition of private
libel, it is abundantly mischievous, since it informs us, that to give
publicity to vice, in other words, to take the only effectual security
against its overspreading the earth, is, according to English law, a
crime. And this doctrine, Mr. Holt, in another place, does not scruple
openly to avow.[‡]

This is, at any rate, an attempt to define. In most law books, if we
look for a definition of libel, we find nothing but a fiction, Libel is
punishable, we are there told, because it tends to provoke a breach of
the peace. The person libelled, may, out of resentment, commit the crime
of assault against his accuser: it is fit, therefore, that the law
should extend its protecting shield over the libeller, and save him from
the chance of a broken head, by inflicting upon him a year’s
imprisonment. A tweak by the nose, according to this doctrine, should be
more criminal than any libel, for it is certainly far more likely to
provoke the species of retaliation alluded to, Miserable as this fiction
is, it has served as a foundation to lawyers for building up the
excellent law maxim, “the greater the truth, the greater the libel.” A
bad man, it is alleged, is more easily provoked than a good man! and a
true accusation being usually more cutting than a false one, exposes the
accuser to a greater hazard of being knocked down!

One might almost as reasonably contend, [says Mr. Mence,] that it ought
to be criminal in point of law for any person to carry money about him,
lest it should tempt some scoundrel to pick his pocket or knock his
brains out. The punishment in such a case, as the law now stands, would
fall upon the thief, instead of the tempter. And the peace would be at
least as well secured, and the interests of morality much better
consulted, in cases of alleged libel, by punishing not the man who
exposes vice and holds it up to deserved infamy, but the man whose
vicious conduct is exposed, and who to his crimes has added the farther
crime of braving the disgrace, and committing violence upon the person
who may justly and meritoriously have exposed him.

(Vol. I, p. 136.)

Edition: current; Page: [22]
The reader may be curious to learn for what purpose this ludicrous
fiction was invented. The purpose was, to render libel a penal offence,
instead of being merely a civil injury. Had it been classed among
private offences, under the head of injuries to reputation, it would
have been necessary to prove, in the first place, that an injury had
really been sustained; and then the damages awarded would not have
exceeded a fair compensation for the actual injury which had been
proved. To make it a public offence, it was erected into a sort of
virtual breach of the peace, which, again, by another equally
contemptible fiction, is the king’s peace; and thus, a libel against an
individual became an offence against the king. Englishmen, who have been
accustomed to hear, and to believe, that the law is the perfection of
human reason,[*] will be astonished to learn, that there is scarcely
one, even of its good principles, which has any thing better than such
fictions as the above for its basis. In fictione juris semper aequitas,
say the lawyers. It is an assertion which they would not venture to put
forth, were not the apathy of the public a sufficient security for its
being believed without inquiry. Yet here is, at any rate, one instance,
(and every one who has examined the law without a resolution to find
every thing as it should be,[†] can supply many more), in which such
fictions have been devised for the most mischievous of all purposes.

This technical definition answered to admiration, so long as there were
no libels but against individuals, all the rest being heresy or treason;
but when times altered, and it was no longer practicable to hang, draw,
and quarter men for libel, judges were put to their shifts for a
definition which should give them power really unlimited, without the
appearance. The late Lord Ellenborough, who, from his greater boldness
of character, was in the habit of giving utterance to the pernicious
doctrine with less of restraint and disguise than is usual, once said
from the bench, that a libel was any thing which hurts the feelings of
any body.[‡] This was acknowledging more than was quite safe. It was
admitting, that, according to English law, as administered by English
judges, it is a crime to impute either error or criminality to public
functionaries or to individuals; since to impute even error to any one,
if it does not in all cases actually hurt his feelings, has, at least,
always a tendency to do so.

The words of an indictment for public libel, which, in the absence of a
definition, are, it must be presumed, intended to give some indication
of the meaning and import of the charge, are “tending to bring our Lord
the King and his Edition: current; Page: [23] administration,” or “the
constitution and government of these realms,” or “the two Houses of
Parliament,” or “the administration of justice, the trial by jury,” &c.
“into great and public hatred and contempt.”[*]

Lord Ellenborough’s dictum itself is not better adapted to bear out the
judge in the most mischievous exertion of power, than this. It is
criminal to bring rulers into “hatred and contempt.” But hatred is the
legitimate consequence of guilt, contempt the legitimate consequence of
folly. To impute either guilt or folly, either intentional or
unintentional error, to rulers, is, therefore, by English law, a crime.

The attempts at definition, bad as they are, have only been exceptions
the general rule has been, to maintain, that libel, though it ought to
be punished, cannot, and ought not to be defined. The conspiracy, in
truth, have a good reason for leaving the offence of libel undefined:
for they would not dare to include in a definition all that the support
of the conspiracy requires to be included. They would not dare to
assume, by a specific law, all the power which they hope to enjoy by
usurpation. Were they to make a definition which included all that they
wish to be included, common feeling would be shocked, neither they nor
other men would bear to look at it. Nothing, however, can be more gross
than the inconsistency into which this necessarily drives them. They
insist that libel cannot be defined, yet they say that twelve unlettered
men are to judge what is libel and what is not. How can any man know
what is included in a general rule, if he knows not what that rule is?

On the subject of libels against the constitution, the following is the
language of Mr. Holt.

If the law protects the subject in his rights, and punishes every
invasion of them, much more does it protect that system from which all
these rights proceed, and by which alone they can be maintained. The
government and constitution being the common inheritance, every attack
made upon them, which affects their permanence and security, is in a
degree an attack upon every individual in the state, and concerns the
rights of all. If it be the highest crime known to our laws, to subvert
by force that constitution and polity which the wisdom and valour of our
ancestors have erected and confirmed, it is certainly a crime, though of
inferior magnitude, yet of great enormity, to endeavour to despoil it of
its best support, the veneration, esteem, and affection of the people.
It is, therefore, a maxim of the law of England, flowing by natural
consequence and easy deduction from the great principle of self-defence,
to consider as libels and misdemeanours every species of attack by
speaking or writing, the object of which is wantonly to defame, or
indecorously to calumniate, that economy, order, and constitution of
things, which make up the general system of the law and government of
the country.

(P. 74.)

Considering the parade of logic, which characterizes Mr. Holt’s book, it
is not a little remarkable that, on the most important point of all, he
should be detected in using language so utterly destitute of any
definite or precise meaning. Such Edition: current; Page: [24] vagueness
can have but one object; namely, to hide the absolute power which the
words that he uses are intended to confer upon the judge.

In the first place, he is pleased to represent the constitution as a
person, and talks of defaming the constitution, calumniating the
constitution, as if an abstract term could be defamed or calumniated.
Then it is wantonly to defame, and indecorously to calumniate. Whether
any thing be added to, or taken from the sense by these epithets, we
profess ourselves unable to understand.

What is the constitution? merely the aggregate of the securities for
good government, which are provided by the existing law, whatever those
securities may be, more or less complete.[*] This must be the meaning of
the word, constitution, if it has any; and if by a sort of metaphor we
speak of the constitution as being calumniated, we can only mean, that
these securities are represented as insufficient for the prevention of
mis-government; that the constitution is represented as not attaining
its end.

Consider what is implied, when it is said, that the securities for good
government which, being taken collectively, we call the constitution,
are inadequate to their end. It is implied, that, to a certain extent at
least, if not altogether, we are as if we had no constitution; and that
rulers have the power to tyrannize over us with impunity. If this be
true, it will not be openly asserted that, to make it known would not be
highly meritorious. The supposition, therefore, must be, that it is not
true. This cannot be proved, without suffering those who deny it to be
heard. It is, therefore, taken for granted without proof.

It being, therefore, according to this doctrine, allowable for English
rulers to take for granted, without proof, that their own form of
government is the best possible, it must be equally allowable for all
other rulers to make the same assumption in favour of theirs. It will
not, however, be contended, that all forms of government are the best.
The doctrine, therefore, of the law of England, as expounded by Mr.
Holt, is, that any rulers, in any country, may justly assume that the
most detestable of all governments is the best, and upon that assumption
may with perfect propriety inflict punishment to any extent upon all who
presume to call in question its excellence.

Higher authorities than Mr. Holt have propounded the same doctrine. Lord
Camden says,

“All governments must set their faces against libels, and whenever they
come before a court and a jury, they will set their faces against them.
And if juries do not prevent them, they may prove fatal to liberty,
destroy government, and introduce anarchy; but tyranny is better than
anarchy, and the worst government better than none at all.”*

Edition: current; Page: [25]
It is here pretty distinctly intimated, that the worst government is
justified in punishing all who hold it up to that detestation which it
deserves; and the premises are equally edifying with the conclusion: if
a tyrannical government be subverted, it is possible that anarchy may
ensue; and anarchy, in the opinion of Lord Camden and of Mr. Holt, is a
greater evil than the worst possible government. Adam Smith, indeed,
thought differently; in the opinion of that great philosopher and
practical judge of human nature, despotism is “more destructive of
leisure and security, than anarchy itself.”* His lordship is welcome,
however, as far as we are concerned, to whatever advantage he can derive
from this assumption. But we submit that, if the worst possible
government may be succeeded by anarchy, it may also be succeeded by a
good government; and how must his mind be constituted who, if it were
necessary, would fear to risk a few years, even of anarchy, for such a
possibility!

In this investigation we have purposely avoided making the supposition,
that the British constitution really is not the best possible. It is
obvious, however, how much, if it be not, the strength of the argument
is increased.

If we were as firmly convinced that the British constitution is, as we
are convinced that it is not, the best possible government, we should be
willing to expose even such a government to a very considerable degree
of risk, rather than support it by means, which if they may be used for
the preservation of the best government, may be equally used to
perpetuate all the atrocities of the worst. But if the constitution be
really imperfect—and who shall say that it is otherwise, if gainsayers
are not suffered to be heard? then how greatly is the atrocity
aggravated! and what are we to think of those who wickedly endeavour to
prop up a bad cause, by means which even the best ought to reject with
horror!

Mr. Holt seems to have been in some degree aware, that the mischievous
purpose of the law would shew itself even through the vague and evasive
language in which he has clothed it. After telling us that the judges
have the power to punish every thing which they may pronounce intended
to “despoil the constitution of its best support, the veneration,
esteem, and affection of the people,” he has thought it expedient to say
something with a view to make it appear that they have not this power.

The constitution of this country, which is nothing but perfect reason,
acknowledges in every man a right to set forth a general or individual
hardship, and to suggest error, even in the highest branch of the
magistracy. The constitution, indeed, is too wise not to acknowledge
that the best interest of the state, as of human society at large, is
truth. It opens, therefore, a ready ear to honest and useful truth of
all kinds, and as it receives this truth from human beings, and
therefore can only expect it as mingled up and adulterated with human
passions, it will often pardon and overlook a natural warmth, for the
sake of the truth which it produces. This is the character of the
constitution with respect to public libels Edition: current; Page: [26]
in good times. But every right has its limits. The right is given by the
constitution, in so far as it is necessary and salutary, for the
purposes of reminding kings of their duty, and parliaments of their
trusts; the right stops at that point where its exercise would endanger
the permanence and due weight of government: that is, where it serves no
other purpose than to revive the original anarchy and to spread
disaffection and tumult through the state.

(P. 76.)

It is not easy to enumerate all the gratuitous assumptions, all the
shifts and evasions, which this one passage contains.

In the first place, it is assumed, that to “endanger the permanence of
government” (such are the words of Mr. Holt) can have no object but to
“revive the original anarchy:” which is precisely the assumption by
which all bad rulers, from time immemorial, have begged the question in
favour of themselves.

In the next place, we are informed that the right of unfavourable
representation is allowed, so far as is necessary to “remind kings of
their duty, and parliaments of their trusts;” but not to such a degree
as to “spread disaffection through the state.” So said the Mogul
emperor: his subjects might state their grievances for his information,
and if he thought fit, he would redress them; with this reservation,
however, that if he should happen to take offence at their
representations, he might cut off their heads upon the spot.[*]

But, thirdly, it seems, even this limited right of unfavourable
representation is allowed only in good times; the question, what are and
are not good times, being of course left to be decided by the government
itself. It is not difficult to see what, by such a judge, would be
pronounced to be good times. So long as the people were perfectly quiet,
and any breath of censure which might be heard boded no danger to
profitable abuses, that censure might be tolerated, simply because there
would be no motive for its suppression. But as soon as a feeling began
to be excited, that there was something wrong, something calling for
reformation; as soon as there began to be a chance, that unfavourable
representations, if they continued, might at length have the effect of
forcing upon rulers some degree of amendment; then would be the time for
declaring that the “permanence and due weight of government” were
endangered: then would be the time for suspending the habeas corpus act,
and extending, like Mr. Pitt, the strong arm of power, to crush every
writer who presumed to insinuate, that all was not for the best.[†]

One admission, however (we shall see how far it is sincere), is made in
the above passage; that the constitution does permit censure, if not at
all times, and on Edition: current; Page: [27] all subjects, yet at some
times, and on some subjects. Now mark the language of Mr. Holt, a few
pages afterwards:

“If” a writer, “forgetting the wholesome respect which is due to
authority and to the maintenance of every system, proposes to reform the
evils of the state by lessening the reverence of the laws; the law,
under such circumstances, considers him as abusing to the purposes of
anarchy, what it has given him for the purposes of defence.” (P. 103.)

It is not to the doctrine, that not only a good system, but every system
ought to be maintained, that we would at present direct the attention of
our readers. It is to the declaration, that nothing must be done tending
to lessen the reverence for the laws: that to whatever degree a law may
be bad, its badness shall not be suffered to be exposed, nor any
representation to be made which shall convince the people of the
necessity for its repeal. What, then, is to be said of the assertions
that “the constitution acknowledges the best interest of the state to be
truth”; that it “opens a ready ear to honest and useful truth of all
kinds?” What, but that they are cant, disgusting from its hypocrisy, as
mischievous as false, and put forth solely to deceive the people into a
belief that the constitution and the law are much better than they
really are?

From libels on the constitution, Mr. Holt passes to libels on the king
and his government, and to this subject we shall follow him, promising
to the reader, that, after all that we have already said, we shall not
detain him long.

From Mr. Holt’s general view of the law on this subject, one passage has
been already extracted. We now give it entire.

Every Englishman has a clear right to discuss public affairs freely,
inasmuch as, from the renewable nature of the popular part of our
constitution, and the privilege of choosing his representatives, he has
a particular, as well as a general interest in them. He has a right to
point out error and abuse in the conduct of the affairs of state, and
freely and temperately to canvass every question connected with the
public policy of the country. But, if instead of the sober and honest
discussion of a man prudent and attentive to his own interests, his
purpose is, to misrepresent, and find a handle for faction; if, instead
of the respectful language of complaint and decorous remonstrance, he
assumes a tone and a deportment which can belong to no individual in
civil society, if, forgetting the wholesome respect which is due to
authority, and to the maintenance of every system, he proposes to reform
the evils of the state by lessening the reverence of the laws; if he
indiscriminately assigns bad motives to imagined errors and abuses; if,
in short, he uses the liberty of the press to cloak a malicious
intention, to the end of injuring private feeling, and disturbing the
peace, economy, and order of the state, the law, under such
circumstances, considers him as abusing to the purposes of anarchy what
it has given him for the purposes of defence.

(Pp. 102-3.)

For the exposure of this doctrine, a few words are sufficient.

In the first place, the distinction between the censure which is
permitted, and the censure which is prohibited, turns out to be, not any
thing in the censure itself, but something in the intention. By what
evidence is the intention to be ascertained? By Edition: current; Page:
[28] the greater severity of the censure? No: for it surely does not
follow, that a man must necessarily intend to misrepresent because he
censures severely; unless it is contended that governments can never act
in such a manner as to merit severe censure.

To obtain reform, you must point out defects. By pointing out defects,
you bring discredit on the government. By pointing out defects and
seeking remedies, you shew your malice. Yes; the same sort of malice
which a man shews towards himself by going to a physician to know the
defects of his constitution, and how to remedy them.

Some parts of Mr. Holt’s language, however, seem to insinuate, what he
himself in other places denies, that censure may be freely applied,
provided it be without assigning bad motives. “The law,” says he, “in
this respect, follows in the line of our duty. Invective, and the
assignment of bad motives, can evidently answer no good purpose. No man
assuredly can justify such contumely, even towards a private individual,
and society at least should have dignity enough to communicate something
of its sacredness to its officers.” (P. 103.)

What is meant by the dignity of society, and communicating sacredness to
its officers, we do not pretend to understand. What Mr. Holt, or the
judges, would consider as bad motives, we do not know. Perhaps, by bad
motives he means criminality, as distinguished from innocent error; and,
in that case, we utterly deny the assertion, that no good purpose is to
be answered by exposing it. Is it of no importance that the public
should know the character of those in whose hands the disposal of their
whole happiness is placed? Apply this doctrine to the crimes of
individuals: would Mr. Holt assert that it can answer no good purpose to
distinguish between wilful murder and accidental homicide?

This part of the law of libel, as expounded by the judges, and by Mr.
Holt, is, like all other parts of it, purposely left in such a state of
vagueness, as to place every public writer absolutely at the mercy of
the judge.

“Every thing,” says Mr. Holt, “is a libel, the purpose of which is, to
misrepresent and find a handle for faction.” But what is faction? Every
man opposing ministers. What is misrepresentation? Falsehood. Who is to
judge what is falsehood? The government: and the government, therefore,
is to judge in its own cause; the government is to decide upon the truth
or falsehood of a charge of error or crime against itself, and if it
pronounces the charge to be false, it is to have the power of inflicting
punishment, to any extent, upon the accuser!

It may be thought, perhaps, that Mr. Holt has distorted the law. To
prove that he has not, we shall next quote some of the dicta of judges;
than which nothing can be more explicit, as to the illegality of all
censure upon the government.

lord holt. They say that nothing is a libel but what reflects on some
particular person. But this is a very strange doctrine, to say that it
is not a libel reflecting on the government, endeavouring to possess the
people that the government is mal-administered by corrupt persons that
are employed in such stations, either in the navy or army. To say that
corrupt Edition: current; Page: [29] officers are appointed to
administer affairs is certainly a reflection on the government. If men
should not be called to account for possessing the people with an ill
opinion of the government, no government can subsist.*

According to this judge, nothing is to be permitted which tends to
possess the people with an ill opinion of the government; that all
censure has this for its object, it is unnecessary to remark. All
censure, therefore, is prohibited.

lord chief justice raymond. Even a private man’s character is not to be
scandalized, either directly or indirectly; because there are remedies
appointed by law, in case he has injured any person, without maliciously
scandalizing him in his character. And much less is a magistrate,
minister of state, or other public person’s character to be stained,
either directly or indirectly. And the law reckons it a greater offence
when the libel is pointed at persons in a public capacity, as it is a
reproach to the government to have corrupt magistrates, &c. substituted
by his majesty, and tends to sow sedition, and disturb the peace of the
kingdom.†

From this we learn two things; first, that nothing is permitted to be
said which can be construed as either directly or by implication a
reproach upon the government. And secondly, that all persons whatever,
public or private, are guaranteed by the law against all exposure of any
misconduct, however glaring, and however hurtful to the community.

sir philip yorke (afterwards Lord Chancellor Hardwicke). He (the
printer) is not to publish any thing reflecting on the character, and
reputation, and administration of his majesty, or his ministers.‡

This doctrine, which is honoured with the peculiar approbation of Mr.
Holt (p. 111), is in substance the same with that which we last quoted,
with this addition, that it contains a prohibition of strictures, even
upon particular measures. The “administration of his majesty, or his
ministers,” is not to be reflected upon.

On the trial of Woolston for a deistical work,[*] the Court said, “that
the Christian religion is established in this kingdom, and therefore
they would not allow any books to be written which should tend to alter
that establishment.”§ Christianity is to be made an instrument of
persecution because it is an establishment; no books are to be written
which tend to alter establishments. What sort of a doctrine is this?

Edition: current; Page: [30]
lord ellenborough. It is no new doctrine, that if a publication be
calculated to alienate the affections of the people, by bringing the
government into disesteem, whether the expedient be by ridicule or
obloquy, the person so conducting himself is exposed to the inflictions
of the law. It is a crime, it has ever been considered as a crime,
whether wrapt in one form or another.*

Having commented at so much length upon similar doctrines, we are under
no inducement to spend time upon this.

The two trials of Mr. Wooler, in the year 1817, for seditious libels,
teem with similar dicta, both of the attorney-general who prosecuted,
and the judge who presided. We quote a report which was printed verbatim
from the manuscript of an eminent short-hand writer. On that occasion,
the then attorney-general, the present Master of the Rolls, and, if
report say true, the future Lord Chancellor, delivered himself in the
following terms:

To impute to the ministers under any form of government, whether
monarchy or any other established form of government, wicked and corrupt
motives of a pecuniary nature, or of another and a worse sort, viz. that
corruption arising from a desire to destroy the liberties and the
constitution of their country, and to take away from the subjects of the
state all the happiness intended to be given by the laws and
constitution, is, I take leave boldly to state, without hazard of
contradiction from any lawyer in the country, a libel against the
administration of the government: against the ministers employed in that
administration.†

It would appear at first sight, to an incautious reader, that the
improved spirit of the times had produced some effect, even upon his
majesty’s attorney-general. The doctrine, that all censure of ministers
is a libel, was no longer dared to be openly avowed. What was avowed,
however, is, that when ministers aim at subverting the constitution, at
subverting that, which, according to the attorney-general, is our only
security against every horror which mankind have, at any period of
history, endured from bad rulers; that when ministers aim at taking away
this security, and plunging us into these evils, no one shall be allowed
to say so. That this is an unfair interpretation we deny. Is it, or is
it not, possible, that ministers should wish to be absolute? If it be
answered, that such a design is possible, but that in this instance it
was unjustly ascribed to them, we answer, that if despotism has been the
aim of some ministers, it may be the aim of the present, and we are not
to believe that to be impossible which all experience proves to be
certain, merely because the attorney-general thinks proper to deny it.
This modest claim, however, he did not scruple to prefer. “They (the
ministers) would not make Edition: current; Page: [31] their will the
general law, but it is not that they dare not, but, I take leave to
state, because they cannot and will not.”*

Here we are asked to believe that ministers are not men of ordinary
virtue, nor even men of extraordinary virtue, but something infinitely
superior to all men who ever did, or can exist. Not so says the law of
England. That law always presumes that men act according to their
interest. So far is this principle carried, that, if a man has a single
shilling to gain by perjury, the law presumes that he will perjure
himself for that shilling, and refuses to hear his evidence. And here we
are called upon to take it for granted, not only that the strongest
conceivable temptations are weaker than the virtue of ministers, but
that a man ought to be severely punished for insinuating the contrary.
And why? Because such is the ipse dixit of his majesty’s
attorney-general.

The present Chief Justice Abbott, on the same occasion, was pleased to
deliver, as has been recently the usual practice, two contrary
doctrines; both of which, of course, by his pronouncing them, became
equally the law of the land.

It is open to every subject of the country to discuss the measures of
government, provided he do it reasonably, fairly, and impartially; but
if, instead of reasoning and discussing upon measures general or
particular, a person chooses to issue forth to the world slander and
calumny against the government, or against the authors of those
measures, he then becomes amenable to the law; if I may so say, where
reasoning ends and slander and calumny begin, there is the line by which
a judgment is to be formed.†

This is one doctrine. Shortly afterwards he, in a passage too long to
quote, propounds, and praises Lord Holt for propounding, the other.[*]
This is, that it is libellous in any way to reflect upon, that is, to
censure, the government, and to bring into discredit, that is again to
censure, the two Houses of Parliament.

We will take the least bad doctrine of the two; that which asserts that
reasoning is permitted, but slander and calumny prohibited.

What is the use of reasoning? To draw conclusions, we suppose. All
reasoning is, we apprehend, for the sake of the conclusion. Reasoning,
it seems, is fit and proper: is it proper to draw conclusions? If they
are favourable, yes, if unfavourable, no; because in that case, they are
slander and calumny.

We might quote many cases posterior to this, but we shall stop here,
partly because we have already exhibited enough, partly because the more
recent trials have not been published in an equally authoritative form.
It is not because there is nothing to say on the trial of Mr. Harvey for
a libel on a living king, or on that of Mr. John Hunt, for a libel on a
dead one,[†] that we refrain from particularly Edition: current; Page:
[32] alluding to what was said by lawyers and judges on those memorable
occasions. It is because it was not in our power to quote any better
authority than newspaper reports; and it is not enough for us that our
assertions are true; we would have them exempt even from the possibility
of suspicion.

We notice the head “Libels against the two Houses of Parliament,”[*]
only to say that, according to Mr. Holt, the one thing to which all the
influence of public opinion over those assemblies is owing, the
publication of their proceedings—is illegal.

Under the head, “Libels against Courts of Justice,”[†] Mr. Holt says.

It is, undoubtedly, within the natural compass of the liberty of the
press, to discuss, in a peaceable and temperate manner, the decisions
and judgments of a court of justice: to suggest even error, and,
provided it be done in the language, and with the views, of fair
criticism, to censure what is apparently wrong, but with this
limitation, that no false or dishonest motives be assigned to any
party.*

“Any public reflection,” he continues, “on the ministration of justice,
is unquestionably libellous.”[‡]

Here are two assertions, the one, that the law permits censure, the
other that it does not. We shall now see which of them is borne out by
the dicta of judges. And we shall content ourselves with quoting the
first case, related under this branch of his subject, by Mr. Holt
himself.

justice buller. Nothing can be of greater importance to the welfare of
the public, than to put a stop to the animadversions and censures which
are so frequently made upon courts of justice in this country. They can
be of no service, and may be attended with the most mischievous
consequences. Cases may happen, in which the judge and jury may be
mistaken; when they are, the law has afforded a remedy, and the party
injured is entitled to pursue every method which the law allows to
correct the mistake. But, when a person has recourse either by writing
like the present, by publications in print, or by any other means, to
calumniate the proceedings of a court of justice, the obvious tendency
of it is, to weaken the administration of justice, and, in consequence,
to sap the very foundation of the constitution itself.†

The law has afforded a remedy! Yes; the injured party, if he can afford
it, may move the very judge by whom he was condemned, for a new trial,
and if by miracle he should obtain it, he may go again to be tried
before the same, or a brother judge, subject to the same sinister
interest,[§] and a jury under the same influence. We Edition: current;
Page: [33] may be permitted to doubt, however, whether his chance of
obtaining redress in this way be so considerable, as to render all other
means superfluous; or whether he would have any chance whatever of
obtaining it, if he had not the means of influencing public opinion in
his favour.

The doctrine inculcated in the above dictum, that it is criminal to
censure the proceedings of a court of judicature, and that whoever
presumes to do so, is an enemy to the administration of justice, became
unhapply, by the artifices of judges and the influence of rulers, deeply
rooted in the minds of Englishmen. It was long the prevailing cry, that
the administration of justice must be preserved free from suspicion,
that no reflections must be permitted on the administration of justice:
as if any mischief could be done to good judges, and good judicature, by
the exposure of bad; as if it were not the greatest possible injury to a
good judge, to render it impossible for the public to distinguish him
from a bad one.

So far is the conduct of judges from requiring no surveillance, that
there is scarcely any set of public functionaries, whose conduct
requires it so much. Receiving their appointments from government,
having, of necessity, from the course they must have adopted to obtain
those appointments, all their leanings on the side of power; having,
most of them, sons and nephews at the bar, for whom they are in the
habit of looking to advancement and patronage at the hands of
government; vested with power, which, if thrown into the scale of
government, goes so far to render it despotic, that no sacrifice, on the
part of rulers, can be too great, by which their co-operation can be
obtained, it is not easy for any set of persons to be exposed to
stronger temptations: and that those temptations have invariably proved
too strong for the virtue even of the best judges, we have only to look
at the records of libel cases, to be convinced.

We are perpetually boasting, [says the writer of the pamphlet which
stands together with Mr. Mence’s work, at the head of this article.] We
are perpetually boasting of the integrity of the judges. The judges on
the bench are always, for the time being, the best of judges, the wisest
and most upright of men, men who will neither do nor suffer injustice,
men who will drive from their presence all who seek to pervert the law,
or who take advantage of its defects to do injury to any one. Woe to him
who shall dare to impeach the conduct of a living judge!

Yet how few are the dead judges whose conduct has not been impeached,
and that, too, on good grounds. Were the judges really and truly
independent of the executive power, and were the people at liberty, as
they ought to be, but as, with the consent of the judges, they never
will be, were they at liberty to canvass the conduct of a living judge
to the necessary extent, so that no judge could commit acts of folly or
of injustice with impunity, very few such acts would be committed. Had
this security been taken, and this freedom been enjoyed in time past,
the evils which have been accumulating for ages would have had no
existence, the law would have been precise, clear, and sufficient, and
its administration very different indeed from that which we are
compelled to witness.*

Edition: current; Page: [34]
We regard it, then, as one of the most favourable signs of the times,
that this indiscriminating reverence for all the instruments of
judicature is giving way; that the proceedings of judges begin to obtain
their due share of examination, and their misconduct of reprobation. And
we take this opportunity of declaring our conviction, that this great
and salutary change has been in a great degree owing to the
indefatigable exertions of the Morning Chronicle; a journal, in which we
have now been long accustomed to look for excellence of all sorts, but
which has displayed, more particularly, in its strictures on the
language and conduct of judicial functionaries, a degree of true
courage, of ability, and of morality in its highest and least common
shape, which it has been but too rarely our lot to witness in the
periodical press of this country.

The two following conclusions may now, we think, be regarded as fully
established:

That the law of England, as delivered by its authorized interpreters,
the judges, however earnestly the same judges may occasionally disavow
this doctrine, prohibits all unfavourable representation with respect to
institutions, and with respect to the government and its acts.

And, consequently, that if any freedom of discussion is permitted to
exist, it is only because it cannot be repressed; the reason why it
cannot be repressed, being, the dread of public opinion.

And now, having established these two propositions, we have only further
to recommend them to the most serious consideration of our readers.

The importance of free discussion, though frequently dwelt upon by
public writers, is seldom fully appreciated by those who, not being
themselves exposed to the danger of becoming its martyrs, erroneously
consider themselves little affected by its violations. It concerns in
fact equally every member of the community. It is equal in value to good
government, because without it good government cannot exist. Once remove
it, and not only are all existing abuses perpetuated, but all which, in
the course of successive ages, it has overthrown, revive in a moment,
along with that ignorance and imbecility, against which it is the only
safeguard. Conceive the horrors of an oriental despotism—from this and
worse we are protected only by the press. Carry next the imagination,
not to any living example of prosperity and good government, but to the
furthest limit of happiness which is compatible with human nature; and
behold that which may in time be attained, if the restrictions under
which the press still groans, merely for the security of the holders of
mischievous power, be removed. Such are the blessings of a free press:
and again and again be it repeated, there cannot be a free press without
freedom of censure.


On Marriage

she to whom my life is devoted has wished for a written exposition of my
opinions on the subject which, of all connected with human Institutions,
is nearest to her happiness. Such as that exposition can be made without
her to suggest and to decide, it is given in these pages: she, herself,
has not refused to put into writing for me, what she has thought and
felt on the same subject, and there I shall be taught all perhaps which
I have, and certainly all which I have not, found out for myself. In the
investigation of truth as in all else, “it is not good for man to be
alone.”[*] And more than all, in what concerns the relations of Man with
Woman, the law which is to be observed by both should surely be made by
both; not, as hitherto, by the stronger only.

How easy would it be for either me or you, to resolve this question for
ourselves alone! Its difficulties, for difficulties it has, are such as
obstruct the avenues of all great questions which are to be decided for
mankind at large, and therefore not for natures resembling each other,
but for natures or at least characters tending to all the points of the
moral compass. All popular morality is as I once said to you a
compromise among conflicting natures, each renouncing a certain portion
of what its own desires call for, in order to avoid the evils of a
perpetual warfare with all the rest. That is the best popular morality,
which attains this general pacification with the least sacrifice of the
happiness of the higher natures, who are the greatest, indeed the only
real, sufferers by the compromise: for they are called upon to give up
what would really make them happy; while others are commonly required
only to restrain desires the gratification of which would bring no real
happiness. In the adjustment, moreover, of the compromise, the higher
natures count only in proportion to their number, how small! or to the
number of those whom they can influence: while the conditions of the
compromise weigh heavily upon them in the ratio of their greater
capacity of happiness, and its natural consequence, their keener sense
of want and disappointment when the degree of happiness which they know
would fall to their lot but for untoward external circumstances, is
denied them.

By the higher natures I mean those characters who from the combination
of natural and acquired advantages, have the greatest capacity of
feeling happiness, Edition: current; Page: [38] Edition: current; Page:
[39] and of bestowing it. Of bestowing it in two ways: as being
beautiful to contemplate, and therefore the natural objects of
admiration and love; and also as being fitted, and induced, by their
qualities of mind and heart, to promote by their actions, and by all
that depends upon their will, the greatest possible happiness of all who
are within the sphere of their influence.

[lf0223-21_figure_001.jpg]
Folio 1r of “On Marriage”

British Library of Political and Economic Science

If all persons were like these, or even would be guided by these,
morality might be very different from what it must now be; or rather it
would not exist at all as morality, since morality and inclination would
coincide. If all resembled you, my lovely friend, it would be idle to
prescribe rules for them. By following their own impulses under the
guidance of their own judgment, they would find more happiness, and
would confer more, than by obeying any moral principles or maxims
whatever; since these cannot possibly be adapted beforehand to every
peculiarity of circumstance which can be taken into account by a sound
and vigorous intellect worked by a strong will, and guided by what
Carlyle calls “an open loving heart.”[*] Where there exists a genuine
and strong desire to do that which is most for the happiness of all,
general rules are merely aids to prudence, in the choice of means; not
peremptory obligations. Let but the desires be right, and the
“imagination lofty and refined”:[†] and provided there be disdain of all
false seeming, “to the pure all things are pure.”[‡]

It is easy enough to settle the moral bearings of our question upon such
characters. The highest natures are of course impassioned natures; to
such, marriage is but one continued act of self-sacrifice where strong
affection is not, every tie therefore which restrains them from seeking
out and uniting themselves with some one whom they can perfectly love,
is a yoke to which they cannot be subjected without oppression: and to
such a person when found, they would naturally, superstition apart,
scorn to be united by any other tie than free and voluntary choice. If
such natures have been healthily developed in other respects, they will
have all other good and worthy feelings strong enough to prevent them
from pursuing this happiness at the expense of greater suffering to
others, and that is the limit of the forbearance which morality ought in
such a case to enjoin.

But will the morality which suits the highest natures, in this matter,
be also best for all inferior natures? My conviction is, that it will,
but this can be only a happy accident. All the difficulties of morality
in any of its branches, grow out of the conflict which continually
arises between the highest morality and even the best popular morality
which the degree of developement yet attained by average human nature,
will allow to exist.

Edition: current; Page: [40]
If all, or even most persons, in the choice of a companion of the other
sex, were led by any real aspiration towards, or sense of, the happiness
which such companionship in its best shape is capable of giving to the
best natures, there would never have been any reason why law or opinion
should have set any limits to the most unbounded freedom of uniting and
separating: nor is it probable that popular morality would ever, in a
civilized or refined people, have imposed any restraint upon that
freedom. But, as I once said to you, the law of marriage as it now
exists, has been made by sensualists, and for sensualists, and to bind
sensualists. The aim and purpose of that law is either to tie up the
sense, in the hope by so doing, of tying up the soul also, or else to
tie up the sense because the soul is not cared about at all. Such
purposes never could have entered into the minds of any to whom nature
had given souls capable of the higher degrees of happiness: nor could
such a law ever have existed but among persons to whose natures it was
in some degree congenial, and therefore more suitable than at first
sight may be supposed by those whose natures are widely different.

There can, I think, be no doubt that for a long time the indissolubility
of marriage acted powerfully to elevate the social position of women.
The state of things to which in almost all countries it succeeded, was
one in which the power of repudiation existed on one side but not on
both: in which the stronger might cast away the weaker, but the weaker
could not fly from the yoke of the stronger. To a woman of an
impassioned character, the difference between this and what now exists,
is not worth much; for she would wish to be repudiated, rather than to
remain united only because she could not be got rid of. But the
aspirations of most women are less high. They would wish to retain any
bond of union they have ever had with a man to whom they do not prefer
any other, and for whom they have that inferior kind of affection which
habits of intimacy frequently produce. Now, assuming what may be assumed
of the greater number of men, that they are attracted to women solely by
sensuality or at best by a transitory taste; it is not deniable, that
the irrevocable vow gave to women when the passing gust had blown over,
a permanent hold upon the men who would otherwise have cast them off.
Something, indeed much, of a community of interest, arose from the mere
fact of being indissolubly united: the husband took an interest in the
wife as being his wife, if he did not from any better feeling: it became
essential to his respectability that his wife also should be respected;
and commonly when the first revulsion of feeling produced by satiety,
went off, the mere fact of continuing together, if the woman had
anything loveable in her and the man was not wholly brutish, could
hardly fail to raise up some feeling of regard and attachment. She
obtained also, what is often far more precious to her, the certainty of
not being separated from her children.

Now if this be all that human life has for women, it is little enough;
and any woman who feels herself capable of great happiness, and whose
aspirations have not been artificially checked, will claim to be set
free from only this, to seek for Edition: current; Page: [41] more. But
women in general, as I have already remarked, are more easily contented.
And this I believe to be the cause of the general aversion of women to
the idea of facilitating divorce. They have a habitual belief that their
power over men is chiefly derived from men’s sensuality; and that the
same sensuality would go elsewhere in search of gratification, unless
restrained by law and opinion. They, on their part, mostly seek in
marriage, a home, and the state or condition of a married woman, with
the addition or not as it may happen, of a splendid establishment &c.
&c. These things once obtained, the indissolubility of marriage renders
them sure of keeping. And most women, either because these things really
give them all the happiness they are capable of, or from the artificial
barriers which curb all spontaneous movements to seek their greatest
felicity, are generally more anxious not to peril the good they have
than to go in search of a greater. If marriage were dissoluble, they
think they could not retain the position once acquired; or not without
practising upon the affections of men by those arts, disgusting in the
extreme to any woman of simplicity, by which a cunning mistress
sometimes establishes and retains her ascendancy.

These considerations are nothing to an impassioned character; but there
is something in them, for the characters from which they emanate—is not
that so? The only conclusion, however, which can be drawn from them, is
one for which there would exist ample grounds even if the law of
marriage as it now exists were perfection. This conclusion is, the
absurdity and immorality of a state of society and opinion in which a
woman is at all dependent for her social position upon the fact of her
being or not being married. Surely it is wrong, wrong in every way, and
on every view of morality, even the vulgar view,—that there should exist
any motives to marriage except the happiness which two persons who love
one another feel in associating their existence.

The means by which the condition of a married woman is rendered
artificially desirable, are not any superiority of legal rights, for in
that respect single women, especially if possessed of property, have the
advantage, the civil disabilities are greatest in the case of the
married woman. It is not law, but education and custom which make the
difference. Women are so brought up, as not to be able to subsist in the
mere physical sense, without a man to keep them: they are so brought up
as not to be able to protect themselves against injury or insult,
without some man on whom they have a special claim, to protect them,
they are so brought up, as to have no vocation or useful office to
fulfil in the world, remaining single; for all women who are educated
for anything except to get married, are educated to be married, and what
little they are taught deserving the name useful, is chiefly what in the
ordinary course of things will not come into actual use, unless nor
until they are married. A single woman therefore is felt both by herself
and others as a kind of excrescence on the surface of society, having no
use or function or office there. She is not indeed precluded from useful
and honorable exertion of various kinds, but a married woman is presumed
to be a useful member of society unless there is Edition: current; Page:
[42] evidence to the contrary; a single woman must establish, what very
few either women or men ever do establish, an individual claim.

All this, though not the less really absurd and immoral even under the
law of marriage which now exists, evidently grows out of that law, and
fits into the general state of society of which that law forms a part;
nor could continue to exist if the law were changed, and marriage were
not a contract at all, or were an easily dissoluble one. The
indissolubility of marriage is the keystone of woman’s present lot, and
the whole comes down and must be reconstructed if that is removed.

And the truth is, that this question of marriage cannot properly be
considered by itself alone. The question is not what marriage ought to
be, but a far wider question, what woman ought to be. Settle that first,
and the other will settle itself. Determine whether marriage is to be a
relation between two equal beings, or between a superior and an
inferior, between a protector and a dependent; and all other doubts will
easily be resolved.

But in this question there is surely no difficulty. There is no natural
inequality between the sexes; except perhaps in bodily strength; even
that admits of doubt: and if bodily strength is to be the measure of
superiority, mankind are no better than savages. Every step in the
progress of civilization has tended to diminish the deference paid to
bodily strength, until now when that quality confers scarcely any
advantages except its natural ones: the strong man has little or no
power to employ his strength as a means of acquiring any other advantage
over the weaker in body. Every step in the progress of civilization has
similarly been marked by a nearer approach to equality in the condition
of the sexes; and if they are still far from being equal, the hindrance
is not now in the difference of physical strength, but in artificial
feelings and prejudices.

If nature has not made men and women unequal, still less ought the law
to make them so. It may be assumed, as one of those propositions which
would almost be made weaker by anything so ridiculous as attempting to
prove them, that men and women ought to be perfectly coequal: that a
woman ought not to be dependent on a man, more than a man on a woman,
except so far as their affections make them so, by a voluntary
surrender, renewed and renewing at each instant by free and spontaneous
choice.

But this perfect independence of each other for all save affection,
cannot be, if there be dependence in pecuniary circumstances: a
dependence which in the immense majority of cases must exist, if the
woman be not capable, as well as the man, of gaining her own
subsistence.

The first and indispensable step, therefore, towards the enfranchisement
of woman, is that she be so educated, as not to be dependent either on
her father or her husband for subsistence: a position which in nine
cases out of ten, makes her either the plaything or the slave of the man
who feeds her; and in the tenth case, only his humble friend. Let it not
be said that she has an equivalent and compensating advantage in the
exemption from toil: men think it base and servile in men to accept
Edition: current; Page: [43] food as the price of dependence, and why do
they not deem it so in women? solely because they do not desire that
women should be their equals. Where there is strong affection,
dependence is its own reward: but it must be voluntary dependence; and
the more perfectly voluntary it is,—the more exclusively each owes every
thing to the other’s affection and to nothing else,—the greater is the
happiness. And where affection is not, the woman who will be dependent
for the sake of a maintenance, proves herself as low-minded as a man in
the like case—or would prove herself so, if that resource were not too
often the only one her education has given her, and if her education had
not also taught her not to consider as a degradation, that which is the
essence of all prostitution, the act of delivering up her person for
bread.

It does not follow that a woman should actually support herself because
she should be capable of doing so: in the natural course of events she
will not. It is not desirable to burthen the labour market with a double
number of competitors. In a healthy state of things, the husband would
be able by his single exertions to earn all that is necessary for both;
and there would be no need that the wife should take part in the mere
providing of what is required to support life: it will be for the
happiness of both that her occupation should rather be to adorn and
beautify it. Except in the class of actual day-labourers, that will be
her natural task, if task it can be called which will in so great a
measure, be accomplished rather by being than by doing.

We have all heard the vulgar talk that the proper employments of a wife
are household superintendence, and the education of her children. As for
household superintendence, if nothing be meant but merely seeing that
servants do their duty, that is not an occupation, every woman who is
capable of doing it at all can do it without devoting anything like half
an hour every day to that purpose peculiarly. It is not like the duty of
a head of an office, to whom his subordinates bring their work to be
inspected when finished: the defects in the performance of household
duties present themselves to inspection: skill in superintendance
consists in knowing the right way of noticing a fault when it occurs,
and giving reasonable advice and instruction how to avoid it; and more
depends upon establishing a good system at first, than upon a perpetual
and studious watchfulness. But if it be meant that the mistress of a
family shall herself do the work of servants, that is good and will
naturally take place in the rank in which there do not exist the means
of hiring servants; but nowhere else.

Then as to the education of children; if by that term be meant,
instructing them in particular arts or particular branches of knowledge,
it is absurd to impose that upon mothers: absurd in two ways: absurd to
set one-half of the adult human race to perform each on a small scale,
what a much smaller number of teachers could accomplish for all, by
devoting themselves exclusively to it; and absurd to set all mothers
doing that for which some persons must be fitter than others, and for
which average mothers cannot possibly be so fit as persons trained to
the profession. Here again, when the means do not exist of hiring
teachers, the mother is the natural Edition: current; Page: [44]
teacher: but no special provision needs to be made for that case.
Whether she is to teach or not, it is desirable that she should know;
because knowledge is desirable for its own sake; for its uses, for its
pleasures, and for its beautifying influence when not cultivated to the
neglect of other gifts. What she knows, she will be able to teach to her
children if necessary: but to erect such teaching into her occupation
whether she can better employ herself or not, is absurd.

The education which it does belong to mothers to give, and which if not
imbibed from them is seldom obtained in any perfection at all, is the
training of the affections; and through the affections, of the
conscience, and the whole moral being. But this most precious, and most
indispensable part of education, does not take up time; it is not a
business, an occupation; a mother does not accomplish it by sitting down
with her child for one or two or three hours to a task. She effects it
by being with the child; by making it happy, and therefore at peace with
all things, by checking bad habits in the commencement; by loving the
child, and by making the child love her. It is not by particular
efforts, but imperceptibly and unconsciously that she makes her own
character pass into the child; that she makes the child love what she
loves, venerate what she venerates, and imitate as far as a child can,
her example. These things cannot be done by a hired teacher; and they
are better and greater, than all the rest. But to impose upon mothers
what hired teachers can do, is mere squandering of the glorious
existence of a woman fit for woman’s highest destiny. With regard to
such things, her part is to see that they are rightly done, not to do
them.

The great occupation of woman should be to beautify life: to cultivate,
for her own sake and that of those who surround her, all her faculties
of mind, soul, and body; all her powers of enjoyment, and powers of
giving enjoyment; and to diffuse beauty, and elegance, and grace,
everywhere. If in addition to this the activity of her nature demands
more energetic and definite employment, there is never any lack of it in
the world. If she loves, her natural impulse will be to associate her
existence with him she loves, and to share his occupations; in which if
he loves her (with that affection of equality which alone deserves to be
called love) she will naturally take as strong an interest, and be as
thoroughly conversant, as the most perfect confidence on his side can
make her.

Such will naturally be the occupations of a woman who has fulfilled what
seems to be considered as the end of her existence, and attained what is
really its happiest state, by uniting herself to a man whom she loves.
But whether so united or not, women will never be what they should be,
nor their social position what it should be, until women, as universally
as men, have the power of gaining their own livelihood: until,
therefore, every girl’s parents have either provided her with
independent means of subsistence, or given her an education qualifying
her to provide those means for herself. The only difference between the
employments of women and those of men will be, that those which partake
most of the beautiful, or Edition: current; Page: [45] which require
delicacy and taste rather than muscular exertion, will naturally fall to
the share of women: all branches of the fine arts in particular.

In considering, then, what is the best law of marriage, we are to
suppose that women already are, what they would be in the best state of
society; no less capable of existing independently and respectably
without men, than men without women. Marriage, on whatever footing it
might be placed, would be wholly a matter of choice, not, as for a woman
it now is, something approaching to a matter of necessity; something, at
least, which every woman is under strong artificial motives to desire,
and which if she attain not, her life is considered to be a failure.

These suppositions being made; and it being no longer any advantage to a
woman to be married; merely for the sake of being married, why should
any woman cling to the indissolubility of marriage, as if it could be
for the good of one party that it should continue when the other party
desires that it should be dissolved?

It is not denied by anyone, that there are numerous cases in which the
happiness of both parties would be greatly promoted by a dissolution of
marriage. We will add, that when the social position of the two sexes
shall be perfectly equal, a divorce if it be for the happiness of either
party, will be for the happiness of both. No one but a sensualist would
desire to retain a merely animal connexion with a person of the other
sex, unless perfectly assured of being preferred by that person, above
all other persons in the world. This certainty never can be quite
perfect under the law of marriage as it now exists: it would be nearly
absolute, if the tie were merely voluntary.

Not only there are, but it is in vain to hope that there will not always
be, innumerable cases, in which the first connexion formed will be one
the dissolution of which if it could be, certainly would be, and ought
to be, effected. It has long ago been remarked that of all the more
serious acts of the life of a human being, there is not one which is
commonly performed with so little of forethought or consideration, as
that which is irrevocable, and which is fuller of evil than any other
act of the being’s whole life if it turn out ill. And this is not so
astonishing as it seems: The imprudence, while the contract remains
indissoluble, consists in marrying at all: If you do marry, there is
little wisdom shewn by a very anxious and careful deliberation
beforehand. Marriage is really, what it has been sometimes called, a
lottery; and whoever is in a state of mind to calculate the chances
calmly and value them correctly, is not at all likely to purchase a
ticket. Those who marry after taking great pains about the matter,
generally do but buy their disappointment dearer. For the failures in
marriage are such as are naturally incident to a first trial; the
parties are inexperienced, and cannot judge. Nor does this evil seem to
be remediable. A woman is allowed to give herself away for life, at an
age at which she is not allowed to dispose of the most inconsiderable
landed estate what then? if people are not to marry until they have
learnt prudence, they will seldom marry Edition: current; Page: [46]
before thirty: can this be expected, or is it to be desired? To direct
the immature judgment, there is the advice of parents and guardians: a
precious security! The only thing which a young girl can do, worse than
marrying to please herself, is marrying to please any other person.
However paradoxical it may sound to the ears of those who are reputed to
have grown wise as wine grows good, by keeping, it is yet true, that A,
an average person, can better know what is for his own happiness, than
B, an average person, can know what is for A’s happiness. Fathers and
mothers as the world is constituted, do not judge more wisely than sons
and daughters; they only judge differently: and the judgments of both
being of the ordinary strength, or rather of the ordinary weakness, a
person’s own self has the advantage of a considerably greater number of
data to judge from, and the further one of a stronger interest in the
subject. Foolish people will say, that being interested in the subject
is a disqualification; strange that they should not distinguish between
being interested in a cause as a party before a judge, i.e., interested
in deciding one way, right or wrong,—and being interested as a person is
in the management of his own property, interested in deciding right. The
parties themselves are only interested in doing what is most for their
happiness; but their relatives may have all sorts of selfish interests
to promote by inducing them to marry or not to marry.

The first choice, therefore, is made under very complicated
disadvantages. By the fact of its being the first, the parties are
necessarily inexperienced in the particular matter; they are commonly
young (especially the party who is in greatest peril from a mistake) and
therefore inexperienced in the knowledge and judgment of mankind and of
themselves generally: and finally, they have seldom had so much as an
opportunity afforded them, of gaining any real knowledge of each other,
since in nine cases out of ten they have never been once in each other’s
society completely unconstrained, or without consciously or
unconsciously acting a part.

The chances therefore are many to one against the supposition that a
person who requires, or is capable of, great happiness, will find that
happiness in a first choice: and in a very large proportion of cases the
first choice is such that if it cannot be recalled, it only embitters
existence. The reasons, then, are most potent for allowing a subsequent
change.

What there is to be said in favor of the indissolubility, superstition
apart, resolves itself into this: that it is highly desirable that
changes should not be frequent; and desirable that the first choice
should be, even if not compulsorily, yet very generally, persevered in:
That consequently we ought to beware lest in giving facilities for
retracting a bad choice, we hold out greater encouragement than at
present for making such a choice as there will probably be occasion to
retract.

It is proper to state as strongly as possible the arguments which may be
advanced in support of this view of the question.

Repeated trials for happiness, and repeated failures, have the most
mischievous Edition: current; Page: [47] effect on all minds. The finer
spirits are broken down, and disgusted with all things: their
susceptibilities are deadened, or converted into sources of bitterness,
and they lose the power of being ever contented. On the commoner natures
the effects produced are not less deplorable. Not only is their capacity
of happiness worn out, but their morality is depraved: all refinement
and delicacy of character is extinguished; all sense of any peculiar
duties or of any peculiar sacredness attaching to the relation between
the sexes, is worn away; and such alliances come to be looked upon with
the very same kind of feelings which are now connected with a passing
intrigue.

Thus much as to the parties themselves, but besides the parties, there
are also to be considered their children; beings who are wholly
dependent both for happiness and for excellence upon their parents; and
who in all but the extreme cases of actual profligacy, or perpetual
bickering and disunion, must be better cared for in both points if their
parents remain together.

So much importance is due to this last consideration, that I am
convinced, if marriage were easily dissoluble, two persons of opposite
sexes who unite their destinies would generally, if they were wise,
think it their duty to avoid having children until they had lived
together for a considerable length of time, and found in each other a
happiness adequate to their aspirations. If this principle of morality
were observed, how many of the difficulties of the subject we are
considering would be smoothed down! To be jointly the parents of a human
being, should be the very last pledge of the deepest, holiest, and most
durable affection, for that is a tie which independently of convention,
is indeed indissoluble: an additional and external tie, most precious
where the souls are already indissolubly united, but simply burthensome
while it appears possible to either that they should ever desire to
separate.

It can hardly be anticipated, however, that such a course will be
followed by any but by those who to the greatest loftiness and delicacy
of feeling, unite the power of the most deliberate reflexion. If the
feelings be obtuse, the force of these considerations will not be felt;
and if the judgment be weak or hasty, whether from inherent defect or
from inexperience, people will fancy themselves in love for their whole
lives with a perfect being, when the case is far otherwise, and will
suppose they risk nothing by creating a new relationship with that
being, which can no longer be got rid of. It will therefore most
commonly happen that when circumstances arise which induce the parents
to separate, there will be children to suffer by the separation: nor do
I see how this difficulty can be entirely got over, until the habits of
society allow of a regulated community of living, among persons
intimately acquainted, which would prevent the necessity of a total
separation between the parents even when they had ceased to be connected
by any nearer tie than mutual good will, and a common interest in their
children.

There is yet another argument which may be urged against facility of
divorce. It is this. Most persons have but a very moderate capacity of
happiness; but no person Edition: current; Page: [48] ever finds this
out without experience, very few even with experience: and most persons
are constantly wreaking that discontent which has its source internally,
upon outward things. Expecting therefore in marriage, a far greater
degree of happiness than they commonly find; and knowing not that the
fault is in their own scanty capabilities of happiness—they fancy they
should have been happier with some one else: or at all events the
disappointment becomes associated in their minds with the being in whom
they had placed their hopes—and so they dislike one another for a
time—and during that time they would feel inclined to separate: but if
they remain united, the feeling of disappointment after a time goes off,
and they pass their lives together with fully as much of happiness as
they could find either singly or in any other union, without having
undergone the wearing of repeated and unsuccessful experiments.

Such are the arguments for adhering to the indissolubility of the
contract, and for such characters as compose the great majority of the
human race, it is not deniable that these arguments have considerable
weight.

That weight however is not so great as it appears. In all the above
arguments it is tacitly assumed, that the choice lies between the
absolute interdiction of divorce, and a state of things in which the
parties would separate on the most passing feeling of dissatisfaction.
Now this is not really the alternative. Were divorce ever so free, it
would be resorted to under the same sense of moral responsibility and
under the same restraints from opinion, as any other of the acts of our
lives. In no state of society but one in which opinion sanctions almost
promiscuous intercourse, (and in which therefore even the indissoluble
bond is not practically regarded,) would it be otherwise than
disreputable to either party, the woman especially, to change
frequently, or on light grounds. My belief is, that in a tolerably moral
state of society, the first choice would almost always, especially where
it had produced children, be adhered to, unless in case of such
uncongeniality of disposition as rendered it positively uncomfortable to
one or both of the parties to live together, or in case of a strong
passion conceived by one of them for a third person. Now in either of
these cases I can conceive no argument strong enough to convince me,
that the first connexion ought to be forcibly preserved.

I see not why opinion should not act with as great efficacy, to enforce
the true rules of morality in this matter, as the false. Robert Owen’s
definitions* of chastity Edition: current; Page: [49] and prostitution,
are quite as simple and take as firm a hold of the mind as the vulgar
ones which connect the ideas of virtue and vice with the performance or
non-performance of an arbitrary ceremonial.

The arguments, therefore, in favour of the indissolubility of marriage,
are as nothing in comparison with the far more potent arguments for
leaving this like the other relations voluntarily contracted by human
beings, to depend for its continuance upon the wishes of the contracting
parties. The strongest of all these arguments is that by no other means
can the condition and character of women become what it ought to be.

When women were merely slaves, to give them a permanent hold upon their
masters was a first step towards their elevation. That step is now
complete: and in the progress of civilization, the time has come when
women may aspire to something more than merely to find a protector. The
condition of a single woman has ceased to be dangerous and precarious:
the law, and general opinion, suffice without any more special
guardianship, to shield her in ordinary circumstances from insult or
injury: woman in short is no longer a mere property, but a person, who
is counted not solely on her husband’s or father’s account but on her
own. She is now ripe for equality. But it is absurd to talk of equality
while marriage is an indissoluble tie. It was a change greatly for the
better, from a state in which all the obligation was on the side of the
weaker, all the rights on the side of the physically stronger, to even
the present condition of an obligation nominally equal on both. But this
nominal equality is not real equality. The stronger is always able to
relieve himself wholly or in a great measure, from as much of the
obligation as he finds burthensome: the weaker cannot. The husband can
ill-use his wife, neglect her, and seek other women, not perhaps
altogether with impunity, but what are the penalties which opinion
imposes on him, compared with those which fall upon the wife who even
with that provocation, retaliates upon her husband? It is true perhaps
that if divorce were permitted, opinion would with like injustice, try
the wife who resorted to that remedy, by a harder measure than the
husband. But this would be of less consequence. Once separated she would
be comparatively independent of opinion: but so long as she is forcibly
united to one of those who make the opinion, she must to a great extent
be its slave.


Austin’s Lectures on Jurisprudence

if we could anticipate early or brilliant success for this work, we
should think more highly of the wisdom of the book-buying public than we
fear there are grounds for. This is a reading age; and precisely because
it is so reading an age, any book which is the result of profound
meditation, is perhaps less likely to be duly and profitably read than
at a former period. The world reads too much, and too quickly, to read
well. When books were few, to get through one was a work of time and
labour: what was written with thought was read with thought, and with a
desire to extract from it as much of the materials of knowledge as
possible. But when almost every person who can spell, can and will
write, what is to be done? It is difficult to know what to read, except
by reading every thing; and so much of the world’s business is now
transacted through the press, that it is necessary to know what is
printed if we desire to know what is going on Opinion weighs with so
vast a weight in the balance of events, that ideas of no value in
themselves, are of importance from the mere circumstance that they are
ideas, and have a bona fide existence as such anywhere out of Bedlam.
The world, in consequence, gorges itself with intellectual food of all
qualities, and in order to swallow the more, bolts it. Nothing is now
read slowly, or twice over. Books are run through with no less rapidity,
and scarcely leave a more durable impression than a newspaper article.
It is for this, among other causes, that so few books are produced of
any value. The lioness in the fable boasted that though she produced
only one at a birth, that one was a lion.[*] But if each lion only
counted for one, and each leveret for one, the advantage would all be on
the side of the hare. When every unit is individually weak, it is only
multitude that tells. Who wonders that the newspapers should carry all
before them? A book produces no greater effect than an article, and
there can be three hundred and sixty-five of these in one year. He,
therefore, who should and would write a book, and write it in the proper
manner of writing a book, now dashes down his first hasty thoughts, or
what he mistakes for thoughts, in a periodical. And the public is in the
predicament of an indolent man, who cannot bring himself to apply his
mind vigorously to his own affairs, and over whom, Edition: current;
Page: [54] therefore, not he who speaks most wisely, but he who speaks
most frequently, obtains the influence.

At such a period, any person who once more gives to mankind a
philosophical work, which he has conscientiously endeavoured to make as
good as he could, by unsparing labour and meditation, make it, performs
an act the more meritorious, as it is the less likely to meet with any
reward; and if, like Mr. Austin, he is qualified for the more successful
and profitable kinds of literary composition, yet deliberately prefers
the more instructive, the greater is his deserving. There are passages
in the volume before us, which shew that if the author chose, he could
excel as a popular writer; and the mere clippings and parings of a work
like this, would be material enough to be wrought up into more than one
popular book. But Mr. Austin knows, that in order to make an impression
upon careless, rapid, and impatient readers, it is necessary to avoid
calling upon them for a vigorous effort of attention, and that without
such an effort, no ideas can be imbibed but such as are loose and vague.
And knowing that there are many persons who are competent to explain
popularly, all that can be popularly explained; for one who can follow
out a long train of thought, and conceive and express it at once with
clearness and with precision, that the former may teach the people, but
it belongs to the latter only to teach the teachers of the people; our
author has chosen for himself the higher, and more difficult, though
less conspicuous and less honoured part.

He has accordingly produced a work which requires to be read, in the
antique sense of that term, not as we read a novel, but rather as men
read for honours at the University. But the work will repay those who
shall so read it. As all know who have ever really learnt any thing,
real knowledge never comes by easy reading. Nobody ever set about
learning Latin by running through the Latin Grammar. Mr. Austin’s work
is part of the grammar of a science. As such, it is not a book for any
but persons who are really anxious to learn; but to them, it is such a
book as they delight in. The author’s style is a model of perspicuity:
the concatenation of his propositions is free from all obscurity; and
the reader will find no difficulty but that which is inseparable from
the attempt to communicate precise ideas.

The volume consists of the preliminary lectures of a course delivered by
Mr. Austin at the University of London, and which we had the good
fortune of hearing. An outline of the entire course is annexed to the
present publication.

We shall endeavour to give as sufficient a conception as can be given in
a few words, of what our author understands by Jurisprudence, as
distinguished from the philosophy of Legislation.

Both these sciences are conversant with laws; namely, laws in the strict
sense, laws set to man by man, in the character of a political superior.
But though the subject-matter of both sciences be the same, both do not
look at it under the same aspect.

The philosophy of legislation is conversant with laws, as a contrivance
for accomplishing certain ends. It considers what are the purposes of
law; and judges Edition: current; Page: [55] of the means, according as
they are well or ill adapted to the accomplishment of those purposes. It
teaches the requisites of a good law; and what particular laws would be
good or bad, either universally, or under any supposable set of
circumstances.

Jurisprudence, on the other hand, does not take any direct cognizance of
the goodness or badness of laws, nor undertake to weigh the motives
which lead to their establishment: it assumes their existence as a fact,
and treats of their nature and properties, as a naturalist treats of any
natural phenomenon. It furnishes an analytical exposition, not indeed of
any particular system of existing laws, but of what is common to all or
most systems of law.

In the first place, the very notion of a law is an extremely complex
idea: that of a body of laws, still more so. These ideas have to be
analyzed. The component elements of a law, and of a body of laws, and
the suppositions which they involve, must be precisely determined and
cleared up. For instance, a law supposes a political superior from whom
the law emanates: what is a political superior? All laws create
obligations, and are clothed with sanctions; all laws (certain peculiar
cases excepted) create rights, but what is meant by an obligation, a
sanction, a right? Every body of laws recognises a distinction between
civil law and criminal law, between private law and constitutional law:
is there any rational foundation for these distinctions, and what is it?

Further, laws operate only by creating rights, and duties, or
obligations. The rights and duties which the law of any country creates,
are the law itself. Now these rights and duties fall so naturally into
certain classes, form themselves so naturally into certain groups, that
in all or almost all bodies of law, which men have tried to reduce into
any thing like a systematic order, an effort has been made to grasp
these very groups, and bind them together by appropriate technical
terms. But the attempt has generally been a most lame and impotent
one,[*] partly for want of what may be called the coup d’oeil of a
practised logician, which enables him, like an experienced general, to
survey an entire field at once, and either comprehend an actual
arrangement, or frame an imaginary one, without being bewildered by the
multitude of details; and still more for want of mastery over the casual
associations connected with familiar terms, and of the capacity to wield
every word as a mere instrument to convey a thought; an instrument which
may be taken up and laid down at pleasure. The classes which have been
formed are not properly classes at all, for they are not separated by
plain well-marked boundaries, but cross one another in all directions.
It is impossible to define them, because no property can be found common
to an entire class; or none but what may also be found in something that
is absurdly left out of the class. Yet, as before observed, the authors
of these unskilful classifications have always had indistinctly before
their eyes Edition: current; Page: [56] certain natural groups, which
they have been ineffectually attempting to hit, and to find some means
of circumscribing within the bounds of a general expression. Hence, if
we were to strip off from the arrangement and technical language of each
system of law, whatever is purely accidental, and (as it may be termed)
historical, having a reference solely to the peculiar history of the
institutions of the particular people; if we were to take the remainder,
and regularize and correct it according to its own general conception
and spirit; we should bring the nomenclature and arrangement of all
systems of law existing in any civilized society, to something very
nearly identical.

Now the science of jurisprudence, as our author conceives it, endeavours
to disentangle these natural groups (with which all classifications
coincide in the gross, and none accurately) from the environment which
surrounds them, of terms without any precise meaning, except perhaps a
historical one, and distinctions answering to no difference, except,
perhaps, one which has ceased to exist. The natural groups are thus
brought into strong relief, a distinct conception is gained of their
boundaries; and compact and precise names may be obtained to designate
them by. When this is done, a commanding view may be taken of the
detailed provisions of any existing body of law, the rights and duties
which it establishes: they may be rendered cognoscible, as Mr. Bentham
would say;[*] a common framework is obtained, into the compartments of
which all bodies of law may be distributed; and a systematic exposition
might be given with comparative ease, either of one or of any number of
legal systems, in parallel columns.

Thus prepared, the student of any existing system of law would no longer
find it a mass of inextricable confusion; he would be enabled, in a
comparatively short time, to obtain a far more perfect mastery of the
system than was ever possessed by those who made it. An expository law
book would then be so constructed as to be a lesson of clear ideas,
instead of being almost enough to incapacitate the mind from ever
forming one. And the legislator who would either reduce any existing
body of laws into a code, or draw up an improved system, would reap two
benefits. The whole of the rights and duties which past legislators have
thought it desirable to create, would be brought compendiously under his
view; and he would have an arrangement, and a technical language ready
made, which would be an excellent basis for him to start from in framing
his own. For though classification is not made by nature, but is wholly
an affair of convenience, one most important part of the convenience of
any classification is, that it shall coincide, as far as possible, with
the mode in which the ideas have a natural tendency to arrange
themselves.

Unfortunately, the science of jurisprudence as thus conceived, mostly
remains still to be created. No person, however, is qualified to do more
towards creating it Edition: current; Page: [57] than the author whose
work is now before us. Whatever assistance is to be derived on the one
hand from the Roman lawyers and their German successors; on the other,
from our own immortal Bentham, he has thoroughly possessed himself of.
And his course of lectures, if it were completed as it has been begun,
would, we think, leave little for any successor in the same field. The
present work, however, is merely an introduction; and even in his oral
lectures, the Professor had not space to complete more than a small part
of his intended scheme. There are portions, however, of what he has
actually delivered (and which we hope may one day be published) still
more instructive and interesting than what is here given.

The volume now published is occupied in “determining the province of
jurisprudence,” by analyzing the notion of a law, in the strict sense of
the term, namely, a law set by a political superior,—and discriminating
it from whatever else has received the name of law; whereof our author
distinguishes three kinds, namely, laws set to man by God, laws
(analogically so called) which may be said to be prescribed by opinion;
and laws so called only by metaphor, as when we speak of the law of
gravitation.[*]

These various notions are defined and discriminated from one another
with rare logical power, and superiority over the trammels of language.
In addition to this main object of the work, it abounds in valuable
discussions on incidental topics. To mention only one of these
discussions, (the largest, and most important,) that great question
which has occupied so many of the most gifted minds, the foundation of
moral obligation, and the nature of the standard or test of right and
wrong, whether it be utility or an instinctive principle, forms the
principal subject of no less than three lectures; being introduced under
the head of the Divine Law, in the form of an inquiry, in what way the
unrevealed portion of that law is made known to us.[†] This
investigation will be the most interesting part of the present volume to
the general reader. Mr. Austin is a strong partisan of the doctrine
which considers utility as the test or index to moral duty. Though he
has stated some, he has omitted others of the essential explanations
with which we think that this doctrine should be received; but he has
treated the question in a most enlarged and comprehensive spirit, and in
the loftiest tone of moral feeling, and has discussed certain branches
of it in a manner which we have never seen equalled.

Valuable as this work is in the intrinsic merits of its contents, its
greatest value, after all, is, we think, as a logical discipline to the
mind. We hardly ever read a book which appears to us, if duly studied,
to have so great a tendency to accustom the mind to habits of close and
precise thinking, of using every word with a meaning, or meanings
accurately settled, rigidly adhered to, and always present to the mind;
of never leaving off with a half-solution of a doubt or difficulty, but
sticking to it till nothing remains unexplained.

Edition: current; Page: [58]
Mr. Austin’s style is more remarkable for clearness and precision than
ease; but it is perfectly unaffected; and his language is the rich,
expressive, homely English, of his favourite writers, Hobbes and Locke.

It would be injustice to our author to conclude this notice without
affording him an opportunity of speaking for himself; but it would be
still greater injustice to exhibit a mere fragment of a philosophic
investigation, the merit of which must of course be mainly dependent
upon its connected and systematic character. Our specimens must
necessarily be selected from the merely parenthetical passages. The
following may perhaps serve, as well as any others, to give a conception
of our author’s general turn of thought and expression.

The first passage that we shall quote is a Pisgah view[*] of the future
improvement of the moral sciences:

If there were a reading public, numerous, discerning, and impartial, the
science of ethics, and all the various sciences which are nearly related
to ethics, would advance with unexampled rapidity.

By the hope of obtaining the approbation which it would bestow upon
genuine merit, writers would be incited to the patient research and
reflection, which are not less requisite to the improvement of ethical,
than to the advancement of mathematical science.

Slight and incoherent thinking would be received with general contempt,
though it were cased in polished periods, studded with brilliant
metaphors. Ethics would be considered by readers, and, therefore,
treated by writers, as the matter or subject of a science; as a subject
for persevering and accurate investigation, and not as a theme for
childish and babbling rhetoric.

This general demand for truth, (though it were clothed in homely guise,)
and this general contempt of falsehood and nonsense, (though they were
decked with rhetorical graces,) would improve the method and the style
of inquiries into ethics, and into the various sciences which are nearly
related to ethics. The writers would attend to the suggestions of Hobbes
and of Locke, and would imitate the method so successfully pursued by
geometers, though such is the variety of the premises which some of
their inquiries involve, and such are the complexity and ambiguity of
some of the terms, that they would often fall short of the perfect
exactness and coherency which the fewness of his premises, and the
simplicity and definiteness of his expressions, enable the geometer to
reach. But, though they would often fall short of geometrical exactness
and coherency, they might always approach, and would often attain to
them. They would acquire the art and the habit of defining their leading
terms, of steadily adhering to the meanings announced by the
definitions; of carefully examining and distinctly stating their
premises, and of deducing the consequences of their premises with
logical vigour. Without rejecting embellishments which might happen to
fall in their way, the only excellencies of style for which they would
seek are precision, clearness, and conciseness; the first being
absolutely requisite to the successful prosecution of inquiry, whilst
the others enable the reader to seize the meaning with certainty, and
spare him unnecessary fatigue.

And, what is equally important, the protection afforded by this public
to diligent and honest writers would inspire into writers upon ethics,
and upon the nearly related sciences, the spirit of dispassionate
inquiry the “indifferency” or impartiality in the pursuit of truth,
which is just as requisite to the detection of truth as continued and
close attention, or Edition: current; Page: [59] sincerity and
simplicity of purpose. Relying on the discernment and the justice of a
numerous and powerful public, shielded by its countenance from the
shafts of the hypocrite and the bigot, indifferent to the idle whistling
of that harmless storm, they would scrutinize established institutions,
and current or received opinions, fearlessly but coolly, with the
freedom which is imperiously demanded by general utility, but without
the antipathy which is begotten by the dread of persecution, and which
is scarcely less adverse than “the love of things ancient” to the rapid
advancement of science

This patience in investigation, this distinctness and accuracy of
method, this freedom and indifferency in the pursuit of the useful and
the true, would thoroughly dispel the obscurity by which the science is
clouded, and would clear it from most of its uncertainties. The wish,
the hope, the prediction of Mr. Locke, would, in time, be accomplished:
and “ethics would rank with the sciences which are capable of
demonstration.”[*] The adepts in ethical, as well as in mathematical
science, would commonly agree in their results, and, as the jar of their
conclusions gradually subsided, a body of doctrine and authority, to
which the multitude might trust, would emerge from the existing chaos.
The direct examination of the multitude would only extend to the
elements, and to the easier, though more momentous of the derivative
practical truths. But none of their opinions would be adopted blindly,
nor would any of their opinions be obnoxious to groundless and
capricious charge. Though most or many of their opinions would still be
taken from authority, the authority to which they would trust might
satisfy the most scrupulous reason. In the unanimous or general consent
of numerous and impartial inquirers, they would find that mark of
trustworthiness which justifies reliance on authority, wherever we are
debarred from the opportunity of examining the evidence for ourselves.

(Pp. 81-4.)

We had marked several passages for quotation: but space presses, and we
must conclude with the following estimate of Dr. Paley:

The treatise by Dr. Paley on Moral and Political Philosophy[†]
exemplifies the natural tendency of narrow and domineering interests to
pervert the course of inquiry from its legitimate purpose

As men go, this celebrated and influential writer was a wise and a
virtuous man. By the qualities of his head and heart, by the cast of his
talents and affections, he was fitted, in a high degree, to seek for
ethical truth, and to expound it successfully to others. He had a clear
and a just understanding; a hearty contempt of paradox, and of ingenious
but useless refinements, no fastidious disdain of the working people,
but a warm sympathy with their homely enjoyments and sufferings. He knew
that they are more numerous than all the rest of the community, and he
felt that they are more important than all the rest of the community to
the eye of unclouded reason and impartial benevolence

But the sinister influence[‡] of the position, which he unluckily
occupied, cramped his generous affections, and warped the rectitude of
his understanding

A steady pursuit of the consequences indicated by general utility, was
not the most obvious way to professional advancement, nor even the short
cut to extensive reputation. For there was no impartial public, formed
from the community at large, to reward and encourage with its
approbation an inflexible adherence to truth

Edition: current; Page: [60]
If the bulk of the community had been instructed, so far as their
position will permit, he might have looked for a host of readers from
the middle classes. He might have looked for a host of readers from
those classes of the working people, whose wages are commonly high,
whose leisure is not inconsiderable, and whose mental powers are called
into frequent exercise by the natures of their occupations or callings.
To readers of the middle classes, and of all the higher classes of the
working people, a well-made and honest Treatise on Moral and Political
Philosophy, in his clear, vivid, downright, English style, would have
been the most easy and attractive, as well as instructive and useful, of
abstract or scientific books

But those numerous classes of the community were commonly too coarse and
ignorant to care for books of the sort. The great majority of the
readers who were likely to look into his book, belonged to the classes
which are elevated by rank or opulence, and to the peculiar professions
or callings which are distinguished by the name of “liberal.” And the
character of the book which he wrote, betrays the position of the
writer. In almost every chapter, and in almost every page, his fear of
offending the prejudices, commonly entertained by such readers, palpably
suppresses the suggestions of his clear and vigorous reason, and masters
the better affections which inclined him to the general good.

He was one of the greatest and best of the great and excellent writers,
who by the strength of their philosophical genius, or by their large and
tolerant spirit, have given imperishable lustre to the Church of
England, and extinguished or softened the hostility of many who reject
her creed. He may rank with the Berkeleys and Butlers, with the Burnets,
Tillotsons, and Hoadleys.

But in spite of the esteem with which I regard his memory, truth compels
me to add, that the book is unworthy of the man. For there is much
ignoble truckling to the dominant and influential few. There is a deal
of shabby sophistry in defence or extenuation of abuses which the few
are interested in upholding.


Reform in Education

in a recent number we briefly announced the appearance of this important
document in an English form.[*] We now return to it, because the
reception of Mr. Roebuck’s motion by the House of Commons,[†] and the
appointment of a committee to consider the subject of national
education,[‡] are tokens, among many others, that the present is an
auspicious moment for inviting the attention of the English public to
that highest and most important of all the objects which a government
can place before itself, and to the great things which have been
accomplished by another nation in the prosecution of that object.

The value of M. Cousin’s Report does not consist in the details, though
without the details it would be comparatively of little interest. It
throws no new or unexpected light upon the means of educating a people;
it simply enables us to realize the fact that a government exists
virtuous enough to will the end. The machinery is no other than that
which common sense suggests, and would suggest to any government
animated by the same spirit. Schools for all,[§] without distinction of
sect, and without imposing upon any sect the creed or observances of
another, the superintendence shared between a Minister of Public
Instruction, and local committees of a most democratic constitution, (a
fact perfectly accordant with the spirit of the Prussian government,
whose municipal institutions are among the freest in Europe;) and
finally, that without which the remainder of the system would be of
little value, schools for teachers.[¶] In all this there is nothing
intricate or recondite; what is memorable is not the conception, but
that it has found hands to execute it: that the thing is actually done,
done within two days’ journey of our own shores, done throughout a great
country, and by a government unrivalled in the art of doing well
whatever it does at all, because surpassing all other Edition: current;
Page: [64] governments in the systematic choice, for whatever it wishes
done, of the persons fittest for doing it.

The spirit which has accomplished this, with us is still to be created;
and in the hope of contributing to the creation of such a spirit, Mrs.
Austin has employed herself in rendering M. Cousin’s Report accessible
to the English reader.

Constituted, [says she,] as the government of this country is, and
accustomed as it is to receive its impulses from without, (a state of
things approved and consecrated by the national ways of thinking,) it
would be contrary to reason and to experience to expect it to originate
any great changes. This is not recognised, either by governors or
governed, as any part of its duty. It is to the public mind, therefore,
that those who desire any change must address themselves.

(P. viii.)

The preface, from which the above is an extract, well deserves to be
separately printed and widely circulated; by the force and
conclusiveness with which it combats the shallow opinions and groundless
feelings which oppose themselves in this country to a national
education, and by the happy union which it exhibits of an earnest spirit
and a conciliatory and engaging tone.

If, as from a speech of the Lord Chancellor a year ago[*] we might
suppose to be his opinion, it were enough that schools exist, and it
mattered not what they teach, or in what method they teach it, we might
in this country expect to see all the ends of a national education
speedily attained with little assistance from government.

In a country containing thirteen millions of people, the whole expense
of the schools to the state, not only for the lower but for the middling
classes, did not amount, in the year 1831, to 35,000l. When we remember
that, as it is asserted on the highest authority, 1,200,000l are
voluntarily raised for the support of our extremely defective popular
schools, we have surely no reason to despair that if our management were
equal to our means, ample provision would be found for the suitable
education of the whole people.*

The £20,000 granted by Parliament last year for building schoolhouses
called forth private contributions of nearly treble the amount.
Independently of all this, we have the immense endowments which the
charity commissioners have brought to light, and proved to have been for
generations embezzled and wasted. As far, therefore, as quantity of
teaching is concerned, the education of our people is, or will speedily
be, amply provided for. It is the quality which so grievously demands
the amending hand of government. And this is the demand which is
principally in danger of being obstructed by popular apathy and
ignorance. The very first condition of improvement is not yet realized;
the public are not sufficiently Edition: current; Page: [65]
discontented. They are not yet alive to the bad quality of the existing
tuition. The very people who furnish so vast an annual sum for the
maintenance of schools, often oppose themselves to the wish of their own
schoolmasters to give valuable instruction. With many of these patrons
of education, whose support Lord Brougham fears will be withdrawn if a
state provision be made for education,[*] the constant alarm is, not
lest too little, but lest too much, should be taught. And even where the
state of their inclinations is unexceptionable, can we expect any
judgment or intelligence in providing education for their inferiors in
the scale of society, from people who allow the places of education for
their own children to be in the wretched state in which we find almost
all the schools for the higher and middle classes of England? Are not
those schools, and the influence which parents exercise over them,
correctly described in the following passage:

aLet us blook at home, and examine whether with all the grievous abuses
of the endowed seminaries of Great Britain, they are, after all, ca
particlec worse than, or even so bad as, almost all our other places of
deducation.d We may ask, whether the desire to gain as much money with
as little labour as is consistent with saving appearances, be peculiar
to the endowed teachers? Whether the plan of nineteen-twentieths of our
unendowed schools be not an organized system of charlatanerie for
imposing upon the ignorance of ethee parents? Whether parents do, in
point of fact, prove themselves as solicitous, and as well qualified, to
judge rightly of the merits of places of education, as the theory of
Adam Smith supposes?[†] Whether the truth be not, that, for the most
part, they bestow very little thought upon the matter; or, if they do,
show themselves in general the ready dupes of the very shallowest
artifices? Whether the necessity of keeping parents in good humour does
not too often, instead of rendering the education better, render it
worse, the real ends of instruction being sacrificed, not solely (as
would fbe the case under other circumstancesf) to the ease of the
teacher, but to that, and galsog to the additional positive vices of
clap-trap and lip-proficiency? We may ask, whether it is not matter of
experience, that a schoolmaster who endeavours really to educate,
instead of endeavouring only to seem to educate, and laying himself out
for the suffrages of those who never look below the surface, and only
for an instant at that, is almost sure, unless he have the genius and
the ardour of a Pestalozzi, to make a losing speculation? Let us do what
we may, it will be the study of the hmereh trading schoolmaster to teach
down to the level of the parents, be that level high or low, as it is of
the trading author to write down to the level of his readers. And in the
one shape as in the other, it is iati all times and in all places
indispensable, that enlightened individuals and Edition: current; Page:
[66] enlightened governments should, from other motives than that of
pecuniary gain, bestir themselves to providej that good and wholesome
food for the wants of the mind, for which the competition of the mere
trading market affords in general so indifferent a substitute.*

To quote another author:

As regards the common run of day and boarding schools, it is well known
that they are, as much as any shopkeepers, obliged to gratify the
tastes, and satisfy the wishes of their customers; and that, even if
some establishments have risen into such popularity, as to render it
truly difficult to insure places in them, this enables them no more to
resist and combat the prevailing prejudices, than the most fashionable
shop in the metropolis has it in its power to abolish all fanciful
fashions, and to introduce a plain and simple dress. Their high
popularity is founded upon the opinion, that by them the public taste
will be gratified more than anywhere else; but let it for a moment be
suspected, that there is a design radically to reform that taste, or
merely to correct and purify it, and all the popularity will be gone in
an instant. Nowhere is there a more extensive application made of the
maxim, Mundus vult decipi, ergo decipiatur;[*] that is to say, in
education,—the vanity and folly of the parents will be flattered,
therefore let us flatter them. And although the weakness of the parents,
and the servility of schoolmasters, has been fully explored, and
although they heartily despise one another, yet the practical language
of a father, when putting his child to school, is still, “I want to be
deceived,—I want to be flattered;” and the schoolmaster’s answer is no
less, “You may rely upon it, it shall be done, in general matters, on
the usual terms, and in special matters, at so much extra.”†

What wonder, then, if they who so ill provide for what most nearly
concerns themselves, should be the wretchedest purveyors for the wants
of others? What wonder that, as Sir William Molesworth affirmed in his
speech on seconding Mr. Roebuck’s motion,

The so-called education, provided for the working classes of England,
deficient as it is admitted to be in quantity, is immeasurably more
deficient in quality; as instruction, it is lamentably meagre,
incomplete, and inappropriate; as education, as nearly as possible,
absolutely null. All instruction consists in the mere repetition by rote
of certain words, to which the children affix either no idea at all, or
ideas too indistinct to have any hold on their minds, or influence on
their conduct.[†]

“The schoolmaster,” (says the Cornish paper from which we take our
report of Edition: current; Page: [67] this excellent speech,) “the
schoolmaster may be abroad,* but it is in quest of his daily bread,
which he earns hardly and ungratefully,” and with as little thought and
as little labour to himself as possible.

Well was it said by Sir W. Molesworth, that,

In order to obviate all doubts upon this subject, and at the same time
to provide us with the data required for legislation on it, some means
should immediately be adopted to ascertain distinctly what is actually
taught in the popular schools throughout the country.[*]

Such should be the main object of the committee recently appointed by
the House of Commons: and a committee being essentially an unfit
instrument for conducting inquiries which must be protracted far beyond
the duration of the session, and for collecting from all parts of the
country evidence much of which can be obtained only on the spot, the
best proof which the committee could afford of wisdom and zeal in the
cause, would be to follow the example of the committee on municipal
corporations, and recommend an address to the king for the appointment
of a commission, to inquire into the quality of the existing popular
education in all its branches.[†]

The sort of facts which such an inquiry would elicit, may be judged by
the passages we are about to quote from a series of Lectures on
Christian Education, delivered in 1829 and published in 1830, by Dr.
Biber; a man of remarkable powers and attainments, and a most
unexceptionable witness to the narrowing and perverting tendency of the
religious instruction pretended to be given at our schools; as his own
religious sentiments are most fervent, and his hostility to
latitudinarianism in religion touches the verge of intolerance.

Of the Church-of-England, or self-styled National, schools:

What affords the most convincing evidence on this subject, and what I
wish, therefore, all those that are interested in it to witness
themselves, if they have the opportunity, is the yearly public
examination of the central school at Baldwin’s Gardens. I have been
present on one of those occasions, and what I then witnessed, far
exceeded all my conceptions of manufacture-teaching. What struck my mind
most forcibly in the whole display, was a sort of co-operative plan in
the solution of an arithmetical question. This was done, like all the
rest, in rotation, the first boy beginning, for instance, 6 times 3 are
18, second boy: put 8 and carry 1, third boy: 6 times 2 are 12; fourth
boy: 12 and 1 are 13, fifth boy: put 3 and carry 1; sixth boy: 6 times 7
are 42; seventh boy: 42 and 1 are 43; eighth boy: put 3 and carry 4 and
so all round and round, again and again, till the whole of it was gone
through. Now, although unquestionably all the children could, with a
moderate degree of attention, get the ciphers correctly on their slates,
it is evident that, with all this, there might, perhaps, not have been
more than two in the whole number, who could have solved the same
problem for Edition: current; Page: [68] themselves. But what is far
more important is, that such a plan of instruction is the direct way of
preventing them from ever thinking about what they are doing, and thus
cutting off every chance of their understanding it. With their
memory-knowledge of the multiplication, addition, and other tables, they
are put into this machinery, which, like the wheel of a treadmill,
although put in motion by the joint exertions of those in it, overpowers
the individual, and forces him to go on at any rate, whether he be
disposed to do so or not. Not to mention the absolute ignorance in which
the children in those schools always remain concerning number, their
attention being only directed to ciphers, I question whether the above
plan is calculated to make even good cipherers. For if there be no
knowledge of numbers, there should be some understanding, at least as
far as it can be had without the other, of the ciphering system, that
the pupil may not be the blind instrument of rules, blindly learned by
rote. Nevertheless the solution of the question, as I have described it
to you, gave general satisfaction to a number of the bishops, and a
large public, assembled on the occasion; and so did the reading of a
long list of alms—or reward—givings, at the end of the examination,
decreeing to one girl an apron, to another girl a pair of shoes, to such
a boy half a crown, to such another boy a pair of trowsers, &c.; that
both the givers and receivers might be seen and known of men! The
observations I made at that examination, I found confirmed by private
visits to the schools; and, among the rest, to one which I may, with the
more propriety, instance in support of the charges I have brought
against the system, as I can, from personal acquaintance, bear the
highest testimony to the zeal, as well as the generally enlightened
views, of the clergyman who presides over it, and in whose company I
visited it. I asked the children to read the parable of the Prodigal
Son,[*] and among other questions which I put to them was this. “What is
meant by riotous living?” “Dissipated living.” “And what does dissipated
living mean?” “Wasteful living.” “And what is the meaning of wasteful
living?” To this question, as their collection of synonymes was
exhausted, I received no answer, and therefore, to get upon intelligible
ground I asked then what things were necessary for subsistence, and what
not; when some of the girls contended that beer, and cheese, and cakes,
and patties, were indispensably necessary for life. And as in this case,
so I found it invariably, whenever and wherever I travelled out of the
road of those questions, which have for their object to direct the
children’s attention to mere words, on the most common subjects I found
their ideas unclear and confused, and the same children, who would use
the most correct language as long as they remained in the track of what
they were just then reading, or what they had learned by rote, were
unable to express themselves even with tolerable correctness on other
matters; a clear proof that their apparent knowledge was a mere
word-knowledge, in the acquisition or advantages of which the mind had
no share. Thus, on another visit, the boys were exhibiting their slates,
on which they had written various words. I stopped one among the rest,
who had the word “disadvantageous.” “What does that word mean, my boy?”
“I don’t know.” “You know, perhaps, what disadvantage means?” “No.” “Do
you know what advantageous means?” “No.” “Or, have you ever heard the
word advantage, what does that mean?” “I don’t know.” “Well, but suppose
you lost your jacket, would that be an advantage or a disadvantage to
you?” “An advantage!” was his answer.

It would be unfair, however, to let it be supposed that facts, such as
these, are only to be met with in National schools. On this head the
British system is quite as defective. Its method of ciphering, though
different in some of the details, is, on the whole, no less
objectionable, as it is, like the other, a mere mechanical application
of the mechanical rules of ciphering, mechanically inculcated into the
memory. And, as regards the preposterous exercise of learning to read
and to write words, selected merely from a regard to the number Edition:
current; Page: [69] of their syllables, by which the children are so
stupified, that they lose the habit of thinking altogether, and do not
care about the meaning even of that which they might understand, I
recollect a fact which far outdoes the boy, who thought it an advantage
for him to lose his jacket. It was at a Lancasterian school, and one
which has the name of being among the best conducted; so at least I was
told by my friend who went with me, and who is one of the managers. When
we entered the room, we found the boys engaged in writing words of
different lengths, according to the order of their seats, I passed by
those in which such words as “approximation, superintendency,” and the
like, caught my eye, and, looking over the sentences which some of the
more advanced boys were writing, I found one who had copied, about half
a dozen times, the words “Live in love.” “What are you writing here?” I
asked, “Live in love.” “And what does that mean?” “I don’t know!” “You
don’t know! But don’t you know what ‘love’ means?” “No!” “Or do you know
what ‘live’ means?” “No!” “What must you do to live in love?” “I don’t
know!” “Do you know what you must not do, to live in love!” “No, I
don’t.” “Well, but you should know something about what ‘Live in love’
means. Does it mean that you are to fight with the other boys?” “I can’t
tell!” “Well,” said I, turning to my friend, “what do you say to this?”
Upon which the school-master, observing somewhat of the scope of our
conversation, came up to us and said, “I dare say you might ask such
questions all over the school, without getting a better answer, they
none of them know what they are writing.”[*]

Of the Lancasterian schools:

It is worth while to examine, in detail, the operations of this system.
“Tickets of nominal value are given to deserving boys each school time,
which are called in at the end of every three months, and rewards are
paid to the holders in exchange. These tickets are valued at the rate of
eight for one penny.” It is not a mere prospect of reward, by which the
pupils are encouraged, a prize stuck up at the end of a long career,
which they must run through to attain it:—no, a reward is immediately
bestowed upon every performance of duty, the very same morning or
afternoon. A distant prospect, it is apprehended, might not act
powerfully enough; thus the children are accustomed to “love a reward
upon every cornfloor,”[†] and in whatsoever they do, instead of doing
it, according to the apostle’s injunction, for the glory of God,[‡] to
“love gifts, and follow after rewards.”[§] So effectual is the operation
of this admirable principle, that the fact has actually occurred in a
Lancasterian school that, upon the mistress proposing a task of rather a
novel description, the girls asked her, whether they should have tickets
for doing it, openly declaring, that if there was no reward attached to
it, they would not do it. “Point d’argent, point de Suisse.”[¶] The
daily getting of a reward for every thing that is called “deserving,” by
the British system, is, however, not sufficient, properly to cultivate
an hireling spirit. To complete this part of its education, the system
gives proper encouragement to a calculating spirit, first of all by the
conversion of the reward tickets into substantial rewards every three
months, and, secondly, by a popish sort of indulgence-trade, which the
children are permitted to carry on with them before their conversion
into real property, and by which those reward tickets come fully under
the denomination of the “Mammon of unrighteousness.”[∥] Under the head
“Punishments,” we Edition: current; Page: [70] are informed that at the
close of each school-time, “the bad boys are classed into divisions,
corresponding with the number of their offences, and are required to pay
one ticket for each offence; those who do so are dismissed, and those
who have no tickets are confined a quarter of an hour for every offence
reported against them.” And lest any doubt should remain on the subject,
it is further stated that “in all cases, the parties may be excused from
confinement, if they are in possession of reward tickets, by forfeiting
them, at the rate of one ticket for every quarter of an hour’s
detention.” Not enough that the child is taught to do his duty, not from
conscientious feeling of obligation, but for reward’s sake; he is also
taught, and that in the most effectual manner, viz., by practice, that
past good conduct amounts to a license for the commission of sin. This
may not be the intention of the framers of those ill-contrived
regulations, but it is the necessary effect of them. How easy is it, for
instance, for a clever boy to gain reward tickets, to a considerable
amount, by attention to reading, spelling, and arithmetic, all of which
he may, if he prefer present indulgence to future gratification, convert
into as many tickets of license for the perpetration of such offences as
are particularly to his taste. I call upon those that are candid, among
the advocates of the British system, to deny, if they can, on the score
of principle, that from such causes such effects must follow, or, on the
ground of practical experience, that such effects are actually taking
place. And if they have not been observed as frequently as might be
anticipated, is there not reason to suppose, that this may partly be
owing to the want of close contact, on the part of the master, with
every individual child, an evil which is the necessary consequence of
the much-extolled machinery of the British system, and which, on more
than one ground, calls loudly for a remedy? Be that as it may, the
effect of the remission of punishment, for the forfeiture of rewards, is
obvious enough, and the fact has been admitted to me by some who have
had opportunities, more than myself, of watching the practical effects
of the system. But even without such an admission it would be evident,
from the combination of all the influences enumerated, that the British
system must beget a set of hirelings, who, for hire’s sake, do the good,
and, for hire’s sake, abstain from evil. But, as if there had been an
anxiety to collect, on the score of motives, all that is unscriptural,
and to put it into practice in those schools, the conversion of the
reward tickets into actual rewards, at the expiration of each three
months, is celebrated in the following manner: “When all the boys have
received the prizes, they are conducted round the school-room by the
general monitors, who proclaim that they have obtained their prizes for
good behaviour, regular attendance, and improvement in learning; after
walking two or three times round the school, they are permitted to go
home.” Is not this, in plain language, sounding a trumpet before the
boys?

Now, I would ask my Christian friends—for so, I know, some of the
managers and supporters of the British system will permit me to call
them, in spite of what I have said against that system—I would ask them,
as Christians, whether they can justify any of these practices
individually: the setting aside of genuine moral feeling, the stimulus
of appearing greater and better, one than the other, the seeking a
reward for every performance of duty, the exemption from punishment
through rewards before gained; the calculation of the total amount of
these rewards within a given period; and lastly, the going round “the
corners” of the school, with the monitors as trumpeters before them?[*]

Lastly, of the infant schools: and this is the most frightful perversion
of all. That any kind of technical instruction should, in vulgar and
unintelligent hands, degenerate into mechanical routine, is less
wonderful: but that an institution designed for moral culture only—a
place where the child learned nothing, in the Edition: current; Page:
[71] vulgar sense of learning, but only learned to live; that places
designed exclusively for the cultivation of the kindly affections,
should by dulness, hardness, and miserable vanity, be converted into
places for parroting gibberish; this is a more wretched example than any
other, of the state of mind of the people who subscribe the 1,200,000l.
which Lord Brougham is afraid they should prefer to keep in their
pockets if more rational views of education were substituted for their
own.[*]

The original design of the infant system has been entirely perverted;
and, as a natural consequence of this, the system itself has undergone
considerable alterations. The first idea, if I am correctly informed,
was to collect those children who were below the grasp of the other
systems, and to endeavour, at the very tenderest age, to awaken them to
a life of love and intelligence.[†] Positive instruction was not made an
object of, but merely considered as a means for the attainment of that
higher object, the development of the soul in the true life. With this
view, the first infant schools were founded, and it seemed as if, from
the mouths of babes, the public would receive evidence, to convince them
of the errors of long cherished prejudices. But, as it is written,
“Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat, with a
pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him,”[‡] so did it
prove to be the case with the prejudices of the public. Infant schools,
indeed, became the fashion, for there was a something in them to win the
feelings, which has since very much worn off, but which, then, was in
all its freshness, and made converts by hundreds. But the consequence of
this was, not that the public adopted the principles of the new system,
but that they grafted upon it their old prejudices, their sectarian
sympathies and antipathies, and all their paltry party feelings and
interests. Originally, the infant schools were calculated to show, what
could be done by appealing to a principle of love in the child, which
would subdue the wrath of its nature, and to a principle of truth, which
would enlighten its darkness; and thereby eventually to subvert those
systems in which, as we have seen, the evil tendencies of our nature are
made the levers of education. This was no sooner discovered, than a stir
was made, for the purpose of suppressing the rising opposition in its
very germ. A society was formed, which, under the pretence of advocating
the infant system, succeeded in gradually commuting it into the very
reverse of what it was originally meant to be, and which, after having
accomplished so praiseworthy an object, has at length absconded, by a
sort of mystification, in a stationer’s shop. But although the agents
have vanished, the baneful effects of their labours have remained. The
infant schools are now no more than preparatory for the Lancasterian and
National schools, especially the latter, which had most to dread from
the rising system, and whose influence, therefore, was most powerfully
exerted in defeating its success. The machinery of those two systems has
found its way into the infant schools, and has made them, with rare
exceptions, mere miniature pictures of the others. You see the little
monitors spelling, with their classes, over the A, B, C, and a variety
of lesson tables without sense and meaning, you hear them say, by rote,
the multiplication table, the pence table, and so on. The same things
are repeated over and over again, so that a parrot hung up for some time
in one of those schools, would unquestionably make as good an infant
school mistress as any. There is hardly one of the means introduced at
the beginning, which has not been turned to a bad purpose. Thus, for
instance, among other things, sets of geometrical figures and bodies,
cut out of wood, were used, for the Edition: current; Page: [72] purpose
of questioning the children respecting the number and proportion of
their angles, sides, &c.; but, instead of making them the means of
intellectual exercises, in which the children would be led every day to
make new discoveries, and to think for themselves, those figures are now
pulled out, chiefly in the presence of visitors, and then the whole
school bawls out together, “This is a pentagon—this is a hexagon—this is
an octagon, and so on.” One of the most pleasing features of the infant
system, in its origin, was the social feeling, the cordiality, and
cheerfulness of the little company, which was greatly promoted by some
short and easy tunes, to which occasionally some infantine words were
sung. The effect which this had, in soothing the irritation of some,
moderating the violence of others, and arousing the dull ones into life,
was truly wonderful; but no sooner was the discovery made, that there
was, so early in life, a way to man’s heart and mind by singing, than
the machinists of education availed themselves of this fact, for the
purpose of conveying to the memory some of their dead stock, which would
not otherwise have found its way there so easily, and, presently, the
multiplication, and other ciphering tables, the pence table, avoirdupois
weight, and more of the like kind, were set to music, and occasionally
better fitted for the infantine taste, at least so it was supposed, by
the addition of the most silly rhymes. What intellectual or moral
effect, I should like to know, can be anticipated from a child learning
such a verse as this:

-   

    Forty pence are three and four pence,
-   

    A pretty sum, or I’m mistaken,
-   

    Fifty pence are four and two pence,
-   

    Which will buy five pounds of bacon;

Or, still more vulgar, in the song about the cow:

-   

    And when she’s dead, her flesh is good,
-   

    For beef is our true English food;
-   

    But though ’twill make us brave and strong,
-   

    To eat too much, we know, is wrong.[*]

In one infant school, I have known the children to be made to laugh, or
to cry, or to look happy, or unhappy, or kind, or angry, at the master’s
command, in another school, in which the picture of a farm yard was hung
up on the wall, the master assured me that he was expressly enjoined by
his committee, to ask the children for scripture references to every
object represented in that picture. Thus, when he pointed to a cow, the
children were to quote him chapter and verse of those passages in
scripture in which a cow was mentioned, the same with the sheaves, the
clouds, and whatever else the picture contained, this was considered, by
the committee, as an excellent method of connecting religious
instruction with all other subjects. To enumerate all the nonsense that
has been practised, and is still practised, in this manner, would be an
endless task; but what has most effectually contributed to the ruin of
the infant system, is the manner of propagating it. The renown of the
system penetrates into some country place, or into some district of a
large town, and some persons take it into their heads, upon hearing what
excellent things the infant schools are, that they too will have an
infant school. They then go in search of a place, and find out Edition:
current; Page: [73] some old barn, or coach-house, which, with a few
alterations, can be turned into a school-room. So far all is right, for
it is better that a good school should be in a wretched place, than, as
we so often see it before our eyes in the metropolis, that a wretched
school should be in a splendid place. But the great difficulty arises in
the choice of the future master or mistress. Each of the originators and
patrons of the proposed institution, has some client in view, whom he
has nominated in his heart. A poor fellow, a tailor, a shoe-maker, or a
fiddler by trade, who is not prosperous in the exercise of his calling,
has the suffrage of the most active member of the committee, or an old
dame, whose school would suffer by the opposition of the new system, is
patronized by some charitable ladies; or the richest contributor has an
old servant, whom she wants to put into a snug place, a struggle arises
between these contending interests, the result of which is, that the
client of the most influential party is selected for the situation,
although, perhaps, the most unfit of all the candidates. The next
question then is, how the new master or mistress is to learn the system,
of which they must be presumed to be entirely ignorant. Some friend,
perhaps, advises the committee to send the teacher to London, or some
other place, for three months, and have him regularly trained under a
good infant school master. In vain! they cannot wait so long, it will
protract the business, and the zeal of the good people in the town might
get cool in the mean time. The infant school must be opened in a
fortnight or three weeks at the latest, and this is consequently all the
time that can be permitted to the newly chosen master for his
preparation. The question of time being settled, another arises to what
place is he to be sent? The expense of sending him up to London, or to
some other place of note, is found too great, particularly for so short
a time, and it seems, therefore, better that he should be sent the least
distance possible, to the nearest infant school, to “catch” the system.
But suppose even he come to London, or to Exeter, or Bristol, to one of
the best schools that are, what can he learn in so short a time? What
strikes him chiefly, is the singing of the tables, the distribution in
classes, the marching round the room, the clapping of hands, and all the
other machinery. This he catches, as well as he can, and back he goes,
and opens his school, and his chief endeavour is to follow the system
which he has caught, as closely as he can. And what can be expected
after this? What else, but that the infant school should become a
treadmill for the minds of the poor children!

Such has been the history of the infant system, it has been
misapprehended by prejudice and narrow-mindedness, and perverted by
bigotry and false zeal, so much so that those who were its warmest
advocates, are tempted to wish that never so much as one infant school
had been established in the country.[*]

We can add nothing to this. Surely every member of the committee of the
House of Commons who reads it, will be eager to make the labours of that
committee instrumental to the reform of such abominations.

We conclude in the words of the same author, with the following general
summary, every word of which accords with all our own information.

I have had a sad picture to lay before you, when speaking of the neglect
of education, and of the numbers of children who are left without any
instruction at all, but no less sad is the picture of the present state
of our charity schools. All the evils under which society at large
labours are, as it were, concentrated upon this point, as if to destroy
the very vitals of the nation. The universal motive is money-getting,
the means are all devised upon the analogy Edition: current; Page: [74]
of large manufactures, carried on by mechanical power; and, to make the
measure of evil full, the cloak of it all is a dead profession of the
gospel. The principle of mammon is recognized as the life of education,
the existence of mental and moral powers is set aside, and the spirit of
religion is supplanted by the letter. Such is the general character of
the education which is imparted to the poorer classes of this country,
whatever may be the name of the system under which it is done. I leave
you to judge, what must become of the nation![*]


On Punishment

the free and bold spirit of inquiry, and the benevolence of heart, which
breathe through this little tract, and which are characteristic of the
supposed writer, render his speculations on the now hacknied subject of
penal law, deserving of an attention, which the degree of truth or of
practical applicability which they possess, would not of itself have
entitled them to. The author, in fact, deals with punishment as Mr. Owen
deals with the institution of private property. He makes out a case of
manifest hardship and cruelty against the one, as Mr. Owen does against
the other, and with as little difficulty, for the materials are ample;
and like Mr. Owen, he helps out his case by including in his enumeration
not only the evils inseparable from the institution itself, but all
those which are actually attendant on it in its present form, however
easily remediable. He then gravely proposes that punishment should be
abolished, and the prevention of crime attempted by other means; as one
might conceive a philanthropist enlarging upon the nauseousness of
medicine, its injurious effects upon the constitution, the hardship of
administering it to persons who are ill and helpless and not their own
masters, and concluding that medicine be abolished, and that mankind
should endeavour to preserve their health in some other manner.

The author’s substitute for punishment is itself a punishment, though
one of the mildest kind. He proposes that those who are convicted of
offences, whether of the slightest or of the gravest description, should
be no otherwise ill-treated than by being compelled to live as a
community apart, in a portion of the country specially allotted to them,
in which they should have the same opportunities of gaining their
livelihood as the rest of the the community, and from which they should
be liberated on proof of continued good conduct. Within this district
there should be a smaller enclosure, to which those should be again
banished who have violated the laws of the criminal community to which
they were first relegated; and within this second a third, in which
again, as the last resort, there should be a prison. But no one is to be
incarcerated in this prison without having the alternative offered to
him of going into perpetual exile.

In the subordinate arrangements there is some good sense and much
ingenuity, and as one among many systems of reformatory discipline, the
plan of our author seems worthy to be tried by way of experiment upon
the less corrupted of the persons convicted of minor offences. But as a
plan of systematic treatment for all Edition: current; Page: [78]
offenders, to be adopted in lieu of every other punishment, it would be
a more utter failure than the worst of the penal systems, for it would
fail to deter from crime. On whom would the penalty of temporary
banishment from the society of the honest, operate as a sufficient
motive to restrain from the violation of the laws? Upon the honest; upon
those who are already sufficiently restrained by their own disposition,
or by the opinion of one another. All who required restraint, would find
this restraint inefficacious; and if all who, in any manner violated the
laws, were removed into such a place of reformation, the inhabitants of
the reformatory would speedily outnumber the remainder of the community,
and would become themselves the rulers of the country.

Even this consequence were it admitted by the author, would not,
perhaps, decide the question in his mind; for he considers the
infliction of punishment for the purpose of prevention, as in itself an
immorality and an injustice.

“To punish one man,” says he, “in order that some other unknown person
may be deterred from the commission of crime, is an iniquitous practice,
and cannot be justified even if its consequences, so far as the public
is affected by the exhibition, were beneficial in ever so great a
degree, and could be calculated upon with certainty.” [P. 72.]

He calls the infliction of punishment “for example’s sake,” a debasing
practice: and expresses his “earnest wishes that so wicked a principle
may never again be adopted as the motive and guide by which the high and
mighty may rule their low and erring brethren.” (P. 73.)

Here is much good indignation thrown away on an occasion, when there is
nothing to call for it but a form of words. You do not punish one person
in order that another may be deterred. The other is deterred, not by the
punishment of the first, but by the expectation of being punished
himself: and as the punishment you threaten him with, would have no
effect upon his conduct, unless he believed that it would really be
inflicted, you are obliged to prove the reality of your intention, by
keeping your word whenever either he, or any other person, disregards
your prohibition. This is no injustice to the sufferer, because he, too,
has been warned beforehand; unless indeed, not the punishment merely,
but the law itself, be unjust, and an improper restriction upon his
freedom. If the acts which the law prohibits, were such as he had no
right to do, and if he had full warning of all the consequences to which
he would subject himself by violating it, he has no ground of complaint
that its full penalties are inflicted, not to deter others, but in order
that what really deters others, the threat of punishment to themselves,
may not be an idle mockery.

Our author’s objection is only valid against either ex post facto laws,
or laws which are in themselves unjust, independently of the means by
which they are enforced. In all other cases the offender himself, and
not the legislator, is responsible for the evil which falls upon him by
his voluntary breach of a just law.

We may add, that if the principles laid down by our author constitute a
valid Edition: current; Page: [79] objection to the existing notions of
punishment, they apply with exactly the same force to his own system of
banishment to a particular place. If what he acknowledges to be “the
fundamental principle that should govern the criminal code of every
enlightened state, viz. protection of person and property,” (p. 23,)
will justify the infliction of the smallest atom of pain upon offenders,
it will justify the infliction of any amount necessary for the end;
unless such as would outweigh all the benefits of which the security of
person or property is the cause. The only right by which society is
warranted in inflicting any pain upon any human creature, is the right
of self-defence; and if this will justify it in interfering with the
natural liberty of its offending members, by the degree of coercion
implied in removing them to the reformatory and keeping them there, it
will warrant any greater degree of coercion which may be found necessary
to protect the innocent part of the community against their
encroachments. On any other principle, instead of relegating offenders
to a particular part of the country, or tendering to them the
alternative of voluntary exile, the utmost rights of honest people would
extend no further than to remove out of harm’s way, by going into exile
themselves. But this is surely being scrupulous in the wrong place. If
we were attacked by robbers or savages, and in danger of our lives, no
one ever questioned our right to defend ourselves even to the death of
the assailant; and we cannot conceive a greater piece of inconsistency
than, admitting this, to deny us the liberty of declaring beforehand to
all robbers, that if they attack us we will put them to death. No doubt
if we can protect ourselves as effectually with less evil to them, it is
our duty to do so; and we ought to try the experiment in all ways which
afford a chance of success, before we give it up as hopeless. But our
right to punish, is a branch of the universal right of self-defence, and
it is a mere subtlety to set up any distinction between them.

Some of the author’s minor suggestions are well deserving of the
attention of an enlightened legislature. We would notice in particular
[p. 95] his idea of restraining juvenile delinquency by holding the
parents legally responsible instead of the children.

Smith on Law Reform

this is such a pamphlet as we have long wished to see. The question of
Law Reform has usually either been treated bit by bit, on the principle
of suggesting no more at once than could be carried at once, or it has
been kept so completely in generalibus that although the existing system
might be shown to be bad, it seemed as if nothing could be done to amend
it except by beginning from the foundations and reconstructing the whole
fabric. There was wanted a writer who, with the requisite knowledge of
the existing law, but with the capacity also of distinguishing
principles of universal legislation from the technicalities of a
conventional system, should review the whole of our jurisprudence, and
examine how much of the absurdity which disfigures, and the complication
which embarrasses it, is capable of being removed in that piecemeal mode
in which parliament legislates, and in a country like ours, or, at
least, in the present state of general opinion, must legislate.

Mr. Smith has attempted a portion of this task, and has executed it with
a high degree of merit. He thoroughly understands his subject, he has
the art of popular and lively exposition, and on the whole we know not
any work where in so small a compass so great a number of important law
reforms, practicable at the present moment, are pointed out, and the
expediency of them so briefly and forcibly, and at the same time
popularly demonstrated. The defects upon which he chiefly animadverts
are some of the peculiarities of the system of pleading; some of the
exclusionary rules of evidence; the doctrine of feudal tenures, which,
although now a mere mass of fiction, still continues to encumber, by the
technical consequences which it involves, the whole of our law of real
property, and the fact that three different and conflicting systems of
law, administered by three sets of courts, (common law, equity, and
ecclesiastical,) co-exist, insomuch that the very same property would
often be assigned by these different systems to different persons; and
the unseemly spectacle is exhibited of one court giving relief, as it is
called, from the disposition of property which would be lawfully and
regularly made by another. The practical mischiefs of a most serious
kind, arising from these defects in our legal system, are pointed out in
a masterly manner by Mr. Smith. The following passage may convey an idea
of his style:

Edition: current; Page: [84]
If any one expects, by a revision of our laws, to prepare a system so
simple that every man may acquire sufficient knowledge of it, that he
who runs may read,[*] that no body of professed lawyers will be
requisite to conduct litigation or frame legal instruments, he is merely
manifesting his total ignorance upon the subject. Jurisprudence, when it
advances beyond those simple rules which are dictated by the general
sense of what is just or unjust, becomes in some measure arbitrary, and
inevitably complicate. Rules are then to be laid down, which must be the
result of a nice balance of opposite expediencies, and when these, or,
indeed, any other rules, are determined, innumerable cases arise, of
which again it is difficult to decide whether they are included in the
rules. But because jurisprudence must of necessity present to our view a
vast and complex system, because it must admit many distinctions, the
value and importance of which cannot without much previous study be
appreciated, is it therefore to be loaded with any foreign matter
whatsoever? Is this a reason for admitting and perpetuating a mass of
erudition quite alien to the science itself of jurisprudence? Is it not
rather a reason, since law must be difficult, for avoiding every
needless cause of difficulty? Again and again I protest against the
admixture, still too frequent, of feudalism and antiquarian lore with
English jurisprudence. Why am I to be incessantly presented with an
historical account of its origin as a sufficient reason for the actual
existence of the law which governs me? Doubtless, the antiquarian will
be shocked, and denounce me as a man of rude, uncultured taste, if I
dispute the necessity of recording by existing laws the ancient
feudalism of Europe. What! no trace left of past times? no pride of
ancestry increased by the very framework of our jurisprudence? all to be
new and scientific? Our laws, he exclaims, will no longer be English,
they might as well be French, or Russian, or Chinese; they will not
belong to us and to our history. Let him go and study history, and
providentially endowed as he is with the love of what is dark and
little, connect with it what antiquities he thinks fit; I will listen
and will learn of him with pleasure. But why must I meet, to my
confusion and dismay, in the real business of life, and at the hazard of
my property, these relics, these spectral remains of the maxims and
manners of my forefathers? I can read with interest of the struggle
maintained by our courts of law against the subtle contrivances of
land-loving monks. Must I, therefore, desire that this struggle be
recorded in the deed which conveys my property? Think you that law,
which is the most ancient matter in this world, and has dealt with the
nearest interests of living men through the remotest generations of the
earth, needs to be set off with this antique and Gothic tracery? Or is
it true that jurisprudence has ends of its own so idle and unimportant
to mankind, that it must stand indebted to such sources of interest as
an antiquarian society can supply?[†]


The Negro Question*

sir,

Your last month’s Number contains a speech against the “rights of
Negroes,”[*] the doctrines and spirit of which ought not to pass without
remonstrance. The author issues his opinions, or rather ordinances,
under imposing auspices, no less than those of the “immortal gods.” [P.
675.] “The Powers,” “the Destinies,” announce through him, not only what
will be, but what shall be done; what they “have decided upon, passed
their eternal act of parliament for.” [Ibid.] This is speaking “as one
having authority;”[†] but authority from whom? If by the quality of the
message we may judge of those who sent it, not from any powers to whom
just or good men acknowledge allegiance. This so-called “eternal Act of
Parliament” is no new law, but the old law of the strongest,—a law
against which the great teachers of mankind have in all ages
protested:—it is the law of force and cunning; the law that whoever is
more powerful than another, is “born lord” of that other, the other
being born his “servant,” [pp. 676-7,] who must be “compelled to work”
for him by “beneficent whip,” if “other methods avail not.” [P. 675.] I
see nothing divine in this injunction. If “the gods” [ibid.] will this,
it is the first duty of human beings to resist such gods. Omnipotent
these “gods” are not, for powers which demand human tyranny and
injustice cannot accomplish their purpose unless human beings
co-operate. The history of human improvement is the record of a struggle
by which inch after inch of ground has been wrung from these maleficent
powers, and more and more of human life rescued from the iniquitous
dominion of the law of might. Much, very much of this work still remains
to do, but the progress made in it is the best and greatest achievement
yet performed by mankind, and it was hardly to be expected at this
period of the world that we should be enjoined, by way of a great reform
in human affairs, to begin undoing it.

The age, it appears, is ill with a most pernicious disease, which
infects all its proceedings, and of which the conduct of this country in
regard to the Negroes is a Edition: current; Page: [88] prominent
symptom—the Disease of Philanthropy. “Sunk in deep froth-oceans of
Benevolence, Fraternity, Emancipation-principle, Christian Philanthropy,
and other most amiable-looking, but most baseless, and, in the end,
baleful and all-bewildering jargon,” the product of “hearts left
destitute of any earnest guidance, and disbelieving that there ever was
any, Christian or heathen,” the “human species” is “reduced to believe
in rose-pink sentimentalism alone.” [P. 671.] On this alleged condition
of the human species I shall have something to say presently. But I must
first set my anti-philanthropic opponent right on a matter of fact. He
entirely misunderstands the great national revolt of the conscience of
this country against slavery and the slave-trade, if he supposes it to
have been an affair of sentiment. It depended no more on humane feelings
than any cause which so irresistibly appealed to them must necessarily
do. Its first victories were gained while the lash yet ruled uncontested
in the barrack-yard and the rod in schools, and while men were still
hanged by dozens for stealing to the value of forty shillings. It
triumphed because it was the cause of justice; and, in the estimation of
the great majority of its supporters, of religion. Its originators and
leaders were persons of a stern sense of moral obligation, who, in the
spirit of the religion of their time, seldom spoke much of benevolence
and philanthropy, but often of duty, crime, and sin. For nearly two
centuries had negroes, many thousands annually, been seized by force or
treachery and carried off to the West Indies to be worked to death,
literally to death; for it was the received maxim, the acknowledged
dictate of good economy, to wear them out quickly and import more. In
this fact every other possible cruelty, tyranny, and wanton oppression
was by implication included. And the motive on the part of the
slave-owners was the love of gold; or, to speak more truly, of vulgar
and puerile ostentation. I have yet to learn that anything more
detestable than this has been done by human beings towards human beings
in any part of the earth. It is a mockery to talk of comparing it with
Ireland. [P. 672.] And this went on, not, like Irish beggary, because
England had not the skill to prevent it,—not merely by the sufferance,
but by the laws of the English nation. At last, however, there were
found men, in growing number, who determined not to rest until the
iniquity was extirpated; who made the destruction of it as much the
business and end of their lives, as ordinary men make their private
interests; who would not be content with softening its hideous features,
and making it less intolerable to the sight, but would stop at nothing
short of its utter and irrevocable extinction. I am so far from seeing
anything contemptible in this resolution, that, in my sober opinion, the
persons who formed and executed it deserve to be numbered among those,
not numerous in any age, who have led noble lives according to their
lights, and laid on mankind a debt of permanent gratitude.

After fifty years of toil and sacrifice, the object was accomplished,
and the negroes, freed from the despotism of their fellow-beings, were
left to themselves, and to the chances which the arrangements of
existing society provide for those Edition: current; Page: [89] who have
no resource but their labour. These chances proved favourable to them,
and, for the last ten years, they afford the unusual spectacle of a
labouring class whose labour bears so high a price that they can exist
in comfort on the wages of a comparatively small quantity of work. This,
to the ex-slave-owners, is an inconvenience; but I have not yet heard
that any of them has been reduced to beg his bread, or even to dig for
it, as the negro, however scandalously he enjoys himself, still must: a
carriage or some other luxury the less, is in most cases, I believe, the
limit of their privations—no very hard measure of retributive justice,
those who have had tyrannical power taken away from them, may think
themselves fortunate if they come so well off; at all events, it is an
embarrassment out of which the nation is not called on to help them: if
they cannot continue to realize their large incomes without more
labourers, let them find them, and bring them from where they can best
be procured, only not by force. Not so thinks your anti-philanthropic
contributor. That negroes should exist, and enjoy existence, on so
little work, is a scandal in his eyes, worse than their former slavery.
It must be put a stop to at any price. He does not “wish to see” them
slaves again “if it can be avoided;” but “decidedly” they “will have to
be servants,” “servants to the whites,” [p. 667,] “compelled to labour,”
and “not to go idle another minute.” [P. 674.] “Black Quashee,” [p.
674,] “up to the ears in pumpkins,” [p. 671,] and “working about half an
hour a day,” [p. 672,] is to him the abomination of abominations. I have
so serious a quarrel with him about principles, that I have no time to
spare for his facts; but let me remark, how easily he takes for granted
those which fit his case. Because he reads in some blue-book of a strike
for wages in Demerara,[*] such as he may read of any day in Manchester,
he draws a picture of negro inactivity, copied from the wildest
prophecies of the slavery party before emancipation. If the negroes
worked no more than “half an hour a day,” would the sugar crops, in all
except notoriously bad seasons, be so considerable, so little diminished
from what they were in the time of slavery, as is proved by the
Customhouse returns?[†] But it is not the facts of the question, so much
as the moralities of it, that I care to dispute with your contributor.

A black man working no more than your contributor affirms that they
work, is, he says, “an eye-sorrow,” a “blister on the skin of the
state,” [p. 676,] and many other things equally disagreeable; to work
being the grand duty of man. “To do competent work, to labour honestly
according to the ability given them; for that, and for no other purpose,
was each one of us sent into this world.” Whoever prevents him from this
his “sacred appointment to labour while he lives on earth” is “his
deadliest enemy.” If it be “his own indolence” that prevents him, “the
first Edition: current; Page: [90] right he has” is that all wiser and
more industrious persons shall, “by some wise means, compel him to do
the work he is fit for.” [P. 673.] Why not at once say that, by “some
wise means,” every thing should be made right in the world? While we are
about it, wisdom may as well be suggested as the remedy for all evils,
as for one only. Your contributor incessantly prays Heaven that all
persons, black and white, may be put in possession of this “divine right
of being compelled, if permitted will not serve, to do what work they
are appointed for.” [P. 674.] But as this cannot be conveniently managed
just yet, he will begin with the blacks, and awilla make them work for
certain whites, those whites not working at all; that so “the eternal
purpose and supreme will” [ibid.] may be fulfilled, and “injustice,”
which is “for ever accursed,” may cease. [P. 676.]

This pet theory of your contributor about work, we all know well enough,
though some persons might not be prepared for so bold an application of
it. Let me say a few words on this “gospel of work”[*]—which, to my
mind, as justly deserves the name of a cant as any of those which he has
opposed, while the truth it contains is immeasurably farther from being
the whole truth than that contained in the words Benevolence,
Fraternity, or any other of his catalogue of contemptibilities. To give
it a rational meaning, it must first be known what he means by work.
Does work mean every thing which people do? No; or he would not reproach
people with doing no work. Does it mean laborious exertion? No; for many
a day spent in killing game, includes more muscular fatigue than a day’s
ploughing. Does it mean useful exertion? But your contributor always
scoffs at the idea of utility.[†] Does he mean that all persons ought to
earn their living? But some earn their living by doing nothing, and some
by doing mischief; and the negroes, whom he despises, still do earn by
labour the “pumpkins” they consume and the finery they wear.

Work, I imagine, is not a good in itself. There is nothing laudable in
work for work’s sake. To work voluntarily for a worthy object is
laudable; but what constitutes a worthy object? On this matter, the
oracle of which your contributor is the prophet has never yet been
prevailed on to declare itself. He revolves in an eternal circle round
the idea of work, as if turning up the earth, or driving a shuttle or a
quill, were ends in themselves, and the ends of human existence. Yet,
even in the case of the most sublime service to humanity, it is not
because it is work that it is worthy; the worth lies in the service
itself, and in the will to render it—the noble feelings of which it is
the fruit; and if the nobleness of will is proved by other evidence than
work, as for instance by danger or sacrifice, there is the same Edition:
current; Page: [91] worthiness. While we talk only of work, and not of
its object, we are far from the root of the matter; or if it may be
called the root, it is a root without flower or fruit.

In the present case, it seems, a noble object means “spices.” “The gods
wish, besides pumpkins, that spices and valuable products be grown in
their West Indies”—the “noble elements of cinnamon, sugar, coffee,
pepper black and grey,” “things far nobler than pumpkins.” [Pp. 674-5.]
Why so? Is what supports life, inferior in dignity to what merely
gratifies the sense of taste? Is it the verdict of the “immortal gods”
that pepper is noble, freedom (even freedom from the lash) contemptible?
But spices lead “towards commerces, arts, polities, and social
developements.” [P. 674.] Perhaps so; but of what sort? When they must
be produced by slaves, the “polities and social developements” they lead
to are such as the world, I hope, will not choose to be cursed with much
longer.

The worth of work does not surely consist in its leading to other work,
and so on to work upon work without end. On the contrary, the
multiplication of work, for purposes not worth caring about, is one of
the evils of our present condition. When justice and reason shall be the
rule of human affairs, one of the first things to which we may expect
them to be applied is the question, How many of the so-called luxuries,
conveniences, refinements, and ornaments of life, are worth the labour
which must be undergone as the condition of producing them? The
beautifying of existence is as worthy and useful an object as the
sustaining of it; but only a vitiated taste can see any such result in
those fopperies of so-called civilization, which myriads of hands are
now occupied and lives wasted in providing. In opposition to the “gospel
of work,” I would assert the gospel of leisure, and maintain that human
beings cannot rise to the finer attributes of their nature compatibly
with a life filled with labour. I do not include under the name labour
such work, if work it be called, as is done by writers and afforders of
“guidance,” an occupation which, let alone the vanity of the thing,
cannot be called by the same name with the real labour, the exhausting,
stiffening, stupefying toil of many kinds of agricultural and
manufacturing labourers. To reduce very greatly the quantity of work
required to carry on existence, is as needful as to distribute it more
equally; and the progress of science, and the increasing ascendancy of
justice and good sense, tend to this result.

There is a portion of work rendered necessary by the fact of each
person’s existence: no one could exist unless work, to a certain amount,
were done either by or for him. Of this each person is bound, in
justice, to perform his share; and society has an incontestable right to
declare to every one, that if he work not, at this work of necessity,
neither shall he eat. Society has not enforced this right, having in so
far postponed the rule of justice to other considerations. But there is
an ever-growing demand that it be enforced, so soon as any endurable
plan can be devised for the purpose. If this experiment is to be tried
in the West Indies, let it be tried impartially; and let the whole
produce belong to those who do the work which produces it. We would not
have black labourers compelled to grow spices which Edition: current;
Page: [92] they do not want, and white proprietors who do not work at
all exchanging the spices for houses in Belgrave Square. We would not
withhold from the whites, any more than from the blacks, the “divine
right” of being compelled to labour. [P. 674.] Let them have exactly the
same share in the produce that they have in the work. If they do not
like this, let them remain as they are, so long as they are permitted,
and make the best of supply and demand.

Your contributor’s notions of justice and proprietary right are of
another kind than these. Acording to him, the whole West Indies belong
to the whites: the negroes have no claim there, to either land or food,
but by their sufferance. “It was not Black Quashee, or those he
represents, that made those West India islands what they are.” [Ibid.] I
submit, that those who furnished the thews and sinews[*] really had
something to do with the matter. “Under the soil of Jamaica the bones of
many thousand British men”—“brave Colonel Fortescue, brave Colonel
Sedgwick, brave Colonel Brayne,” and divers others, “had to be laid.”
[P. 676.] How many hundred thousand African men laid their bones there,
after having had their lives pressed out by slow or fierce torture? They
could have better done without Colonel Fortescue, than Colonel Fortescue
could have done without them. But he was the stronger, and could
“compel;” what they did [p. 674] and suffered therefore goes for
nothing. Not only they did not, but it seems they could not have
cultivated those islands. “Never by art of his” (the negro) “could one
pumpkin have grown there to solace any human throat.” [P. 675.] They
grow pumpkins, however, and more than pumpkins, in a very similar
country, their native Africa. We are told to look at Haiti: what does
your contributor know of Haiti? “Little or no sugar growing, black Peter
exterminating black Paul, and where a garden of the Hesperides might be,
nothing but a tropical dog-kennel and pestiferous jungle.” [Ibid.] Are
we to listen to arguments grounded on hearsays like these? In what is
black Haiti worse than white Mexico? If the truth were known, how much
worse is it than white Spain?

But the great ethical doctrine of the Discourse, than which a doctrine
more damnable, I should think, never was propounded by a professed moral
reformer, is, that one kind of human beings are born servants to another
kind. “You will have to be servants,” he tells the negroes, “to those
that are born wiser than you, that are born lords of you—servants to the
whites, if they are (as what mortal can doubt that they are?) born wiser
than you.” [Pp. 676-7.] I do not hold him to the absurd letter of his
dictum; it belongs to the mannerism in which he is enthralled like a
child in swaddling clothes. By “born wiser,” I bwillb suppose him to
mean, born more capable of wisdom: a proposition which, he says, no
mortal can doubt, but which I will make bold to say, that a full moiety
of all thinking persons, who have attended Edition: current; Page: [93]
to the subject, either doubt or positively deny. Among the things for
which your contributor professes entire disrespect, is the analytical
examination of human nature. It is by analytical examination that we
have learned whatever we know of the laws of external nature; and if he
had not disdained to apply the same mode of investigation to the laws of
the formation of character, he would have escaped the vulgar error of
imputing every difference which he finds among human beings to an
original difference of nature. As well might it be said, that of two
trees, sprung from the same stock, one cannot be taller than another but
from greater vigour in the original seedling. Is nothing to be
attributed to soil, nothing to climate, nothing to difference of
exposure—has no storm swept over the one and not the other, no lightning
scathed it, no beast browsed on it, no insects preyed on it, no passing
stranger stript off its leaves or its bark? If the trees grew near
together, may not the one which, by whatever accident, grew up first,
have retarded the other’s developement by its shade? Human beings are
subject to an infinitely greater variety of accidents and external
influences than trees, and have infinitely more operation in impairing
the growth of one another, since those who begin by being strongest,
have almost always hitherto used their strength to keep the others weak.
What the original differences are among human beings, I know no more
than your contributor, and no less; it is one of the questions not yet
satisfactorily answered in the natural history of the species. This,
however, is well known—that spontaneous improvement, beyond a very low
grade,—improvement by internal developement, without aid from other
individuals or peoples—is one of the rarest phenomena in history; and
whenever known to have occurred, was the result of an extraordinary
combination of advantages; in addition doubtless to many accidents of
which all trace is now lost. No argument against the capacity of negroes
for improvement, could be drawn from their not being one of these rare
exceptions. It is curious withal, that the earliest known civilization
was, we have the strongest reason to believe, a negro civilization. The
original Egyptians are inferred, from the evidence of their sculptures,
to have been a negro race: it was from negroes, therefore, that the
Greeks learnt their first lessons in civilization; and to the records
and traditions of these negroes did the Greek philosophers to the very
end of their career resort (I do not say with much fruit) as a treasury
of mysterious wisdom. But I again renounce all advantage from facts:
were the whites born ever so superior in intelligence to the blacks, and
competent by nature to instruct and advise them, it would not be the
less monstrous to assert that they had therefore a right either to
subdue them by force, or circumvent them by superior skill, to throw
upon them the toils and hardships of life, reserving for themselves,
under the misapplied name of work, its agreeable excitements.

Were I to point out, even in the briefest terms, every vulnerable point
in your contributor’s Discourse, I should produce a longer dissertation
than his. One instance more must suffice. If labour is wanted, it is a
very obvious idea to import labourers; and if negroes are best suited to
the climate, to import negroes. This is a Edition: current; Page: [94]
mode of adjusting the balance between work and labourers, quite in
accordance with received principles: it is neither before nor behind the
existing moralities of the world: and since it would accomplish the
object of making the negroes work more, your contributor at least, it
might have been supposed, would have approved of it. On the contrary,
this prospect is to him the most dismal of all; for either “the new
Africans, after labouring a little,” will “take to pumpkins like the
others,” or if so many of them come that they will be obliged to work
for their living, there will be “a black Ireland.” [P. 672.] The labour
market admits of three possibile conditions, and not, as this would
imply, of only two. Either, first, the labourers can live almost without
working, which is said to be the case in Demerara; or, secondly, which
is the common case, they can live by working, but must work in order to
live; or, thirdly, they cannot by working get a sufficient living, which
is the case in Ireland. Your contributor sees only the extreme cases,
but no possibility of the medium. If Africans are imported, he thinks
there must either be so few of them, that they will not need to work, or
so many, that although they work, they will not be able to live.

Let me say a few words on the general quarrel of your contributor with
the present age. Every age has its faults, and is indebted to those who
point them out. Our own age needs this service as much as others; but it
is not to be concluded that it has degenerated from former ages, because
its faults are different. We must beware, too, of mistaking its virtues
for faults, merely because, as is inevitable, its faults mingle with its
virtues and colour them. Your contributor thinks that the age has too
much humanity, is too anxious to abolish pain. I affirm, on the
contrary, that it has too little humanity—is most culpably indifferent
to the subject: and I point to any day’s police reports as the proof. I
am not now accusing the brutal portion of the population, but the humane
portion; if they were humane enough, they would have contrived long ago
to prevent cthesec daily atrocities. It is not by excess of a good
quality that the age is in fault, but by deficiency—deficiency even of
philanthropy, and still more of other qualities wherewith to balance and
direct what philanthropy it has. An “Universal Abolition of Pain
Association” [p. 670] may serve to point a sarcasm, but can any worthier
object of endeavour be pointed out than that of diminishing pain? Is the
labour which ends in growing spices noble, and not that which lessens
the mass of suffering? We are told [p. 675], with a triumphant air, as
if it were a thing to be glad of, that “the Destinies” proceed in a
“terrible manner;” and this manner will not cease “for soft sawder or
philanthropic stump-oratory;” but whatever the means may be, it has
ceased in no inconsiderable degree, and is ceasing more and more: every
year the “terrible manner,” in some department or other, is made a
little less terrible. Is our cholera comparable to the old
pestilence—our hospitals to the old lazar-houses—our workhouses to the
hanging of vagrants—our prisons to those visited by Howard? It is
precisely Edition: current; Page: [95] because we have succeeded in
abolishing so much pain, because pain and its infliction are no longer
familiar as our daily bread, that we are so much more shocked by what
remains of it than our ancestors were, or than in your contributor’s
opinion we ought to be.

But (however it be with pain in general) the abolition of the infliction
of pain by the mere will of a human being, the abolition, in short, of
despotism, seems to be, in a peculiar degree, the occupation of this
age; and it would be difficult to shew that any age had undertaken a
worthier. Though we cannot extirpate all pain, we can, if we are
sufficiently determined upon it, abolish all tyranny, one of the
greatest victories yet gained over that enemy is slave-emancipation, and
all Europe is struggling, with various success, towards further
conquests over it. If, in the pursuit of this, we lose sight of any
object equally important; if we forget that freedom is not the only
thing necessary for human beings, let us be thankful to any one who
points out what is wanting; but let us not consent to turn back.

That this country should turn back, in the matter of negro slavery, I
have not the smallest apprehension. There is, however, another place
where that tyranny still flourishes, but now for the first time finds
itself seriously in danger. At this crisis of American slavery, when the
decisive conflict between right and iniquity seems about to commence,
your contributor steps in, and flings this missile, loaded with the
weight of his reputation, into the abolitionist camp. The words of
English writers of celebrity are words of power on the other side of the
ocean: and the owners of human flesh, who probably thought they had not
an honest man on their side between the Atlantic and the Vistula, will
welcome such an auxiliary. Circulated as his dissertation will probably
be, by those whose interests profit by it, from one end of the American
Union to the other, I hardly know of an act by which one person could
have done so much mischief as this may possibly do, and I hold that by
thus acting, he has made himself an instrument of what an able writer in
the Inquirer justly calls “a true work of the devil.”[*]


Statement on Marriage

being about, if I am so happy as to obtain her consent, to enter into
the marriage relation with the only woman I have ever known, with whom I
would have entered into that state; and the whole character of the
marriage relation as constituted by law being such as both she and I
entirely and conscientiously disapprove, for this among other reasons,
that it confers upon one of the parties to the contract, legal power and
control over the person, property, and freedom of action of the other
party, independent of her own wishes and will; I, having no means of
legally divesting myself of these odious powers (as I most assuredly
would do if an engagement to that effect could be made legally binding
on me), feel it my duty to put on record a formal protest against the
existing law of marriage, in so far as conferring such powers; and a
solemn promise never in any case or under any circumstances to use them.
And in the event of marriage between Mrs. Taylor and me I declare it to
be my will and intention, and the condition of the engagement between
us, that she retains in all respects whatever the same absolute freedom
of action, and freedom of disposal of herself and of all that does or
may at any time belong to her, as if no such marriage had taken place,
and I absolutely disclaim and repudiate all pretension to have acquired
any rights whatever by virtue of such marriage.




Remarks on Mr. Fitzroy’s Bill for the More Effectual Prevention of Assaults on Women and Children

the bill brought into parliament by mr. fitzroy, as the organ of the
Home Office, enlarging the powers of magistrates to inflict summary
penalties for brutal assaults on women and children, is excellent in
design; and if in execution it falls short of what is required to deal
adequately with the enormity of the evil, the speech of the Mover
indicated that he felt its imperfection, and had done as much as he
thought it prudent to attempt without assurance of support.[*] There
have since been signs, both in and out of Parliament, that the Minister
formed a lower estimate than necessary of what the public would receive
at his hands, and that a measure far more likely to be efficacious would
have been well received. The following remarks, on what the writer deems
the shortcomings of the present Bill, are offered for the consideration
of those who interest themselves in its success.

The speech of the Mover showed him to be strongly impressed with the
horrible amount of domestic brutality which the law at present existing
leaves unrepressed; and he made a selection of recent cases, exhibiting
the disgraceful contrast which every reader of police reports is
accustomed to see, between the flagrancy of the offence and the
insignificance of the penalty.[†] If any deficiency could be remarked in
the statement, it is, that all the instances cited were cases of outrage
against women, to the exclusion of the brutalities inflicted both by men
and women on the still more helpless children. Without reckoning the
frightful cases of flogging and starving which so often come to light,
there have been two cases within the last few weeks in each of which a
woman, entrusted with the care of an infant three or four years old,
caused its death by burning with fire.[‡] In one of these cases the
woman had forced the infant to grasp a red hot coal in its hand, and
Edition: current; Page: [104] hold it there for some minutes; and being
put on trial before the child had died, but when it was already certain
that he would be a cripple for life, was sentenced, not by a police
magistrate, but by the Central Criminal Court at the Old Bailey, to—a
fortnight’s imprisonment! Such cases prove that there is more amiss than
an extension of the powers of the subordinate Courts will remedy; that
there is not merely a want of power in the administrators of criminal
justice to treat such culprits with a severity sufficient for example,
but, in some cases at least, a want of will. Merely to authorize a
greater amount of punishment for these offences, at the discretion of a
judicial officer, is no guarantee against their continuing to be
perpetrated with almost as near an approach to impunity as at present.
To increase the penalty is an indication of intention on the part of the
Legislature. To see that the intention be fulfilled ought to be the care
of those with whom rests the choice of judges and of magistrates.

By the existing law, the utmost punishment which can be inflicted by
summary sentence is five pounds fine, or two months’ imprisonment.[*]
The Bill raises this limit to a fine of twenty pounds, or imprisonment
for six months, with or without hard labour.[†] With regard to the fine,
when the prisoner cannot pay it, the power of fining is nugatory. When
he can, it is revolting to the commonest sense of justice that any one
should be able to buy the privilege of inflicting atrocious cruelty by
paying twenty pounds. From the newspaper reports it appears to be the
practice of police magistrates, not to pass sentence of imprisonment
unless they have first ascertained that the prisoner cannot pay the
fine. It is only because these criminals are usually of the most
reckless and therefore the most needy portion of the labouring classes,
that this power of compounding by payment of blood-money does not
operate as an actual licence to the offences intended to be repressed.

Remains the penalty of imprisonment, “with or without” the addition of
labour. The remark is applicable to the question of secondary punishment
in general, and peculiarly to these offences, that the alternative of
imprisonment with or without labour is equivalent to that of conviction
with or without punishment. Can it be supposed that any amount of
imprisonment without labour (unless in the few jails in which the
salutary rule of separation of prisoners has been made universal) has a
deterring effect upon criminals of the class who come under the proposed
enactment? What is a prison to them? A place where, probably, they are
better fed, better clothed, better lodged, than in their own dwellings,
with an abundance of society of their own description, while they are
exempted from the hard work by which they earned their living until the
justice of their country undertook to punish them. In return for this
release from all the most disagreeable circumstances of their ordinary
condition, they suffer the inconvenience of not being able to get gin
Edition: current; Page: [105] and tobacco; that is, they are treated
exactly as if they were in the union workhouse, except the hard labour.
Even alms are not given to the able-bodied at the expense of the parish,
though but for a day, without a day’s work in exchange for it;[*] and
surely, now that attention has been awakened to these subjects, it must
soon be recognized that when imprisonment is imposed as a punishment,
even if only for a day, either solitude or hard labour (for those who
are capable of it) ought invariably to be a part of the sentence. In the
case of the poor, the addition of labour is not even a punishment. Their
life when at large must be one of labour, and generally of a restraint
even upon their power of locomotion, almost equal to that of
imprisonment. With the addition of labour, imprisonment to the ordinary
labourer scarcely amounts to a punishment; without labour it is a
holiday.

But neither with labour nor without it, is imprisonment in any form a
suitable or a sufficient penalty for crimes of brutality. For these
nothing will be effectual but to retaliate upon the culprit some portion
of the physical suffering which he has inflicted. The beneficial
efficacy of the enactment now in contemplation will, it is safe to
prophesy, depend on the adoption or not of Mr. Phinn’s amendment, making
corporal punishment a part of the penalty.[†] The Mover himself did not
disguise his conviction that nothing less than this would be adequate to
the exigency;[‡] and it is earnestly to be hoped that the many adhesions
which the suggestion has since received, including that of one of the
most intelligent of the London police magistrates,* will induce Mr.
Fitzroy to incorporate it in the Bill.

Overwhelming as are the objections to corporal punishment except in
cases of personal outrage, it is peculiarly fitted for such cases. The
repulsiveness to standers by, and the degradation to the culprit, which
make corporal maltreatment so justly odious as a punishment, would cease
to adhere to it, if it were exclusively reserved as a retribution to
those guilty of personal violence. It is probably the only punishment
which they would feel. Those who presume on their consciousness of
animal strength to brutally illtreat those who are physically weaker,
should be made to know what it is to be in the hands of a physical
strength as much greater than their own, as theirs than that of the
subjects of their tyranny. It is the moral medicine needed for the
domineering arrogance of brute power After one or two Edition: current;
Page: [106] cases of flogging for this description of crime, we should
hear no more of outrages upon women or children for a long time to come.
Probably such outrages would cease altogether, as soon as it became well
known that the punishment of flogging would be inflicted for them.

With this penalty in the Act, and a clear understanding on the part of
magistrates that it was not intended as a brutum fulmen, nor to be
reserved for those horrible cases for which, as a matter of moral
retribution, hanging would scarcely be punishment enough; if the
administration of the law were such that the ruffianly part of the
population would know that they could not give loose to their brutal
rage without imminent risk of incurring in fact, and not nominally, the
only punishment which they would dread; the enactment would do more for
the improvement of morality, and the relief of suffering, than any Act
of Parliament passed in this century, not excepting, perhaps, the Act
for the abolition of slavery.[*] But this salutary impression can only
be made by rendering punishment prompt and certain in infliction, as
well as efficacious in kind; by avoiding, therefore, to let in, by the
terms of the Act itself, certainty of delay, and probable chances of
escape. This would, however, be an inevitable effect of adopting another
amendment, of which notice has been given, allowing an appeal to the
quarter sessions.[†] An appeal is often a necessary evil, but in such a
case as this, a palpably unnecessary one. These are not cases in which a
magistrate, or two magistrates, are likely to err on the side of
inflicting too severe a sentence; there is abundant experience that the
danger of error is all on the contrary side.

A government which should pass an act embodying these provisions, would
confer a more immediate and a more certain benefit on the community,
than it is often in the power of legislators to ensure by any enactment.
The beneficial fruits of such a law are not to be measured by the crime
and suffering which it would directly prevent, though these would be
sufficient to stamp it as one of the most beneficent acts yet done by
Government for the improvement of our institutions. A measure such as
this, is of wider scope, and still more extensive beneficence. It is a
measure of moral education. All parties now acknowledge that it is the
urgent duty of Government to provide that the people be educated, could
they but discover how it is to be done; and the present Ministry made it
one of their pledges, on coming into office, that they would do
something effectual for education.[‡] But even if the measure they
contemplate were far more considerable than they probably have it in
their power to make it, what chance is there for education, if the
schools teach one lesson, and the laws another contradictory to it? The
administration of criminal Edition: current; Page: [107] justice is one
of the chief instruments of moral education of the people. Its lessons
of morality are of the utmost importance for good or for ill; for they
take effect upon that part of the population which is unreached by any
other moralizing influences, or on which others have been tried, and
have failed of their effect. The lessons which the law teaches, it
cannot fail of teaching impressively. The man who is brought, or who
knows himself liable to be brought, to answer for his conduct at the bar
of justice, cannot slight or despise the notions of right and wrong, the
opinions and feelings respecting conduct and character, which he there
finds prevailing. It is the one channel through which the sentiments of
the well-conducted part of the community are made operative perforce on
the vilest and worst. Yet, in this day of ragged schools, and model
prisons, and plans for the reformation of criminals, the most important
instrument which society has for teaching the elements of morality to
those who are most in need of such teaching, is scarcely used at all. So
potent an engine must necessarily act in one way or another, and when it
does not act for good, it acts for evil. Is there any system of moral
instruction capable of being devised for the populace, which could stand
against the lessons of a diametrically opposite tendency, daily given by
the criminal courts? The law and the tribunals are terribly in earnest
when they set about the protection of property. But violence to the
person is treated as hardly deserving serious notice, unless it
endangers life; and even then, unless premeditated intention is proved
by such superfluity of evidence that neither ingenuity nor stupidity can
escape from admitting it, the criminal generally gets off almost scot
free.* It is of little avail to talk of inculcating justice, or
kindness, or self-control, while the judicial and police courts teach by
actions, so much more efficacious than words, that the most atrocious
excesses of ungovernable violence are, in the eyes of the authorities,
something quite venial. The law has the forming of the character of the
lowest classes in its own hands. A tithe of the exertion and money now
spent in attempting to reform criminals, if spent in reforming the minor
criminal laws and their administration, would produce a real diminution
of crime, instead of an imaginary reformation of criminals. But then, it
must be allowed, it would not serve to fill so much of philanthropic
gentlemen’s time.

Not only is education by the course of justice the most efficacious, in
its own Edition: current; Page: [108] province, of all kinds of popular
education, but it is also one on which there needs be no difference of
opinion. Churches and political parties may quarrel about the teaching
of doctrines, but not about the punishment of crimes. There is diversity
of opinion about what is morally good, but there ought to be none about
what is atrociously wicked. Whatever else may be included in the
education of the people, the very first essential of it is to
unbrutalise them; and to this end, all kinds of personal brutality
should be seen and felt to be things which the law is determined to put
down. The Bill of Mr. Fitzroy is a step in the right direction; but,
unless its provisions are strengthened, it will be rather an indication
of the wish, than a substantial exercise of the power, to repress one of
the most odious forms of human wickedness.


A Few Words on Non-Intervention

there is a country in europe, equal to the greatest in extent of
dominion, far exceeding any other in wealth, and in the power that
wealth bestows, the declared principle of whose foreign policy is, to
let other nations alone. No country apprehends or affects to apprehend
from it any aggressive designs. Power, from of old, is wont to encroach
upon the weak, and to quarrel for ascendancy with those who are as
strong as itself. Not so this nation. It will hold its own, it will not
submit to encroachment, but if other nations do not meddle with it, it
will not meddle with them. Any attempt it makes to exert influence over
them, even by persuasion, is rather in the service of others, than of
itself: to mediate in the quarrels which break out between foreign
States, to arrest obstinate civil wars, to reconcile belligerents, to
intercede for mild treatment of the vanquished, or finally, to procure
the abandonment of some national crime and scandal to humanity, such as
the slave-trade. Not only does this nation desire no benefit to itself
at the expense of others, it desires none in which all others do not as
freely participate. It makes no treaties stipulating for separate
commercial advantages. If the aggressions of barbarians force it to a
successful war, and its victorious arms put it in a position to command
liberty of trade, whatever it demands for itself it demands for all
mankind. The cost of the war is its own; the fruits it shares in
fraternal equality with the whole human race. Its own ports and commerce
are free as the air and the sky: all its neighbours have full liberty to
resort to it, paying either no duties, or, if any, generally a mere
equivalent for what is paid by its own citizens, nor does it concern
itself though they, on their part, keep all to themselves, and persist
in the most jealous and narrow-minded exclusion of its merchants and
goods.

A nation adopting this policy is a novelty in the world; so much so, it
would appear, that many are unable to believe it when they see it. By
one of the practical paradoxes which often meet us in human affairs, it
is this nation which finds itself, in respect of its foreign policy,
held up to obloquy as the type of egoism and selfishness; as a nation
which thinks of nothing but of out-witting and out-generalling its
neighbours. An enemy, or a self-fancied rival who had been distanced in
the race, might be conceived to give vent to such an accusation in a
moment of ill-temper. But that it should be accepted by lookers-on, and
should pass into a popular doctrine, is enough to surprise even those
who have best sounded the depths of human prejudice. Such, however, is
the estimate of the Edition: current; Page: [112] foreign policy of
England most widely current on the Continent. Let us not flatter
ourselves that it is merely the dishonest pretence of enemies, or of
those who have their own purposes to serve by exciting odium against us,
a class including all the Protectionist writers, and the mouthpieces of
all the despots and of the Papacy. The more blameless and laudable our
policy might be, the more certainly we might count on its being
misrepresented and railed at by these worthies. Unfortunately the belief
is not confined to those whom they can influence, but is held with all
the tenacity of a prejudice, by innumerable persons free from interested
bias. So strong a hold has it on their minds, that when an Englishman
attempts to remove it, all their habitual politeness does not enable
them to disguise their utter unbelief in his disclaimer. They are firmly
persuaded that no word is said, nor act done, by English statesmen in
reference to foreign affairs, which has not for its motive principle
some peculiarly English interest. Any profession of the contrary appears
to them too ludicrously transparent an attempt to impose upon them.
Those most friendly to us think they make a great concession in
admitting that the fault may possibly be less with the English people,
than with the English Government and aristocracy. We do not even receive
credit from them for following our own interest with a straightforward
recognition of honesty as the best policy. They believe that we have
always other objects than those we avow; and the most far-fetched and
unplausible suggestion of a selfish purpose appears to them better
entitled to credence than anything so utterly incredible as our
disinterestedness. Thus, to give one instance among many, when we taxed
ourselves twenty millions (a prodigious sum in their estimation) to get
rid of negro slavery,[*] and, for the same object, perilled, as
everybody thought, destroyed as many thought, the very existence of our
West Indian colonies, it was, and still is, believed, that our fine
professions were but to delude the world, and that by this
self-sacrificing behaviour we were endeavouring to gain some hidden
object, which could neither be conceived nor described, in the way of
pulling down other nations. The fox who had lost his tail had an
intelligible interest in persuading his neighbours to rid themselves of
theirs:[†] but we, it is thought by our neighbours, cut off our own
magnificent brush, the largest and finest of all, in hopes of reaping
some inexplicable advantage from inducing others to do the same.

It is foolish attempting to despise all this—persuading ourselves that
it is not our fault, and that those who disbelieve us would not believe
though one should rise from the dead. Nations, like individuals, ought
to suspect some fault in themselves when they find they are generally
worse thought of than they think they deserve, and they may well know
that they are somehow in fault when almost everybody but themselves
thinks them crafty and hypocritical. It is not solely because England
Edition: current; Page: [113] has been more successful than other
nations in gaining what they are all aiming at, that they think she must
be following after it with a more ceaseless and a more undivided chase.
This indeed is a powerful predisposing cause, inclining and preparing
them for the belief. It is a natural supposition that those who win the
prize have striven for it; that superior success must be the fruit of
more unremitting endeavour; and where there is an obvious abstinence
from the ordinary arts employed for distancing competitors, and they are
distanced nevertheless, people are fond of believing that the means
employed must have been arts still more subtle and profound. This
preconception makes them look out in all quarters for indications to
prop up the selfish explanation of our conduct. If our ordinary course
of action does not favour this interpretation, they watch for exceptions
to our ordinary course, and regard these as the real index to the
purposes within. They moreover accept literally all the habitual
expressions by which we represent ourselves as worse than we are;
expressions often heard from English statesmen, next to never from those
of any other country—partly because Englishmen, beyond all the rest of
the human race, are so shy of professing virtues that they will even
profess vices instead; and partly because almost all English statesmen,
while careless to a degree which no foreigner can credit, respecting the
impression they produce on foreigners, commit the obtuse blunder of
supposing that low objects are the only ones to which the minds of their
non-aristocratic fellow-countrymen are amenable, and that it is always
expedient, if not necessary, to place those objects in the foremost
rank.

All, therefore, who either speak or act in the name of England, are
bound by the strongest obligations, both of prudence and of duty, to
avoid giving either of these handles for misconstruction: to put a
severe restraint upon the mania of professing to act from meaner motives
than those by which we are really actuated, and to beware of perversely
or capriciously singling out some particular instance in which to act on
a worse principle than that by which we are ordinarily guided. Both
these salutary cautions our practical statesmen are, at the present
time, flagrantly disregarding.

We are now in one of those critical moments, which do not occur once in
a generation, when the whole turn of European events, and the course of
European history for a long time to come, may depend on the conduct and
on the estimation of England. At such a moment, it is difficult to say
whether by their sins of speech or of action our statesmen are most
effectually playing into the hands of our enemies, and giving most
colour of justice to injurious misconception of our character and policy
as a people.

To take the sins of speech first: What is the sort of language held in
every oration which, during the present European crisis, any English
minister, or almost any considerable public man, addresses to parliament
or to his constituents? The eternal repetition of this shabby
refrain—“We did not interfere, because no English interest was
involved;” “We ought not to interfere where no English Edition: current;
Page: [114] interest is concerned.” England is thus exhibited as a
country whose most distinguished men are not ashamed to profess, as
politicians, a rule of action which no one, not utterly base, could
endure to be accused of as the maxim by which he guides his private
life; not to move a finger for others unless he sees his private
advantage in it. There is much to be said for the doctrine that a nation
should be willing to assist its neighbours in throwing off oppression
and gaining free institutions. Much also may be said by those who
maintain that one nation is incompetent to judge and act for another,
and that each should be left to help itself, and seek advantage or
submit to disadvantage as it can and will. But of all attitudes which a
nation can take up on the subject of intervention, the meanest and worst
is to profess that it interferes only when it can serve its own objects
by it. Every other nation is entitled to say, “It seems, then, that
non-interference is not a matter of principle with you. When you abstain
from interference, it is not because you think it wrong. You have no
objection to interfere, only it must not be for the sake of those you
interfere with; they must not suppose that you have any regard for their
good. The good of others is not one of the things you care for; but you
are willing to meddle, if by meddling you can gain anything for
yourselves.” Such is the obvious interpretation of the language used.

There is scarcely any necessity to say, writing to Englishmen, that this
is not what our rulers and politicians really mean. Their language is
not a correct exponent of their thoughts. They mean a part only of what
they seem to say. They do mean to disclaim interference for the sake of
doing good to foreign nations. They are quite sincere and in earnest in
repudiating this. But the other half of what their words express, a
willingness to meddle if by doing so they can promote any interest of
England, they do not mean. The thought they have in their minds, is not
the interest of England, but her security. What they would say, is, that
they are ready to act when England’s safety is threatened, or any of her
interests hostilely or unfairly endangered. This is no more than what
all nations, sufficiently powerful for their own protection, do, and no
one questions their right to do. It is the common right of self-defence.
But if we mean this, why, in Heaven’s name, do we take every possible
opportunity of saying, instead of this, something exceedingly different?
Not self-defence, but aggrandizement, is the sense which foreign
listeners put upon our words. Not simply to protect what we have, and
that merely against unfair arts, not against fair arivalrya; but to add
to it more and more without limit, is the purpose for which foreigners
think we claim the liberty of intermeddling with them and their affairs.
If our actions make it impossible for the most prejudiced observer to
believe that we aim at or would accept any sort of mercantile
monopolies, this has no effect on their minds but to make them think
that we have chosen a more cunning way to the same end. It is a
generally Edition: current; Page: [115] accredited opinion among
Continental politicians, especially those who think themselves
particularly knowing, that the very existence of England depends upon
the incessant acquisition of new markets for our manufactures; that the
chase after these is an affair of life and death to us; and that we are
at all times ready to trample on every obligation of public or
international morality, when the alternative would be, pausing for a
moment in that race. It would be superfluous to point out what profound
ignorance and misconception of all the laws of national wealth, and all
the facts of England’s commercial condition, this opinion presupposes:
but such ignorance and misconception are unhappily very general on the
Continent; they are but slowly, if perceptibly, giving way before the
advance of reason; and for generations, perhaps, to come, we shall be
judged under their influence. Is it requiring too much from our
practical politicians to wish that they would sometimes bear these
things in mind? Does it answer any good purpose to express ourselves as
if we did not scruple to profess that which we not merely scruple to do,
but the bare idea of doing which never crosses our minds? Why should we
abnegate the character we might with truth lay claim to, of being
incomparably the most conscientious of all nations in our national acts?
Of all countries which are sufficiently powerful to be capable of being
dangerous to their neighbours, we are perhaps the only one whom mere
scruples of conscience would suffice to deter from it. We are the only
people among whom, by no class whatever of society, is the interest or
glory of the nation considered to be any sufficient excuse for an unjust
act; the only one which regards with jealousy and suspicion, and a
proneness to hostile criticism, precisely those acts of its Government
which in other countries are sure to be hailed with applause, those by
which territory has been acquired, or political influence extended.
Being in reality better than other nations, in at least the negative
part of international morality, let us cease, by the language we use, to
give ourselves out as worse.

But if we ought to be careful of our language, a thousand times more
obligatory is it upon us to be careful of our deeds, and not suffer
ourselves to be betrayed by any of our leading men into a line of
conduct on some isolated point, utterly opposed to our habitual
principles of action—conduct such that if it were a fair specimen of us,
it would verify the calumnies of our worst enemies, and justify them in
representing not only that we have no regard for the good of other
nations, but that we actually think their good and our own incompatible,
and will go all lengths to prevent others from realizing even an
advantage in which we ourselves are to share. This pernicious, and, one
can scarcely help calling it, almost insane blunder, we seem to be
committing on the subject of the Suez Canal.

It is the universal belief in France that English influence at
Constantinople, strenuously exerted to defeat this project, is the real
and only invincible obstacle to its being carried into effect. And
unhappily the public declarations of our present Prime Minister not only
bear out this persuasion, but warrant the assertion that we Edition:
current; Page: [116] oppose the work because, in the opinion of our
Government, it would be injurious to the interest of England.[*] If such
be the course we are pursuing, and such the motive of it, and if nations
have duties, even negative ones, towards the weal of the human race, it
is hard to say whether the folly or the immorality of our conduct is the
most painfully conspicuous.

Here is a project, the practicability of which is indeed a matter in
dispute, but of which no one has attempted to deny that, supposing it
realized, it would give a facility to commerce, and consequently a
stimulus to production, an encouragement to intercourse, and therefore
to civilization, which would entitle it to a high rank among the great
industrial improvements of modern times. The contriving of new means of
abridging labour and economizing outlay in the operations of industry,
is the object to which the larger half of all the inventive ingenuity of
mankind is at present given up; and this scheme, if realized, will save,
on one of the great highways of the world’s traffic, the
circumnavigation of a continent. An easy access of commerce is the main
source of that material civilization, which, in the more backward
regions of the earth, is the necessary condition and indispensable
machinery of the moral; and this scheme reduces practically by one half,
the distance, commercially speaking, between the self-improving nations
of the world and the most important and valuable of the unimproving. The
Atlantic Telegraph is esteemed an enterprise of world-wide importance
because it abridges the transit of mercantile intelligence merely. What
the Suez Canal would shorten is the transport of the goods themselves,
and this to such an extent as probably to augment it manifold.

Let us suppose, then—for in the present day the hypothesis is too
un-English to be spoken of as anything more than a supposition—let us
suppose that the English nation saw in this great benefit to the
civilized and uncivilized world a danger or damage to some peculiar
interest of England. Suppose, for example, that it feared, by shortening
the road, to facilitate the access of foreign navies to its Oriental
possessions. The supposition imputes no ordinary degree of cowardice and
imbecility to the national mind; otherwise it could not but reflect that
the same thing which would facilitate the arrival of an enemy, would
facilitate also that of succour; that we have had French fleets in the
Eastern seas before now, and have fought naval battles with them there,
nearly a century ago; that if we ever became unable to defend India
against them, we bshouldb assuredly have them there without the aid of
any canal; and that our power of resisting an enemy does not depend upon
putting a little more or less of obstacle in the way of his coming, but
upon the amount of force which we are able to oppose to him when come.
Let us assume, however, that the success of the project would do more
harm to England Edition: current; Page: [117] in some separate capacity,
than the good which, as the chief commercial nation, she would reap from
the great increase of commercial intercourse. Let us grant this: and I
now ask, what then? Is there any morality, Christian or secular, which
bears out a nation in keeping all the rest of mankind out of some great
advantage, because the consequences of their obtaining it may be to
itself, in some imaginable contingency, a cause of inconvenience? Is a
nation at liberty to adopt as a practical maxim, that what is good for
the human race is bad for itself, and to withstand it accordingly? What
is this but to declare that its interest and that of mankind are
incompatible—that, thus far at least, it is the enemy of the human race?
And what ground has it of complaint if, in return, the human race
determine to be its enemies? So wicked a principle, avowed and acted on
by a nation, would entitle the rest of the world to unite in a league
against it, and never to make peace until they had, if not reduced it to
insignificance, at least sufficiently broken its power to disable it
from ever again placing its own self-interest before the general
prosperity of mankind.

There is no such base feeling in the British people. They are accustomed
to see their advantage in forwarding, not in keeping back, the growth in
wealth and civilization of the world. The opposition to the Suez Canal
has never been a national opposition. With their usual indifference to
foreign affairs, the public in general have not thought about it, but
have left it, as (unless when particularly excited) they leave all the
management of their foreign policy, to those who, from causes and
reasons connected only with internal politics, happen for the time to be
in office. Whatever has been done in the name of England in the Suez
affair has been the act of individuals, mainly, it is probable, of one
individual;[*] scarcely any of his countrymen either prompting or
sharing his purpose, and most of those who have paid any attention to
the subject (unfortunately a very small number) being, to all
appearance, opposed to him.

But (it is said) the scheme cannot be executed. If so, why concern
ourselves about it? If the project can come to nothing, why profess
gratuitous immorality and incur gratuitous odium to prevent it from
being tried? Whether it will succeed or fail is a consideration totally
irrelevant; except thus far, that if it is sure to fail, there is in our
resistance to it the same immorality, and an additional amount of folly;
since, on that supposition, we are parading to the world a belief that
our interest is inconsistent with its good, while if the failure of the
project would really be any benefit to us, we are certain of obtaining
that benefit by merely holding our peace.

As a matter of private opinion, the present writer, so far as he has
looked into the evidence, inclines to agree with those who think that
the scheme cannot be executed, at least by the means and with the funds
proposed. But this is a consideration for the shareholders. The British
Government does not deem it any part of its business to prevent
individuals, even British citizens, from wasting their Edition: current;
Page: [118] own money in unsuccessful speculations, though holding out
no prospect of great public usefulness in the event of success. And if,
though at the cost of their own property, they acted as pioneers to
others, and the scheme, though a losing one to those who first undertook
it, should, in the same or in other hands, realize the full expected
amount of ultimate benefit to the world at large, it would not be the
first nor the hundredth time that an unprofitable enterprise has had
this for its final result.

There seems to be no little need that the whole doctrine of
non-interference with foreign nations should be reconsidered, if it can
be said to have as yet been considered as a really moral question at
all. We have heard something lately about being willing to go to war for
an idea. To go to war for an idea, if the war is aggressive, not
defensive, is as criminal as to go to war for territory or revenue; for
it is as little justifiable to force our ideas on other people, as to
compel them to submit to our will in any other respect. But there
assuredly are cases in which it is allowable to go to war, without
having been ourselves attacked, or threatened with attack; and it is
very important that nations should make up their minds in time, as to
what these cases are. There are few questions which more require to be
taken in hand by ethical and political philosophers, with a view to
establish some rule or criterion whereby the justifiableness of
intervening in the affairs of other countries, and (what is sometimes
fully as questionable) the justifiableness of refraining from
intervention, may be brought to a definite and rational test. Whoever
attempts this, will be led to recognise more than one fundamental
distinction, not yet by any means familiar to the public mind, and in
general quite lost sight of by those who write in strains of indignant
morality on the subject. There is a great difference (for example)
between the case in which the nations concerned are of the same, or
something like the same, degree of civilization, and that in which one
of the parties to the situation is of a high, and the other of a very
low, grade of social improvement. To suppose that the same international
customs, and the same rules of international morality, can obtain
between one civilized nation and another, and between civilized nations
and barbarians, is a grave error, and one which no statesman can fall
into, however it may be with those who, from a safe and unresponsible
position, criticise statesmen. Among many reasons why the same rules
cannot be applicable to situations so different, the two following are
among the most important. In the first place, the rules of ordinary
international morality imply reciprocity. But barbarians will not
reciprocate. They cannot be depended on for observing any rules. Their
minds are not capable of so great an effort, nor their will sufficiently
under the influence of distant motives. In the next place, nations which
are still barbarous have not got beyond the period during which it is
likely to be for their benefit that they should be conquered and held in
subjection by foreigners. Independence and nationality, so essential to
the due growth and development of a people further advanced in Edition:
current; Page: [119] improvement, are generally impediments to theirs.
The sacred duties which civilized nations owe to the independence and
nationality of each other, are not binding towards those to whom
nationality and independence are either a certain evil, or at best a
questionable good. The Romans were not the most clean-handed of
conquerors, yet would it have been better for Gaul and Spain, Numidia
and Dacia, never to have formed part of the Roman Empire? To
characterize any conduct whatever towards a barbarous people as a
violation of the law of nations, only shows that he who so speaks has
never considered the subject. A violation of great principles of
morality it may easily be; but barbarians have no rights as a nation,
except a right to such treatment as may, at the earliest possible
period, fit them for becoming one. The only moral laws for the relation
between a civilized and a barbarous government, are the universal rules
of morality between man and man.

The criticisms, therefore, which are so often made upon the conduct of
the French in Algeria, or of the English in India, proceed, it would
seem, mostly on a wrong principle. The true standard by which to judge
their proceedings never having been laid down, they escape such comment
and censure as might really have an improving effect, while they are
tried by a standard which can have no influence on those practically
engaged in such transactions, knowing as they do that it cannot, and if
it could, ought not to be observed, because no human being would be the
better, and many much the worse, for its observance. A civilized
government cannot help having barbarous neighbours: when it has, it
cannot always content itself with a defensive position, one of mere
resistance to aggression. After a longer or shorter interval of
forbearance, it either finds itself obliged to conquer them, or to
assert so much authority over them, and so break their spirit, that they
gradually sink into a state of dependence upon itself, and when that
time arrives, they are indeed no longer formidable to it, but it has had
so much to do with setting up and pulling down their governments, and
they have grown so accustomed to lean on it, that it has become morally
responsible for all evil it allows them to do. This is the history of
the relations of the British Government with the native States of India.
It never was secure in its own Indian possessions until it had reduced
the military power of those States to a nullity. But a despotic
government only exists by its military power. When we had taken away
theirs, we were forced, by the necessity of the case, to offer them ours
instead of it. To enable them to dispense with large armies of their
own, we bound ourselves to place at their disposal, and they bound
themselves to receive, such an amount of military force as made us in
fact masters of the country. We engaged that this force should fulfil
the purposes of a force, by defending the prince against all foreign and
internal enemies. But being thus assured of the protection of a
civilized power, and freed from the fear of internal rebellion or
foreign conquest, the only checks which either restrain the passions or
keep any vigour in the character of an Asiatic despot, the native
Governments either became so oppressive and extortionate as to Edition:
current; Page: [120] desolate the country, or fell into such a state of
nerveless imbecility, that every one, subject to their will, who had not
the means of defending himself by his own armed followers, was the prey
of anybody who had a band of ruffians in his pay. The British Government
felt this deplorable state of things to be its own work; being the
direct consequence of the position in which, for its own security, it
had placed itself towards the native governments. Had it permitted this
to go on indefinitely, it would have deserved to be accounted among the
worst political malefactors. In some cases (unhappily not in all) it had
endeavoured to take precaution against these mischiefs by a special
article in the treaty, binding the prince to reform his administration,
and in future to govern in conformity to the advice of the British
Government. Among the treaties in which a provision of this sort had
been inserted, was that with Oude.[*] For fifty years and more did the
British Government allow this engagement to be treated with entire
disregard; not without frequent remonstrances, and occasionally threats,
but without ever carrying into effect what it threatened. During this
period of half a century, England was morally accountable for a mixture
of tyranny and anarchy, the picture of which, by men who knew it well,
is appalling to all who read it. The act by which the Government of
British India at last set aside treaties which had been so
pertinaciously violated, and assumed the power of fulfilling the
obligation it had so long before incurred, of giving to the people of
Oude a tolerable government, far from being the political crime it is so
often ignorantly called, was a criminally tardy discharge of an
imperative duty.[†] And the fact, that nothing which had been done in
all this century by the East India Company’s Government made it so
unpopular in England, is one of the most striking instances of what was
noticed in a former part of this article—the predisposition of English
public opinion to look unfavourably upon every act by which territory or
crevenuec are acquired from foreign States, and to take part with any
government, however unworthy, which can make out the merest semblance of
a case of injustice against our own country.

But among civilized peoples, members of an equal community of nations,
like Christian Europe, the question assumes another aspect, and must be
decided on totally different principles. It would be an affront to the
reader to discuss the immorality of wars of conquest, or of conquest
even as the consequence of lawful Edition: current; Page: [121] war; the
annexation of any civilized people to the dominion of another, unless by
their own spontaneous election. Up to this point, there is no difference
of opinion among honest people; nor on the wickedness of commencing an
aggressive war for any interest of our own, except when necessary to
avert from ourselves an obviously impending wrong. The disputed question
is that of interfering in the regulation of another country’s internal
concerns; the question whether a nation is justified in taking part, on
either side, in the civil wars or party contests of another: and
chiefly, whether it may justifiably aid the people of another country in
struggling for liberty; or may impose on a country any particular
government or institutions, either as being best for the country itself,
or as necessary for the security of its neighbours.

Of these cases, that of a people in arms for liberty is the only one of
any nicety, or which, theoretically at least, is likely to present
conflicting moral considerations. The other cases which have been
mentioned hardly admit of discussion. Assistance to the government of a
country in keeping down the people, unhappily by far the most frequent
case of foreign intervention, no one writing in a free country needs
take the trouble of stigmatizing. A government which needs foreign
support to enforce obedience from its own citizens, is one which ought
not to exist; and the assistance given to it by foreigners is hardly
ever anything but the sympathy of one despotism with another. A case
requiring consideration is that of a protracted civil war, in which the
contending parties are so equally balanced that there is no probability
of a speedy issue; or if there is, the victorious side cannot hope to
keep down the vanquished but by severities repugnant to humanity, and
injurious to the permanent welfare of the country. In this exceptional
case it seems now to be an admitted doctrine, that the neighbouring
nations, or one powerful neighbour with the acquiescence of the rest,
are warranted in demanding that the contest shall cease, and a
reconciliation take place on equitable terms of compromise. Intervention
of this description has been repeatedly practised during the present
generation, with such general approval, that its legitimacy may be
considered to have passed into a maxim of what is called international
law. The interference of the European Powers between Greece and Turkey,
and between Turkey and Egypt, were cases in point. That between Holland
and Belgium was still more so. The intervention of England in Portugal,
a few years ago, which is probably less remembered than the others,
because it took effect without the employment of actual force, belongs
to the same category. At the time, this interposition had the appearance
of a bad and dishonest backing of the government against the people,
being so timed as to hit the exact moment when the popular party had
obtained a marked advantage, and seemed on the eve of overthrowing the
government, or reducing it to terms. But if ever a political act which
looked ill in the commencement could be justified by the event, this
was, for, as the fact turned out, instead of giving ascendancy to a
party, it proved a really healing Edition: current; Page: [122] measure;
and the chiefs of the so-called rebellion were, within a few years, the
honoured and successful ministers of the throne against which they had
so lately fought.[*]

With respect to the question, whether one country is justified in
helping the people of another in a struggle against their government for
free institutions, the answer will be different, according as the yoke
which the people are attempting to throw off is that of a purely native
government, or of foreigners; considering as one of foreigners, every
government which maintains itself by foreign support. When the contest
is only with native rulers, and with such native strength as those
rulers can enlist in their defence, the answer I should give to the
question of the legitimacy of intervention is, as a general rule, No.
The reason is, that there can seldom be anything approaching to
assurance that intervention, even if successful, would be for the good
of the people themselves. The only test possessing any real value, of a
people’s having become fit for popular institutions, is that they, or a
sufficient portion of them to prevail in the contest, are willing to
brave labour and danger for their liberation. I know all that may be
said, I know it may be urged that the virtues of freemen cannot be
learnt in the school of slavery, and that if a people are not fit for
freedom, to have any chance of becoming so they must first be free. And
this would be conclusive, if the intervention recommended would really
give them freedom. But the evil is, that if they have not sufficient
love of liberty to be able to wrest it from merely domestic oppressors,
the liberty which is bestowed on them by other hands than their own,
will have nothing real, nothing permanent. No people ever was and
remained free, but because it was determined to be so; because neither
its rulers nor any other party in the nation could compel it to be
otherwise. If a people—especially one whose freedom has not yet become
prescriptive—does not value it sufficiently to fight for it, and
maintain it against any force which can be mustered within the country,
even by those who have the command of the public revenue, it is only a
question in how few years or months that people will be enslaved. Either
the government which it has given to itself, or some military leader or
knot of conspirators who contrive to subvert the government, will
speedily put an end to all popular institutions: unless indeed it suits
their convenience better to leave them standing, and be content with
reducing them to mere forms; for, unless the spirit of liberty is strong
in a people, those who have the executive in their hands easily work
danyd institutions to the purposes of despotism. There is no sure
guarantee against this deplorable issue, even in a country which has
achieved its own freedom; as may be seen in the present day by striking
examples both in the Old and New Worlds: but when freedom has been
achieved for them, they have little prospect indeed of escaping this
fate. When a Edition: current; Page: [123] people has had the misfortune
to be ruled by a government under which the feelings and the virtues
needful for maintaining freedom could not develope themselves, it is
during an arduous struggle to become free by their own efforts that
these feelings and virtues have the best chance of springing up. Men
become attached to that which they have long fought for and made
sacrifices for, they learn to appreciate that on which their thoughts
have been much engaged; and a contest in which many have been called on
to devote themselves for their country, is a school in which they learn
to value their country’s interest above their own.

It can seldom, therefore—I will not go so far as to say never—be either
judicious or right, in a country which has a free government, to assist,
otherwise than by the moral support of its opinion, the endeavours of
another to extort the same blessing from its native rulers. We must
except, of course, any case in which such assistance is a measure of
legitimate self-defence. If (a contingency by no means unlikely to
occur) this country, on account of its freedom, which is a standing
reproach to despotism everywhere, and an encouragement to throw it off,
should find itself menaced with attack by a coalition of Continental
despots, it ought to consider the popular party in every nation of the
Continent as its natural ally, the Liberals should be to it, what the
Protestants of Europe were to the Government of Queen Elizabeth. So,
again, when a nation, in her own defence, has gone to war with a despot,
and has had the rare good fortune not only to succeed in her resistance,
but to hold the conditions of peace in her own hands, she is entitled to
say that she will make no treaty, unless with some other ruler than the
one whose existence as such may be a perpetual menace to her safety and
freedom. These exceptions do but set in a clearer light the reasons of
the rule; because they do not depend on any failure of those reasons,
but on considerations paramount to them, and coming under a different
principle.

But the case of a people struggling against a foreign yoke, or against a
native tyranny upheld by foreign arms, illustrates the reasons for
non-intervention in an opposite way; for in this case the reasons
themselves do not exist. A people the most attached to freedom, the most
capable of defending and of making a good use of free institutions, may
be unable to contend successfully for them against the military strength
of another nation much more powerful. To assist a people thus kept down,
is not to disturb the balance of forces on which the permanent
maintenance of freedom in a country depends, but to redress that balance
when it is already unfairly and violently disturbed. The doctrine of
non-intervention, to be a legitimate principle of morality, must be
accepted by all governments. The despots must consent to be bound by it
as well as the free States. Unless they do, the profession of it by free
countries comes but to this miserable issue, that the wrong side may
help the wrong, but the right must not help the right. Intervention to
enforce non-intervention is always rightful, always moral, if not always
prudent. Though it be a mistake to give freedom to a people who do not
value the boon, it cannot but be right to insist that if they do value
it, they shall not be hindered from Edition: current; Page: [124] the
pursuit of it by foreign coercion. It might not have been right for
England (even apart from the question of prudence) to have taken part
with Hungary in its noble struggle against Austria; although the
Austrian Government in Hungary was in some sense a foreign yoke. But
when, the Hungarians having shown themselves likely to prevail in this
struggle, the Russian despot interposed, and joining his force to that
of Austria, delivered back the Hungarians, bound hand and foot, to their
exasperated oppressors, it would have been an honourable and virtuous
act on the part of England to have declared that this should not be, and
that if Russia gave assistance to the wrong side, England would aid the
right. It might not have been consistent with the regard which every
nation is bound to pay to its own safety, for England to have taken up
this position single-handed. But England and France together could have
done it; and if they had, the Russian armed intervention would never
have taken place, or would have been disastrous to Russia alone: while
all that those Powers gained by not doing it, was that they had to fight
Russia five years afterwards, under more difficult circumstances, and
without Hungary for an ally. The first nation which, being powerful
enough to make its voice effectual, has the spirit and courage to say
that not a gun shall be fired in Europe by the soldiers of one Power
against the revolted subjects of another, will be the idol of the
friends of freedom throughout Europe. That declaration alone will ensure
the almost immediate emancipation of every people which desires liberty
sufficiently to be capable of maintaining it: and the nation which gives
the word will soon find itself at the head of an alliance of free
peoples, so strong as to defy the efforts of any number of confederated
despots to bring it down. The prize is too glorious not to be snatched
sooner or later by some free country; and the time may not be distant
when England, if she does not take this heroic part because of its
heroism, will be compelled to take it from consideration for her own
safety.


The Contest in America

the cloud which for the space of a month hung gloomily over the
civilized world, black with far worse evils than those of simple war,
has passed from over our heads without bursting. The fear has not been
realized, that the only two first-rate Powers who are also free nations
would take to tearing each other in pieces, both the one and the other
in a bad and odious cause. For while, on the American side, the war
would have been one of reckless persistency in wrong, on ours it would
have been a war in alliance with, and, to practical purposes, in defence
and propagation of, slavery. We had, indeed, been wronged. We had
suffered an indignity, and something more than an indignity, which not
to have resented, would have been to invite a constant succession of
insults and injuries from the same and from every other quarter. We
could have acted no otherwise than we have done: yet it is impossible to
think, without something like a shudder, from what we have escaped. We,
the emancipators of the slave—who have wearied every Court and
Government in Europe and America with our protests and remonstrances,
until we goaded them into at least ostensibly co-operating with us to
prevent the enslaving of the negro—we, who for the last half-century
have spent annual sums equal to the revenue of a small kingdom in
blockading the African coast, for a cause in which we not only had no
interest, but which was contrary to our pecuniary interest, and which
many believed would ruin, as many among us still, though erroneously,
believe that it has ruined, our colonies,—we should have lent a hand to
setting up, in one of the most commanding positions of the world, a
powerful republic, devoted not only to slavery, but to pro-slavery
propagandism—should have helped to give a place in the community of
nations to a conspiracy of slave-owners, who have broken their connexion
with the American Federation on the sole ground, ostentatiously
proclaimed, that they thought an attempt would be made to restrain, not
slavery itself, but their purpose of spreading slavery wherever
migration or force could carry it.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [128]
A nation which has made the professions that England has amadea, does
not with impunity, under however great provocation, betake itself to
frustrating the objects for which it has been calling on the rest of the
world to make sacrifices of what they think their interest. At present
all the nations of Europe have sympathized with us; have acknowledged
that we were injured, and declared, with rare unanimity, that we had no
choice but to resist, if necessary by arms. But the consequences of such
a war would soon have buried its causes in oblivion. When the new
Confederate States, made an independent Power by English help, had begun
their crusade to carry negro slavery from the Potomac to Cape Horn, who
would then have remembered that England raised up this scourge to
humanity not for the evil’s sake, but because somebody had offered an
insult to her flag? Or, even if unforgotten, who would then have felt
that such a grievance was a sufficient palliation of the crime? Every
reader of a newspaper to the furthest ends of the earth, would have
believed and remembered one thing only: that at the critical juncture
which was to decide whether slavery should blaze up afresh with
increased vigour, or be trodden out—at the moment of conflict between
the good and the evil spirit—at the dawn of a hope that the demon might
now at last be chained and flung into the pit, England stepped in, and,
for the sake of cotton, made Satan victorious.

The world has been saved from this calamity, and England from this
disgrace. The accusation would indeed have been a calumny. But to be
able to defy calumny, a nation, like an individual, must stand very
clear of just reproach in its previous conduct. Unfortunately, we
ourselves have given too much plausibility to the bcharge: notb by
anything said or done by us as a Government or as a nation, but by the
tone of our press, and in some degree, it must be owned, the general
opinion of English society. It is too true, that the feelings which have
been manifested since the beginning of the American contest—the
judgments which have been put forth, and the wishes which have been
expressed, concerning the incidents and probable eventualities of the
struggle—the bitter and irritating criticism which has been kept up, not
even against both parties equally, but almost solely against the party
in the right, and the ungenerous refusal of all those just allowances,
which no country needs more than our own, whenever its circumstances are
as near to those of America cat the present momentc as a cut finger is
to an almost mortal wound,—these facts, with minds not favourably
disposed to us, would have gone far to make the most odious
interpretation of the war in which we have been so nearly engaged with
the United States, appear by many degrees the most probable. There is no
denying that our attitude towards the contending parties (I mean our
moral attitude, for politically there was no other course open to us
than neutrality) Edition: current; Page: [129] has not been that which
becomes a people who are as sincere enemies of slavery as the English
really are, and have made as great sacrifices to put an end to it where
they could. And it has been an additional misfortune, that some of our
most powerful journals have been, for many years past, very unfavourable
exponents of English feeling on all subjects connected with slavery:
some, probably, from the influences, more or less direct, of West Indian
opinions and interests: others from inbred Toryism, which, even when
compelled by reason to hold opinions favourable to liberty, is always
adverse to it in feeling; which likes the spectacle of irresponsible
power exercised by one person over others; which has no moral repugnance
to the thought of human beings born to the penal servitude for life, to
which for the term of a few years we sentence our most hardened
criminals, but keeps its indignation to be expended on “rabid and
fanatical abolitionists” across the Atlantic, and on those writers in
England who attach a sufficiently serious meaning to their Christian
professions, to consider a fight against slavery as a fight for God.

Now dthatd the mind of England, and it may almost be said, of the
civilized part of mankind, has been relieved from the incubus which had
weighed on it ever since the Trent outrage, and when we are no longer
feeling towards the Northern Americans as men feel towards those with
whom they may be on the point of struggling for life or death; now, if
ever, is the time to review our position, and consider whether we have
been feeling what ought to have been felt, and wishing what ought to
have been wished, regarding the contest in which the Northern States are
engaged with the South.

In considering this matter, we ought to dismiss from our minds as far as
possible those feelings against the North, which have been engendered
not merely by the Trent aggression, but by the previous anti-British
effusions of newspaper writers and stump orators. It is hardly worth
while to ask how far these explosions of ill-humour are anything more
than might have been anticipated from ill-disciplined minds,
disappointed of the sympathy which they justly thought they had a right
to expect from the great anti-slavery people, in their really noble
enterprise. It is almost superfluous to remark that a democratic
government always shows worst, where other governments generally show
best, on its outside; that unreasonable people are much more noisy than
the reasonable, that the froth and scum are the part of a violently
fermenting liquid that meets the eyes, but are not its body and
substance. Without insisting on these things, I contend, that all
previous cause of offence should be considered as cancelled, by the
reparation which the American Government has so amply made; not so much
the reparation itself, which might have been so made as to leave still
greater cause of permanent resentment behind it; but the manner and
spirit in which they have made it. These have been such as most of us, I
venture to say, did not by any means expect. If Edition: current; Page:
[130] reparation were made at all, of which few of us felt more than a
hope, we thought that it would have been made obviously as a concession
to prudence, not to principle. We thought that there would have been
truckling to the newspaper editors and supposed fire-eaters who were
crying out for retaining the prisoners[*] at all hazards. We expected
that the atonement, if atonement there were, would have been made with
reservations, perhaps under protest. We expected that the correspondence
would have been spun out, and a trial made to induce England to be
satisfied with less; or that there would have been a proposal of
arbitration; or that England would have been asked to make concessions
in return for justice; or that if submission was made, it would have
been made, ostensibly, to the opinions and wishes of Continental Europe.
We expected anything, in short, which would have been weak, and timid,
and paltry. The only thing which no one seemed to expect, is what has
actually happened. Mr. Lincoln’s Government have done none of these
things. Like honest men, they have said in direct terms, that our demand
was right; that they yielded to it because it was just; that if they
themselves had received the same treatment, they would have demanded the
same reparation; and that if what seemed to be the American side of a
question was not the just side, they would be on the side of justice;
happy as they were to find, after their resolution had been taken, that
it was also the side which America had formerly defended.[†] Is there
any one, capable of a moral judgment or feeling, who will say that his
opinion of America and American statesmen is not raised by such an act,
done on such grounds? The act itself may have been imposed by the
necessity of the circumstances; but the reasons given, the principles of
action professed, were their own choice. Putting the worst hypothesis
possible, which it would be the height of injustice to entertain
seriously, that the concession was really made solely to convenience,
and that the profession of regard for justice was hypocrisy: even so,
the ground taken, even if insincerely, is the most hopeful sign of the
moral state of the American mind which has appeared for many years. That
a sense of justice should be the motive which the rulers of a country
rely on, to reconcile the public to an unpopular, and what might seem a
humiliating act; that the journalists, the orators, many lawyers, the
Lower House of Congress, and Mr. Lincoln’s own naval secretary,[‡]
should be told in the face of the world, by their own Government, that
they have been giving public thanks, presents of swords, freedom of
cities, all manner of heroic honours to the author[§] of an act which,
though not so intended, was lawless and wrong, and for which the proper
remedy is confession and atonement; that this should be the accepted
policy (supposing it to be nothing higher) of a Democratic Republic,
shows even unlimited democracy to be a better thing than many Englishmen
have lately been in the habit of Edition: current; Page: [131]
considering it, and goes some way towards proving that the aberrations
even of a ruling multitude are only fatal when the better instructed
have not the virtue or the courage to front them boldly. Nor ought it to
be forgotten, to the honour of Mr. Lincoln’s Government, that in doing
what was in itself right, they have done also what was best fitted to
allay the animosity which was daily becoming more bitter between the two
nations so long as the question remained open. They have put the brand
of confessed injustice upon that rankling and vindictive resentment,
with which the profligate and passionate part of the American press has
been threatening us in the event of concession, and which is to be
manifested by some dire revenge, to be taken, as they pretend, after the
nation is extricated from its present difficulties. Mr. Lincoln has done
what depended on him to make this spirit expire with the occasion which
raised it up; and we shall have ourselves chiefly to blame if we keep it
alive by the further prolongation of that stream of vituperative
eloquence, the source of which, even now, when the cause of quarrel has
been amicably made up, does not seem to have run dry.*

Let us, then, without reference to these jars, or to the declamations of
newspaper writers on either side of the Atlantic, examine the American
question as it stood from the beginning; its origin, the purpose of both
the combatants, and its various possible or probable issues.

There is a theory in England, believed perhaps by some, half believed by
many more, which is only consistent with original ignorance, or complete
subsequent forgetfulness, of all the antecedents of the contest. There
are people who tell us that, on the side of the North, the question is
not one of Slavery at all. The North, it seems, have no more objection
to Slavery than the South have. Their leaders never say one word
implying disapprobation of it. They are ready, on the contrary, to give
it new guarantees; to renounce all that they have been contending for,
to win back, if opportunity offers, the South to the Union, by
surrendering the whole point.

If this be the true state of the case, what are the Southern chiefs
fighting about? Their apologists in England say that it is about
tariffs, and similar trumpery. They say nothing of the kind. They tell
the world, and they told their own citizens when Edition: current; Page:
[132] they wanted their votes, that the object of the fight was slavery.
Many years ago, when General Jackson was President, South Carolina did
nearly rebel (she never was near separating) about a tariff; but no
other State abetted her, and a strong adverse demonstration from
Virginia brought the matter to a close. Yet the tariff of that day was
rigidly protective. Compared with that, the one in force at the time of
the secession was a free-trade tariff. This latter was the result of
several successive modifications in the direction of freedom; and its
principle was not protection for protection, but as much of it only as
might incidentally result from duties imposed for revenue. Even the
Morrill Tariff[*] (which never could have been passed but for the
Southern secession) is stated by the eunimpeachablee authority of Mr.
H.C. Carey to be considerably more liberal than the reformed French
Tariff under Mr. Cobden’s Treaty;[†] insomuch that he, a Protectionist,
would be glad to exchange his own protective tariff for Louis Napoleon’s
free-trade one.[‡] But why discuss on probable evidence, notorious
facts? The world knows what the question between the North and South has
been for many years, and still is. Slavery alone was thought of, alone
talked of. Slavery was battled for and against, on the floor of Congress
and in the plains of Kansas: on the Slavery question exclusively was the
party constituted which now rules the United States: on slavery Fremont
was rejected, on slavery Lincoln was elected; the South separated on
slavery, and proclaimed slavery as the one cause of separation.

It is true enough that the North are not carrying on war to abolish
slavery in the States where it legally exists. Could it have been
expected, or even perhaps desired, that they should? A great party does
not change, suddenly and at once, all its principles and professions.
The Republican party have taken their stand on law, and the existing
Constitution of the Union. They have disclaimed all right to attempt
anything which that Constitution forbids. It does forbid interference by
the Federal Congress with slavery in the Slave States;[§] but it does
not forbid their abolishing it in the district of Columbia; and this
they are now doing, having voted, I perceive, in their present pecuniary
straits, a million of dollars to indemnify the slave-owners of the
district.[¶] Neither did the Constitution, in their own opinion, require
them to permit the introduction of slavery into the Territories, which
were not yet States. To prevent this, the Republican party was formed,
and to prevent it they are now fighting, as the slave-owners are
fighting to enforce it.

Edition: current; Page: [133]
The present Government of the United States is not an abolitionist
government. Abolitionists, in America, mean those who do not keep within
the Constitution; who demand the destruction (as far as slavery is
concerned) of as much of it as protects the internal legislation of each
State from the control of Congress, who aim at abolishing slavery
wherever it exists, by force if need be, but certainly by some other
power than the constituted authorities of the Slave States.* The
Edition: current; Page: [134] Republican party neither aim nor profess
to aim at this object. And when we consider the flood of wrath which
would have been poured out against them if they did, by the very writers
who now taunt them with not doing it, we shall be apt to think the taunt
a little misplaced. But though not an Abolitionist party, they are a
Free-soil party. If they have not taken arms against slavery, they have
against its extension. And they know, as we may know if we please, that
this amounts to the same thing. The day when slavery can no longer
extend itself, is the day of its doom. The slave-owners know this, and
it is the cause of their fury. They know, as all know who have attended
to the subject, that confinement within existing limits is its
death-warrant. Slavery, under the conditions in which it exists in the
States, exhausts even the beneficent powers of nature. So incompatible
is it with any kind whatever of skilled labour, that it causes the whole
productive resources of the country to be concentrated on one or two
products, cotton being the chief, which require, to raise and prepare
them for the market, little besides brute animal force. The cotton
cultivation, in the opinion of all competent judges, alone saves North
American slavery; but cotton cultivation, exclusively adhered to,
exhausts in a moderate number of years all the soils which are fit for
it, and can only be kept up by travelling farther and farther westward.
Mr. Olmsted had given a vivid description of the desolate state of parts
of Georgia and the Carolinas, once among the richest specimens of soil
and cultivation in the world, and even the more recently colonized
Alabama, as he shows, is rapidly following in the same downhill
track.[*] To slavery, therefore, it is a matter of life and death to
find fresh fields for the employment of slave labour. Confine it to the
present States, and the owners of slave property will either be speedily
ruined, or will have to find means of reforming and renovating their
agricultural system; which cannot be done without treating the slaves
like human beings, nor without so large an employment of skilled, that
is, of free labour, as will widely displace the unskilled, and so
depreciate the pecuniary value of the slave, that the immediate
mitigation and ultimate extinction of slavery would be a nearly
inevitable and probably rapid consequence.

The Republican leaders do not talk to the public of these almost certain
results of success in the present conflict. They talk but little, in the
existing emergency, even of the original cause of quarrel. The most
ordinary policy teaches them to inscribe on their banner that part only
of their known principles in which their supporters are unanimous. The
preservation of the Union is an object about which the North are agreed;
and it has many adherents, as they believe, in the South generally. That
nearly half the population of the Border Slave States are in favour of
it is a patent fact, since they are now fighting in its defence. It is
not probable that they would be willing to fight directly against
slavery. The Republicans well know that if they can re-establish the
Union, they gain everything for which they originally Edition: current;
Page: [135] contended; and it would be a plain breach of faith with the
Southern friends of the Government, if, after rallying them round its
standard for a purpose of which they approve, it were suddenly to alter
its terms of communion without their consent.

But the parties in a protracted civil war almost invariably end by
taking more extreme, not to say higher grounds of principle than they
began with. Middle parties and friends of compromise are soon left
behind; and if the writers who so severely criticise the present
moderation of the Free-soilers are desirous to see the war become an
abolition war, it is probable that, if the war lasts long enough, they
will be gratified. Without the smallest pretension to see further into
futurity than other people, I at least have foreseen and foretold from
the first, that if the South were not promptly put down, the contest
would become distinctly an anti-slavery one; nor do I believe that any
person, accustomed to reflect on the course of human affairs in troubled
times, can expect anything else. Those who have read, even cursorily,
the most valuable testimony to which the English public have access,
concerning the real state of affairs in America—the letters of the Times
correspondent, Mr. Russell—must have observed how early and rapidly he
arrived at the same conclusion, and with what increasing emphasis he now
continually reiterates it. In one of his recent letters he names the end
of next summer as the period by which, if the war has not sooner
terminated, it will have assumed a complete anti-slavery character.[*]
So early a term exceeds, I confess, my most sanguine hopes; but if Mr.
Russell be right, Heaven forbid that the war should cease sooner, for if
it lasts till then it is quite possible that it will regenerate the
American people.

If, however, the purposes of the North may be doubted or misunderstood,
there is at least no question as to those of the South. They make no
concealment of their principles. As long as they were allowed to direct
all the policy of the Union; to break through compromise after
compromise, encroach step after step, until they reached the pitch of
claiming a right to carry slave property into the Free States, and, in
opposition to the laws of those States, hold it as property there, so
long, they were willing to remain in the Union. The moment a President
was elected of whom it was inferred from his opinions, not that he would
take any measures against slavery where it exists, but that he would
oppose its establishment where it exists not,—that moment they broke
loose from what was, at least, a very solemn contract, and formed
themselves into a Confederation professing as its fundamental principle
not merely the perpetuation, but the indefinite extension of slavery.
And the doctrine is loudly preached through the new Republic, that
slavery, whether black or white, is a good in itself, and fisf the
proper condition of the working classes everywhere.

Let me, in a few words, remind the reader what sort of a thing this is,
which the Edition: current; Page: [136] white oligarchy of the South
have banded themselves together to propagate, and establish, if they
could, universally. When it is wished to describe any portion of the
human race as in the lowest state of debasement, and under the most
cruel oppression, in which it is possible for human beings to live, they
are compared to slaves. When words are sought by which to stigmatize the
most odious despotism, exercised in the most odious manner, and all
other comparisons are found inadequate, the despots are said to be like
slave-masters, or slave-drivers. What, by a rhetorical licence, the
worst oppressors of the human race, by way of stamping on them the most
hateful character possible, are said to be, these men, in very truth,
are. I do not mean that all of them are hateful personally, any more
than all the inquisitors, or all the buccaneers. But the position which
they occupy, and gof which they are in arms to vindicate the abstract
excellenceg, is that which the united voice of mankind habitually
selects as the type of all hateful qualities. I will not bandy chicanery
about the more or less of stripes or other torments which are daily
requisite to keep the machine in working order, nor discuss whether the
Legrees or the St. Clairs[*] are more numerous among the slave-owners of
the Southern States. The broad facts of the case suffice. One fact is
enough. There are, Heaven knows, vicious and tyrannical institutions in
ample abundance on the earth. But this institution is the only one of
them all which requires, to keep it going, that human beings should be
burnt alive. The calm and dispassionate Mr. Olmsted affirms that there
has not been a single year, for many years past, in which this horror is
not known to have been perpetrated in some part or other of the
South.[†] And not upon negroes only; the Edinburgh Review, in a recent
number, gave the hideous details of the burning alive of an unfortunate
Northern huckster by Lynch law, on mere suspicion of having aided in the
escape of a slave.[‡] What must American slavery be, if deeds like these
are necessary under it? and it they are not necessary, and are yet done,
is not the evidence against slavery still more damning? The South are in
rebellion not for simple slavery, they are in rebellion for the right of
burning human creatures alive.

But we are told, by a strange misapplication of a true principle, that
the South had a right to separate; that their separation ought to have
been consented to, the moment they showed themselves ready to fight for
it; and that the North, in resisting it, are committing the same error
and wrong which England committed in opposing the original separation of
the thirteen colonies. This is carrying the doctrine of the sacred right
of insurrection rather far. It is wonderful how easy, and Edition:
current; Page: [137] liberal, and complying, people can be in other
people’s concerns. Because they are willing to surrender their own past,
and have no objection to join in reprobation of their
great-grandfathers, they never put htoh themselves the question what
they themselves would do in circumstances far less trying, under far
less pressure of real national calamity. Would those who profess these
ardent revolutionary principles consent to their being applied to
Ireland, or India, or the Ionian Islands? How have they treated those
who did attempt so to apply them? But the case can dispense with any
mere argumentum ad hominem. I am not frightened at the word rebellion. I
do not scruple to say that I have sympathized more or less ardently with
most of the rebellions, successful and unsuccessful, which have taken
place in my time. But I certainly never conceived that there was a
sufficient title to my sympathy in the mere fact of being a rebel; that
the act of taking arms against one’s fellow citizens was so meritorious
in itself, was so completely its own justification, that no question
need be asked concerning the motive. It seems to me a strange doctrine
that the most serious and responsible of all human acts imposes no
obligation on those who do it, of showing that they have a real
grievance; that those who rebel for the power of oppressing others,
exercise as sacred a right as those who do the same thing to resist
oppression practised upon themselves. Neither rebellion, nor any other
act which affects the interests of others, is sufficiently legitimated
by the mere will to do it. Secession may be laudable, and so may any
other kind of insurrection; but it may also be an enormous crime. It is
the one or the other, according to the object and the provocation. And
if there ever was an object which, by its bare announcement, stamped
rebels against a particular community as enemies of mankind, it is the
one professed by the South. Their right to separate is the right which
Cartouche or Turpin would have had to secede from their respective
countries, because the laws of those countries would not suffer them to
rob and murder on the highway. The only real difference is, that the
present rebels are more powerful than Cartouche or Turpin, and may
possibly be able to effect their iniquitous purpose.

Suppose, however, for the sake of argument, that the mere will to
separate were in this case, or in any case, a sufficient ground for
separation, I beg to be informed whose will? The will of any knot of men
who, by fair means or foul, by usurpation, terrorism, or fraud, have got
the reins of government into their hands? If the inmates of Parkhurst
Prison were to get possession of the Isle of Wight, occupy its military
positions, enlist one part of its inhabitants in their own ranks, set
the remainder of them to work in chain gangs, and declare themselves
independent, ought their recognition by the British Government to be an
immediate consequence? Before admitting the authority of any persons, as
organs of the will of the people, to dispose of the whole political
existence of a country, I ask to see whether their credentials are from
the whole, or only from a part. And first, it is necessary Edition:
current; Page: [138] to ask, Have the slaves been consulted? Has their
will been counted as any part in the estimate of collective volition?
They are a part of the population. However natural in the country
itself, it is rather cool in English writers who talk so glibly of the
ten millions (I believe there are only eight), to pass over the very
existence of four millions who must abhor the idea of separation.
Remember, we consider them to be human beings, entitled to human rights.
Nor can it be doubted that the mere fact of belonging to a Union in some
parts of which slavery is reprobated, is some alleviation of their
condition, if only as regards future probabilities. But even of the
white population, it is questionable if there was in the beginning a
majority for secession anywhere but in South Carolina. Though the thing
was pre-determined, and most of the States committed by their public
authorities before the people were called on to vote; though in taking
the votes terrorism in many places reigned triumphant; yet even so, in
several of the States, secession was carried only by narrow majorities.
In some the authorities have not dared to publish the numbers; in some
it is asserted that no vote has ever been taken. Further (as was pointed
out in an admirable letter by Mr. Carey),[*] the Slave States are
intersected in the middle, from their northern frontier almost to the
Gulf of Mexico, by a country of free labour—the mountain region of the
Alleghanies and their dependencies, forming parts of Virginia, North
Carolina, Tennessee, Georgia, and Alabama, in which, from the nature of
the climate and of the agricultural and mining industry, slavery to any
material extent never did, and never will, exist. This mountain zone is
peopled by ardent friends of the Union. Could the Union abandon them,
without even an effort, to be dealt with at the pleasure of an
exasperated slave-owning oligarchy? Could it abandon the Germans who, in
Western Texas, have made so meritorious a commencement of growing cotton
on the borders of the Mexican Gulf by free labour? Were the right of the
slave-owners to secede ever so clear, they have no right to carry these
with them; unless allegiance is a mere question of local proximity, and
my next neighbour, if I am a stronger man, can be compelled to follow me
in any lawless vagaries I choose to indulge.

But (it is said) the North will never succeed in conquering the South;
and since the separation must in the end be recognised, it is better to
do at first what must be done at last; moreover, if it did conquer them,
it could not govern them when conquered, consistently with free
institutions. With no one of these propositions can I agree.

Whether or not the Northern Americans will succeed in reconquering the
South, I do not affect to foresee. That they can conquer it, if their
present determination holds, I have never entertained a doubt; for they
are twice as numerous, and ten or twelve times as rich. Not by taking
military possession of their country, or marching an army through it,
but by wearing them out, exhausting their resources, depriving them of
the comforts of life, encouraging their slaves to desert, and Edition:
current; Page: [139] excluding them from communication with foreign
countries. All this, of course, depends on the supposition that the
North does not give in first. Whether they will persevere to this point,
or whether their spirit, their patience, and the sacrifices they are
willing to make, will be exhausted before reaching it, I cannot tell.
They may, in the end, be wearied into recognising the separation. But to
those who say that because this may have to be done at last, it ought to
have been done at first, I put the very serious question—On what terms?
Have they ever considered what would have been the meaning of separation
if it had been assented to by the Northern States when first demanded?
People talk as if separation meant nothing more than the independence of
the seceding States. To have accepted it under that limitation would
have been, on the part of the South, to give up that which they have
seceded expressly to preserve. Separation, with them, means at least
half the Territories; including the Mexican border, and the consequent
power of invading and overrunning Spanish America for the purpose of
planting there the “peculiar institution”[*] which even Mexican
civilization has found too bad to be endured. There is no knowing to
what point of degradation a country may be driven in a desperate state
of its affairs; but if the North ever, unless on the brink of actual
ruin, makes peace with the South, giving up the original cause of
quarrel, the freedom of the Territories; if it resigns to them when out
of the Union that power of evil which it would not grant to retain them
in the Union—it will incur the pity and disdain of posterity. And no one
can suppose that the South would have consented, or in their present
temper ever will consent, to an accommodation on any other terms. It
will require a succession of humiliations to bring them to that. The
necessity of reconciling themselves to the confinement of slavery within
its existing boundaries, with the natural consequence, immediate
mitigation of slavery, and ultimate emancipation, is a lesson which they
are in no mood to learn from anything but disaster. Two or three defeats
in the field, breaking their military strength, though not followed by
an invasion of their territory, may possibly teach it to them. If so,
there is no breach of charity in hoping that this severe schooling may
promptly come. When men set themselves up, in defiance of the rest of
the world, to do the devil’s work, no good can come of them until the
world has made them feel that this work cannot be suffered to be done
any longer. If this knowledge does not come to them for several years,
the abolition question will by that time have settled itself. For
assuredly Congress will very soon make up its mind to declare all slaves
free who belong to persons in arms against the Union.[†] When that is
done, slavery, confined to a minority, will soon cure itself; and the
pecuniary value of the negroes belonging to loyal masters will probably
not exceed the amount of compensation which the United States will be
willing and able to give.

Edition: current; Page: [140]
The assumed difficulty of governing the Southern States as free and
equal commonwealths, in case of their return to the Union, is purely
imaginary. If brought back by force, and not by voluntary compact, they
will return without the Territories, and without a Fugitive Slave Law.
It may be assumed that in that event the victorious party would make the
alterations in the Federal Constitution which are necessary to adapt it
to the new circumstances, and which would not infringe, but strengthen,
its democratic principles. An article would have to be inserted
prohibiting the extension of slavery to the Territories, or the
admission into the Union of any new Slave State. Without any other
guarantee, the rapid formation of new Free States would ensure to
freedom a decisive and constantly increasing majority in Congress. It
would also be right to abrogate that bad provision of the Constitution
(a necessary compromise at the time of its first establishment) whereby
the slaves, though reckoned as citizens in no other respect, are
counted, to the extent of three-fifths of their number, in the estimate
of the population for fixing the number of representatives of each State
in the Lower House of Congress.[*] Why should the masters have members
in right of their human chattels, any more than of their oxen and pigs?
The President, in his Message, has already proposed that this salutary
reform should be effected in the case of Maryland, additional territory,
detached from Virginia, being given to that State as an equivalent: thus
clearly indicating the policy which he approves, and which he is
probably willing to make universal.[†]

As it is necessary to be prepared for all possibilities, let us now
contemplate another. Let us suppose the worst possible issue of this
war—the one apparently desired by those English writers whose moral
feeling is so philosophically indifferent between the apostles of
slavery and its enemies. Suppose that the North should stoop to
recognise the new Confederation on its own terms, leaving it half the
Territories, and that it is acknowledged by Europe, and takes its place
as an admitted member of the community of nations. It will be desirable
to take thought beforehand what are to be our own future relations with
a new Power professing the principles of Attila and Genghis Khan as the
foundation of its Constitution. Are we to see with indifference its
victorious army let loose to propagate their national faith at the
rifle’s mouth through Mexico and Central America? Shall we submit to see
fire and sword carried over Cuba and Porto Rico, and Hayti and Liberia
conquered and brought back to slavery? We shall soon have causes enough
of quarrel on our own account. When we are in the act of sending an
expedition against Mexico to redress the wrongs of private British
subjects,[‡] we should do well to reflect in time that the President of
the new Republic, Mr. Jefferson Davis, Edition: current; Page: [141] was
ione of the original apostlesi of repudiation. jUnless we abandon the
principles we have for two generations consistently professed and acted
on, we should be at war with the new Confederacy within five years about
the African slave-trade. An English Government will hardly be base
enough to recognise them, unless they accept all the treaties by which
America is at present bound; nor, it may be hoped, even if de facto
independent, would they be admitted to the courtesies of diplomatic
intercourse, unless they granted in the most explicit manner the right
of search. To allow the slave-ships of a Confederation formed for the
extension of slavery to come and go, free and unexamined, between
America and the African coast, would be to renounce even the pretence of
attempting to protect Africa against the man-stealer, and abandon that
Continent to the horrors, on a far larger scale, which were practised
before Granville Sharp and Clarkson were in existence. But even if the
right of intercepting their slavers were acknowledged by treaty, which
it never would be, the arrogance of the Southern slaveholders would not
long submit to its exercise. Their pride and self-conceit, swelled to an
inordinate height by their successful struggle, would defy the power of
England as they had already successfully defied that of their Northern
countrymen. After our people by their cold disapprobation, and our press
by its invective, had combined with their own difficulties to damp the
spirit of the Free States, and drive them to submit and make peace, we
should have to fight the Slave States ourselves at far greater
disadvantages, when we should no longer have the wearied and exhausted
North for an ally. The time might come when the barbarous and
barbarizing Power, which we by our moral support had helped into
existence, would require a general crusade of civilized Europe, to
extinguish the mischief which it had allowed, and we had aided, to rise
up in the midst of our civilization.

For these reasons I cannot join with those who cry Peace, peace I cannot
wish that this war should not have been engaged in by the North, or that
being engaged in, it should be terminated on any conditions but such as
would retain the whole of the Territories as free soil. I am not blind
to the possibility that it may require a long war to lower the arrogance
and tame the aggressive ambition of the slave-owners, to the point of
either returning to the Union, or consenting to remain out of it with
their present limits. But war, in a good cause, is not the greatest evil
which a nation can suffer. War is an ugly thing, but not the ugliest of
things, the decayed and degraded state of moral and patriotic feeling
which thinks nothing worth a war, is worse. When a people are used as
mere human instruments for firing cannon or Edition: current; Page:
[142] thrusting bayonets, in the service and for the selfish purposes of
a master, such war degrades a people. A war to protect other human
beings against tyrannical injustice; a war to give victory to their own
ideas of right and good, and which is their own war, carried on for an
honest purpose by their free choice—is often the means of their
regeneration. A man who has nothing which he is willing to fight for,
nothing which he cares more about than he does about his personal
safety, is a miserable creature who has no chance of being free, unless
made and kept so by the exertions of better men than himself. As long as
justice and injustice have not terminated their ever renewing fight for
ascendancy in the affairs of mankind, human beings must be willing, when
need is, to do battle for the one against the other. I am far from
saying that the present struggle, on the part of the Northern Americans,
is wholly of this exalted character; that it has arrived at the stage of
being altogether a war for justice, a war of principle. But there was
from the beginning, and now is, a large infusion of that element in it;
and this is increasing, will increase, and if the war lasts, will in the
end predominate. Should that time come, not only will the greatest
enormity which still exists among mankind as an institution, receive far
earlier its coup de grâce than there has ever, until now, appeared any
probability of; but in effecting this the Free States will have raised
themselves to that elevated position in the scale of morality and
dignity, which is derived from great sacrifices consciously made in a
virtuous cause, and the sense of an inestimable benefit to all future
ages, brought about by their own voluntary efforts.


The Slave Power

this volume has a twofold claim to attention; on the author’s account,
and on its own. Mr. Cairnes, one of the ablest of the distinguished men
who have given lustre to the much-calumniated Irish colleges, as well as
to the chair of Political Economy, which Ireland owes to the enlightened
public spirit of Archbishop Whately, is known to the thinking part of
the public as the contributor to English periodicals of the clearest and
most conclusive discussions which have yet appeared on some of the most
disputed and difficult economical questions of the time. He has now, in
a work of larger dimensions, given the result of the study which, both
as a first-rate political economist, and in the higher character of a
moral and political philosopher, he has devoted to the American contest.
A work more needed, or one better adapted to the need, could scarcely
have been produced at the present time. It contains more than enough to
give a new turn to English feeling on the subject, if those who guide
and sway public opinion were ever likely to reconsider a question on
which they have so deeply committed themselves. To all who are still
open to conviction, it is an invaluable exposition both of the
principles and the facts of the case. The last is as much required as
the first; for the strange partiality of the nation which most abhors
negro slavery, to those who are urging an internecine war solely for its
propagation, could not have existed for a moment, had there not been,
not merely a complete misunderstanding of principles, but an utter
ignorance of facts.

We believe that we shall, on the present occasion, do a better service
to truth and right by helping to extend the knowledge of the contents of
Mr. Cairnes’ treatise, than by any comments of our own. Mr. Cairnes
opens up the question in so lucid and natural an order, and so exhausts
it in all its more important aspects, that a mere condensation of his
book would be the most powerful argumentative discourse on the subject,
which could well be given in the narrow compass of an article. Not that,
as is the case with lax and diffuse writers, his argument gains by
acondensation. Ona the contrary, it loses greatly. In Mr. Cairnes’ book
there is nothing verbose, nothing superfluous; the effect is nowhere
weakened by expansion, nor the impression of the whole frittered away by
undue expatiating on parts; the work is artistic as well as scientific,
observing due proportion, dwelling Edition: current; Page: [146] long
enough, and not too long, on each portion of the subject, and passing to
a new point exactly when the mind is prepared for it, by having
completely appropriated those preceding. An attempt to convey the
substance of such a composition in an abridged form, may give some idea
of the skeleton, but none of the nerve and muscle: the greatest merit
which it could have would be that of stimulating the reader to have
recourse to Mr. Cairnes’ own pages.

After sweeping away the idle notion, which never could have been
entertained by any one conversant with even the surface of American
history, that the quarrel is about tariffs, or anything whatever except
slavery, Mr. Cairnes proceeds to the main thesis of his book, viz., that
the Slave Power, whose character and aims are the cause of the American
contest, is “the most formidable antagonist to civilized progress which
has appeared for many centuries, representing a system of society at
once retrograde and aggressive, a system which, containing within it no
germs from which improvement can spring, gravitates inevitably towards
barbarism, while it is impelled by exigencies inherent in its position
and circumstances to a constant extension of its territorial domain.”
[P. 18.] This is what a man of distinguished ability, who has deeply
considered the subject, thinks of the new power, which England, by the
moral influence of its opinion and sympathies, is helping to raise up.
“The vastness,” he continues, “of the interests at stake in the American
contest, regarded under this aspect, appears to me to be very
inadequately conceived in this country, and the purpose of the present
work is to bring forward this view of the case more prominently than has
yet been done.” [Ibid.]

Accordingly, in the first place, Mr. Cairnes expounds the economic
necessities under which the Slave Power is placed by its fundamental
institution.[*] Slavery, as an industrial system, is not capable of
being everywhere profitable. It requires peculiar conditions. Originally
a common feature of all the Anglo-Saxon settlements in America, it took
root and became permanent only in the southern portion of them. What is
the explanation of this fact? Several causes have been assigned. One is,
diversity of character in the original founders of bthoseb communities;
New England having been principally colonized by the middle and poorer
classes, Virginia and Carolina by the higher. The fact was so, but it
goes a very little way towards the explanation of the phenomenon, since
“it is certain the New Englanders were not withheld from employing
slaves by moral scruples;” and if slave labour had been found suitable
for the requirements of the country, they would, without doubt, have
adopted it in fact, as they actually did in principle. [P. 36.] Another
common explanation of the different fortune of slavery in the Northern
and in the Southern States is, that the Southern climate is not adapted
to white labourers, and that negroes will not work without slavery. The
latter half of Edition: current; Page: [147] this statement is opposed
to fact. Negroes are willing to work wherever they have the natural
inducements to it, inducements equally indispensable to the white race.
The climate theory is inapplicable to the Border Slave States, Kentucky,
Virginia, and others, whose climate “is remarkably genial, and perfectly
suited to the industry of Europeans.” [P. 37.] Even in the Gulf States,
the alleged fact is only true, as it is in all other parts of the world,
of particular localities. The Southern States, it is observed by M. de
Tocqueville, “are not hotter than the south of Italy and Spain.”[*] In
Texas itself there is a flourishing colony of free Germans, who carry on
all the occupations of the country, growth of cotton included, by white
labour; and “nearly all the heavy out-door work in the city of New
Orleans is performed by whites.”[Pp. 38-9.]

What the success or failure of slavery as an industrial system depends
on, is the adaptation of the productive industry of the country to the
qualities and defects of slave labour. There are kinds of cultivation
which even in tropical regions cannot advantageously be carried on by
slaves, there are others in which, as a mere matter of profit, slave
labour has the advantage over the only kind of free labour which, as a
matter of fact, comes into competition with it—the labour of peasant
proprietors.

The economic advantage of slave labour is, that it admits of complete
organization: “it may be combined on an extensive scale, and directed by
a controlling mind to a single end.” [P. 44.] Its defects are, that it
is given reluctantly; it is unskilful; it is wanting in versatility.
Being given reluctantly, it can only be depended on as long as the slave
is watched, but the cost of watching is too great if the workmen are
dispersed over a widely-extended area; their concentration, or, in other
words, the employment of many workmen at the same time and place, is a
condition sine quá non of slavery as an industrial system, while, to
enable it to compete successfully with the intense industry and thrift
of workmen who enjoy the entire fruits of their own labour, this
concentration and combination of labour must be not merely possible, but
also economically preferable. The second disadvantage of slave labour is
that it is unskilful “not only because the slave, having no interest in
his work, has no inducement to exert his higher faculties, but because,
from the ignorance to which he is of necessity condemned, he is
incapable of doing so.” [P. 45.] This disqualification restricts the
profitableness of slavery to the case of purely unskilled labour. “The
slave is unsuited for all branches of industry which require the
slightest care, forethought, or dexterity. He cannot be made to
co-operate with machinery; he can only be trusted with the commonest
implements; he is incapable of all but the rudest labour.” [P. 46.] The
third defect of slave labour is but a form of the second, its want of
versatility. “The difficulty of teaching the slave anything is so great,
that the only chance of turning his labour to profit is, when he has
once learned a Edition: current; Page: [148] lesson, to keep him to that
lesson for life. Where slaves, therefore, are employed, there can be no
variety of production. If tobacco be cultivated, tobacco becomes the
sole staple, and tobacco is produced whatever be the state of the
market, and whatever be the condition of the soil.” [Pp. 46-7.] All
this, not as matter of theory merely, but of actual daily experience in
the Southern States, is superabundantly proved, as Mr. Cairnes shows, by
Southern testimony.[*]

It follows, first, that slave labour is unsuited for manufactures, and
can only, in competition with free labour, be profitably carried on in a
community exclusively agricultural. Secondly, that even among
agricultural employments it is unsuited to those in which the labourers
are, or without great economical disadvantage can be, dispersed over a
wide surface; among which are nearly all kinds of cereal cultivation,
including the two great staples of the Free States, maize and wheat. “A
single labourer can cultivate twenty acres of wheat or Indian corn,
while he cannot manage more than two of tobacco, or three of cotton.”
[P. 50.] Tobacco and cotton admit, therefore, the possibility of working
large numbers within a limited space: and as they also benefit in a far
greater degree than wheat or maize by combination and classification of
labour, the characteristic advantage of slave labour is at the highest,
while its greatest drawback, the high cost of superintendence, is
reduced to the minimum. It is to these kinds of cultivation, together
with sugar and rice, that in America slave labour is practically
confined. Wherever, even in the Southern States, “the external
conditions are especially favourable to cereal crops, as in parts of
Virginia, Kentucky, and Missouri, and along the slopes of the
Alleghanies, there slavery has always failed to maintain itself.” [P.
52.]

But a kind of cultivation suitable to it is not the only condition which
the slave system requires in order to be economically profitable. It
demands, in addition, an unlimited extent of highly fertile land. This
arises from the other two infirmities of slave labour, its unskilfulness
and its want of versatility. This point being of the very highest
importance, and the foundation of the author’s main argument, we give
the statement of it in his own words:

When the soils are not of good quality, cultivation needs to be
elaborate; a larger capital is expended, and with the increase of
capital the processes become more varied, and the agricultural
implements of a finer and more delicate construction. With such
implements slaves cannot be trusted, and for such processes they are
unfit. It is only, therefore, where the natural fertility of the soil is
so great as to compensate for the inferiority of the cultivation, where
nature does so much as to leave little for art, and to supersede the
necessity of the more difficult contrivances of industry, that slave
labour can be turned to profitable account.

Further, slavery, as a permanent system, has need not merely of a
fertile soil, but of a practically unlimited extent of it. This arises
from the defect of slave labour in point of versatility. As has been
already remarked, the difficulty of teaching the slave anything is so
great—the result of the compulsory ignorance in which he is kept,
combined with want of intelligent interest in his work—that the only
chance of rendering his labour profitable is, Edition: current; Page:
[149] when he has once learned a lesson, to keep him to that lesson for
life. Accordingly, where agricultural operations are carried on by
slaves, the business of each gang is always restricted to the raising of
a single product. Whatever crop cbec best suited to the character of the
soil and the nature of slave industry, whether cotton, tobacco, sugar,
or rice, that crop is cultivated, and that crop only. Rotation of crops
is thus precluded by the conditions of the case. The soil is tasked
again and again to yield the same product, and the inevitable result
follows. After a short series of years its fertility is completely
exhausted, the planter abandons the ground which he has rendered
worthless, and passes on to seek in new soils for that fertility under
which alone the agencies at his disposal can be profitably employed.

(Pp. 53-6.)

Accordingly, the ruin, and in many cases the abandonment to nature, of
what were once the most productive portions of the older Slave States,
are facts palpable to the eye, admitted and loudly proclaimed by
slave-holders. And hence that pressing demand for the perpetual
extension of the area of slavery, that never-ceasing tendency westward,
and unceasing struggle for the opening of fresh regions to slave-owners
and their human property, which has grown with the growth of the cotton
cultivation, and strengthened with its strength; which produced the
seizure of Texas, the war with Mexico, the buccaneering expeditions to
Central America, and the sanguinary contest for Kansas; which has been
the one determining principle of Southern politics for the last quarter
of a century; and because at last, though tardily, resisted by the
North, has decided the cotton States to break up the Union.

Such being the economic conditions of a slave community like those of
the Southern States, the author proceeds to show how this economic
system gives rise to a social andd political organization tending in the
highest degree to aggravate the evils which emanate originally from the
economic system itself.

The single merit of slave labour as an industrial instrument consists,
as we have seen, in its capacity for organization, its susceptibility of
being adjusted with precision to the kind of work to be done, and of
being directed on a comprehensive plan towards some distinctly conceived
end. Now, to give scope to this quality, the scale on which industry is
carried on must be extensive, and to carry on industry on an extensive
scale, large capitals are required.

(p. 66)

moreover, a capitalist employing slave labour requires funds sufficient
not merely to maintain his slaves, but to purchase their fee simple from
the first.

Owing to these causes, large capitals are, relatively to small, more
profitable, and are at the same time absolutely more required, in
countries of slave, than in countries of free labour. It happens,
however, that capital is in slave countries a particularly scarce
commodity, owing partly to the exclusion from such countries of many
modes of creating it—manufactures and commerce, for example—which are
open to free communities, and partly to what is also a consequence of
the institution, the unthrifty habits of the upper classes. From this
state of things result two phenomena, which may be regarded as typical
of industry carried on by Edition: current; Page: [150] slaves—the
magnitude of the plantations, and the indebtedness of the planters.
Wherever negro slavery has prevailed in modern times, these two
phenomena will be found to exist. “Our wealthier planters,” says Mr.
Clay, “are buying out their poorer neighbours, extending their
plantations, and adding to their slave force. The wealthy few, who are
able to live on smaller profits, and to give their blasted fields some
rest, are thus pushing off the many who are merely independent.”[*] At
the same time these wealthier planters are, it is well known, very
generally in debt, the forthcoming crops being for the most part
mortgaged to Northern capitalists, who make the needful advances, and
who thus become the instruments by which a considerable proportion of
the slave labour of the South is maintained. The tendency of things,
therefore, in slave countries, is to a very unequal distribution of
wealth. The large capitalists, having a steady advantage over their
smaller competitors, engross with the progress of time a larger and
larger proportion of the aggregate wealth of the country, and gradually
acquire the control of its collective industry. Meantime, amongst the
ascendant class a condition of general indebtedness prevails.

(Pp. 66-71.)

Side by side with these great land and slave proprietors grows up a
white proletariat of the worst kind, known in Southern phraseology as
“mean whites” or “white trash.”[†] The vast districts (becoming, under
the deteriorating effects of slave industry, constantly larger,) which
are surrendered to nature, and relapse into wilderness,

Become the resort of a numerous horde of people, who, too poor to keep
slaves, and too proud to work, prefer a vagrant and precarious life
spent in the desert, to engaging in occupations which would associate
them with the slaves whom they despise. In the Southern States no less
than five millions of human beings are now said to exist in this manner,
in a condition little removed from savage life, eking out a wretched
subsistence by hunting, by fishing, by hiring themselves out for
occasional jobs, by plunder. Combining the restlessness and contempt for
regular industry peculiar to the savage, with the vices of the
proletaire of civilized communities, these people make up a class at
once degraded and dangerous; and constantly reinforced as they are by
all that is idle, worthless, and lawless among the population of the
neighbouring States, form an inexhaustible preserve of ruffianism, ready
at hand for all the worst purposes of Southern ambition. The planters
complain of these people for their idleness, for corrupting their
slaves, for their thievish propensities; but they cannot dispense with
them, for in truth they perform an indispensable function in the economy
of slave societies, of which they are at once the victims and the
principal supporters. It is from their ranks that those filibustering
expeditions are recruited, which have been found so effective an
instrument in extending the domain of the slave power; they furnish the
“Border Ruffians” who in the colonization struggle with the Northern
States contend with Freesoilers on the territories, and it is to their
antipathy to the negroes that the planters securely trust for repressing
every attempt at servile insurrection.

(Pp. 75-6.)

Such, then, is the constitution of society in the Slave States; “it
resolves itself into three classes—the slaves, on whom devolves all the
regular industry; the slaveholders, who reap all its fruits; and an idle
and lawless rabble who live dispersed over vast plains in a condition
little removed from absolute barbarism.” Edition: current; Page: [151]
[P. 85.] Of a society thus composed, the political structure is
determined by an inexorable law.

When the whole wealth of a country is monopolized by a thirtieth part of
its population, while the remainder are by physical or moral causes
consigned to compulsory poverty and ignorance, when the persons
composing the privileged thirtieth part are all engaged in pursuits of
the same kind, subject to the influence of the same moral ideas, and
identified with the maintenance of the same species of property;
political power will of necessity reside with those in whom centre the
elements of such power—wealth, knowledge, and intelligence—the small
minority for whose exclusive benefit the system exists. The polity of
such a society must thus, in essence, be an oligarchy, whatever be the
particular mould in which it is cast. Nor is this all. A society so
organized tends to develop with a peculiar intensity the distinctive
vices of an oligarchy. In a country of free labour, whatever be the form
of government to which it is subject, the pursuits of industry are
various. Various interests, therefore, take root, and parties grow up
which, regarding national questions from various points of view, become
centres of opposition, whether against the undue pretensions of any one
of their number, or against those of a single ruler. It is not so in the
Slave States. That variety of interests which springs from the
individual impulses of a free population does not here exist. The
elements of a political opposition are wanting. There is but one party,
but one set of men who are capable of acting together in political
concert. The rest is an undisciplined rabble. From this state of things
the only possible result is that which we find—a despotism, in the last
degree unscrupulous and impatient of control, wielded by the wealthy
few.

To sum up in a few words the general results of the foregoing
discussion, the Slave Power—that power which has long held the helm of
government in the Union—is, under the forms of a democracy, an
uncontrolled despotism, wielded by a compact oligarchy Supported by the
labour of four millions of slaves, it rules a population of five
millions of whites—a population ignorant, averse to systematic industry,
and prone to irregular adventure. A system of society more formidable
for evil, more menacing to the best interests of the human race, it is
difficult to conceive.

(Pp. 85-7, and 92.)

Are there, in the social and political system which has now been
characterized, any elements of improvement, any qualities which leave
room for a reasonable hope of the ultimate, however gradual, correction
of its inherent evils? Mr. Cairnes has conclusively shown that the very
reverse is the case. Instead of raising themselves to the level of free
societies, these communities are urged by the most imperious motives to
drag down, if possible, free societies to the level of themselves.

It may be thought, perhaps, that American slavery will, from merely
natural causes, share the fate of slavery elsewhere. The institution of
slavery was once universal, but mankind have nevertheless improved; the
most progressive communities in the ancient and modern world—the Greeks,
Romans, Hebrews, mediaeval Europeans—have been afflicted with this
scourge, but by the natural progress of improvement have got rid of it,
and why, it may be said, should not this also happen in the Southern
States? and if so, would not an attempt to anticipate this natural
progress, and make emancipation move forward more rapidly than the
preparation for it, be full of mischief even to the oppressed race
itself?

Mr. Cairnes feels all the importance of this question; and no part of
his book is Edition: current; Page: [152] more instructive, or more
masterly, than the chapter in which he grapples with it.[*] He shows,
that “between slavery as it existed in classical and mediaeval times,
and the system which now erects itself defiantly in North America,”
there are such deep-seated distinctions, as render the analogy of the
one entirely inapplicable to the other. [P. 98.]

The first distinction is the vital fact of the difference in colour
between modern slaves and their masters. In the ancient world, slaves,
once freed, became an integral part of free society; their descendants
not only were not a class apart, but were the main source from which the
members of the free community were recruited; and no obstacle, legal or
moral, existed to their attainment of the highest social positions. In
America, on the contrary, the freed slave transmits the external brand
of his past degradation to all his descendants. However worthy of
freedom, they bear an outward mark which prevents them from becoming
imperceptibly blended with the mass of the free; and while that odious
association lasts, it forms a great additional hindrance to the
enfranchisement by their masters, of those whom, even when enfranchised,
the masters cannot endure to look upon as their fellow-citizens.

But another difference between ancient and modern slavery, which still
more intimately affects the question under discussion, arises from the
immense development of international commerce in modern times.

So long as each nation was in the main dependent on the industry of its
own members for the supply of its wants, a strong motive would be
present for the cultivation of the intelligence, and the improvement of
the condition, of the industrial classes. The commodities which minister
to comfort and luxury cannot be produced without skilled labour, and
skilled labour implies a certain degree of mental cultivation, and a
certain progress in social respect. To attain success in the more
difficult industrial arts, the workman must respect his vocation, must
take an interest in his task; habits of care, deliberation, forethought,
must be acquired; in short, there must be such a general awakening of
the faculties, intellectual and moral, as by leading men to a knowledge
of their rights and of the means of enforcing them, inevitably
disqualifies them for the servile condition. Now this was the position
in which the slave master found himself in the ancient world. He was, in
the main, dependent on the skill of his slaves for obtaining whatever he
required. He was therefore naturally led to cultivate the faculties of
his slaves, and by consequence to promote generally the improvement of
their condition. His progress in the enjoyment of the material
advantages of civilization depended directly upon their progress in
knowledge and social consideration. Accordingly the education of slaves
was never prohibited in the ancient Roman world, and, in point of fact,
no small number of them enjoyed the advantage of a high cultivation.
“The youths of promising genius,” says Gibbon, “were instructed in the
arts and sciences, and almost every profession, liberal and mechanical,
might be found in the household of an opulent senator.”[†] Modern
slaveholders, on the contrary, are independent of the skill, and
therefore of the intelligence and social improvement, of their slave
population. They have only need to find a Edition: current; Page: [153]
commodity which is capable of being produced by crude labour, and at the
same time in large demand in the markets of the world, and by applying
their slaves to the production of this, they may, through an exchange
with other countries, make it the means of procuring for themselves
whatever they require. Cotton and sugar, for example, are commodities
which fulfil these conditions: they may be raised by crude labour, and
they are in large demand throughout the world. Accordingly, Alabama and
Louisiana have only to employ their slaves in raising these products,
and they are enabled through their means to command the industrial
resources of all commercial nations. Without cultivating one of the arts
or refinements of civilization, they can possess themselves of all its
material comforts. Without employing an artisan, a manufacturer, a
skilled labourer of any sort, they can secure the products of the
highest manufacturing and mechanical skill.

(Pp. 100-3.)

There being thus no inducements for cultivating the intelligence of
slaves, the mighty motives which always exist against suffering it to be
cultivated, have had full play; and in all the principal Slave States,
teaching a slave to read or write is rigorously prohibited, under most
severe penalties both to the teacher and the taught.[*]

There is yet another important distinction between slavery in ancient
and in modern times—namely,

the place which the slave trade fills in the organization of modern
slavery. Trading in slaves was doubtless practised by the ancients, and
with sufficient barbarity. But we look in vain in the records of
antiquity for a traffic which, in extent, in systematic character, and
above all, in the function discharged by it as the common support of
countries breeding and consuming human labour, can with justice be
regarded as the analogue of the modern slave trade—of that organized
system which has been carried on between Guinea and the coast of
America, and of that between Virginia, the Guinea of the New World, and
the slave-consuming States of the South and West.

[Pp. 107-8.]

The barbarous inhumanity of the slave trade has long been understood;
but what has not been so often noticed is the mode in which it operates
in giving increased coherence and stability to the system of which it is
a part, first, “by bringing the resources of salubrious countries to
supplement the waste of human life in torrid regions; and secondly, by
providing a new source of profit for slaveholders, which enables them to
keep up the institution, when, in the absence of this resource, it would
become unprofitable and disappear.” [P. 109.] Thus, in Virginia, when
slavery, by exhausting the soil, had eaten away its own profits, and the
recolonization of the State by free settlers had actually begun, came
suddenly the prohibition of the African slave trade, and nearly at the
same time the vast enlargement of the field for slave labour by the
purchase of Louisiana, and these two events made slavery in Virginia
again profitable, as a means of breeding slaves for exportation and sale
to the South.

It is through the existence of this abundant breeding ground for slaves,
which enables their number to be kept up and increased, in the face of
the most frightful mortality in the places to which they are sent, that
slavery is enabled, as it exhausts Edition: current; Page: [154] old
lands, to move on to new ones, preventing that condensation of
population which, by depriving the “mean whites” of the means of
subsisting without regular work, might render them efficient workmen,
instead of, as they now are, “more inefficient, more unreliable, more
unmanageable” than even the slaves, and so might gradually effect the
substitution of free for slave labour. [P. 126.] The consequence is that
population under these institutions increases only by dispersion.
Fifteen persons to the square mile are its maximum density in the really
slave countries; a state of things under which “popular education
becomes impracticable; roads, canals, railways must be losing
speculations” [p. 129] (in South Carolina “a train has been known to
travel a hundred miles with a single passenger” [p. 131]); all
civilizing agencies, all powers capable of making improvement penetrate
the mass of the poor white population, are wanting.

There remain, as a source from which the regeneration of slave society
is to be looked for, the slave-owners themselves; the chance, whatever
it may be, that these may be induced, without external compulsion, to
free their slaves, or take some measure, great or small, to prepare the
slaves for freedom. An individual here and there may be virtuous enough
to do this, if the general sentiment of those by whom he is surrounded
will allow him; but no one, we suppose, is simple enough to expect this
sacrifice from the entire ruling class of a nation, least of all from
the ruling class in the Slave States, with whom the maintenance of
slavery has become a matter of social pride and political ambition as
much as of pecuniary interest.

It is not simply as a productive instrument that slavery is valued by
its supporters. It is far rather for its social and political results,
as the means of upholding a form of society in which slaveholders are
the sole depositaries of social prestige and political power, as the
corner-stone of an edifice of which they are the masters, that the
system is prized. Abolish slavery, and you introduce a new order of
things, in which the ascendancy of the men who now rule eine the South
would be at an end. An immigration of new men would set in rapidly from
various quarters. The planters and their adherents would soon be placed
in a hopeless minority in their old dominions. New interests would take
root and grow, new social ideas would germinate; new political
combinations would be formed; and the power and hopes of the party which
has long swayed the politics of the Union, and which now seeks to break
loose from that Union in order to secure a free career for the
accomplishment of bolder designs, would be gone for ever.

[Pp. 138-9.]

Accordingly the South has advanced, from the modest apologies for
slavery of a generation ago, to loudly vaunting it as a moral,
civilizing, and every way wholesome institution; the fit condition not
only for negroes but for the labouring classes of all countries; nay, as
an ordinance of God, and a sacred deposit providentially entrusted to
the keeping of the Southern Americans, for preservation and
extension.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [155]
The energies of the Southern rulers have long been devoted to protecting
themselves against the economical inconveniences of slavery in a manner
directly the reverse of either its extinction or its mitigation. To
obtain for it an ever wider field is the sole aim of their policy, and,
as they are firmly persuaded, the condition of their social existence. “
‘There is not a slaveholder,’ says Judge Warner, of Georgia,” and in
saying this he only expressed the general sentiment,

“in this house or out of it, but who knows perfectly well that whenever
slavery is confined within certain specified limits its future existence
is doomed, it is only a question of time as to its final destruction.
You may take any single slaveholding county in the Southern States, in
which the great staples of cotton and sugar are cultivated to any
extent, and confine the present slave population within the limits of
that county. Such is the rapid natural increase of the slaves, and the
rapid exhaustion of the soil in the cultivation of those crops (which
add so much to the commercial wealth of the country), that in a few
years it would be impossible to support them within the limits of such
county. Both master and slave would be starved out; and what would be
the practical effect in any one county, the same result would happen to
all the Slaveholding States. Slavery cannot be confined within certain
limits without producing the destruction of both master and slave, it
requires fresh lands, plenty of wood and water, not only for the comfort
and happiness of the slave, but for the benefit of the owner.”[*]

And this is the doctrine of the advocates of slavery! What, to any mind
but that of a slaveholder, would seem at once the reductio ad absurdum
and the bitterest moral satire on slavery, is by them brought
forward—such is the state of their minds—as an unanswerable argument for
bringing fresh territory under it as fast as its exhausts the old,
until, we suppose, all the remaining soil of our planet is used up and
depopulated.

Even were they not prompted to this aggressive ambition by pecuniary
interest, they would have a sufficient inducement to it in the passions
which are the natural growth of slave society. “That which the necessity
for fresh soils is to the political economy of such communities, a lust
of power is to their morality. The slaveholder lives from infancy in an
atmosphere of fdespotism; hef sees around him none but abject creatures,
who, under fearful penalties to be inflicted by himself, are bound to do
his slightest, his most unreasonable bidding.” [P. 155.] The commerce
between master and slave, in the words of Jefferson, himself born and
bred a slave-owner, “ ‘is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous
passions—the most unremitting despotism on the one hand, and degrading
submission on the other. Our children see this, and learn to imitate it.
The parent storms, the child looks on, catches the lineaments of wrath,
puts on the same airs in the circle of smaller slaves, gives a loose to
the worst passions, and thus nursed, educated, and daily exercised in
tyranny, cannot but be stamped with its odious peculiarities.’ ”[†] The
Edition: current; Page: [156] arrogance, self-will, and impatience of
restraint, which are the natural fruits of the situation, and with which
the Southern-American character in all its manifestations is deeply
stamped, suffice of themselves to make the slaveholding class throw all
their pride and self-importance into the maintenance, extension, and
exaltation of their “peculiar institution;”[*] the more, because the
institution and its upholders are generally reprobated by mankind, and
because they have to defy the opinion of free nations, and may have to
resist the exertion of their physical power.

Hence it is that the politicians of the Slave States have devoted
themselves, with the ardour of fanaticism, to acquiring, by fair means
or foul, ascendancy in the politics of the Union, in order that they
might employ that ascendancy in gaining territory for the formation of
new Slave States; and again to create more and more Slave States, in
order to maintain their ascendancy in the Union. Mr. Cairnes has traced
with a vigorous hand the history of these efforts:[†] the struggle
between freedom and slavery for the possession of Missouri; the
compromise by which that new State was given up to slavery, on condition
that no future Slave State should be created north of the parallel
36°30′ of north latitude; the filibustering occupation of Texas in order
to detach it from Mexico, its annexation to the Union by means of
slavery ascendancy, and the war with Mexico for the acquisition of more
slave territory; the Missouri compromise, as soon as all its fruits had
been reaped, discovered to be unconstitutional, and repudiated, the
principle next set up being “squatter sovereignty”[‡] (the doctrine that
Congress could not legislate for the territories, and that the first
inhabitants had the right to decide whether they would allow slavery or
not); the Northern territories consequently opened to slavery, and the
race which followed between Northern and Southern occupants for the
possession of Kansas; a slavery constitution for Kansas voted at the
rifle’s point by bands of “border ruffians”[§] from the South, who did
not even intend to settle in the territory; when this nefarious
proceeding was frustrated by the crowds of free settlers who flocked in
from the North and refused to be bound by the fictitious constitution,
the principle of squatter sovereignty also repudiated, since it had
failed to effect Southern objects, and the doctrine set up that slavery
exists ipso jure in all the territories, and that not even the settlers
themselves could make it illegal; and finally a decision obtained from
the highest tribunal of the United States (which Southern influence had
succeeded in filling with Southern lawyers) by which not only this
monstrous principle was affirmed, but the right of a slavemaster was
recognised to carry his slaves with him to any part of the Free States,
and hold them there, any local law to the contrary notwithstanding. This
Edition: current; Page: [157] was the one step too much in the otherwise
well planned progress of the Southern conspiracy. At this point the
Northern allies, by whose help alone they could command a majority in
the councils of the Federation, fell off from them. The defeat of the
Southern candidate for the Presidency[*] followed as a consequence, and
this first check to the aggressive and advancing movement of slavery,
was the signal for secession and civil war. Well may Mr. Cairnes say
that this series of events “is one of the most striking and alarming
episodes in modern history, and furnishes a remarkable example of what a
small body of men may effect against the most vital interests of human
society, when, thoroughly understanding their position and its
requirements, they devote themselves, deliberately, resolutely, and
unscrupulously, to the accomplishment of their ends.” [P. 221.]

Should these conspirators succeed in making good their independence, and
possessing themselves of a part of the territories, being those which
are in immediate contact with Mexico, nothing is to be expected but the
spread of the institution by conquest (unless prevented by some European
Power) over that vast country, and ultimately over all Spanish America,
and if circumstances permit, the conquest and annexation of the West
Indies; while so vast an extension of the field for the employment of
slaves would raise up a demand for more, which would in all probability
lead to that reopening of the African slave-trade, the legitimacy and
necessity of which have long been publicly asserted by many organs of
the South. Such are the issues to humanity which are at stake in the
present contest between free and slaveholding America; and such is the
cause to which a majority of English writers, and of Englishmen who have
the ear of the public, have given the support of their sympathies.

What is the meaning of this? Why does the English nation, which has made
itself memorable to all time as the destroyer of negro slavery, which
has shrunk from no sacrifices to free its own character from that odious
stain, and to close all the countries of the world against the slave
merchant; why is it that the nation which is at the head of
Abolitionism, not only feels no sympathy with those who are fighting
against the slaveholding conspiracy, but actually desires its success?
Why is the general voice of our press, the general sentiment of our
people, bitterly reproachful to the North, while for the South, the
aggressors in the war, we have either mild apologies or direct and
downright encouragement? and this not only from the Tory and
anti-democratic camp, but from Liberals, or soi-disant such?

This strange perversion of feeling prevails nowhere else. The public of
France, and of the Continent generally, at all events the Liberal part
of it, saw at once on which side were justice and moral principle, and
gave its sympathies consistently and steadily gtog the North. Why is
England an exception? Several causes may be Edition: current; Page:
[158] assigned, none of them honourable to this country, though some,
more than others, may seem to make the aberration excusable.

In the first place, it must, we fear, be admitted, that the anti-slavery
feeling in England, though quite real, is no longer, in point of
intensity, what it was. We do not ascribe this to any degeneracy in the
public mind. It is because the work, so far as it specially concerns
England, is done. Strong feeling on any practical subject is only kept
up by constant exercise. A new generation has grown up since the great
victory of slavery abolition; composed of persons whose ardour in the
cause has never been wrought upon and strung up by contest. The public
of the present day think as their fathers did concerning slavery, but
their feelings have not been in the same degree roused against its
enormities. Their minds have been employed, and their feelings excited,
on other topics, on which there still remained, as it might seem, more
to be done. Slavery has receded into the background of their mental
prospect; it stands, to most of them, as a mere name, the name of one
social evil among many others; not as, what in truth it is, the
summing-up and concentration of them all; the stronghold in which the
principle of tyrannical power, elsewhere only militant, reigns
triumphant.

It must be remembered, too, that though the English public are averse to
slavery, several of the political and literary organs which have most
influence over the public are decidedly not so. For many years the Times
has taken every opportunity of throwing cold water, as far as decency
permitted, on the cause of the negro; had its attempts succeeded, the
African squadron would have been withdrawn, and the effort so long and
honourably persisted in by England to close the negro coast against the
man-stealer would have been ignominiously abandoned. Another of the
misleaders of opinion on this subject, more intellectual in its aims,
and addressing itself to a more intellectual audience, has been from its
first origin, however Liberal on the surface, imbued with a
deeply-seated Tory feeling, which makes it prefer even slavery to
democratic equality; and it never loses an opportunity of saying a word
for slavery, and palliating its evils.[*]

The most operative cause, however, of the wrong direction taken on the
American question by English feeling, is the general belief that
Americans are hostile to England, and long to insult and humble her if
they had but an opportunity; and the accumulated resentment left by a
number of small diplomatic collisions, in which America has carried
herself with a high hand, has bullied and blustered, or her press has
bullied and blustered for her, and in which, through the reluctance of
England to push matters to extremities, which do not vitally concern the
national honour, bullying and blustering have been allowed to prevail.
The facts are too true; but it has not been sufficiently considered,
that the most foul-mouthed enemies of England in the American press and
in Congress were Southern men, and men in the Southern interest; and
that the offensive tone and Edition: current; Page: [159] encroaching
policy of the Federal Government were the tone and policy of a
succession of Governments created by the South, and entirely under
Southern influence. If some bitterness towards England has shown itself
rather widely among the Northern people since the commencement of the
war, and has been ministered to in their usual style by the hacks of the
newspaper press, it must be said in excuse, that they were smarting
under disappointed hopes; that they had found only rebuke where they
felt that they deserved, and had counted upon finding, sympathy, and
when sympathy would have been of the utmost importance to their cause.
“If England had but sympathized with us now,” said recently to us one of
the first of American writers, “it would have united the two nations
almost to the end of time.”[*]

But none of these causes would have accounted for the sad aberration of
English feeling at this momentous crisis, had they not been combined
with an almost total ignorance respecting the antecedents of the
struggle. England pays a heavy price for its neglect of general
cotemporary history, and inattention to what takes place in foreign
countries. The English people did not know the past career or the
present policy and purposes of the Slave Power. They did not, nor do
they yet, know that the object, the avowed object, of secession was the
indefinite extension of slavery; that the sole grievance alleged by the
South consisted in being thwarted in this; that the resistance of the
North was resistance to the spread of slavery—the aim of the North its
confinement within its present bounds, which, in the opinion of the
slave-owners themselves, ensures its gradual extinction, and which is
the only means whereby the extinction can be gradual. The ignorance of
the public was shared by the Foreign Minister, whose official attitude
in reference to the contest has been everything which it ought to be,
but who did unspeakable mischief by the extra-official opinion so often
quoted, that the Southern States are in arms for independence, the
Northern for dominion.[†]

When this was the view taken of the contest in the quarter supposed to
be best informed, what could be expected from the public? Could they
fail to bestow their sympathies on the side which, they were told from
authority, was fighting for the common right of mankind to a government
of their choice, while the other had armed itself for the wicked purpose
of exercising power over others against their will? The moral relations
of the two parties are misplaced, are almost reversed, in Earl Russell’s
dictum. Could we consent to overlook the fact that the South are
fighting for, and the North against, the most odious form of unjust
dominion hwhichh ever existed; could we forget the slaves, and view the
question as one between two white populations; even then, who, we ask,
are fighting for Edition: current; Page: [160] dominion, if not those
who having always before succeeded in domineering, break off from the
Union at the first moment when they find that they can domineer no
longer? Did ever any other section of a nation break through the solemn
contract which united them with the rest, for no reason but that they
were defeated in an election? It is true, indeed, and they are welcome
to the admission, that a very serious interest of the slave-owning
oligarchy depended on retaining the power to domineer. They had at
stake, not dominion only, but the profits of dominion; and those profits
were, that the propagation of slavery might be without limit, instead of
being circumscribed within the vast unoccupied space already included in
the limits of the Slave States, being about half of their entire extent.

But if the South are fighting for slavery, the North, we are told, are,
at all events, not fighting against it: their sole object in the
struggle is the preservation of the Union.

And if it were so: is there anything so very unjustifiable in resisting,
even by arms, the dismemberment of their country? Does public morality
require that the United States should abdicate the character of a
nation, and be ready at the first summons to allow any discontented
section to dissever itself from the rest by a single vote of a local
majority, fictitious or real, taken without any established form, or
public guarantee for its genuineness and deliberateness? This would be
to authorize any State, or part of a State, in a mere fit of ill-temper,
or under the temporary influence of intriguing politicians, to detach
itself from the Union, and perhaps unite itself to some hostile power;
and the end would probably be to break down the Union, from one of the
great nations of the world, into as many petty republics as there are
States, with lines of custom-houses all round their frontiers, and
standing armies always kept up in strength to protect them against their
nearest neighbours.

It is so new a thing to consider questions of national morality from the
point of view of nations, instead of exclusively from that of rulers,
that the conditions have not yet been defined under which it is the duty
of an established Government to succumb to a manifestation of hostile
feeling by a portion, greater or smaller, of its citizens. Until some
rule or maxim shall have grown up to govern this subject, no Government
is expected or bound to yield to a rebellion until after a fair trial of
strength in the field. Were it not for the certainty of opposition, and
the heavy penalties of failure, revolt would be as frequent a fact as it
is now an unfrequent, rebellions would be attempted, not as they now
are, in cases of almost unanimous discontent, but as often as any object
was sought, or offence taken, by the smallest section of the community.

Would the Government or people of the United Kingdom accept for
themselves this rule of duty? Would they look on quietly and see the
kingdom dismembered? They might renounce transmarine possessions which
they hold only as dependencies, which they care little for, and with
which they are neither connected by interest nor by neighbourhood; but
would England acquiesce, without fighting, in Edition: current; Page:
[161] the separation of Ireland or Scotland? and would she be required
to do so by any recognised obligation of public morality?

Putting at the very lowest the inducements which can be supposed to have
instigated the people of the Northern States to rush into the field with
nearly all their available population, and pledge the collective wealth
of the country to an unparalleled extent, in order to maintain its
integrity; it might still be thought, that a people who iwerei supposed
to care for nothing in comparison with the “almighty dollar,”[*] ought
to have some credit given them for showing, by such decisive proofs,
that they are capable of sacrificing that and everything else to a
patriotic impulse. It might have been supposed, too, that even had their
motives been wholly selfish, all good men would have wished them success
when they were fighting for the right, and, considering what it was that
they were fighting against, might have been glad that even selfish
motives had induced one great nation to shed its blood and expend its
substance in doing battle against a monster evil which the other
nations, from the height of their disinterested morality, would have
allowed to grow up unchecked, until the consequences came home to
themselves.

But such a view of the motives of the Northern Americans would be a
flagrant injustice to them. True, the feeling which made the heroic
impulse pervade the whole country, and descend to the least enlightened
classes, was the desire to uphold the Union. But not the Union, simply.
Had they consented to give up the Northern interpretation of the pact;
had they yielded to the Supreme Court’s Southern exposition of it, they
would have won back the South to the Federation by an unanimous
voice.[†] It was because they valued something else even more highly
than the Union, that the Union was ever in a position in which it had to
be fought for. The North fights for the Union, but the Union under
conditions which deprive the Slave Power of its pernicious ascendancy.
People talk as if to support the existing constitution were synonymous
with altogether abandoning emancipation, and “giving guarantees to
slavery.” Nothing of the sort. The Constitution guarantees slavery
against nothing but the interference of Congress to legislate for the
legally constituted Slave States.[‡] Such legislation, in the opinion
equally of North and South, is neither the only, nor the best, nor the
most effectual mode of getting rid of slavery. The North may indeed be
driven to it; and, in the opinion of near observers, is moving rapidly
towards that issue. Mr. Russell, in his letters to Edition: current;
Page: [162] the Times, was constantly reiterating that the war would
before long become an abolition war;[*] and Mr. Dicey, the latest
traveller in America who has published his impressions, and whose book
should be in every one’s hand, says, that this predicted consummation is
now rapidly drawing near, through the conviction, becoming general in
the North, that slavery and the Union are incompatible.[†] But the
Federal Government was bound to keep within the Federal Constitution:
and what, that could be done against slavery consistently with the
Constitution, has it left undone? The district of Columbia was
constitutionally under the authority of Congress; Congress have
abolished slavery in that district, granting compensation.[‡] They have
offered liberal pecuniary assistance to any Slave State which will take
measures for either immediately or gradually emancipating its slaves.[§]
They have admitted Western Virginia into the Union as a State, under a
provision that all children born after a certain day of 1863 shall be
born free.[¶] They have concluded a treaty with England for the better
suppression of the slave trade, conceding, what all former American
Governments have so obstinately resisted, the right of search.[∥] And,
what is more important than all, they have, by a legislative act,
prohibited slavery in the territories.[**] No human being can henceforth
be held in bondage in any possession of the United States which has not
yet been erected into a State. A barrier is thus set to all further
extension of the legal area of slavery within the dominion of the United
States. These things have the United States done, in opposition to the
opinion of the Border States which are still true to their allegiance;
at the risk of irretrievably offending those States, and deciding them
to go over to the enemy. What could the party now dominant in the United
States have done more, to prove the sincerity of its aversion to
slavery, and its purpose to get rid of it by all lawful means?

And these means would, in all probability, suffice for the object. To
prevent the extension of slavery, is, in the general opinion of
slaveholders, to ensure its extinction. It is, at any rate, the only
means by which that object can be effected through the interest of the
slaveholders themselves. If peaceful and gradual is preferable to sudden
and violent emancipation (which we grant may in the present case be
doubtful), this is the mode in which alone it can be effected. Further
Edition: current; Page: [163] colonization by slaves and slave-masters
being rendered impossible, the process of exhausting the lands fitted
for slave cultivation would either continue, or would be arrested. If it
continue, the prosperity of the country will progressively decline,
until the value of slave property jwasj reduced so low, and the need of
more efficient labour so keenly felt, that there kwouldk be no motive
remaining to hold the negroes in bondage. If, on the other hand, the
exhaustive process should be arrested, it must be by means implying an
entire renovation, economical and social, of Southern society. There
would be needed new modes of cultivation, processes more refined and
intellectual, and, as an indispensable condition, labourers more
intelligent, who must be had either by the introduction of free labour,
or by the mental improvement of the slaves. The masters must resign
themselves to become efficient men of business, personal and vigilant
overseers of their own labourers; and would find that in their new
circumstances successful industry was impossible without calling in
other motives than the fear of the lash. The immediate mitigation of
slavery, and the education of the slaves, would thus be certain
consequences, and its gradual destruction by the consent of all
concerned, a probable one, of the mere restriction of its area: whether
brought about by the subjugation of the Southern States, and their
return to the Union under the Constitution according to its Northern
interpretation, or by what Mr. Cairnes regards as both more practical
and more desirable, the recognition of their independence, with the
Mississippi for their western boundary.[*]

Either of these results would be a splendid, and probably a decisive and
final, victory over slavery. But the only point on which we hesitate to
agree with Mr. Cairnes is in preferring the latter, to the former and
more complete issue of the contest. Mr. Cairnes is alarmed by what he
thinks the impossibility of governing this group of States after
reunion, unless in a manner incompatible with free institutions—as
conquered countries, and by military law. We are unable to see the
impossibility. If reduced by force, the Slave States must submit at
discretion. They could no longer claim to be dealt with according to the
Constitution which they had rebelled against. The door which has been
left open till now for their voluntary return, would be closed, it is to
be presumed, after they had been brought back by force. In that case the
whole slave population might, and probably would, be at once
emancipated, with compensation to those masters only who had remained
loyal to the Federal Government, or who may have voluntarily returned to
their allegiance before a time fixed. This having been done, there would
be no real danger in restoring the Southern States to their old position
in the Union. It would be a diminished position, because the masters
would no longer be allowed representatives in Congress in right of
three-fifths of their slaves. The slaves once Edition: current; Page:
[164] freed, and enabled to hold property, and the country thrown open
to free colonization, in a few years there would be a free population in
sympathy with the rest of the Union. The most actively disloyal part of
the population, already diminished by the war, would probably in great
part emigrate if the North were successful. Even if the negroes were not
admitted to the suffrage, or if their former masters were able to
control their votes, there is no probability, humbled and prostrated as
the Slave Power would be, that in the next few years it would rally
sufficiently to render any use which it could make of constitutional
freedom again dangerous to the Union. When it is remembered that the
thinly-peopled Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and some parts even of the
South-Eastern States, have even now so few slaves that they may be made
entirely free at a very trifling expense in the way of redemption; and
when the probable great influx of Northern settlers into those provinces
is considered; the chance of any dangerous power in the councils of the
United States to be exercised by the six or seven Cotton States, if
allowed to retain their constitutional freedom, must appear so small,
that there could be little temptation to deny them that common right.

It may, however, prove impossible to reduce the seceded States to
unconditional submission, without a greater lapse of time, and greater
sacrifices, than the North may be willing to endure. If so, the terms of
compromise suggested by Mr. Cairnes, which would secure all west of the
Mississippi for free labour, would be a great immediate gain to the
cause of freedom, and would probably in no long period secure its
complete triumph. We agree with Mr. Cairnes[*] that this is the only
kind of compromise which should be entertained for a moment. That peace
should be made by giving up the cause of quarrel, the exclusion of
slavery from the territories, would be one of the greatest calamities
which could happen to civilization and to mankind. Close the
territories, prevent the spread of the disease to countries not now
afflicted with it, and much will already have been done to hasten its
doom. But that doom would still be distant if the vast uncolonized
region of Arkansas, and Texas, which alone is thought sufficient to form
five States, were left to be filled up by a population of slaves and
their masters; and no treaty of separation can be regarded with any
satisfaction but one which should convert the whole country west of the
Mississippi into free soil.


Austin on Jurisprudence

these lectures and fragments, with the volume on The Province of
Jurisprudence,[*] of which they are the continuation, and a very few
though very elaborate essays on miscellaneous subjects, published at
long intervals, mostly in Reviews, are all that remains of the
intellectual life of a most remarkable mind. Mr. Austin’s name and
writings are little known, except to students of the science which,
though only aonea of those on which his writings prove him to have
reflected, was the subject on which he principally wrote. But in that
science, even the limited portion of his labours which was before the
world had placed him, in the estimation of all competent judges, in the
very highest rank; and if such judges are now greatly more numerous than
when he began to write, the fact is in no small degree owing to his
intellectual influence. He has been in nothing more useful than in
forming the minds by which he is, and will hereafter be, judged. No
writer whom we know had more of the qualities needed for initiating and
disciplining other minds in the difficult art of precise thought. Though
the merit and worth of his writings as a contribution to the philosophy
of jurisprudence are conspicuous, their educational value, as a training
school for the higher class of intellects, will be found, we think, to
be still greater. Considered in that aspect, there is not extant any
other book which can do for the thinker exactly what this does.
Independently of the demands which its subject makes upon the attention,
not merely of a particular profession, but of all liberal and cultivated
minds, we do not hesitate to say that as a mere organon for certain
faculties of the intellect, a practical logic for some of the higher
departments of thought, these volumes have a claim to a place in the
education of statesmen, publicists, and students of the human mind.

It is not, of course, intended to claim for Mr. Austin a position in the
philosophy of law either equal or similar to that which posterity will
assign to his great predecessor, Bentham. That illustrious thinker has
done, for this important department of human affairs, what can only be
done once. But though the work which Mr. Austin did, neither would nor
could have been done if Bentham had not given the impulse and pointed
out the way, it was of a different character from Edition: current;
Page: [168] Bentham’s work, and not less indispensable. In the
confidence of private friendship, Mr. Austin once said of himself, that
if he had any special intellectual vocation, it was that of “untying
knots.” In this judgment he estimated his own qualifications very
correctly. The untying of intellectual knots; the clearing up of the
puzzles arising from complex combinations of ideas confusedly
apprehended, and not analysed into their elements; the building up of
definite conceptions where only indefinite ones existed, and where the
current phrases disguised and perpetuated the indefiniteness; the
disentangling of the classifications and distinctions grounded on
differences in things themselves, from those arising out of the mere
accidents of their history, and, when disentangled, applying the
distinctions (often for the first time) clearly, consistently, and
uniformly—these were, of the many admirable characteristics of Mr.
Austin’s work as a jurist, those which most especially distinguished
him. This untying of knots was not particularly characteristic of
Bentham. He cut them rather. He preferred to draw his pen through the
whole of the past, and begin anew at the beginning. Neither his tastes
nor his mental habits were adapted to the other kind of work: but,
though his neglect of it led him not unfrequently into errors, yet, all
things considered, success has justified his choice. His effect on the
world has been greater, and therefore more beneficial, by means of it.
The battering ram was of more importance, in Bentham’s time, than the
builder’s trowel. He had to conquer an inveterate superstition. He found
an incondite mass of barbarian conceits, obsolete technicalities, and
contrivances which had lost their meaning, bound together by sophistical
ingenuity into a semblance of legal science, and held up triumphantly to
the admiration and applause of mankind. The urgent thing for Bentham was
to assault and demolish this castle of unreason, and to try if a
foundation could not be laid for a rational science of law by direct
consideration of the facts of human life. To rescue from among the ruins
such valuable materials as had been built in among rubbish, and give
them the new and workmanlike shape which fitted them for a better
edifice; to hunt among the irrationalities of law for helps to its
rationale, was work for which, even if it had been opportune in his day,
Bentham had not time. For Bentham’s subject had a wider range than Mr.
Austin’s. It was the whole, of which the latter is but a part. The one
inquiry was ultimate, the other instrumental. Mr. Austin’s subject was
Jurisprudence, Bentham’s was Legislation.

The purpose of Bentham was to investigate principles from which to
decide what laws ought to exist—what legal rights, and legal duties or
obligations, are fit to be established among mankind. This was also the
ultimate end of Mr. Austin’s speculations; but the subject of his
special labours was theoretically distinct, though subsidiary, and
practically indispensable, to the former. It was what may be called the
logic of law, as distinguished from its morality or expediency. Its
purpose was that of clearing up and defining the notions which the human
mind is compelled to form, and the distinctions which it is necessitated
to make, by the mere existence of a body of law of any kind, or of a
body of law taking cognisance Edition: current; Page: [169] of the
concerns of a civilized and complicated state of society. A clear and
firm possession of these notions and distinctions is as important to
practice as it is to science. For only by means of it can the legislator
know how to give effect to his own ideas and his own purposes. Without
it, however capable the legislator might be of conceiving good laws in
the abstract, he could not possibly so word them, and so combine and
arrange them, that they should really do the work intended and expected.

These notions and distinctions form the science of jurisprudence as Mr.
Austin conceived it. The readers of what we must now call his first
volume, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined, have probably often
regretted, that though it discussed in a most elaborate and searching
manner the “province” (in other words the subject-matter and limits) of
jurisprudence, the nature and uses of the study itself were rather taken
for granted than expressly set forth. This, which was a real defect in
the former volume considered as a separate work, is now supplied by a
dissertation on the study of jurisprudence, formed out of the
introductory lectures to the two courses which Mr. Austin delivered, at
University College and at the Inner Temple. This instructive paper,
besides being included in the larger work, has, in order to recommend
the study to a more numerous body of readers, been judiciously published
separately as a pamphlet.

We have already, in reviewing the second edition of Mr. Austin’s
Province of Jurisprudence,* republished by his widow in 1861, compared
and contrasted the method of Mr. Austin with that of another eminent
philosophical lawyer, Mr. Maine. The subject-matter of both writers is
positive law—the legal institutions which exist, or have existed, among
mankind, considered as actual facts. The aim of both is to let in the
light of philosophy on these facts, and both do this with great success.
Neither writer treats ex professo of laws as they ought to be; though,
in treating of them as they are and as they have been, it is the
declared aim of both to facilitate their improvement. But they pursue
this end, for the most part, through different intellectual media. Mr.
Maine’s operation is essentially historical, not only in the mode of
prosecuting his inquiry, but in the nature of the inquiry itself. He
investigates, not properly the philosophy of law, but the philosophy of
the history of law. In the various legal institutions which obtain, or
have formerly obtained, he studies principally the causes that produced
them. His book may be called a treatise on the action and reaction
between the ideas prevalent among mankind, and their positive
institutions. Under each of the principal classes of facts with which
law is conversant—family, property, contract, and delict or Edition:
current; Page: [170] offence—he historically investigates the primitive
ideas of mankind, traces the customs and institutions, which have
prevailed ever since, to their origin in those primitive ideas, and
shows how institutions which were modelled on the rude notions of an
early state of society, have influenced the thoughts of subsequent
generations down to the present time. Speculations like these, when
directed, as Mr. Maine’s are, by a true historical genius, possess in a
pre-eminent degree all the uses which can belong to history. The laws
and institutions of primitive mankind are the richest indications
available for reading their thoughts, entering into their feelings, and
understanding their general mode of existence. But the historical value
of these studies is the smallest part of their utility. They teach us
the highly practical lesson, that institutions which, with more or less
of modification, still exist, originated in ideas now universally
exploded; and conversely, that ideas and modes of thought which have not
lost their hold even on our own time, are often the artificial, and in
some sort accidental product of laws and institutions which exist no
longer, and of which no one would now approve the revival.

It is not in this manner, except incidentally and occasionally, that Mr.
Austin’s treatise contributes to the improvement of law; though there is
a place allotted to such speculations in his comprehensive conception of
the study of jurisprudence. He does not specially contemplate legal
systems in reference to their origin, and to the psychological causes of
their existence. He considers them in respect of what may be called
their organic structure. Every body of law has certain points of
agreement with every other; and between those which have prevailed in
cultivated and civilized societies, there is a still greater number of
features in common. Independently of the resemblances which naturally
exist in their substantive provisions (designed as these are for the
same world, and for the same human nature), there is also a certain
common groundwork of general conceptions or notions, each in itself very
wide, and some of them very complex, which can be traced through every
body of law, and are the same in all. These conceptions are not
pre-existent; they are a result of abstraction, and emerge as soon as
the attempt is made to look at any body of laws as a whole, or to
compare one part of it with another, or to regard persons, and the facts
of life, from a legal point of view. There are certain combinations of
facts and of ideas which every system of law must recognise, and certain
modes of regarding facts which every such system requires. The proof is,
that all legal systems require a variety of names, which are not in use
for any other purpose. Whoever has apprehended the full meaning of these
names—that is, whoever perfectly understands the facts and the
combinations of thoughts which cthe namesc denote—is a master of
juristical knowledge; and a well-made lexicon of the legal terms of all
systems would be a complete science of jurisprudence: for the objects,
whether natural or artificial, with which law has to do, must be the
same objects which it also has occasion to name.

Edition: current; Page: [171]
But to conceive distinctly a great mass of objects, partly resembling
and partly differing from one another, they must be classed; and to make
any set of practical provisions, which cover a large field, definite and
intelligible, they must be presented to the mind on some principle of
arrangement, grounded on the degree of their connexion and alliance with
one another. The details of different legal systems are different, but
there is no reason why the main classifications and heads of arrangement
should not be in a great measure the same. The facts of which law takes
cognisance, though far from being identical in all civilised societies,
are sufficiently analogous to enable them to be arranged in the same
cadres. The more general of the terms employed for legal purposes might
stand for the same ideas, and be expounded by the same definitions, in
systems otherwise different. The same terminology, nomenclature, and
principle of arrangement, which would render one system of law definite,
clear, and (in Bentham’s language) cognoscible,[*] would serve, with
additions and variations in minor details, to render the same office for
another.

Such a result, however, has not been attained by the mode in which
existing bodies of law have been formed. Laws having in general been
made singly, and their mass having grown by mere aggregation, there has
usually been no authoritative arrangement but the chronological one, and
no uniform or predetermined phraseology, even in the case of statute
law; while in many countries, and pre-eminently in England, the greater
portion of the law, the part which serves as the basis for all the rest,
does not exist at all in the form of general language, but lies imbedded
in judicial decisions; of which even the general principle has to be
evolved by abstraction, and made the subject of forensic disputation,
when the time comes for applying it. Whatever definiteness in detail,
and whatever order or consistency as a whole, has been attained by any
established system, has in almost all countries been given by private
writers on law. All the generalizations of legal ideas, and all explicit
statements of the meaning of the principal legal terms, have, speaking
generally, been the work of these unauthorized persons—have passed from
their writings into professional usage, and have ended by being, either
expressly, or oftener by implication, adopted by governments and
legislatures. So far as any great body of law has been systematized,
this is the mode in which the work has been done; and being done
piecemeal, by persons often ill-prepared for the task, and who had
seldom any other object in view than the convenience of professional
practice, it has been, as a general rule, done very ill. Instead of
classing objects together which agree in their main features, or in the
points which are of chief importance to the ends of law, the classes
formed consist of things which have either no common qualities, or none
but such as are common to them with other things. When the bond of
connexion is real, it seldom lies in the things Edition: current; Page:
[172] themselves, but usually in the historical accidents of the
particular body of laws. In actual systems of law “most of the leading
terms” (it is truly said by Mr. Austin) “are not names of a definite
class of objects, but of a heap of heterogeneous objects.”*

The only mode of correcting this evil, is to free from confusion and set
in a clear light those necessary resemblances and differences, which, if
not brought into distinct apprehension by all systems of law, are latent
in all, and do not depend on the accidental history of any. These
resemblances and differences, while they are the key to all others, are
evidently those which, in a scientific point of view, are alone worth
understanding in themselves. They are also those which are alone fit to
be made use of as the groundwork of a scientific arrangement. The fact
that they exist in all legal systems, proves that they go deeper down
into the roots of law than any of those which are peculiar to some one
system. That the main divisions of the subject should be grounded on
these, follows from the first principle of classification, that the
general should take precedence of the special: and as they are common to
all systems, or to all which are of any scientific importance, the parts
of any given system which are peculiar to it will still find, in this
arrangement, a proper place in which to lodge themselves; which would
not happen if the main arrangement were itself grounded on distinctions
purely historical, and belonging only to a particular system.

To clear up these general notions is, therefore, the direct object of
the science of jurisprudence, as conceived by Mr. Austin. And the
practical result of the science, if carried to the greatest perfection
of which it is susceptible, would be to provide, first, such a legal
terminology (with a strict and precise meaning attached to every word
and phrase) that any system whatever of law might be expressed in it;
and next, such a general scheme of arrangement, that any system whatever
of law might be distributed according to it; and that when so expressed
and distributed, every part of it would be distinctly intelligible, and
each part would assist the comprehension of all the rest. Jurisprudence,
thus understood, is not so much a science of law, as of the application
of logic to law. But by affording a clear and connected view of the
whole field of law—illuminating it by large, comprehensive, and exactly
discriminated conceptions—and enabling every legal dfactd to be classed
at once with those with which it has the nearest alliance, it bestows on
the student either of the philosophy of law, or of any existing legal
system, a command over the subject such as no other course of study
would have made attainable.

In the attempt to investigate, and bring out into scientific clearness,
the conceptions and distinctions of general jurisprudence, Mr. Austin
has built chiefly on the foundation of the Roman law. This has been a
cause of disappointment to some earnest students, who expected, and
would have preferred, something more Edition: current; Page: [173]
decidedly original. The course, however, which Mr. Austin deliberately
adopted, admits, we conceive, of full justification. If the conceptions
and distinctions which he sought belong to law in general, they must
exist in all bodies of law, either explicitly or latently, and might, in
strictness, be evolved from any. By stripping off what belongs to the
accidental or historical peculiarities of the given system, the elements
which are universal will be more surely and completely arrived at, than
by any process of construction à priori; and with the additional
advantage of a knowledge not confined to generals, but including under
each generalization a large acquaintance with the concrete particulars
contained in it. If this be so, the legal system which has been moulded
into the shape it possesses by the greatest number of exact and logical
minds, will necessarily be the best adapted for the purpose; for, though
the elements sought exist in all systems, this is the one in which the
greatest number of them are likely to have been brought out into
distinct expression, and the fewest to remain latent. And this
superiority is possessed, beyond question, by the Roman law. The eminent
systematizing genius of the Roman jurists, and not any over-estimate of
the Roman law considered in itself, determined Mr. Austin to make it the
basis of his own investigations, as is evident from many passages, and
from the following especially:

Much has been talked of the philosophy of the Roman Institutional
writers. Of familiarity with Grecian philosophy there are few traces in
their writings, and the little that they have borrowed from that source
is the veriest foolishness for example, their account of Jus Naturale,
in which they confound Law with animal instincts—Law, with all those
wants and necessities of mankind which are causes of its institutions.

Nor is the Roman law to be resorted to as a magazine of legislative
wisdom. The great Roman Lawyers are, in truth, expositors of a positive
or technical system. Not Lord Coke himself is more purely technical.[*]
Their real merits lie in their thorough mastery of that system; in their
command of its principles, in the readiness with which they recall, and
the facility and certainty with which they apply them.

In consequence of this mastery of principles, of their perfect
consistency (elegantia), and of the clearness of the method in which
they are arranged, there is no positive system of law which it is so
easy to seize as a whole. The smallness of its volume tends to the same
end.

The principles themselves, many of them being derived from barbarous
ages, are indeed ill fitted to the ends of law, and the conclusions at
which they arrive, being logical consequences of their imperfect
principles, necessarily partake of the same defect.

([On the] Study of Jurisprudence, pp. 17-19.)*

Mr. Austin, therefore, was justified in seeking for the constituent
elements of universal jurisprudence where they were certain to be found,
and where (from the superior quality of the minds which had been
employed on the system) more of Edition: current; Page: [174] those
elements had been explicitly recognised, and adopted into the scientific
arrangement of the law itself, than in any other legal system. There
remains, it is true, a question belonging to a later stage of the
inquiry: did the Roman jurists select as the foundation of their
technology and arrangement those among the conceptions and distinctions
of law universal which were best fitted for the purpose? Mr. Austin
seems to think that they did; since his own arrangement is merely theirs
in an improved form. We shall presently give our reasons for thinking
that, with great merits, the arrangement of the Roman jurists has great
faults; that, in taking as the ground of their entire system the
classification of rights, they adopted a principle suited only to what
Bentham called the substantive law,[*] and only to the civil branch of
that, and, in so doing, reversed the order of filiation of juristical
conceptions, and missed the true aim of scientific classification. But
this, though a very important, is still a secondary consideration. To
find the absolutely best systematic order for a body of law, would be
the ultimate result of a complete science of jurisprudence; but its main
problem is to give clearness, precision, and consistency to the
juristical conceptions themselves. What Mr. Austin has done towards this
object, constitutes the great permanent worth of his speculations,
considered as substantive results of thought. No one thoroughly versed
in these volumes need ever again miss his way amidst the obscurity and
confusion of legal language. He will not only have been made sensible of
the absence of meaning in many of the phrases and dogmas of writers on
law, but will have been put in the way to detect the true meaning, for
which those phrases are the empty substitute. He will have seen this
done for him in the Lectures, with rare completeness, in regard to a
great number of the leading ideas of jurisprudence, and will have served
an apprenticeship, enabling him with comparative ease to practise the
same operation upon the remainder.

Edition: current; Page: [175]
The Course of Lectures, which occupies the greatest part of these
volumes, was never completed. The first eleven lectures, condensed (or
rather enlarged) into six, form the original volume, lately republished.
The remainder have never before appeared in print, but left an indelible
impression on the minds of those who heard them delivered, among whom
were an unusual number of persons since distinguished as among the
foremost minds of the time. Though the Lectures do not conclude the
subject, yet, with the loose and unfinished but rich and suggestive
memoranda which have been very properly subjoined to them, they fill up
the greatest part of the outline given in the first volume; so that,
when taken in conjunction with that outline, and with the important and
elaborate notes appended to the tables which Mr. Austin prepared of the
various known arrangements of the field of law, they give something like
an adequate idea of the mode in which he would have treated the entire
subject. We may add that, notwithstanding the fragmentary nature of the
latter part of these volumes, they will be found, on the whole, easier
reading (if that epithet can be applied to anything worth reading on
such a subject) than the work already so highly prized by those for whom
it was intended.[*] This is an effect of that peculiarity of Mr.
Austin’s mind, which made his first drafts always more fitted for
popularity than his finished performances. For, in deliberate scientific
exposition, he was so rigid in his demands on himself, so intolerant of
anything short of absolute completeness, so impatient while the
slightest shadow rested upon any part of the field he surveyed, that he
was apt to overlay his work with excess of matter, and, by the
elaboration which he bestowed on minor points, weakened the general
effect of his elucidation of those which were greater. But this, while
it necessarily diminished the popularity of his writings, added to their
intrinsic value. Where most men would have permitted themselves to pass
lightly over some detail or difficulty, he developed it at full length;
but it was because he well knew that unless the point were cleared up,
the matter in hand could not be understood thoroughly. Those who pass on
their way leaving dark corners unexplored, and concern themselves only
with as much of the subject as lies straight before them, often through
that neglect miss the very key of the position. Absence of light and
shade, and uniformity of distance, bringing all objects alike into the
foreground, are fatal defects in describing things for merely artistic
purposes; but Mr. Austin’s delineations are like geometrical
line-drawing, not intended to exhibit objects in their most impressive
aspect, but to show exactly what they are. Whether it would have been
possible, by greater artifice of composition, to have somewhat relieved
the tension of mind required by the length and intricacy of the fifth
and sixth chapters of The Province of Jurisprudence:[†] whether somewhat
more of rhetoric, in the elevated sense in which the word was understood
by Aristotle,[‡] might have conciliated an easier reception for their
Edition: current; Page: [176] severe logic—those who have best learnt
from experience the extreme difficulty of such a task will be the most
backward to decide. But we feel certain that any competent student of
the subject who reads those chapters once, will read them repeatedly,
and that each reading will raise higher his estimate of their substance,
and reconcile him more, if he ever needed reconciliation, with their
manner.

In the very summary view which can alone be taken of the contents of the
work, a few words must be premised on the introductory portion, although
epublished many years earliere; the rather, as it affords an apt
exemplification of what we have said concerning the object and character
of the entire treatise. The inquiry into the Province of Jurisprudence
may be correctly characterized as being from one end to the other an
analysis and explanation of a word. It is an examination of what is
meant by a law, in the political or juristical sense of the term. And
yet it is as far from being a merely verbal discussion, as the inquiry
into the meaning of justice, which is the foundation of the greatest and
most renowned of the writings of Plato.[*] For the meaning of a name
must always be sought in the distinctive qualities of the thing named;
and these are only to be detected by an accurate study of the thing
itself, and of every other thing from which it requires to be
distinguished.

A law is a command. A command is an expression of desire, issuing from a
superior, and enforced by a sanction, that is, by something of the
nature of a punishment. Law, however, does not mean every command, but
only commands which oblige generally—which oblige to acts or
forbearances of a class, not to an act or forbearance individually
determined. These several notions having been duly analysed and
illustrated, various objects are brought to view, which do not possess
all the attributes of a law, but which, bearing a certain analogy to
laws, require to be distinguished from them. And even within the limits
of the strict meaning of the term, the laws which are the subject of
jurisprudence require to be distinguished from laws in the same logical
sense but of a different species—namely, divine laws, or the laws of
God. The region which these different inquiries travel over is large and
important, including the following as its principal parts:

First, the laws of God. Of the six lectures, or chapters, composing the
volume, three[†] are occupied in the inquiry, by what means the will of
God, concerning the rules of conduct to be observed by his rational
creatures, is to be ascertained—ascertained, that is, so far as it has
not been revealed, or, if revealed, requires ulterior inquiry respecting
the sense intended by the revelation. The Edition: current; Page: [177]
author discusses at considerable length the two rival theories on this
subject, that of utility, and that of the moral sense; of the former of
which he is an earnest supporter, and has given a most able and
instructive defence.[*] His treatment is sometimes such as might suggest
the idea that he regarded the binding force of the morals of utility as
depending altogether upon the express or implied commands of God. This,
however, is a mere appearance, arising from the particular point of view
to which he was limited by the nature of his subject. What is called the
moral law, was only related to the Law of which Mr. Austin was treating,
in so far as it might be considered to possess the distinctive character
of laws proper, that of being the command of a superior. If he could
have been suspected of encouraging a mere worship of power, by
representing the distinction of right and wrong as constituted by the
Divine will, instead of merely recognised and sanctioned by it, the
supposition would have been conclusively rebutted by a passage at page
116n: “If the laws set by the Deity were not generally useful, or if
they did not promote the general happiness of his creatures, or if their
great Author were not wise and benevolent, they would not be good, or
worthy of praise, but were devilish and worthy of execration.”

The laws with which jurisprudence is conversant, having been
distinguished from divine laws, have next to be discriminated from what
are called laws only by way of analogy—rules prescribed and sanctioned
only by opinion: to which Mr. Austin, by a happy extension of the term
Positive as applied to law, gives the name of Positive Morality,[†]
meaning the moral opinions and sentiments actually prevailing in any
given society, as distinguished from Deontology, or morality as it ought
to be. Of this character is much that is commonly (to the great
confusion of the minds of students) called by the name of Law. What is
termed Constitutional Law is, in part, only maxims of morality,
considered proper to be observed towards one another by the component
members of the sovereign body. But the strongest case is that of
International Law, which, as independent nations are not subject to any
common political superior, ought not to be termed Law, but Positive
International Morality. It is law only in as far as effect is given to
its maxims by the tribunals of any particular country; and in that
capacity it is not international law, but a part of the particular law
of that country.

Lastly, laws properly so called have to be distinguished from laws which
are such only in a metaphorical sense—the laws of nature as the
expression is understood by physical inquirers, meaning the uniformities
of co-existence or succession in the phenomena of the universe. That an
ambiguity like this should ever have misled any one—that what are laws
only by a metaphor, should be supposed to be laws in the same sense as
those which are really the commands of a superior—would hardly à priori
have appeared probable, yet this confusion is Edition: current; Page:
[178] total in the majority of modern writers; among whom Mr. Austin
mentions Hooker, Blackstone, and Montesquieu in his celebrated first
chapter, which is even now regarded by most French thinkers as profound
philosophy.[*] In our own country we are frequently warned by a certain
class of writers against disobeying or violating the physical laws of
organic life; as if it were not the very meaning of a physical law, that
it may be unknown or disregarded, but cannot possibly be violated.

These distinctions, with the many important considerations into which
they branch out, bring us to the end of the fifth chapter. The sixth is
employed in giving precision to the remainder of the conceptions
involved in a law in the positive sense (a law emanating from a
sovereign or political superior), by clearing up the meaning of
sovereignty, and independent political society; involving incidentally
the whole subject of constitutional organization, and the division of
the sovereignty among several members; also that of subordinate
governments, of federations, and all the various relations in which one
political society can stand to another.

In the Lectures newly published, the first subject treated is the most
general of all those which come within the scope of jurisprudence—the
nature and meaning of Rights (understanding thereby legal rights), and
of legal Duties or Obligations. In order to treat of this subject, it
was necessary to define certain notions, which are involved in all cases
of rights and duties—the notions of person, thing, act, and forbearance.
These, accordingly, are the first matters with which the author deals;
and he criticizes various cases of confusion of thought or misuse of
language on these subjects, in the writings of jurists.

All rights, as he observes, are rights to acts or forbearances, either
on the part of persons generally, or of particular persons. When we talk
of our right to a thing, we mean, if the thing is in our possession, a
right to the forbearance of all persons from taking it, or disturbing us
in its enjoyment. If it is in the possession of some other person, we
mean a right to an act or forbearance of that person—the act of
delivering it to us, or forbearance on his part from detaining it. It is
by commanding these acts and forbearances that the law confers the
right; and the right, therefore, is essentially and directly a right to
them, and only indirectly to the thing itself.

Right is correlative with legal duty or obligation. But though every
right supposes a correlative obligation—though the obligation properly
constitutes the right—every obligation does not create a right
correlative to it. There are duties or Edition: current; Page: [179]
obligations which are not relative, but (as the phrase is) absolute. The
act commanded is not to be done, or the forbearance observed, towards or
in respect to a determinate person; or, if any, not a person distinct
from the agent himself. Such absolute duties comprise, first, what are
called duties towards oneself. The law may forbid suicide or
drunkenness; but it would not be said, by so doing, to give me a right
to my life or health as against myself. Secondly, duties towards persons
indefinitely, or towards the sovereign or state; such as the political
duties of a citizen, which do not correspond to any right vested in
determinate individuals. Lastly, duties which do not regard persons—the
duty, for instance, of abstaining from cruelty to the lower animals; and
religious duties as such, if the law, most improperly, thinks fit to
enforce them.

From a comparison between duties which correspond to rights, and duties
which have no corresponding rights, and also from a brief review of the
different kinds of rights, Mr. Austin endeavours to collect a general
definition of a legal right. He rejects the definitions usually given,
as not applicable to all cases. He is of opinion that rights have very
few properties in common, and that “all that can be affirmed of rights,
considered universally, amounts to a brief and barren generality.”* The
only definition of a right which he finds himself able to give, is, that
whenever a legal duty is to be performed towards or in respect of some
determinate person, that person is invested with a right.[*] The idea of
a legal right involves, in his opinion, nothing more.

This is one of the points (extremely few, considering the extent and
intricacy of the subject) on which we cannot help thinking that Mr.
Austin’s analysis falls short of perfect exhaustiveness.

Mr. Austin always recognises, as entitled to great consideration, the
custom of language—the associations which mankind already have with
terms, insomuch that, when a name already stands for a particular notion
(provided that, when brought out into distinct consciousness, the notion
is not found to be self-contradictory), the definition should rather aim
at fixing that notion, and rendering it determinate, than attempt to
substitute another notion for it. A definition of right, so wide and
general as that of Mr. Austin, does not, as it appears to us, stand this
test. It does not satisfy the conception which is in everyone’s mind, of
the meaning of the word right. Almost every one will feel that there is,
somehow, an element left out; an element which is approximately, though
perhaps imperfectly, expressed by saying, that the person who has the
right, is the person who is meant to be benefited by the imposition of
the duty.

In the Lectures as delivered (which included much extemporaneous matter,
not preserved in the publication) Mr. Austin anticipated this obvious
objection, and combated it. The notion of a right as having necessarily
for its purpose the benefit Edition: current; Page: [180] of the person
invested with it, is contradicted, he said, by the case of fiduciary
rights. To these he might have added (and probably did add) the rights
of public functionaries—the judge, for instance, or the policeman; which
are not created for the benefit of the judge or policeman themselves.
These examples are conclusive against the terms of the particular
definition contended against; but it will appear, from two
considerations, that they do not fully dispose of the subject.

In the first place, Mr. Austin’s own definition is amenable to a
similar, though contrary, criticism. If the definition which he rejected
does not comprise all rights, his own comprises more than rights. It
includes cases of obligation to which he himself must have admitted that
there were no rights corresponding. For example, the legal duties of
jailers. It is a jailer’s duty to feed the prisoners in his custody, and
to this duty corresponds a correlative right in the prisoners. But it is
also his legal duty to keep them in confinement, perhaps in bodily
fetters. This case is strictly of the kind contemplated in Mr. Austin’s
definition of a right; there is a duty to be performed, towards, or in
respect to, a determinate person or persons; but would it be said that a
corresponding right resided in those persons, or, in other words, that
they had a right to be imprisoned, and that their right would be
violated by setting them at liberty? Again, it is the duty of the
hangman to inflict capital punishment upon all persons lawfully
delivered to him for that purpose; but would the culprit himself be
spoken of as having a right to be hanged? Certainly not. And the reason
is one which Mr. Austin fully recognises. He says, in one place, that “a
right in a condition which is purely burthensome is hardly
conceivable;”* and, in another, that “a right to a burthen, or to
vindicate the enjoyment of a burthen,” is “an absurdity.”† He also, with
writers in general, speaks of many obligations as existing for the sake
of the correlative rights.‡ If this is a correct expression, there is
more in the idea of a right, than an obligation towards or in respect to
a given person; since an obligation cannot exist merely in order that
there may be a person towards or in respect to whom it exists.

The truth is, that it is not customary to speak of a person as having a
right to anything which is not, in the contemplation of the legislator,
a desirable thing; and it is always assumed that the person possessing
the right is the person specially interested in enforcing the duty which
corresponds to it. Mr. Austin, no less than others, makes this
supposition, when, in the common language of jurists, he says, that when
a duty is violated, the person who has the right is wronged or injured
by the violation.[*] This desirableness of the right, and this especial
vocation on the part of the possessor to defend it, do not necessarily
suppose that the right is established for his particular advantage. But
it must either be given to him for that reason, or because it is needful
for the performance of his own legal duties. It is Edition: current;
Page: [181] consistent with the meaning of words to call that desirable
to us, which is required for the fulfilment of our duties. The
alternative covers the case of fiduciary rights, the rights of
magistrates, and we think every case in which a person can, consistently
with custom and with the ends of language, be said to have a right. And,
including all such cases, and no others, it seems to supply what is
wanting to Mr. Austin’s definition. We submit it therefore to the
consideration of his readers.

The analysis of right and duty is not complete without an analysis of
wrong or injury—the violation of a duty or of a right. And in order to
clear up all that is included in the notion of wrong or injury, it is
necessary “to settle the meaning of the following perplexing terms—viz.
will, motive, intention, and negligence; including in the term
negligence those modes of the corresponding complex notion which are
styled temerity or rashness, imprudence or heedlessness.”* These topics
comprise the whole theory of the grounds of imputation, in other words,
the generalia of criminal or penal law. How much bad law, and bad
philosophy of law, have arisen from imperfect comprehension of them, may
be seen in the nonsense of English law writers concerning malice. The
full elucidation of them by our author occupies a considerable space,[*]
and our limits are inconsistent with even the briefest abstract of it.
Mr. Austin’s special vocation for “untying knots,” which would have
fitted him as well for the problems of inductive psychology as for those
of jurisprudence, is nowhere called into more successful exercise.
Without a single metaphysical subtlety, there cannot be a more happy
example than he here affords of metaphysical analysis.

With the idea of wrong, that of sanction is inseparably bound up, and
after settling the meaning of sanction in its largest sense, Mr. Austin
examines the two kinds into which sanctions are divided—namely, civil
and criminal,[†] or, as they are sometimes called, private and public.
Whoever has even the most superficial acquaintance with the writings of
criminalists, knows what a mass of vague and confusing speculation this
distinction has given birth to, though, as pointed out by Mr. Austin,[‡]
the real difference between civil injuries and crimes consists only in
this, that in wrongs of the former class the sanction is enforced at the
instance and discretion of the injured party, who has the power of
remitting the liability incurred by the wrongdoer; while, when the
offence is called a crime (which only means that the procedure is of the
kind called criminal), the sanction is enforced at the discretion of the
sovereign or state, by whom alone the liability of the wrongdoer can be
remitted. This case is an instance of the mode in which a confused
apprehension of juristical ideas, in themselves not at all difficult of
Edition: current; Page: [182] comprehension, reacts mischievously on
practical legislation. The unhappy idea of classifying wrongs according
to a difference which exists only in the modes appointed for redressing
them, has raised up a notion in English lawyers that there is a
distinction between civil injuries and crimes considered per se, which
makes damages the proper remedy for the one, and punishment for the
other. And hence that serious defect in English law, by which punishment
eo nomine, and damages to the injured party, cannot both be awarded in
the same cause; while in France, on the contrary, the sufferers by the
crime can always be admitted as parties civiles, and compensation to
them is habitually a part of the sentence. In England, whenever the
wrong is of so grave a character as to require punishment over and above
the obligation of making amends, the injured party loses the indemnity
which he would have been able to exact for a less heinous injury; and
the penalty on the criminal is deprived of one of its uses, that of
being instrumental to the redress of the particular evil which the crime
has inflicted upon an individual.

With the twenty-eighth Lecture[*] Mr. Austin commences a new subject—Law
considered with reference to its sources, and to the modes in which it
begins and ends; involving the distinction between written and what is
called unwritten law; the theory of customary law; the meaning of what
is called equity; and the false metaphysical distinction drawn by the
Roman lawyers and by nearly all modern jurists, between law natural and
positive. These theoretical considerations involve, among other
important consequences, the highly practical question of codification,
or the reduction of the laws of any country into a compact body,
expressed in fixed words, and conforming to a systematic arrangement.
Whether we regard the importance of these subjects, or the mass of
illogical, unphilosophical, and practically misleading speculation in
which they have been enveloped, there is no part of the field of
jurisprudence on which the value of precise and logical thought is more
conspicuous. Mr. Austin was eminently fitted to supply it, both by the
general quality of his intellect, and by that accurate special knowledge
of the history of institutions and of juristical ideas, which he had in
common with Mr. Maine; of whose masterly treatise also a great part of
the value has reference to this cluster of subjects.

Even such apparently simple phrases as “written” and “unwritten” law,
have their full share of the ambiguity which infects nearly the whole
vocabulary of legal science. They are employed to express no less than
three different distinctions. “Written law” is used, first, in its
literal sense, to denote law which is put into writing at the time of
its origin, as distinguished from “law originating in custom, or
floating traditionally amongst lawyers.”[†] But this last so-called law
is not Edition: current; Page: [183] really law until re-enacted by the
legislature, or enforced judicially by the tribunals.

Secondly, written law, in what is called its juridical sense, means law
made directly by the sovereign legislature, as distinguished from that
which is made by subordinate legislatures, or by judicial tribunals. In
this sense of the term, laws made by provincial or colonial legislatures
are unwritten laws, as were also the edicts of the Roman praetors. But
the laws made by the Roman emperors, not as legislators by their
imperial constitutions, but as supreme judges by their rescripts, would
be styled written law, because made directly by the sovereign.

Thirdly (and this is the most important distinction), written law is
synonymous with statute law, or law made (whether by supreme or
subordinate authorities) in the way of direct legislation. Unwritten law
is judiciary law, or law made indirectly, in the way of judicial
decision, either by the sovereign in a judicial capacity, or by a
subordinate judge. The terms statutory law and judiciary law, being
unambiguous, should be exclusively employed where this really
fundamental distinction is to be expressed.

Mr. Austin next deals with the strange notion which has prevailed among
the Roman and the majority of modern jurists, that customary law exists
as law merely by being custom; that it is law not by the will of the
legislature, but by the spontaneous act of those who practise it.[*] He
exposes the absurdities involved in this notion, and shows that custom
in itself belongs not to law, but at most to positive morality, binding
only by moral sanctions—by the penalties of opinion. What was originally
custom may become law, when either the legislature (supreme or
subordinate) enacts a statute in conformity to the custom, or the
tribunals recognise it, and enforce it by legal sanctions. In both these
ways, custom, in all countries, is continually passing into law. But it
has force as law solely by the authority of the sovereign legislator,
who either shapes his direct commands in accordance with the custom, or
lends his sanctions to the tribunals, which, in the discretion allowed
them, annex those sanctions to the particular practice, and render
obligatory what before was only voluntary.

The notion of writers on law, “that there are positive laws which exist
as positive laws independently of a sovereign authority,”[†] is not
limited to customary laws. It extends to the laws which, in the Roman
system avowedly, and in all others really, are modelled on the opinions
and practices of private lawyers. The Responsa Prudentum, and the
treatises of institutional writers, gave birth to the whole body of law
contained in the Pandects;[‡] and in England “much of the law Edition:
current; Page: [184] of real property is notoriously taken from opinions
and practices which have grown up, and are daily growing up, amongst
conveyancers.”[*] The English tribunals (by what, when first employed,
was an entirely indispensable artifice) keep up what Mr. Austin, with
reference to present circumstances, justly calls the “puerile
fiction,”[†] that these opinions and practices are mere evidence of law
already established by custom. But they well know, and every lawyer
knows, that the law thus introduced is really new, and, in the case
which creates the first precedent, is even ex post facto; though not
generally liable to the condemnation implied in that term, being
commonly shaped for the purpose of fulfilling, not frustrating, the
expectations presumed to have been entertained by the parties concerned.

The fact that there is law which the legislature has never expressly
announced, but which is, with its tacit consent, made by tribunals which
are not regularly authorized to enact law, but only to declare it, has
thrown a vagueness over the whole idea of law, which has contributed
greatly to obscure the distinction between it and positive morality. The
error, that law exists as such independently of legal sanctions, appears
in an aggravated shape in the notion that there exists a natural law—a
law known by the light of nature, which does not emanate from
legislators, but is nevertheless binding on tribunals, and may and ought
to be by them enforced by reason of its natural obligation only. This
Jus Naturale has, as Mr. Austin observes, “thoroughly perplexed and
obscured the sciences of jurisprudence and ethics.”* As the notion
admits only of an historical explanation, Mr. Austin deals with it
substantially in the same manner as Mr. Maine.

He expounds the origin of the Jus Gentium of the early Roman lawyers,[‡]
a different thing not only from international law, to which the term has
been perversely transferred by modern jurists, but also from the Natural
Law of modern writers on jurisprudence, though of this last it is the
real progenitor. The jus gentium took its rise from the necessity in
which the Romans found themselves, through the growth of their dominion,
of administering justice to persons who were not Romans—to whom the laws
provided for Roman citizens were not applicable, and who, belonging to
different nations and communities, had originally different laws.
Provincials of the same province retained, as between themselves, their
old laws; but between a provincial and a Roman citizen, or between
provincials of one province and those of another, it was neither
convenient, nor would in most cases have been just, to decide disputes
by a law which was not the law of both parties. The praetors, whose
decision in such cases was probably at first arbitrary, were able to
find many legal principles and provisions which were not peculiar to
either people (as so much of the early Roman law was peculiar to the
Romans) but were common to the laws of all or of many Edition: current;
Page: [185] different communities. These principles and provisions there
seemed no hardship in applying to cases between persons of what would
now be called different nationalities. And where these did not furnish a
rule exactly applicable to the case, the praetors were led to supply the
deficiency by rules either derived from them by analogy, or suggested by
a sense of substantial justice or expediency. In this manner arose the
idea of a body of law not peculiar to one, but common to all nations, on
which the praetors were supposed, and supposed themselves, to have
fashioned the body of positive law which grew up under their hands. This
law, being abstracted from the peculiarities both of the Jus Quiritium
and of all other local and special bodies of law or custom, was, as
might naturally be expected, of a more liberal character. It was less
charged with technical and circuitous modes of proceeding, invented to
evade conflict with local or accidental prejudice. It was less infected
by the freaks of fancy which, as Mr. Austin observes, are “omnipotent
with barbarians,”[*] but in which one barbarous people is not likely to
agree with another. It might be said, by comparison, to represent that
portion of all systems, which arose from the wants and feelings of human
nature generally. Being, for this reason, as well as from its
originating in a more civilized period, far preferable to the old Roman
law, it became the model on which the praetors, by their edicts,
gradually modified the old law itself, and finally (though not till
after many centuries), almost entirely substituted itself for the
original Roman law. The provisions of the more liberal jus gentium,
applied by the praetors as modifying principles to the old law, obtained
the name of Aequitas, or equity: an appellation which became extended to
the somewhat similar process by which the Court of Chancery for ages
employed itself in supplying the omissions and mitigating the
barbarities of the feudal laws of England. The explanation and
elucidation of this one word Equity, in the many senses in which it is
used by jurists, forms the subject of several of Mr. Austin’s
lectures.[†] Both historically and philosophically, they are among the
most interesting parts of the Course, though much of the matter they
contain, when once stated, appears so obvious, that one is apt to forget
how often and by what esteemed authorities it has been misunderstood.*

Now it was this Roman idea of a jus gentium, or portion of law common to
all nations, which grew insensibly into the modern idea of Natural Law.
“The jus Naturale, or law of nature,” as Mr. Maine observes, “is simply
the jus gentium Edition: current; Page: [186] seen in the light of a
peculiar theory.”* That theory, as both he and Mr. Austin remark, was
derived from the precept “Live according to Nature” of the Greek
philosophical schools.[*]

After Nature had become a household word in the mouths of the Romans,
the belief gradually prevailed among the Roman lawyers that the old jus
gentium was in fact the lost code of Nature, and that the praetor, in
framing an Edictal Jurisprudence on the principles of the jus gentium,
was gradually restoring a type from which law had only departed to
deteriorate.†

Being observed or recognised universally, these principles were supposed
to have a higher origin than human design, and to be (we quote Mr.
Austin) “not so properly rules of human position or establishment, as
rules proceeding immediately from the Deity himself, or the intelligent
and rational Nature which animates and directs the universe.”‡ This
notion, once formed, was, by an obvious process, so enlarged as to
include merely moral or merely customary rules which had obtained
general acceptance; “every rule, in short, which is common to all
societies, though the rule may not obtain as positive law in all
political communities, or in any political community.”§ In this manner
the Natural Law of modern writers was extended to those international
usages, and those rules of international morality, which obtained
generally among nations. And by a similar process each writer was led to
include in his scheme of Natural Law, whatever maxims of justice or
utility approved themselves to him as an individual moralist, provided
they appeared to be at once self-evident and universal. The writings
which profess to treat of the Law of Nature and Nations are a chaos of
all these materials. “In studying these writers,” says Mr. Maine, “the
great difficulty is always to discover whether they are discussing law
or morality—whether the state of international relations they describe
is actual or ideal—whether they lay down that which is, or that which in
their opinion ought to be.”¶ This arose from the confused apprehension
of the very meaning of law, engendered by their notion of a Law of
Nature according to which what in their opinion ought to be law, was
conceived as being, in some strange manner, law already. By this
confusion they have spread a thick fog over the distinctions and
demarcations which separate the three different notions, positive law,
positive morality, and deontology, or morality as it ought to be.

The influence of the imaginary Law of Nature over modern thought has
been Edition: current; Page: [187] all-pervading; on the whole, however,
still greater on the Continent than in England. Mr. Maine very truly
affirms, that “the theory of natural law is the source of almost all the
special ideas as to law, politics, and society, which France during the
last hundred years has been the instrument of diffusing over the western
world. The part” (he continues) “played by jurists in French history,
and the sphere of jural conceptions in French thought, have always been
remarkably large;”* and in the latter half of the last century, when
other old modes of thought were breaking up, the calamitous influence of
Rousseau (calamitous at least in this respect) became powerfully
operative in strengthening this particular delusion. Coleridge, in the
Friend, has maintained, with much force of argument, that the thrusting
of immutable principles of morality into the province of law, and
assuming them as the only legitimate basis of politics, is the essence
of Jacobinism.[*] It is the essence not specially of that, but of a
general mode of thought which prevails among French thinkers of all
political opinions. As a general rule, French speculation knows no
distinction or barrier between the province of morals and that of
politics or legislation. While, on the one hand, it tends to impose on
morals (for this, however, Catholic thought and the influence of the
Canonists are partly responsible) all the formality and literalness of
juridical rules; on the other, it invests the creations of pure legal
institution—the law of property for example—with the sacredness and
indefeasibility of the fundamental doctrines of morals; and cannot bear
to discuss such a question, for instance, as copyright, on grounds of
general expediency, but insists on clenching it by affirming or denying
an assumed absolute right in authors to hold the produce of their brain,
by themselves or their representatives, as permanent property to the end
of time.

The influence, for good and for evil, of the theory of a Law of Nature,
is delineated by Mr. Maine more fully than was compatible with Mr.
Austin’s more extensive design. There is no doubt that for a long period
the good side of the influence predominated. It assisted mankind in
disencumbering themselves from a superstititous reverence for the
institutions which had historically grown up in their several countries.
It accustomed them to test particular laws by general principles of some
sort, and gave them a type of excellence of which simplicity and
symmetry were among the supposed characteristics. Finally, it
disregarded all distinctions between man and man, between citizen and
foreigner, noble and burgess, burgess and peasant; and Mr. Maine is of
opinion “that to the assumption of a Law Natural we owe the doctrine of
the fundamental equality of human beings.”[†] When almost everything
which was artificial was oppressive, the reaction in favour of what was
supposed to be natural had a healthy tendency, though we now know that
the real natural state (if natural means primitive), instead Edition:
current; Page: [188] of being the reign of justice and freedom, is a
condition of more universal tyranny than any form whatever of civilized
life. But whatever power of liberalizing men’s minds may once have
belonged to the doctrine of Natural Law, that power is now exhausted;
the doctrine has done all it can do in that direction, and its remaining
influence serves only to make men greater bigots, not indeed to the
peculiar vices of any given system, but to whatever vices have existed
from the beginning in them all. Meanwhile, the theory of law must be a
mass of contradiction as long as the imaginary Natural Law retains any
authority in it; for as every actual system of law has been shaped out
by conflicting instincts, a theory generalized from what they have in
common is necessarily full of conflicting principles, and affords, on
both sides of every controverted point, arguments which, if the theory
be granted, are all equally unanswerable.

In the thirty-seventh Lecture[*] Mr. Austin commences discussing the
differences which distinguish statute from judiciary law; the advantages
and disadvantages of judicial legislation, and the possibility and
desirableness of excluding it for the future, and converting all
judiciary law into statute—in other words, codification. From this
excellent discussion we shall permit ourselves, in consideration of its
great practical moment, to give a longer quotation than we have ventured
to make from any other portion of the Course. It is taken from the place
in which, after remarking on some disadvantages erroneously attributed
to judiciary law, Mr. Austin points out the evils which are really
inherent in it.

First: A judiciary law (or a rule of judiciary law) exists nowhere in
fixed or determinate expressions. It lies in concreto, or it is
implicated with the peculiarities of the particular case or cases, by
the decision or decisions whereon, the law or rule was established.
Before we can arrive at the rule, we must abstract the ratio decidendi
(which really constitutes the rule) from all that is peculiar to the
case through which the rule was introduced, or to the resolution of
which the rule was originally applied. And in trying to arrive at the
rule by this process of abstraction and induction, we must not confine
our attention to the general positions or expressions which the judicial
legislator actually employed. We must look at the whole case which it
was his business to decide, and to the whole of the discourse by which
he signified his decision. And from the whole of his discourse, combined
with the whole of the case, we must extract that ratio decidendi, or
that general principle or ground, which truly constitutes the law that
the particular decision established.

But the process of abstraction and induction to which I now have
alluded, is not uncommonly a delicate and difficult process, its
difficulty being proportioned to the number and the intricacy of the
cases from which the rule that is sought must be abstracted and induced.
Consequently, a rule of judiciary law is less accessible and knowable
than a statute law. . . . And it must be recollected, that whether it be
performed by judges applying the rule to subsequent cases, or by private
persons in the course of extra-judicial business, this delicate and
difficult process is commonly performed in haste. Insomuch that judges
in the exercise of their judicial functions, and private persons in
their extra-judicial transactions, must often mistake the import of the
rule which they are trying to ascertain and apply.

Edition: current; Page: [189]
And this naturally conducts me to a second objection: namely, that
judiciary law (generally speaking) is not only applied in haste, but is
also made in haste. It is made (generally speaking) in the hurry of
judicial business, and not with the mature deliberation which
legislation requires, and with which statute law is or might be
constructed. . . .

There is more of stability and coherency in judiciary law than might, at
the first blush, be imagined. But though it be never so stable and never
so coherent, every system of judiciary law has all the evils of a system
which is really vague and inconsistent. This arises mainly from two
causes, the enormous bulk of the documents in which the law must be
sought, and the difficulty of extracting the law (supposing the
decisions known) from the particular decided cases in which it lies
imbedded.

By consequence, a system of judiciary law (as every candid man will
readily admit) is nearly unknown to the bulk of the community, although
they are bound to adjust their conduct to the rules or principles of
which it consists. Nay, it is known imperfectly to the mass of lawyers,
and even to the most experienced of the legal profession. A man of Lord
Eldon’s legal learning, and of Lord Eldon’s acuteness and comprehension,
may know where to find the documents in which the law is preserved, and
may be able to extract from the documents the rule for which he is
seeking. To a man, therefore, of Lord Eldon’s learning, and of Lord
Eldon’s acuteness, the law might really serve as a guide of conduct. But
by the great body of the legal profession (when engaged in advising
those who resort to them for counsel), the law (generally speaking) is
divined rather than ascertained. And whoever has seen opinions even of
celebrated lawyers, must know that they are often worded with a discreet
and studied ambiguity, which, whilst it saves the credit of the
uncertain and perplexed adviser, thickens the doubts of the party who is
seeking instruction and guidance. And as to the bulk of the
community—the simple-minded laity (to whom, by reason of their
simplicity, the law is so benign)—they might as well be subject to the
mere arbitrium of the tribunals, as to a system of law made by judicial
decisions. A few of its rules or principles are extremely simple, and
are also exemplified practically in the ordinary course of affairs.
Such, for example, are the rules which relate to certain crimes, and to
contracts of frequent occurrence. And of these rules or principles, the
bulk of the community have some notion. But those portions of the law
which are somewhat complex, and are not daily and hourly exemplified in
practice, are by the mass of the community utterly unknown, and are by
the mass of the community utterly unknowable. Of those, for example, who
marry, or of those who purchase land, not one in a hundred (I will
venture to affirm) has a distinct notion of the consequences which the
law annexes to the transaction.

Consequently, although judiciary law be really certain and coherent, it
has all the mischievous effect (in regard to the bulk of the community)
of ex post facto legislation. Unable to obtain professional advice, or
unable to obtain advice which is sound and safe, men enter into
transactions of which they know not the consequences, and then (to their
surprise and dismay) find themselves saddled with duties which they
never contemplated.

The ordinary course is this:—

A man enters into some transaction (say, for example, a contract) either
without advice, or with the advice of an incompetent attorney.

By consequence, he gets into a scrape

Finding himself in a scrape, he submits a case, through his attorney, to
counsel

And, for the fee to attorney and counsel, he has the exquisite
satisfaction of learning with certainty that the mischief is
irremediable

[I am far from thinking, that the law ever can be so condensed and
simplified, that any considerable portion of the community may know the
whole or much of it

But I think that it may be so condensed and simplified, that lawyers may
know it and that Edition: current; Page: [190] at a moderate expense,
the rest of the community may learn from lawyers beforehand the legal
effect of transactions in which they are about to engage.

Not to mention (as I shall show, when I come to the rationale of the
distinction between Law of Things and Law of Persons) that the law may
be so arranged, that each of the different classes of persons may know
something of the part of it with which they are particularly concerned.

Forms, too, for the more usual transactions might be made out by the
legislature.]

The evil upon which I am insisting is certainly not peculiar to
judiciary law. Statute law badly expressed, and made bit by bit, may be
just as bulky and just as inaccessible as law of the opposite kind. But
there is this essential difference between the kinds of law. The evil is
inherent in judiciary law, although it be as well constructed as
judiciary law can be. But statute law (though it often is bulky and
obscure) may be compact and perspicuous, if constructed with care and
skill.

Fifthly: I am not aware that there is any test by which the validity of
a rule made judicially can be ascertained.

Is it the number of decisions in which a rule has been followed, that
makes it law binding on future judges? Or is it the elegantia of the
rule (to borrow the language of the Roman lawyers), or its consistency
and harmony with the bulk of the legal system? Or is it the reputation
of the judge or judges by whom the case or cases introducing the rule
was decided? . . .

We never can be absolutely certain (so far as I know) that any judiciary
rule is good or valid law, and will certainly be followed by future
judges in cases resembling the cases by which it has been introduced.

Here, then, is a cause of uncertainty which seems to be of the essence
of judiciary law. For I am not aware of any contrivance by which the
inconvenience could be obviated.

Sixthly: In consequence of the implication of the ratio decidendi with
the peculiarities of the decided case, the rule established by the
decision (or the ratio, or the general principle of the decision) is
never or rarely comprehensive. It is almost necessarily confined to such
future cases as closely resemble the case actually decided although
other cases more remotely resembling may need the care of the
legislator. In other words, the rule is necessarily limited to a narrow
species or sort, although the genus or kind, which includes that species
or sort, ought to be provided for at the same time by one comprehensive
law.

This is excellently explained by Sir Samuel Romilly.

“Not only is the judge, who at the very moment when he is making law, is
bound to profess that it is his province only to declare it, not only is
he thus confined to technical doctrines and to artificial reasoning—he
is further compelled to take the narrowest view possible of every
subject on which he legislates. The law he makes is necessarily
restricted to the particular case which gives occasion for its
promulgation. Often when he is providing for that particular case, or
according to the fiction of our Constitution, is declaring how the
ancient and long-forgotten law has provided for it, he represents to
himself other cases which probably may arise, though there is no record
of their ever having yet occurred, which will as urgently call for a
remedy as that which it is his duty to decide. It would be a prudent
part to provide, by one comprehensive rule, as well for these possible
events, as for the actual case that is in dispute, and, while
terminating the existing litigation, to obviate and prevent all future
contests. This, however, is, to the judicial legislator, strictly
forbidden; and if, in illustrating the grounds of his judgment, he
adverts to other and analogous cases, and presumes to anticipate how
they should be decided, he is considered as exceeding his province; and
the opinions thus delivered are treated by succeeding judges as
extra-judicial, and as entitled to no authority.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [191]
[Hence, exigencies of society provided for bit by bit, and therefore
slowly.

Hence, further, immense volume of the documents in which the law is
recorded. For in lieu of one comprehensive rule determining a genus of
cases, we have many several and narrow rules severally determining the
species which that genus includes.]

And this inconvenience (for a reason which I have noticed above)[*] is
probably of the essence of judiciary law. So delicate and difficult is
the task of legislation, that any comprehensive rule, made in haste, and
under a pressure of business, would probably be ill adapted to meet the
contemplated purpose. It is certain that the most experienced, and the
most learned and able of our judges, have commonly abstained the most
scrupulously from throwing out general propositions which were not as
proximate as possible to the case awaiting solution: though the ratio
decidendi (or ground or principle of decision) is necessarily a general
position applying to a class of cases, and does not concern exclusively
the particular case in question. . . .

Seventhly. Wherever much of the law is judiciary law, the statute law
which coexists with it, is imperfect, unsystematic, and bulky.

For the judiciary law is, as it were, the nucleus around which the
statute law is formed. The judiciary law contains the legal dictionary,
or the definitions and expositions (in so far as such exist) of the
leading technical terms of the entire legal system. The statute law is
not a whole of itself, but is formed or fashioned on the judiciary law,
and tacitly refers throughout to those leading terms and principles
which are expounded by the judiciary.

Wherever, therefore, much of the law consists of judiciary law, the
statute law is not of itself complete, but is merely a partial and
irregular supplement to that judiciary law which is the mass and bulk of
the system. The statute law is not of itself an edifice, but is merely a
set of irregular unsystematic patches stuck from time to time upon the
edifice reared by judges. . .

Wherever, therefore, much of the law consists of judiciary law, the
entire legal system, or the entire corpus juris, is necessarily a
monstrous chaos partly consisting of judiciary law, introduced bit by
bit, and imbedded in a measureless heap of particular judicial
decisions, and partly of legislative law stuck by patches on the
judiciary law, and imbedded in a measureless heap of occasional and
supplemental statutes.*

Since such [continues Mr. Austin] are the monstrous evils of judicial
legislation, it would seem that the expediency of a Code, or of a
complete or exclusive body of statute law, will hardly admit of a doubt.
Nor would it, provided that the chaos of judiciary law and of the
statute law stuck patchwise on the judiciary could be superseded by a
good code. For when we contrast the chaos with a positive code, we must
not contrast it with the very best of possible or conceivable codes, but
with the code which, under the given circumstances of the given
community, would probably be the result of an attempt to codify.[†]

The expediency of codification at a particular time and place depends on
the question, “Are there men, then and there, competent to the task of
successful codification?”[‡] The difficulty of the work no one feels
more strongly, or has stated more emphatically, than Mr. Austin. He
considers “the technical part of legislation incomparably more difficult
than what may be styled the ethical,” holding it “far easier to conceive
justly what would be useful law, than so to Edition: current; Page:
[192] construct that same law that it may accomplish the design of the
law-giver:”* an opinion which, in its full breadth of statement, we
should hesitate to endorse. But it will readily be admitted that the two
qualifications are different, that the one is no guarantee for the
other, and that the talent which is merely instrumental is, in any high
degree of perfection, nearly if not quite as rare as that to which it is
subordinate.

The expediency, therefore, of codification in England and at the present
time, Mr. Austin does not discuss; but he shows “the futility of the
leading or principal arguments which are advanced against codification,
considered generally or in abstract.”[*] Unhappily a great part of the
matter which he delivered on this subject is missing from the
manuscript. But its place is partly supplied by the abundant notes and
memoranda relating to the subject, which have been found among his
papers, and of which the “Notes on Codification,” appended to the third
volume, are but a part.[†] We shall quote only one passage, which
belongs to the Lectures, and is reproduced in the pamphlet on the Study
of Jurisprudence. It is a reply to the common objection that statute law
cannot include all cases. Mr. Austin shows that it can at least include
all those which are covered by judiciary law.

The current objection to codification is the necessary incompleteness of
a code. It is said that the individual cases which may arise in fact or
practice are infinite, and that, therefore, they cannot be anticipated,
and provided for, by a body of general rules. The objection (as applied
to statute law generally) is thus put by Lord Mansfield in the case of
Omichund and Barker. (He was then Solicitor-General.) “Cases of Law
depend upon occasions which give rise to them. All occasions do not
arise at once. A statute very seldom can take in all cases. Therefore
the common law that works itself pure by rules drawn from the fountains
of justice, is superior to an act of parliament.”[‡]

My answer to this objection is, that it is equally applicable to all
law; and that it implies in the partisans of judiciary law (who are
pleased to insist upon it) a profound ignorance, or a complete
forgetfulness, of the nature of the law which is established by judicial
decisions.

Judiciary law consists of rules, or it is merely a heap of particular
decisions inapplicable to the solution of future cases. On the last
supposition, it is not law at all and the judges who apply decided cases
to the resolution of other cases, are not resolving the latter by any
determinate law, but are deciding them arbitrarily.

The truth, however, is, that the general grounds or principles of
judicial decisions are as completely law as statute law itself, though
they differ considerably from statutes in the manner and form of
expression. And being law, it is clear that they are liable to the very
imperfection which is objected to statute law. Be the law statute or
judiciary, it cannot anticipate all the cases which may possibly arise
in practice.

The objection implies, that all judicial decisions which are not
applications of statutes are merely arbitrary. It therefore involves a
double mistake. It mistakes the nature of judiciary law, and it
confounds law with the arbitrium of the judge. Deciding arbitrarily, the
judge, Edition: current; Page: [193] no doubt, may provide for all
possible cases. But whether providing for them thus be providing for
them by law, I leave it to the judicious to consider.

If law, as reduced into a code, would be incomplete, so is it incomplete
as not so reduced. For codification is the re-expression of existing
law. It is true that the code might be incomplete, owing to an oversight
of redactors. But this is an objection to codification in particular. .
.

Repetition and inconsistency are far more likely, where rules are formed
one by one (and, perhaps, without concert, by many distinct tribunals),
than where all are made at once by a single individual or body, who are
trying to embrace the whole field of law, and so to construct every rule
as that it may harmonize with the rest.

And here I would make a remark which the objection in question suggests,
and which to my understanding is quite conclusive.

Rules of judiciary law are not decided cases, but the general grounds or
principles (or the rationes decidendi) whereon the cases are decided.
Now, by the practical admission of those who apply these grounds or
principles, they may be codified, or turned into statute laws. For what
is that process of induction by which the principle is gathered before
it is applied, but this very process of codifying such principles,
performed on a particular occasion, and performed on a small scale? If
it be possible to extract from a case, or from a few cases, the ratio
decidendi, or general principle of decision, it is possible to extract
from all decided cases their respective grounds of decisions, and to
turn them into a body of law, abstract in its form, and therefore
compact and accessible. Assuming that judiciary law is really law, it
clearly may be codified.

I admit that no code can be complete or perfect. But it may be less
incomplete than judge-made law, and (if well constructed) free from the
great defects which I have pointed out in the latter. It may be brief,
compact, systematic, and therefore knowable as far as it goes.

(Vol. II, pp. 374-7.)

The “Notes on Codification” contain, in substance, all that is required
to meet any of the objections against codification generally, or in the
abstract,* but their form is too completely that of a mere syllabus, to
be acceptable to the general reader. We shall quote, however, as a
specimen, and for its practical importance, one excellent passage,
containing the author’s view of the real difficulties of codification,
and the conditions necessary for rendering it advisable.

Edition: current; Page: [194]
The great difficulty is, the impossibility that any one man should
perform the whole. But if done by several, it would be incoherent,
unless all were imbued with the same principles, and all versed in the
power of applying them. The great difficulty, therefore, is to get a
sufficient number of competent men, versed in common studies and modes
of reasoning. This being given, codification is practicable and
expedient.

Peculiarly technical and partial knowledge of English lawyers. No
English lawyer is master even of English law, and has, therefore, no
notion of that interdependency of parts of a system, on which its
successful codification must depend.

A code must be the work of many minds. The project must be the work of
one, and revised by a commission. The general outline, the work of one,
might be filled up by divers.

All-importance in codification of the first intention. Till minds are
trained, it will scarcely succeed. How the difficulty is to be
surmounted. Necessity for men versed in theory, and equally versed in
practice, or rather, of a combination of theorists and practitioners.
Necessity for preliminary digests, or for waiting till successful
jurists and jurisprudence are formed through effectual legal education.

(Vol. III, pp. 278-9.)

Having concluded the subject of Law in general, regarded under its
different aspects, Mr. Austin proceeds to consider the parts of which a
corpus juris is necessarily composed, and the mutual relations of those
parts.[*] As already observed, he adheres in the main, though with some
not unimportant improvements, to the classification and arrangement of
the Roman law, or rather of its modern expositors, who have carried out
the ideas of the classical jurists with a precision still greater than
theirs.

Mr. Austin gives excellent reasons for rejecting their primary division,
followed by most modern writers, into public and private law, and shows
how the various parts which compose the former of these should be
disposed of.* This being set aside, the leading division is into what
are termed by the Roman lawyers, Law of Persons and Law of Things—jus
personarum and jus rerum, strangely mistranslated by Hale and Blackstone
into rights of persons and rights of things.[†] The original expressions
are extremely ill-chosen, and have been an ignis fatuus to law writers,
both in ancient and modern times. The Law of Persons (agreeably to one
of the meanings of the word persona) is the law of Status or
conditions—of the rights and obligations peculiar to certain classes of
persons, on whom a peculiar legal stamp has been set. And, in
contradistinction, the Law of Things is the law common to all persons,
together with the peculiar laws relating to other classes of persons not
so specially marked out from the rest. But this has seldom been properly
understood by law writers. They have imagined that persons (personae),
in this acceptation, meant persons in the ordinary sense—human beings;
and forgetting that in this sense all law, and all rights and
obligations, relate to persons, they supposed that the Law of Persons,
as distinguished from that of Things, ought Edition: current; Page:
[195] to contain all law which deals with those interests of persons
which have no (or but slight) reference to things. Hence Blackstone
places in the Law of Persons what he calls Absolute Rights, being those
which belong to all persons without exception, such as the right to
life, to personal security, to reputation—rights which, looked at from
the point of view of the Roman lawyers, belong even more pre-eminently
than any others to the Law of Things.[*]

Those jurists who have understood the meaning of the Roman lawyers more
correctly than Blackstone, have exhausted their ingenuity in search of
metaphysical reasons why some peculiarities of legal position have been
accounted Status, and included in jus personarum, while others, equally
marked and equally important, have been retained in the Law of Things.
Mr. Austin minutely examines and criticizes these subtleties, and, after
a full review of them, decides that the division has no logical or
metaphysical basis at all.[†] It rests solely on convenience. Executors,
heirs, trustees, proprietors, contractors, &c., are as much classes of
persons as parents, guardians, infants, magistrates, and the like; yet
they are never accounted status, and the laws which concern them are
always included in the Law of Things. No reason can be given why the one
group should, and the other should not, be detached from the general
body of the law and placed apart, except that the laws relating to the
one “have no necessary coherency with the bulk of the legal system,” and
need not, generally speaking, be taken into consideration in order to
understand the law as a whole; while the others “have such a coherency
with the bulk of the legal system, that if they were detached from it
the requisite continuity in the statement or exposition of it would be
lost.”*

As much of the law, then, as relates to certain peculiar legal
positions, is remanded to a separate branch, which naturally should be
placed after the general law, or jus rerum. The Roman institutional
writers, by placing the Law of Persons first, gave one among several
proofs that even they had not a perfectly clear conception of the
distinction which they had themselves drawn.

In proceeding to subdivide the Law of Things, Mr. Austin adopts from the
Roman lawyers their principle of grounding the general division of the
corpus juris upon a classification of rights. But he selects as his
primary division of rights (and of the corresponding duties) a
distinction not specially recognised by those writers.

The Roman lawyers primarily divided rights into jura in rem, or rights
availing against all the world, and jura in personam, or rights availing
against determinate persons only.‡ Of the former, the right of dominion
or property is the most Edition: current; Page: [196] familiar instance.
My right of ownership in a thing, is constituted by a duty or obligation
imposed on all persons not to deprive me of the thing, or molest me in
its enjoyment. Of rights in personam, the most prominent example is a
right by virtue of a contract. If B has contracted with A to deliver
certain goods, A has a right, answering to the legal obligation on B,
but the right is against B alone. Until they are delivered, A has
acquired no right to the goods as against other persons. If the goods
came into the possession of a third party, through (for example) a
wrongful resale by B, A would still have his original right as against
B, and might have a right to damages besides, but he could not by
process of law recover the goods themselves from the new possessor. A’s
right, therefore, is not in rem, but in personam, meaning in personam
determinatam. The distinction between these two classes of rights
belongs to universal jurisprudence, for every system of law must
establish rights of both kinds; and the difference between them is
connected with practical differences in the legal remedies. Among rights
in rem must be reckoned the right to life, to reputation, to the free
disposal of one’s person and faculties, to exemption from bodily harm or
indignity, and to any external thing of which one is the legal owner. To
these must be added the limited right in a thing owned by some one else,
which is called servitus or easement, such as a right of way over
another person’s land.

Rights in personam, or availing against a determinate person or persons,
are divided by Roman jurists into rights (in their unhappy phraseology
obligationes) ex contractu, and rights (or obligationes) ex delicto,
with two miscellaneous appendages, rights quasi ex contractu and quasi
ex delicto. By quasi-contracts are not to be understood implied
contracts, differing from express ones only in that the engagement is
signified by conduct instead of words. Such tacit engagements are real
contracts, and are placed in the law of contract. The term
quasi-contract applies to cases in which there has not been, and is
known not to have been, any engagement, either express or tacit, but in
which the ends of legislation require that the same legal obligations
shall be imposed as if the party had entered into an engagement. The
case commonly used as an illustration is solutio indebiti—the obligation
of a person to whom a payment has been made under a mistake, to refund
the amount. Obligations quasi ex contractu are, therefore, simply
miscellaneous obligations which cannot be reduced to any of the other
classes. The third class, obligations (or rights) arising from offences,
is, we venture to say, a stumbling-block to all clear-headed persons
when they begin the study of the Roman law. Mr. Austin retains it, but
suppresses the fourth class, quasi ex delicto, it being quite needless
to have two repositories for merely miscellaneous obligations without
any positive feature in common. The term quasi-contracts, rightly
understood, includes them all. As Mr. Austin expresses it, “one fiction
suffices.” “The terms are merely a sink into which such obligatory
incidents as are not contracts, or not delicts, but beget an obligation
as if, &c., are thrown without Edition: current; Page: [197]
discrimination. And this is the rational view which Gaius has taken of
the subject.”*

Though Mr. Austin retains the class of rights ex delicto, it is here
that his classification most materially deviates from that of the Roman
jurists. Instead of making rights ex delicto a secondary, he makes them
a primary class. Instead of co-ordinating them with rights from contract
and from quasi-contract, as species of jura in personam, he opposes them
to all other rights, in rem and in personam taken together. His division
of rights in general, is into Primary, and what he terms Sanctioning,
Rights.[*] The characteristic of these is, that they exist only for the
sake of the primary. Primary rights and duties have a legal existence
only by virtue of their sanctions. But in order that the sanctions may
be applied, legal provisions are necessary, by which other rights are
created and duties imposed. These secondary rights and duties are the
subject-matter of Penal Law and of the Law of Procedure. They correspond
partly (though, as we shall see, not entirely) with the obligationes ex
delicto of the Romans, and admit of being classed as rights and duties
arising out of offences. As such, they are again divided by Mr. Austin
into “Rights and Duties arising from Civil Injuries,” and “Duties and
other Consequences arising from Crimes.”[†] The basis which the Roman
jurists assumed for their division of rights in general—the distinction
between rights in rem and in personam—is retained by Mr. Austin only for
primary rights. The following table,[‡] abridged from one annexed to the
author’s Outline, will serve as a rough ground-plan of his distribution
of the field of law:

[lf0223-21_figure_002.jpg]

Edition: current; Page: [198]
The remaining Lectures are devoted to the examination and elucidation of
the particulars included under these heads. And, with all their
incompleteness (which, as with the broken arches in Addison’s “Vision,”
becomes greater as we approach the point where they cease
altogether),[*] their value to the student will be found to be very
great. We would particularly direct attention to the treatment of
Dominium or Property, in its various senses, with the contrasted
conception of servitus or easement.[†] The nature and boundaries of
these two kinds of rights are made so transparently clear, that it
requires some acquaintance with the speculations of jurists to be able
to believe that any one could ever have misunderstood the subject.

But is the division and arrangement of law in general, expressed in the
table, wholly unimpeachable? We do not mean in point of mere
correctness. It satisfies the fundamental rules of logical division. It
covers the whole subject, and no one part overlaps another. It affords
an arrangement in which it is at least possible to lay out perspicuously
the whole of the matter; and if the proper mode of ordering and setting
out a body of law is to ground it upon a classification of rights, no
better one for the purpose could probably be made.

But the purely logical requisites are not the only qualities desirable
in a scientific classification. There is a further requisite—that the
division should turn upon the most important features of the things
classified; in order that these, and not points of minor importance, may
be the points on which attention is concentrated. A classification which
does this, is what men of science mean when they speak of a Natural
Classification. To fulfil this condition may require, according to
circumstances, different principles of division; since the most
important properties may either be those which are most important
practically, by their bearing on human interests, or those which are
most important scientifically, as rendering it easiest to understand the
subject—which will generally be the most elementary properties.

In the case now under consideration, both these indications coincide.
They both point to the same principle of division. Law is a system of
means for the attainment of ends. The different ends for which different
portions of the law are designed, are consequently the best foundation
for the division of it. They are at once what is most practically
important in the laws, and the fundamental element in the conception of
them—the one which must be clearly understood to make anything else
intelligible. Is, then, this requirement, of distinguishing the parts of
the corpus juris from one another according to the ends which they
subserve, fulfilled by a division which turns entirely upon a
classification of rights?

It would be so, if the ends of different portions of the law differed
only in respect of the different kinds of Rights which they create. But
this is not the fact. The rights Edition: current; Page: [199] created
by a law are sometimes the end or purpose of the law, but are not always
so.

In the case of what Mr. Austin terms Primary Rights,[*] the rights
created are the very reason and purpose of the law which creates them.
That these rights may be enjoyed is the end for which the law is
enacted, the duties imposed, and the sanctions established.

In that part of the law, however, which presupposes and grows out of
wrongs—the law of civil injuries, of crimes, and of civil and criminal
procedure—the case is quite otherwise. There are, it is true, rights
(called, by Mr. Austin, Sanctioning Rights)[†] created by this portion
of the law, and necessary to its existence. But the laws do not exist
for the sake of these rights; the rights, on the contrary, exist for the
sake of the laws. They are a portion of the means by which those laws
effect their end. The purpose of this part of the law is not the
creation of rights, but the application of sanctions, to give effect to
the rights created by the law in its other departments. The sanctioning
rights are merely instrumental to the sanctions; but the sanctions are
themselves instrumental to the primary rights. The filiation of the
ideas, proceeding from the simple to the more complex, is as follows:

1. Primary Rights, with the correlative Duties.

2. Sanctions.

3. Laws determining the mode of applying the Sanctions.

4. Rights and Duties established by those laws, for the sake of, and as
being necessary to, the application of the Sanctions.

It appears from these considerations, that however suitable a groundwork
the classification of rights may be for the arrangement of that portion
of the law which treats of Primary Rights (commonly called the Civil
Code)—in the Penal Code and Code of Procedure the rights thereby created
are but a secondary consideration, on which it is not well to bestow the
prominence which is given to them by carrying out into those branches
the same principle of classification. We do not mean that rights ex
delicto can be left out of the classification of rights for the purposes
of the Civil Code. They are rights, and being so, cannot be omitted in
the catalogue. But they should, we apprehend, be merely mentioned there,
and their enumeration and definition reserved for a separate department,
of which the subject should be, not Rights, but Sanctions. If this view
be correct, the primary division of the body of law should be into two
parts. First, the Civil Law, containing the definition and
classification of rights and duties. Secondly, the law of Wrongs and
Remedies. This last would be subdivided into Penal Law, which treats of
offences and punishments, and the law of Procedure. If this were a mere
opinion of our own, we should hesitate to assert it against a judge in
all respects so much more competent Edition: current; Page: [200] as Mr.
Austin; but if his great authority is against us, we have with us that
of Bentham, James Mill, and the authors of, we believe, all modern
codes.[*]

Not only does this more commonplace distribution and arrangement of the
corpus juris appear to us more scientific than Mr. Austin’s; we
apprehend that it is also more convenient. Mr. Austin, in fact, has been
driven, by the plan he adopted, to the introduction of a logical
anomaly, which he himself acknowledges. There are, as he rightly holds,
legal duties which are absolute, that is, which have not only for their
ultimate but for their immediate and direct object the general good, and
not the good of any determinate person or persons, and to which,
therefore, there are no correlative rights. Now, in a classification
grounded wholly on rights, there is no place for duties which do not
correspond to any rights. It being impossible to class these duties with
jura in rem or in personam, Mr. Austin treats of them under the head of
Sanctioning Rights. The difficulty, however, is not in knowing under
what kind of rights to place them, but in placing them under rights at
all. Duties which answer to no rights, have no more natural affinity
with Sanctioning than they have with Primary rights. Why then is this,
as it undoubtedly is, their proper place in the classification? Because,
though the duties have no affinity with rights, the wrongs which are
violations of those duties have an affinity with the wrongs which are
violations of rights. Violations of absolute duties are Crimes; many
violations of rights are also Crimes; and between crimes of these two
sorts there is no generic difference which it is necessary that either
penal law or criminal procedure should recognise. Now, if the second
great division of the law is regarded (which we think it ought to be) as
conversant not directly with Rights, but with Wrongs, the wrongs in
question, which are violations of absolute duties, take their place
among other wrongs as a matter of course. But in a classification
grounded on Rights, they are altogether an anomaly and a blot. There is
no place marked out for them by the principle of the classification; and
to include them in it, recourse must be had to a second principle,
which, except for that purpose, the classification does not recognise.
It has been seen in the table, that, in the second division of Mr.
Austin’s Sanctioning Rights, he drops rights altogether, and speaks of
“duties and other consequences.”

But this is not the only, nor the greatest objection which may be made,
both on the ground of scientific symmetry and of practical convenience,
against the place assigned by Mr. Austin to the law of Wrongs and
Remedies. A still stronger objection is manifest from a mere inspection
of the table. It interpolates the entire subjects of Penal Law and
Procedure between the general Civil Law of Things and the Law of Status;
that is, between two subjects so closely allied, that after a strenuous
application of his powerful intellect to the subject, Mr. Austin was
unable to draw a definite line, or find any essential or scientific
difference between Edition: current; Page: [201] them; and was induced
to separate them at all, only by the convenience of treating the genus
first, and a few of its more complex species afterwards. As he himself
says, the law of any and of all Status is “indissolubly connected with
that more general matter which is contained in the Law of Things.”*
These two portions of law are conversant with the same general
ideas—namely, rights and their definitions (to a great degree even with
the same kinds of rights), and one of them is but a kind of appendix or
extension of the other, so that there is often a doubt in which
compartment a particular chapter or title of the law may best be placed;
yet the one is put at the beginning of the corpus juris, the other at
the end, and between them lies all that great portion of the law which
has to do with the subsequent considerations of Offences, Punishments,
Judicature, and Judicial Procedure. We cannot think that this is a mode
of arrangement which would have approved itself to Mr. Austin’s, on such
subjects, almost infallible judgment, had he ever completed his Course.

It may be remarked that, though the arrangement which we have criticized
was founded on that of the classical Roman jurists, the criticism is not
fairly applicable to those jurists themselves. According to the plan of
their treatises, they had no alternative. They could not treat of
delicts under any other form than that of “obligationes quae ex delicto
nascuntur.”[*] For, as Mr. Austin himself observes, their institutional
writings were solely on private law.[†] Public law was, it is uncertain
for what reason, excluded. But crimes, and criminal procedure, belonged
to their conception of Public law. Of these, therefore, they had not to
treat.† Civil procedure they did treat of; but they placed it in a
branch apart, which was neither jus rerum nor personarum, but a third
division co-ordinate with them, called Jus Actionum. There remained only
the law of civil injuries. Now, the specific character which
distinguishes civil injuries from crimes is that, though the sanction is
in both cases the leading idea, the mode in which, in the case of civil
injuries, the sanction is applied, is by giving to the injured party a
right to compensation or redress, which, like his other rights, he may
exercise or forego at his pleasure. It is evident that there is not in
this case the same impropriety as in the case of crimes or of procedure,
in considering the right created as the real purpose of the law. It is
true that, even in this case, another purpose of the law is punishment,
but the law is willing to forego that object, provided the injured
person consents to waive it. The right, therefore, of the injured
person, in this Edition: current; Page: [202] particular class of
injuries, might without absurdity be treated as the principal object.
Being a right availing only against determinate persons—namely, the
offender or his representatives—it is a right in personam, or, in the
language of the classical jurists, an obligatio; and its particular
nature afforded no reason why it should not, in an arrangement in all
other respects dictated by the exigencies of the civil code, take its
place where alone, in such an arrangement, a place could be assigned to
it—namely, under the general head of Jura in Personam, as a sub-species.
But this, though it accounts for the place assigned in the Roman law to
“obligationes quae ex delicto nascuntur,” forms no reason for applying
the same arrangement to the whole law of wrongs and remedies, and making
it the basis of a division including the entire field of the corpus
juris—crimes, punishments, civil and criminal procedure, among the rest.

After treating of dominium in the narrower sense in which it is opposed
to servitus—a right to use or deal with a thing in a manner which,
though not unlimited, is indefinite, as distinguished from a right to
use or deal with a thing in a manner not only limited but definite—Mr.
Austin proceeds to treat of rights limited or unlimited as to duration;
of rights vested and contingent; and of dominium or property in the more
emphatic sense in which it denotes the largest right which the law
recognises over a thing—a right not only indefinite in extent and
unlimited in duration, but including the power of aliening the thing
from the person who would otherwise take it by succession.[*] The
Lectures finally break off, where they were interrupted by ill health,
in the middle of the important subject of Title. There is no finer
specimen of analytical criticism in these volumes than the comment (in
the Notes to the Tables) on the erroneous and confused notions which the
Roman jurists connected with their distinction between Titulus and Modus
Acquirendi.[†]

It cannot be too deeply regretted that, through the combined effect of
frequently-recurring attacks of depressing illness, and feelings of
discouragement which are vividly reproduced in the touching preface of
the editor,[‡] Mr. Austin did not complete his Lectures in the form of a
systematic treatise. We are fully persuaded that, had he done so, the
result would have proved those feelings of discouragement to be ill
grounded. The success of the first volume, by no means the most
attractive part of the Course, is a proof that even then there was in
the more enlightened part of the legal profession a public prepared for
such speculations; a public not numerous, but intellectually
competent—the only one which Mr. Austin desired. Had he produced a
complete work on jurisprudence, such as he, and perhaps only he in his
generation, was capable of accomplishing, Edition: current; Page: [203]
he would have attracted to the study every young student of law who had
a soul above that of a mere trader in legal learning; and many
non-professional students of social and political philosophy (a class
now numerous, and eager for an instruction which unhappily, for the most
part, does not yet exist) would have been delighted to acquire that
insight into the rationale of all legal systems, without which the
scientific study of politics can scarcely be pursued with profit, since
juristical ideas meet, and, if ill understood, confuse the student at
every turning and winding in that intricate subject. Before the end of
the period to which Mr. Austin’s life was prolonged, he might have stood
at the head of a school of scientific jurists, such as England has now
little chance of soon possessing. But the remains which he has left,
fragmentary though much of them be, are a mine of material for the
future. He has shown the way, solved many of the leading problems, and
made the path comparatively smooth for those who follow. Among the
younger lawyers of the present time, there must surely be several
(independently of the brilliant example of Mr. Maine) who possess the
capacity, and can acquire the knowledge, required for following up a
work so well begun; and whoever does so will find, in the notes and
miscellaneous papers which compose the latter part of the third volume,
a perfect storehouse of helps and suggestions.

It remains to say a few words on the question of execution. A work left
unfinished, and never really composed as a book, however mature and
well-digested its thoughts, is not a proper subject for literary
criticism. It is from the first volume only that we are able to judge
what, in point of composition, Mr. Austin would have made it. But all
the merits of expression which were found in that volume reappear in
quite an equal degree in the remainder, and even, as far as the case
admitted, in the looser memoranda. The language is pure and classical
English, though here and there with something of an archaic tinge. In
expression as in thought, precision is always his first object. It would
probably have been so, whatever had been the subject treated; but on one
in which the great and fatal hindrance to rational thought is vague and
indefinite phrases, this was especially imperative. Next after
precision, clearness is his paramount aim; clearness alike in his
phraseology and in the structure of his sentences. His pre-eminent
regard to this requisite gives to his style a peculiarity the reverse of
agreeable to many readers, since he prefers, on system, the repetition
of a noun substantive, or even of an entire clause, in order to dispense
with the employment of the little words it and them, which he is quite
right in regarding as one of the most frequent sources of ambiguity and
obscurity in composition. If there be some excess here, it is the excess
of a good quality, and is a scarcely appreciable evil, while a fault in
the contrary direction would have been a serious one. In other respects
Mr. Austin’s style deserves to be placed very high. His command of apt
and vigorous expression is remarkable, and when the subject permits,
there is an epigrammatic force in the turn of his sentences which makes
them highly effective.

Edition: current; Page: [204]
Some readers may be offended at the harsh words which he now and then
uses, not towards persons, to whom he is always, at the lowest,
respectful, but towards phrases and modes of thought which he considers
to have a mischievous tendency. He frequently calls them “absurd,” and
applies to them such epithets as “jargon,” “fustian,” and the like.[*]
But it would be a great injustice to attribute these vehement
expressions to dogmatism, in any bad sense of the word—to undue
confidence in himself, or disdain of opponents. They flowed from the
very finest part of his character. He was emphatically one who hated the
darkness and loved the light. He regarded unmeaning phrases and confused
habits of thinking as the greatest hindrance to human intellect, and
through it to human virtue and happiness. And, thinking this, he
expressed the thought with corresponding warmth: for it was one of his
noble qualities that while, whatever he thought, he thought strongly,
his feelings always went along with his thoughts. The same perfervidum
ingenium made him apply the same strong expressions to any mistake which
he detected in himself. In a passage of the Lectures, he says, referring
to a former lecture, “I said so and so. But that remark was absurd; for
it would prove,” &c.* And in an extemporaneous passage, which some of
his hearers may remember, he rated himself soundly for an erroneous
opinion which he had expressed, and conjectured, as he might have done
respecting a complete stranger to him, what might have been the causes
that led him into so gross a misapprehension. That the occasional
strength of his denunciations had its source in a naturally enthusiastic
character, combined in him with an habitually calm and deliberate
judgment, is shown by the corresponding warmth which marks his
expressions of eulogium. He was one in whom the feelings of admiration
and veneration towards persons and things that deserve it, existed in a
strength far too rarely met with among mankind. It is from such feelings
that he speaks of “the godlike Turgot;”[†] that, in mentioning Locke, he
commemorates “that matchless power of precise and just thinking, with
that religious regard for general utility and truth, which marked the
incomparable man who emancipated human reason from the yoke of mystery
and jargon;”† that he does homage, in many passages of the Lectures, to
the great intellectual powers of Thibaut and Von Savigny,[‡] and that,
in a note at page 248 of his first volume, he devotes to Hobbes perhaps
the noblest vindication which that great but unpopular thinker has ever
received. That Mr. Austin was capable of similar admiration for the
great qualities of those from whose main scheme of thought he dissents,
and whose authority he is oftener obliged to thrust aside than enabled
to follow, is shown in many passages, and in Edition: current; Page:
[205] none more than in some remarks on Kant’s Metaphysical Principles
of the Science of Law.* We may add that his praises are not only warm,
but (probably without exception) just, that such severity as is shown,
is shown towards doctrines, very rarely indeed towards persons, and is
never, as with vulgar controversialists, a substitute for refutation,
but always and everywhere a consequence of it.



Mill, John Stuart

August 9, 1866

Blackheath Park


Educational Endowments

Blackheath Park

,
August 9, 1866

.

sir,

I have now the honour of transmitting to the Royal Commissioners for
Inquiry into Schools, such answers as it is in my power to give to the
queries which the Commissioners did me the honour of addressing to me.
Want of time, no less than the understood wishes of the Commissioners,
has compelled me to be brief; but, for the further elucidation of the
topics to which I have adverted, as well as for many valuable facts and
thoughts connected with the subject of their inquiries, I hope I may be
permitted to refer the Commissioners to the paper by Mr. Chadwick,[*]
mentioned in my answer to the second query, and the evidence appended
thereto.

I have, &c.

J.S. Mill

The Secretary of the Schools Inquiry Commission

* * * * *

1. The expediency, in the case of endowed schools, of continuing to give
gratuitous education to the scholars, and fixed incomes to the teachers.

I conceive the practice of payment by fixed salaries to be almost fatal
to the general usefulness of educational endowments, and quite
sufficient in itself to account for the admitted fact of their extensive
failure.

If any practical maxim for the conduct of business of any kind by a
delegated agent can be called fundamental, it is that of identifying the
agent’s interest with his duty. But if a schoolmaster’s remuneration is
neither increased by efficiency, nor diminished by inefficiency, his
personal interest is, to have as few pupils as Edition: current; Page:
[210] possible, and to take the least possible trouble with their
instruction. I have read of a school where the master’s salary was 600l.
a year, and his object was to drive away the pupils, which he succeeded
in effecting by a series of severe floggings.[*] Without vouching for
the strict truth of this anecdote, it may be accepted as a warning
illustration of what may happen in an extreme case. Every motive that
acts upon a teacher thus situated, tends to render his work valueless,
except conscience or a disinterested love for his duty; and the
insufficiency, in average cases, of these motives, is the principal
cause which renders laws and institutions necessary.

The true principle for the remuneration of schoolmasters of all classes
and grades, wherever it is possible to apply it, is that of payment for
results. The results of their teaching can, in general, only be tested
by examinations, conducted by independent public examiners, and if this
examination were partly of a competitive character, extending to the
pupils of all endowed middle-class schools, somewhat after the model of
the Oxford and Cambridge local examinations, it might be made a basis
for proportioning, in some degree, the remuneration of schoolmasters to
the degree of success which their pupils obtained in the examinations.

It appears to me, generally speaking, undesirable that education should
be provided gratuitously for the children of the classes specifically
concerned in the present inquiry. Those classes can afford to pay, they
are not objects of charity: they have no claim to be relieved from the
duty of providing education for their children; and entire relief from
that obligation on any other ground than inability, appears to me to
have a highly demoralizing tendency. The suggestion that exhibitions
should be given to pupils of the elementary schools, to be earned by
merit, for the purpose of enabling them to prolong their school course,
and advance to a higher grade of education, seems to me, on the
contrary, to be of a highly moral and improving character, and I would
give it my warmest support. I would suggest that these exhibitions be
awarded by competitive examination. It is, however, a different
question, whether the funds of endowments should be exclusively devoted
to this purpose, or to this and to the pensioning of retired teachers.
Though endowments are not, I conceive, beneficially employed in
educating the children of the middle classes without expense to the
parents, I think it a very proper application of them to provide, for
those classes, a better quality of education than can be supplied from
the contributions of parents as an exclusive resource. They should be
called on to pay only what they can, in ordinary cases, well afford, and
this having been done, the very best education should be given which can
be provided by the addition to those payments, of all other funds
legitimately applicable to the purpose.

2. The best mode of providing for the future management of endowments,
and of preventing them from relapsing into inefficiency.

As the first and most indispensable part of any arrangements for this
purpose, I Edition: current; Page: [211] would urge that the whole of
the foundation schools be placed under the regular supervision of the
Inspectors of the Privy Council. Nothing but frequent and systematic
inspection, by an authority having the power, if not of removing, at
least of proposing the removal of the schoolmaster in case of proved
unfitness, will ever prevent the majority of such schools from falling
back into the state from which it is now desired to rescue them. The
inspectors, some of whom are gentlemen of great experience and ability,
and the selection of whom will always be the most important of all the
duties of the Education Committee of Council, will be the persons most
capable of pointing out, in each case, the best arrangements for
securing a local superintendence in aid of the general one. The manner
in which power and responsibility should be shared between the local and
the central authority, and, above all, the question which of the two
should exercise, in the last resort, the most important function of all,
the appointment and removal of the masters, are matters of deep and
serious consideration, with a view to obtain the best security for the
efficiency of the work, while avoiding the danger of giving too great a
control over the education of the country to a department of the
executive. In a country possessing any organized system of local
administration, there would be, in every district of a certain size, a
school committee, composed of those inhabitants of the locality (whether
elected or nominated) who took the greatest practical interest in the
subject; and to such a committee, with a representative of the Education
Committee of the Privy Council for their regularly appointed adviser,
the authority over the local schools might safely and properly be
entrusted. But in the chaotic confusion of English local institutions,
which throws such obstacles in the way of any systematic improvement in
the real government of the country, it would require much more practical
experience than I possess, and more meditation than I have been able to
bestow on the subject, to enable me to suggest the best constitution for
the local superintending body, or to define the powers which ought to be
vested in it. It is even possible that both its constitution and its
powers ought to be different in different localities, according to the
nature of the materials available. For the present, probably, the
responsibility of selecting the proper persons from among the leading
inhabitants of all denominations, might with advantage be temporarily
intrusted to the inspectors; though I would by no means propose this as
a permanent arrangement. In whatever manner appointed. I strongly
recommend that there should be but one such body for the whole of the
endowed schools of a considerable district, comprising, however, persons
from various parts of the district, who might severally act as local
visitors of the schools nearest to them.

In still further extension of the same principle, I would propose that
all the educational endowments of the district, together with all other
charitable endowments within the same local limits which are now
applied, ostensibly or really, to the relief of the poor in modes which
are useless or hurtful, should be brought into a single fund, to be
devoted to maintaining one or a few large schools in convenient
situations, in preference to a greater number of small ones.

Edition: current; Page: [212]
Large schools, with numerous pupils, have a great advantage in point of
economy and efficiency over small schools with few pupils. The principal
sources of this advantage are—

a. That when the pupils are numerous they can be formed into
considerable classes, of about the same degree of proficiency, and
capable of profiting by the same teaching; while, if they are few in
number, pupils of very unequal degrees of advancement have to be taught
together, and either the majority are neglected in favour of the few
most proficient, or the teacher’s attention is given to them by turns,
those to whom the teaching of the moment is unsuited remaining
comparatively idle.

b. That by merging many small schools in one large school, it becomes
possible to obtain teachers of a far better quality for the same cost,
and to economize their labour by confining the superior teachers to the
higher departments. A small number of well-paid masters, adapted to the
different grades of proficiency, are a vastly superior educational
instrument to a large number of illpaid masters scattered over the
country, each of whom has to teach pupils of all grades, and if he is
fit for the higher work, is throwing away his labour in teaching mere
elements to little boys.

c. And lastly, that large schools economize, in a similar manner, the
most important labour of all, and that which requires the highest
qualities in the persons intrusted with it, the labour of inspection.

These and other reasons in favour of the consolidation of schools, will
be found largely illustrated in a document forming No. 120 of the papers
printed by order of the House of Commons in the session of 1862,
containing evidence collected by Mr. Chadwick for the former Royal
Commission on Education, accompanied by comments of his own on this and
other points of the very highest value.[*]

The same Parliamentary paper contains the particulars of a most
important practical application of the principles just stated—the case
of the Faversham schools.[†] This was a new foundation, growing out of a
bequest by a banker of Faversham,[‡] as recently as 1840, of property
yielding 2,000l. a year, for the general benefit of the poor of that
place. The trustees, being thus free to adopt the best ideas of the age,
and being evidently men of practical good sense, determined that the
purposes of the testator could best be effected by devoting the bequest
to an improved scheme of public education for the town and its
neighbourhood; and having drawn up a plan for that purpose, obtained the
authority of the Court of Chancery for carrying it into execution. The
plan comprehends an infant school, a national school, a middle-class or
commercial school, and an evening school for Edition: current; Page:
[213] adults under trained masters. The Parliamentary paper already
referred to shows the great advantages which have been found to attend
the union of all these schools under the same management. Pupils are
promoted, as a reward for proficiency, from the national to the
commercial school, where they are supplied with books, and their school
fees paid, at the expense of the endowment; and there is an annual
examination of the commercial school by graduates of one of the
Universities, at which exhibitions are awarded, by what is stated to be
in effect a competitive examination, to successful pupils, to enable
them to continue their studies in an old foundation grammar school which
already existed in the town under another trust, and the union of which
with the new schools under a common management would complete the
scheme. No religious difficulty is experienced, dissenters and
churchmen, both lay and clerical, acting together with perfect
cordiality, both as trustees and as members of the school committee.

3. The possibility of securing for purposes of education, endowments
that are now wasted.

There are numerous charitable funds which are now, under the terms of
antiquated trusts, distributed in mere doles, to persons supposed to be
necessitous, but who have not always even that claim, such as it is. It
would be a far more efficacious mode of alleviating the evil of
indigence, to employ these funds in making war on its principal cause,
the want of education. Full information respecting these wasted
endowments could probably be obtained through the Charity Commissioners,
within whose special duty it naturally falls to procure such
information, when they do not already possess it.[*] The sanction of the
Court of Chancery or of Parliament would probably not be refused to the
necessary change in the destination of these endowments, due regard
being had to the fair claims of living individuals who may have become,
in any degree, dependent on them for support.

4. The best mode of securing, or at least encouraging, a due supply of
qualified teachers.

No part of the subject is more important than this; the wretched
incompetency of the great majority of the existing schools for the
children of the middle classes being notorious. Mr. Edward Carleton
Tufnell, one of the ablest and most experienced of Her Majesty’s
inspectors of schools, stated in evidence to Mr. Chadwick, “It has
frequently occurred to me to cause the dismissal of a master from a
pauper school on account of gross ignorance or gross immorality. The
useful power of the Poor Law Board[†] prevents such people being again
appointed to pauper schools, but I have taken pains to ascertain what
has become of those Edition: current; Page: [214] masters, and I have
generally found that they have got places as ushers in schools for the
middle or upper classes.”[*]

With a view to correct the extreme deficiency of due qualification in
the teachers, all the suggestions referred to in the letter which the
Commissioners did me the honour to address to me, appear worthy of
adoption, and all of them together are not more than sufficient. It
would be highly important that training schools should be established
for teachers, where they should learn, not only the things they will
have to teach, but how to teach them; for which purpose these training
schools must of course be connected with schools of the ordinary kind,
where the art of teaching may be practically acquired. It is evidently
proper that the restriction, in many foundations, of the office of
schoolmaster to persons in holy orders, should be abolished. And it is
also right that certificates of fitness for the office of teacher should
be granted, after examination, either by the Universities (that of
London included) or by examiners appointed by the Committee of Council.
I would add a recommendation that on the first appointment of teachers,
the principle of competitive examination should be introduced as far as
practicable, and that in their subsequent promotion a mode of
examination should be resorted to, which might, if possible, test the
results of their teaching in the schools where they had already taught.
But the greatest security of all, without which no other will
permanently avail, is the assured prospect of removal, in case of
incompetency proved by experience. The whole chance of success of any
reform in the endowed schools rests upon the degree of certainty which
can be given to this expectation; and the utmost exertions of the
department should, I earnestly urge, be above all directed to this end.
With a view to it, the visitorial functions of the Court of Chancery
should be transferred to the Privy Council, who might be empowered to
avail themselves, if needful, of the aid of the Poor Law Inspectors, as
well as of the Charity Commissioners. The arrangements for local
visitation I have already touched upon. But all will be ineffective
without efficient and vigorous examination of the pupils, by an
authority totally independent of the teachers and of those by whom the
teachers are appointed; and the value of this examination would be
greatly increased if part of it were made competitive among the pupils
of all the schools in a given district, or in the whole country.



Inaugural Address Delivered to the University of St. Andrews

in complying with the custom which prescribes that the person whom you
have called by your suffrages to the honorary presidency of your
University should embody in an Address a few thoughts on the subjects
which most nearly concern a seat of liberal education; let me begin by
saying, that this usage appears to me highly commendable. Education, in
its larger sense, is one of the most inexhaustible of all topics. Though
there is hardly any subject on which so much has been written, by so
many of the wisest men, it is as fresh to those who come to it with a
fresh mind, a mind not hopelessly filled full with other people’s
conclusions, as it was to the first explorers of it and notwithstanding
the great mass of excellent things which have been said respecting it,
no thoughtful person finds any lack of things both great and small still
waiting to be said, or waiting to be developed and followed out to their
consequences. Education, moreover, is one of the subjects which most
essentially require to be considered by various minds, and from a
variety of points of view. For, of all many-sided subjects, it is the
one which has the greatest number of sides. Not only does it include
whatever we do for ourselves, and whatever is done for us by others, for
the express purpose of bringing us somewhat nearer to the perfection of
our nature; it does more, in its largest acceptation, it comprehends
even the indirect effects produced on character and on the human
faculties, by things of which the direct purposes are quite different,
by laws, by forms of government, by the industrial arts, by modes of
social life; nay even by physical facts not dependent on human will; by
climate, soil, and local position. Whatever helps to shape the human
being, to make the individual what he is, or hinder him from being what
he is not—is part of his education. And a very bad education it often
is; requiring all that can be done by cultivated intelligence and will,
to counteract its tendencies. To take an obvious instance; the
niggardliness of Nature in some places, by engrossing the whole energies
of the human being in the mere preservation of life, and her over-bounty
in others, affording a sort of brutish subsistence on too easy terms,
with hardly any exertion of the human faculties, are both hostile to the
spontaneous growth and development of the mind; and it is at those two
extremes of the scale that we find human societies in the state of most
unmitigated savagery. I shall confine myself, Edition: current; Page:
[218] however, to education in the narrower sense; the culture which
each generation purposely gives to those who are to be its successors,
in order to qualify them for at least keeping up, and if possible for
raising, the level of improvement which has been attained. Nearly all
here present are daily occupied either in receiving or in giving this
sort of education: and the part of it which most concerns you at present
is that in which you are yourselves engaged—the stage of education which
is the appointed business of a national University.

The proper function of an University in national education is tolerably
well understood. At least there is a tolerably general agreement about
what an University is not. It is not a place of professional education.
Universities are not intended to teach the knowledge required to fit men
for some special mode of gaining their livelihood. Their object is not
to make skilful lawyers, or physicians, or engineers, but capable and
cultivated human beings. It is very right that there should be public
facilities for the study of professions. It is well that there should be
Schools of Law, and of Medicine, and it would be well if there were
schools of engineering, and the industrial arts. The countries which
have such institutions are greatly the better for them; and there is
something to be said for having them in the same localities, and under
the same general superintendence, as the establishments devoted to
education properly so called. But these things are no part of what every
generation owes to the next, as that on which its civilization and worth
will principally depend. They are needed only by a comparatively few,
who are under the strongest private inducements to acquire them by their
own efforts, and even those few do not require them until after their
education, in the ordinary sense, has been completed. Whether those
whose speciality they are, will learn them as a branch of intelligence
or as a mere trade, and whether, having learnt them, they will make a
wise and conscientious use of them or the reverse, depends less on the
manner in which they are taught their profession, than upon what sort of
minds they bring to it—what kind of intelligence, and of conscience, the
general system of education has developed in them. Men are men before
they are lawyers, or physicians, or merchants, or manufacturers; and if
you make them capable and sensible men, they will make themselves
capable and sensible lawyers or physicians. What professional men should
carry away with them from an University, is not professional knowledge,
but that which should direct the use of their professional knowledge,
and bring the light of general culture to illuminate the technicalities
of a special pursuit. Men may be competent lawyers without general
education, but it depends on general education to make them philosophic
lawyers—who demand, and are capable of apprehending, principles, instead
of merely cramming their memory with details. And so of all other useful
pursuits, mechanical included. Education makes a man a more intelligent
shoemaker, if that be his occupation, but not by teaching him how to
make shoes; it does so by the mental exercise it gives, and the habits
it impresses.

This, then, is what a mathematician would call the higher limit of
University Edition: current; Page: [219] education: its province ends
where education, ceasing to be general, branches off into departments
adapted to the individual’s destination in life. The lower limit is more
difficult to define. An University is not concerned with elementary
instruction: the pupil is supposed to have acquired that before coming
here. But where does elementary instruction end, and the higher studies
begin? Some have given a very wide extension to the idea of elementary
instruction. According to them, it is not the office of an University to
give instruction in single branches of knowledge from the commencement.
What the pupil should be taught here (they think), is to methodize his
knowledge, to look at every separate part of it in its relation to the
other parts, and to the whole, combining the partial glimpses which he
has obtained of the field of human knowledge at different points, into a
general map, if I may so speak, of the entire region; observing how all
knowledge is connected, how we ascend to one branch by means of another,
how the higher modifies the lower, and the lower helps us to understand
the higher; how every existing reality is a compound of many properties,
of which each science or distinct mode of study reveals but a small
part, but the whole of which must be included to enable us to know it
truly as a fact in Nature, and not as a mere abstraction.

This last stage of general education, destined to give the pupil a
comprehensive and connected view of the things which he has already
learnt separately, includes a philosophic study of the Methods of the
sciences; the modes in which the human intellect proceeds from the known
to the unknown. We must be taught to generalize our conception of the
resources which the human mind possesses for the exploration of nature;
to understand how man discovers the real facts of the world, and by what
tests he can judge whether he has really found them. And doubtless this
is the crown and consummation of a liberal education: but before we
restrict an University to this highest department of instruction—before
we confine it to teaching, not knowledge, but the philosophy of
knowledge—we must be assured that the knowledge itself has been acquired
elsewhere. Those who take this view of the function of an University are
not wrong in thinking that the schools, as distinguished from the
universities, ought to be adequate to teaching every branch of general
instruction required by youth, so far as it can be studied apart from
the rest. But where are such schools to be found? Since science assumed
its modern character, nowhere: and in these islands less even than
elsewhere. This ancient kingdom, thanks to its great religious
reformers, had the inestimable advantage, denied to its southern sister,
of excellent parish schools, which gave, really and not in pretence, a
considerable amount of valuable literary instruction to the bulk of the
population, two centuries earlier than in any other country. But schools
of a still higher description have been, even in Scotland, so few and
inadequate, that the Universities have had to perform largely the
functions which ought to be performed by schools; receiving students at
an early age, and undertaking not only the work for which the schools
should have prepared them, but much of the Edition: current; Page: [220]
preparation itself. Every Scottish University is not an University only,
but a High School, to supply the deficiency of other schools. And if the
English Universities do not do the same, it is not because the same need
does not exist, but because it is disregarded. Youths come to the
Scottish Universities ignorant, and are there taught. The majority of
those who come to the English Universities come still more ignorant, and
ignorant they go away.

In point of fact, therefore, the office of a Scottish University
comprises the whole of a liberal education, from the foundations
upwards. And the scheme of your Universities has, almost from the
beginning, really aimed at including the whole, both in depth and in
breadth. You have not, as the English Universities so long did, confined
all the stress of your teaching, all your real effort to teach, within
the limits of two subjects, the classical languages and mathematics. You
did not wait till the last few years to establish a Natural Science and
a Moral Science Tripos. Instruction in both those departments was
organized long ago: and your teachers of those subjects have not been
nominal professors, who did not lecture: some of the greatest names in
physical and in moral science have taught in your Universities, and by
their teaching contributed to form some of the most distinguished
intellects of the last and present centuries. To comment upon the course
of education at the Scottish Universities is to pass in review every
essential department of general culture. The best use, then, which I am
able to make of the present occasion, is to offer a few remarks on each
of those departments, considered in its relation to human cultivation at
large: adverting to the nature of the claims which each has to a place
in liberal education; in what special manner they each conduce to the
improvement of the individual mind and the benefit of the race; and how
they all conspire to the common end, the strengthening, exalting,
purifying, and beautifying of our common nature, and the fitting out of
mankind with the necessary mental implements for the work they have to
perform through life.

Let me first say a few words on the great controversy of the present day
with regard to the higher education, the difference which most broadly
divides educational reformers and conservatives; the vexed question
between the ancient languages and the modern sciences and arts; whether
general education should be classical—let me use a wider expression, and
say literary—or scientific. A dispute as endlessly, and often as
fruitlessly agitated as that old controversy which it resembles, made
memorable by the names of Swift and Sir William Temple in England and
Fontenelle in France—the contest for superiority between the ancients
and the moderns.[*] This question, whether we should be taught the
Edition: current; Page: [221] classics or the sciences, seems to me, I
confess, very like a dispute whether painters should cultivate drawing
or colouring, or, to use a more homely illustration, whether a tailor
should make coats or trousers. I can only reply by the question, why not
both? Can anything deserve the name of a good education which does not
include literature and science too? If there were no more to be said
than that scientific education teaches us to think, and literary
education to express our thoughts, do we not require both? and is not
any one a poor, maimed, lopsided fragment of humanity who is deficient
in either? We are not obliged to ask ourselves whether it is more
important to know the languages or the sciences. Short as life is, and
shorter still as we make it by the time we waste on things which are
neither business, nor meditation, nor pleasure, we are not so badly off
that our scholars need be ignorant of the laws and properties of the
world they live in, or our scientific men destitute of poetic feeling
and artistic cultivation. I am amazed at the limited conception which
many educational reformers have formed to themselves of a human being’s
power of acquisition. The study of science, they truly say, is
indispensable: our present education neglects it, there is truth in this
too, though it is not all truth, and they think it impossible to find
room for the studies which they desire to encourage, but by turning out,
at least from general education, those which are now chiefly cultivated.
How absurd, they say, that the whole of boyhood should be taken up in
acquiring an imperfect knowledge of two dead languages. Absurd indeed:
but is the human mind’s capacity to learn, measured by that of Eton and
Westminster to teach? I should prefer to see these reformers pointing
their attacks against the shameful inefficiency of the schools, public
and private, which pretend to teach these two languages and do not. I
should like to hear them denounce the wretched methods of teaching, and
the criminal idleness and supineness, which waste the entire boyhood of
the pupils without really giving to most of them more than a smattering,
if even that, of the only kind of knowledge which is even pretended to
be cared for. Let us try what conscientious and intelligent teaching can
do, before we presume to decide what cannot be done.

Scotland has on the whole, in this respect, been considerably more
fortunate than England. Scotch youths have never found it impossible to
leave school or the university having learnt somewhat of other things
besides Greek and Latin, and why? Because Greek and Latin have been
better taught. A beginning of classical instruction has all along been
made in the common schools: and the common schools of Scotland, like her
Universities, have never been the mere shams that the English
Universities were during the last century, and the greater part of the
English classical schools still are. The only tolerable Latin grammars
for school purposes that I know of, which had been produced in these
islands until very lately, Edition: current; Page: [222] were written by
Scotchmen.[*] Reason, indeed, is beginning to find its way by gradual
infiltration even into English schools, and to maintain a contest,
though as yet a very unequal one, against routine. A few practical
reformers of school tuition, of whom Arnold was the most eminent, have
made a beginning of amendment in many things: but reforms, worthy of the
name, are always slow, and reform even of governments and churches is
not so slow as that of schools, for there is the great preliminary
difficulty of fashioning the instruments: of teaching the teachers. If
all the improvements in the mode of teaching languages which are already
sanctioned by experience, were adopted into our classical schools, we
should soon cease to hear of Latin and Greek as studies which must
engross the school years, and render impossible any other acquirements.
If a boy learnt Greek and Latin on the same principle on which a mere
child learns with such ease and rapidity any modern language, namely, by
acquiring some familiarity with the vocabulary by practice and
repetition, before being troubled with grammatical rules—those rules
being aacquired with tenfold greater facility when the cases to which
they apply are already familiar to the mind; an average schoolboy, long
before the age at which schooling terminates, would be able to read
fluently and with intelligent interest any ordinary. Latin or Greek
author in prose or verse, would have a competent knowledge of the
grammatical structure of both languages, and have had time besides for
an ample amount of scientific instruction. I might go much further; but
I am as unwilling to speak out all that I think practicable in this
matter, as George Stephenson was about railways, when he calculated the
average speed of a train at ten miles an hour, because if he had
estimated it higher, the practical men would have turned a deaf ear to
him, as that most unsafe character in their estimation, an enthusiast
and a visionary. The results have shewn, in that case, who was the real
practical man. What the results would shew in the other case, I will not
attempt to anticipate. But I will say confidently, that if the two
classical languages were properly taught, there would be no need
whatever for ejecting them from the school course, in order to have
sufficient time for everything else that need be included therein.

Let me say a few words more on this strangely limited estimate of what
it is possible for human beings to learn, resting on a tacit assumption
that they are already as efficiently taught as they ever can be. So
narrow a conception not only Edition: current; Page: [223] vitiates our
idea of education, but actually, if we receive it, darkens our
anticipations as to the future progress of mankind. For if the
inexorable conditions of human life make it useless for one man to
attempt to know more than one thing, what is to become of the human
intellect as facts accumulate? In every generation, and now more rapidly
than ever, the things which it is necessary that somebody should know
are more and more multiplied. Every department of knowledge becomes so
loaded with details, that one who endeavours to know it with minute
accuracy, must confine himself to a smaller and smaller portion of the
whole extent: every science and art must be cut up into subdivisions,
until each man’s portion, the district which he thoroughly knows, bears
about the same ratio to the whole range of useful knowledge that the art
of putting on a pin’s head does to the field of human industry. Now, if
in order to know that little completely, it is necessary to remain
wholly ignorant of all the rest, what will soon be the worth of a man,
for any human purpose except his own infinitesimal fraction of human
wants and requirements? His state will be even worse than that of simple
ignorance. Experience proves that there is no one study or pursuit,
which, practised to the exclusion of all others, does not narrow and
pervert the mind; breeding in it a class of prejudices special to that
pursuit, besides a general prejudice, common to all narrow specialities,
against large views, from an incapacity to take in and appreciate the
grounds of them. We should have to expect that human nature would be
more and more dwarfed, and unfitted for great things, by its very
proficiency in small ones. But matters are not so bad with us, there is
no ground for so dreary an anticipation. It is not the utmost limit of
human acquirement to know only one thing, but to combine a minute
knowledge of one or a few things with a general knowledge of many
things. By a general knowledge I do not mean a few vague impressions. An
eminent man, one of whose writings is part of the course of this
University, Archbishop Whately, has well discriminated between a general
knowledge and a superficial knowledge.[*] To have a general knowledge of
a subject is to know only its leading truths, but to know these not
superficially but thoroughly, so as to have a true conception of the
subject in its great features, leaving the minor details to those who
require them for the purposes of their special pursuit. There is no
incompatibility between knowing a wide range of subjects up to this
point, and some one subject with the completeness required by those who
make it their principal occupation. It is this combination which gives
an enlightened public: a body of cultivated intellects, each taught by
its attainments in its own province what real knowledge is, and knowing
enough of other subjects to be able to discern who are those that know
them better. The amount of knowledge is not to be lightly estimated,
which qualifies us for judging to whom we may have recourse for more.
The elements of the more important studies being widely diffused, those
who have reached the higher summits find a public capable of Edition:
current; Page: [224] appreciating their superiority, and prepared to
follow their lead. It is thus too that minds are formed capable of
guiding and improving public opinion on the greater concerns of
practical life. Government and civil society are the most complicated of
all subjects accessible to the human mind, and he who would deal
competently with them as a thinker, and not as a blind follower of a
party, requires not only a general knowledge of the leading facts of
life, both moral and material, but an understanding exercised and
disciplined in the principles and rules of sound thinking, up to a point
which neither the experience of life, nor any one science or branch of
knowledge, affords. Let us understand, then, that it should be our aim
in learning, not merely to know the one thing which is to be our
principal occupation, as well as it can be known, but to do this and
also to know something of all the great subjects of human interest:
taking care to know that something accurately; marking well the dividing
line between what we know accurately and what we do not: and remembering
that our object should be to obtain a true view of nature and life in
their broad outline, and that it is idle to throw away time upon the
details of anything which is to form no part of the occupation of our
practical energies.

It by no means follows, however, that every useful branch of general, as
distinct from professional, knowledge, should be included in the
curriculum of school or university studies. There are things which are
better learnt out of school, or when the school years, and even those
usually passed in a Scottish university, are over. I do not agree with
those reformers who would give a regular and prominent place in the
school or university course to modern languages. This is not because I
attach small importance to the knowledge of them. No one can in our age
be esteemed a well-instructed person who is not familiar with at least
the French language, so as to read French books with ease; and there is
great use in cultivating a familiarity with German. But living languages
are so much more easily acquired by intercourse with those who use them
in daily life; a few months in the country itself, if properly employed,
go so much farther than as many years of school lessons; that it is
really waste of time for those to whom that easier mode is attainable,
to labour at them with no help but that of books and masters: and it
will in time be made attainable, through international schools and
colleges, to many more than at present. Universities do enough to
facilitate the study of modern languages, if they give a mastery over
that ancient language which is the foundation of most of them, and the
possession of which makes it easier to learn four or five of the
continental languages than it is to learn one of them without it. Again,
it has always seemed to me a great absurdity that history and geography
should be taught in schools, except in elementary schools for the
children of the labouring classes, whose subsequent access to books is
limited. Who ever really learnt history and geography except by private
reading? and what an utter failure a system of education must be, if it
has not given the pupil a sufficient taste for reading to seek for
himself those most attractive and easily intelligible of all kinds of
knowledge? Besides, such history and geography as can be taught in
schools Edition: current; Page: [225] exercise none of the faculties of
the intelligence except the memory. An University is indeed the place
where the student should be introduced to the Philosophy of History;
where Professors who not merely know the facts but have exercised their
minds on them, should initiate him into the causes and explanation, so
far as within our reach, of the past life of mankind in its principal
features. Historical criticism also—the tests of historical truth—are a
subject to which his attention may well be drawn in this stage of his
education. But of the mere facts of history, as commonly accepted, what
educated youth of any mental activity does not learn as much as is
necessary, if he is simply turned loose into an historical library? What
he needs on this, and on most other matters of common information, is
not that he should be taught it in boyhood, but that abundance of books
should be accessible to him.

The only languages, then, and the only literature, to which I would
allow a place in the ordinary curriculum, are those of the Greeks and
Romans, and to these I would preserve the position in it which they at
present occupy. That position is justified, by the great value, in
education, of knowing well some other cultivated language and literature
than one’s own, and by the peculiar value of those particular languages
and literatures.

There is one purely intellectual benefit from a knowledge of languages,
which I am specially desirous to dwell on. Those who have seriously
reflected on the causes of human error, have been deeply impressed with
the tendency of mankind to mistakea words for things. Without entering
into the metaphysics of the subject, we know how common it is to use
words glibly and with apparent propriety, and to accept them confidently
when used by others, without ever having had any distinct conception of
the things denoted by them. To quote again from Archbishop Whately, it
is the habit of mankind to mistake familiarity for accurate
knowledge.[*] As we seldom think of asking the meaning of what we see
every day, so when our ears are used to the sound of a word or a phrase,
we do not suspect that it conveys no clear idea to our minds, and that
we should have the utmost difficulty in defining it, or expressing, in
any other words, what we think we understand by it. Now it is obvious in
what manner this bad habit tends to be corrected by the practice of
translating with accuracy from one language to another, and hunting out
the meanings expressed in a vocabulary with which we have not grown
familiar by early and constant use. I hardly know any greater proof of
the extraordinary genius of the Greeks, than that they were able to make
such brilliant achievements in abstract thought, knowing, as they
generally did, no language but their own. But the Greeks did not escape
the effects of this deficiency. Their greatest intellects, those who
laid the foundation of philosophy and of all our intellectual culture,
Plato and Aristotle, are continually led away by words; mistaking the
accidents of language for real relations in nature, and supposing that
things which have the Edition: current; Page: [226] same name in the
Greek tongue must be the same in their own essence. There is a
well-known saying of Hobbes, the far-reaching significance of which you
will more and more appreciate in proportion to the growth of your own
intellect: “Words are the counters of wise men, but the money of
fools.”[*] With the wise man a word stands for the fact which it
represents; to the fool it is itself the fact. To carry on Hobbes’
metaphor, the counter is far more likely to be taken for merely what it
is, by those who are in the habit of using many different kinds of
counters. But besides the advantage of possessing another cultivated
language, there is a further consideration equally important. Without
knowing the language of a people, we never really know their thoughts,
their feelings, and their type of character: and unless we do possess
this knowledge, of some other people than ourselves, we remain, to the
hour of our death, with our intellects only half expanded. Look at a
youth who has never been out of his family circle: he never dreams of
any other opinions or ways of thinking than those he has been bred up
in; or, if he has heard of any such, attributes them to some moral
defect, or inferiority of nature or education. If his family are Tory,
he cannot conceive the possibility of being a Liberal; if Liberal, of
being a Tory. What the notions and habits of a single family are to a
boy who has had no intercourse beyond it, the notions and habits of his
own country are to him who is ignorant of every other. Those notions and
habits are to him human nature itself; whatever varies from them is an
unaccountable aberration which he cannot mentally realize: the idea that
any other ways can be right, or as near an approach to right as some of
his own, is inconceivable to him. This does not merely close his eyes to
the many things which every country still has to learn from others: it
hinders every country from reaching the improvement which it could
otherwise attain by itself. We are not likely to correct any of our
opinions or mend any of our ways, unless we begin by conceiving that
they are capable of amendment: but merely to know that foreigners think
differently from ourselves, without understanding why they do so, or
what they really do think, does but confirm us in our self-conceit, and
connect our national vanity with the preservation of our own
peculiarities. Improvement consists in bringing our opinions into nearer
agreement with facts; and we shall not be likely to do this while we
look at facts only through glasses coloured by those very opinions. But
since we cannot divest ourselves of preconceived notions, there is no
known means of eliminating their influence but by frequently using the
differently coloured glasses of other people: and those of other
nations, as the most different, are the best.

But if it is so useful, on this account, to know the language and
literature of any other cultivated and civilized people, the most
valuable of all to us in this respect are the languages and literature
of the ancients. No nations of modern and civilized Edition: current;
Page: [227] Europe are so unlike one another, as the Greeks and Romans
are unlike all of us; yet without being, as some remote Orientals are,
so totally dissimilar, that the labour of a life is required to enable
us to understand them. Were this the only gain to be derived from a
knowledge of the ancients, it would already place the study of them in a
high rank among enlightening and liberalizing pursuits. It is of no use
saying that we may know them through modern writings. We may know
something of them in that way; which is much better than knowing
nothing. But modern books do not teach us ancient thought; they teach us
some modern writer’s notion of ancient thought. Modern books do not shew
us the Greeks and Romans: they tell us some modern writer’s opinions
about the Greeks and Romans. Translations are scarcely better. When we
want really to know what a person thinks or says, we seek it at first
hand from himself. We do not trust to another person’s impression of his
meaning, given in another person’s words; we refer to his own. Much more
is it necessary to do so when his words are in one language, and those
of his reporter in another. Modern phraseology never conveys the exact
meaning of a Greek writer; it cannot do so, except by a diffuse
explanatory circumlocution which no translator dares use. We must be
able, in a certain degree, to think in Greek, if we would represent to
ourselves how a Greek thought, and this not only in the abstruse region
of metaphysics, but about the political, religious, and even domestic
concerns of life. I will mention a further aspect of this question,
which, though I have not the merit of originating it, I do not remember
to have seen noticed in any book. There is no part of our knowledge
which it is more useful to obtain at first hand—to go to the fountain
head for—than our knowledge of history. Yet this, in most cases, we
hardly ever do. Our conception of the past is not drawn from its own
records, but from books written about it, containing not the facts, but
a view of the facts which has shaped itself in the mind of somebody of
our own or a very recent time. Such books are very instructive and
valuable, they help us to understand history, to interpret history, to
draw just conclusions from it; at the worst, they set us the example of
trying to do all this, but they are not themselves history. The
knowledge they give is upon trust, and even when they have done their
best, it is not only incomplete but partial, because confined to what a
few modern writers have seen in the materials, and have thought worth
picking out from among them. How little we learn of our own ancestors
from Hume, or Hallam, or Macaulay,[*] compared with what we know if we
add to what these tell us, even a little reading of cotemporary authors
and documents! The most recent historians are so well aware of this,
that they fill their pages with extracts from the original materials,
feeling that these extracts are the real history, and their comments and
thread of narrative are only helps towards understanding it. Now it is
Edition: current; Page: [228] part of the great worth to us of our Greek
and Latin studies, that in them we do read history in the original
sources. We are in actual contact with cotemporary minds; we are not
dependent on hearsay; we have something by which we can test and check
the representations and theories of modern historians. It may be asked,
why then not study the original materials of modern history? I answer,
it is highly desirable to do so; and let me remark by the way, that even
this requires a dead language; nearly all the documents prior to the
Reformation, and many subsequent to it, being written in Latin. But the
exploration of these documents, though a most useful pursuit, cannot be
a branch of education. Not to speak of their vast extent, and the
fragmentary nature of each, the strongest reason is, that in learning
the spirit of our own past ages, until a comparatively recent period,
from cotemporary writers, we learn hardly anything else. Those authors,
with a few exceptions, are little worth reading on their own account.
While, in studying the great writers of antiquity, we are not only
learning to understand the ancient mind, but laying in a stock of wise
thought and observation, still valuable to ourselves; and at the same
time making ourselves familiar with a number of the most perfect and
finished literary compositions which the human mind has
produced—compositions which, from the altered conditions of human life,
are likely to be seldom paralleled, in their sustained excellence, by
the times to come.

Even as mere languages, no modern European language is so valuable a
discipline to the intellect as those of Greece and Rome, on account of
their regular and complicated structure. Consider for a moment what
grammar is. It is the most elementary part of logic. It is the beginning
of the analysis of the thinking process. The principles and rules of
grammar are the means by which the forms of language are made to
correspond with the universal forms of thought. The distinctions between
the various parts of speech, between the cases of nouns, the moods and
tenses of verbs, the functions of particles, are distinctions in
thought, not merely in words. Single nouns and verbs express objects and
events, many of which can be cognized by the senses: but the modes of
putting nouns and verbs together, express the relations of objects and
events, which can be cognized only by the intellect; and each different
mode corresponds to a different relation. The structure of every
sentence is a lesson in logic. The various rules of syntax oblige us to
distinguish between the subject and predicate of a proposition, between
the agent, the action, and the thing acted upon; to mark when an idea is
intended to modify or qualify, or merely to unite with, some other idea;
what assertions are categorical, what only conditional; whether the
intention is to express similarity or contrast, to make a plurality of
assertions conjunctively or disjunctively; what portions of a sentence,
though grammatically complete within themselves, are mere members or
subordinate parts of the assertion made by the entire sentence. Such
things form the subject-matter of universal grammar; and the languages
which teach it best are those which have the most definite rules, and
which provide distinct forms for the greatest number of distinctions in
thought, so that if we fail to attend precisely and Edition: current;
Page: [229] accurately to any of these, we cannot avoid committing a
solecism in language. In these qualities the classical languages have an
incomparable superiority over every modern language, and over all
languages, dead or living, which have a literature worth being generally
studied.

But the superiority of the literature itself, for purposes of education,
is still more marked and decisive. Even in the substantial value of the
matter of which it is the vehicle, it is very far from having been
superseded. The discoveries of the ancients in science have been greatly
surpassed, and as much of them as is still valuable loses nothing by
being incorporated in modern treatises: but what does not so well admit
of being transferred bodily, and has been very imperfectly carried off
even piecemeal, is the treasure which they accumulated of what may be
called the wisdom of life: the rich store of experience of human nature
and conduct, which the acute and observing minds of those ages, aided in
their observations by the greater simplicity of manners and life,
consigned to their writings, and most of which retains all its value.
The speeches in Thucydides; the Rhetoric, Ethics, and Politics of
Aristotle, the Dialogues of Plato; the Orations of Demosthenes; the
Satires, and especially the Epistles of Horace, all the writings of
Tacitus; the great work of Quintilian, a repertory of the best thoughts
of the ancient world on all subjects connected with education;[*] and,
in a less formal manner, all that is left to us of the ancient
historians, orators, philosophers, and even dramatists, are replete with
remarks and maxims of singular good sense and penetration, applicable
both to political and to private life, and the actual truths we find in
them are even surpassed in value by the encouragement and help they give
us in the pursuit of truth. Human invention has never produced anything
so valuable, in the way both of stimulation and of discipline to the
inquiring intellect, as the dialectics of the ancients, of which many of
the works of Aristotle illustrate the theory, and those of Plato exhibit
the practice. No modern writings come near to these, in teaching, both
by precept and example, the way to investigate truth, on those subjects,
so vastly important to us, which remain matters of controversy, from the
difficulty or impossibility of bringing them to a directly experimental
test. To question all things; never to turn away from any difficulty, to
accept no doctrine either from Edition: current; Page: [230] ourselves
or from other people without a rigid scrutiny by negative criticism,
letting no fallacy, or incoherence, or confusion of thought, slip by
unperceived; above all, to insist upon having the meaning of a word
clearly understood before using it, and the meaning of a proposition
before assenting to it; these are the lessons we learn from the ancient
dialecticians. With all this vigorous management of the negative
element, they inspire no scepticism about the reality of truth, or
indifference to its pursuit. The noblest enthusiasm, both for the search
after truth and for applying it to its highest uses, pervades these
writers, Aristotle no less than Plato, though Plato has incomparably the
greater power of imparting those feelings to others. In cultivating,
therefore, the ancient languages as our best literary education, we are
all the while laying an admirable foundation for ethical and
philosophical culture. In purely literary excellence—in perfection of
form—the pre-eminence of the ancients is not disputed. In every
department which they attempted, and they attempted almost all, their
composition, like their sculpture, has been to the greatest modern
artists an example, to be looked up to with hopeless admiration, but of
inappreciable value as a light on high, guiding their own endeavours. In
prose and in poetry, in epic, lyric, or dramatic, as in historical,
philosophical, and oratorical art, the pinnacle on which they stand is
equally eminent. I am now speaking of the form, the artistic perfection
of treatment: for, as regards substance, I consider modern poetry to be
superior to ancient, in the same manner, though in a less degree, as
modern science: it enters deeper into nature. The feelings of the modern
mind are more various, more complex and manifold, than those of the
ancients ever were. The modern mind is, what the ancient mind was not,
brooding and self-conscious; and its meditative self-consciousness has
discovered depths in the human soul which the Greeks and Romans did not
dream of, and would not have understood. But what they had got to
express, they expressed in a manner which few even of the greatest
moderns have seriously attempted to rival. It must be remembered that
they had more time, and that they wrote chiefly for a select class,
possessed of leisure. To us who write in a hurry for people who read in
a hurry, the attempt to give an equal degree of finish would be loss of
time. But to be familiar with perfect models is not the less important
to us because the element in which we work precludes even the effort to
equal them. They shew us at least what excellence is, and make us desire
it, and strive to get as near to it as is within our reach. And this is
the value to us of the ancient writers, all the more emphatically,
because their excellence does not admit of being copied, or directly
imitated. It does not consist in a trick which can be learnt, but in the
perfect adaptation of means to ends. The secret of the style of the
great Greek and Roman authors, is that it is the perfection of good
sense. In the first place, they never use a word without a meaning, or a
word which adds nothing to the meaning. They always (to begin with) had
a meaning; they knew what they wanted to say; and their whole purpose
was to say it with the highest degree of exactness and completeness, and
bring it home to the mind with the greatest possible clearness Edition:
current; Page: [231] and vividness. It never entered into their thoughts
to conceive of a piece of writing as beautiful in itself, abstractedly
from what it had to express: its beauty must all be subservient to the
most perfect expression of the sense. The curiosa felicitas which their
critics ascribed in a pre-eminent degree to Horace, expresses the
standard at which they all aimed.[*] Their style is exactly described by
Swift’s definition, “the right words in the right places.”[†] Look at an
oration of Demosthenes, there is nothing in it which calls attention to
itself as style at all, it is only after a close examination we perceive
that every word is what it should be, and where it should be, to lead
the hearer smoothly and imperceptibly into the state of mind which the
orator wishes to produce. The perfection of the workmanship is only
visible in the total absence of any blemish or fault, and of anything
which checks the flow of thought and feeling, anything which even
momentarily distracts the mind from the main purpose. But then (as has
been well said) it was not the object of Demosthenes to make the
Athenians cry out “What a splendid speaker!” but to make them say “Let
us march against Philip!” It was only in the decline of ancient
literature that ornament began to be cultivated merely as ornament. In
the time of its maturity, not the merest epithet was put in because it
was thought beautiful in itself; nor even for a merely descriptive
purpose, for epithets purely descriptive were one of the corruptions of
style which abound in Lucan, for example the word had no business there
unless it brought out some feature which was wanted, and helped to place
the object in the light which the purpose of the composition required.
These conditions being complied with, then indeed the intrinsic beauty
of the means used was a source of additional effect, of which it behoved
them to avail themselves, like rhythm and melody of versification. But
these great writers knew that ornament for the sake of ornament,
ornament which attracts attention to itself, and shines by its own
beauties, only does so by calling off the mind from the main object, and
thus not only interferes with the higher purpose of human discourse,
which ought, and generally professes, to have some matter to
communicate, apart from the mere excitement of the moment, but also
spoils the perfection of the composition as a piece of fine art, by
destroying the unity of effect. This, then, is the first great lesson in
composition to be learnt from the classical authors. The second is, not
to be prolix. In a single paragraph, Thucydides can give a clear and
vivid representation of a battle, such as a reader who has once taken it
into his mind can seldom forget. The most powerful and affecting piece
of narrative perhaps in all historical literature, is the account of the
Sicilian catastrophe in his seventh book, yet how few pages does it
fill![‡] The ancients were concise, because of the extreme pains they
took with their Edition: current; Page: [232] compositions; almost all
moderns are prolix, because they do not. The great ancients could
express a thought so perfectly in a few words or sentences, that they
did not need to add any more: the moderns, because they cannot bring it
out clearly and completely at once, return again and again, heaping
sentence upon sentence, each adding a little more elucidation, in hopes
that though no single sentence expresses the full meaning, the whole
together may give a sufficient notion of it. In this respect I am afraid
we are growing worse instead of better, for want of time and patience,
and from the necessity we are in of addressing almost all writings to a
busy and imperfectly prepared public. The demands of modern life are
such—the work to be done, the mass to be worked upon, are so vast, that
those who have anything particular to say—who have, as the phrase goes,
any message to deliver—cannot afford to devote their time to the
production of masterpieces. But they would do far worse than they do, if
there had never been masterpieces, or if they had never known them.
Early familiarity with the perfect, makes our most imperfect production
far less bad than it otherwise would be. To have a high standard of
excellence often makes the whole difference of rendering our work good
when it would otherwise be mediocre.

For all these reasons I think it important to retain these two languages
and literatures in the place they occupy, as a part of liberal
education, that is, of the education of all who are not obliged by their
circumstances to discontinue their scholastic studies at a very early
age. But the same reasons which vindicate the place of classical studies
in general education, shew also the proper limitation of them. They
should be carried as far as is sufficient to enable the pupil, in after
life, to read the great works of ancient literature with ease. Those who
have leisure and inclination to make scholarship, or ancient history, or
general philology, their pursuit, of course require much more, but there
is no room for more in general education. The laborious idleness in
which the school-time is wasted away in the English classical schools
deserves the severest reprehension. To what purpose should the most
precious years of early life be irreparably squandered in learning to
write bad Latin and Greek verses? I do not see that we are much the
better even for those who end by writing good ones. I am often tempted
to ask the favourites of nature and fortune, whether all the serious and
important work of the world is done, that their time and energy can be
spared for these nugae difficiles? I am not blind to the utility of
composing in a language, as a means of learning it accurately. I hardly
know any other means equally effectual. But why should not prose
composition suffice? What need is there of original composition at all?
if that can be called original which unfortunate schoolboys, without any
thoughts to express, hammer out on compulsion from mere memory,
acquiring the pernicious habit which a teacher should consider it one of
his first duties to repress, that of merely stringing together borrowed
phrases? The exercise in composition, most suitable to the requirements
of learners, is that most valuable one, of retranslating from translated
passages of a good author: and to this might be added, what still exists
in Edition: current; Page: [233] many Continental places of education,
occasional practice in talking Latin. There would be something to be
said for the time spent in the manufacture of verses, if such practice
were necessary for the enjoyment of ancient poetry: though it would be
better to lose that enjoyment than to purchase it at so extravagant a
price. But the beauties of a great poet would be a far poorer thing than
they are, if they only impressed us through a knowledge of the
technicalities of his art. The poet needed those technicalities: they
are not necessary to us. They are essential for criticizing a poem, but
not for enjoying it. All that is wanted is sufficient familiarity with
the language, for its meaning to reach us without any sense of effort,
and clothed with the associations on which the poet counted for
producing his effect. Whoever has this familiarity, and a practised ear,
can have as keen a relish of the music of Virgil and Horace, as of Gray,
or Burns, or Shelley, though he know not the metrical rules of a common
Sapphic or Alcaic. I do not say that these rules ought not to be taught,
but I would have a class apart for them, and would make the appropriate
exercises an optional, not a compulsory part of the school teaching.

Much more might be said respecting classical instruction, and literary
cultivation in general, as a part of liberal education. But it is time
to speak of the uses of scientific instruction: or rather its
indispensable necessity, for it is recommended by every consideration
which pleads for any high order of intellectual education at all.

The most obvious part of the value of scientific instruction, the mere
information that it gives, speaks for itself. We are born into a world
which we have not made; a world whose phenomena take place according to
fixed laws, of which we do not bring any knowledge into the world with
us. In such a world we are appointed to live, and in it all our work is
to be done. Our whole working power depends on knowing the laws of the
world—in other words, the properties of the things which we have to work
with, and to work among, and to work upon. We may and do rely, for the
greater part of this knowledge, on the few who in each department make
its acquisition their main business in life. But unless an elementary
knowledge of scientific truths is diffused among the public, they never
know what is certain and what is not, or who are entitled to speak with
authority and who are not: and they either have no faith at all in the
testimony of science, or are the ready dupes of charlatans and
impostors. They alternate between ignorant distrust, and blind, often
misplaced, confidence. Besides, who is there who would not wish to
understand the meaning of the common physical facts that take place
under his eye? Who would not wish to know why a pump raises water, why a
lever moves heavy weights, why it is hot at the tropics and cold at the
poles, why the moon is sometimes dark and sometimes bright, what is the
cause of the tides? Do we not feel that he who is totally ignorant of
these things, let him be ever so skilled in a special profession, is not
an educated man but an ignoramus? It is surely no small part of
education to put us in intelligent possession of the most important and
most universally interesting facts of the universe, so that the world
which Edition: current; Page: [234] surrounds us may not be a sealed
book to us, uninteresting because unintelligible. This, however, is but
the simplest and most obvious part of the utility of science, and the
part which, if neglected in youth, may be the most easily made up for
afterwards. It is more important to understand the value of scientific
instruction as a training and disciplining process, to fit the intellect
for the proper work of a human being. Facts are the materials of our
knowledge, but the mind itself is the instrument: and it is easier to
acquire facts, than to judge what they prove, and how, through the facts
which we know, to get to those which we want to know.

The most incessant occupation of the human intellect throughout life is
the ascertainment of truth. We are always needing to know what is
actually true about something or other. It is not given to us all to
discover great general truths that are a light to all men and to future
generations; though with a better general education the number of those
who could do so would be far greater than it is. But we all require the
ability to judge between the conflicting opinions which are offered to
us as vital truths; to choose what doctrines we will receive in the
matter of religion, for example; to judge whether we ought to be Tories,
Whigs, or Radicals, or to what length it is our duty to go with each, to
form a rational conviction on great questions of legislation and
internal policy, and on the manner in which our country should behave to
dependencies and to foreign nations. And the need we have of knowing how
to discriminate truth, is not confined to the larger truths. All through
life it is our most pressing interest to find out the truth about all
the matters we are concerned with. If we are farmers we want to find
what will truly improve our soil; if merchants, what will truly
influence the markets of our commodities; if judges, or jurymen, or
advocates, who it was that truly did an unlawful act, or to whom a
disputed right truly belongs. Every time we have to make a new
resolution or alter an old one, in any situation in life, we shall go
wrong unless we know the truth about the facts on which our resolution
depends. Now, however different these searches for truth may look, and
however unlike they really are in their subject-matter, the methods of
getting at truth, and the tests of truth, are in all cases much the
same. There are but two roads by which truth can be discovered;
observation, and reasoning: observation, of course, including
experiment. We all observe, and we all reason, and therefore, more or
less successfully, we all ascertain truths: but most of us do it very
ill, and could not get on at all were we not able to fall back on others
who do it better. If we could not do it in any degree, we should be mere
instruments in the hands of those who could, they would be able to
reduce us to slavery. Then how shall we best learn to do this? By being
shewn the way in which it has already been successfully done. The
processes by which truth is attained, reasoning and observation, have
been carried to their greatest known perfection in the physical
sciences. As classical literature furnishes the most perfect types of
the art of expression, so do the physical sciences those of the art of
thinking. Mathematics, and its application to astronomy and natural
philosophy, are the most complete example of the discovery of truths by
reasoning; Edition: current; Page: [235] experimental science, of their
discovery by direct observation. In all these cases we know that we can
trust the operation, because the conclusions to which it has led have
been found true by subsequent trial. It is by the study of these, then,
that we may hope to qualify ourselves for distinguishing truth, in cases
where there do not exist the same ready means of verification.

In what consists the principal and most characteristic difference
between one human intellect and another? In their ability to judge
correctly of evidence. Our direct perceptions of truth are so limited;
we know so few things by immediate intuition, or, as it used to be
called, by simple apprehension—that we depend for almost all our
valuable knowledge, on evidence external to itself; and most of us are
very unsafe hands at estimating evidence, where an appeal cannot be made
to actual eyesight. The intellectual part of our education has nothing
more important to do, than to correct or mitigate this almost universal
infirmity—this summary and substance of nearly all purely intellectual
weakness. To do this with effect needs all the resources which the most
perfect system of intellectual training can command. Those resources, as
every teacher knows, are but of three kinds, first, models, secondly
rules, thirdly, appropriate practice. The models of the art of
estimating evidence are furnished by science; the rules are suggested by
science, and the study of science is the most fundamental portion of the
practice.

Take in the first instance mathematics. It is chiefly from mathematics
we realize the fact that there actually is a road to truth by means of
reasoning, that anything real, and which will be found true when tried,
can be arrived at by a mere operation of the mind. The flagrant abuse of
mere reasoning in the days of the schoolmen, when men argued confidently
to supposed facts of outward nature without properly establishing their
premises, or checking the conclusions by observation, created a
prejudice in the modern, and especially in the English mind, against
deductive reasoning altogether, as a mode of investigation. The
prejudice lasted long, and was upheld by the misunderstood authority of
Lord Bacon,[*] until the prodigious applications of mathematics to
physical science—to the discovery of the laws of external nature—slowly
and tardily restored the reasoning process to the place which belongs to
it as a source of real knowledge. Mathematics, pure and applied, are
still the great conclusive example of what can be done by reasoning.
Mathematics also habituates us to several of the principal precautions
for the safety of the process. Our first studies in geometry teach us
two invaluable lessons. One is, to lay down at the beginning, in express
and clear terms, all the premises from which we intend to reason. The
other is, to keep every step in the reasoning distinct and separate from
all the other steps, and to make each step safe before proceeding to
another; expressly stating to ourselves, at every joint in the
reasoning, what new premise we there introduce. It is not necessary that
we should do this at all times, in Edition: current; Page: [236] all our
reasonings. But we must be always able and ready to do it. If the
validity of our argument is denied, or if we doubt it ourselves, that is
the way to check it. In this way we are often enabled to detect at once
the exact place where paralogism or confusion get in: and after
sufficient practice we may be able to keep them out from the beginning.
It is to mathematics, again, that we owe our first notion of a connected
body of truth; truths which grow out of one another, and hang together
so that each implies all the rest; that no one of them can be questioned
without contradicting another or others, until in the end it appears
that no part of the system can be false unless the whole is so. Pure
mathematics first gave us this conception; applied mathematics extends
it to the realm of physical nature. Applied mathematics shews us that
not only the truths of abstract number and extension, but the external
facts of the universe, which we apprehend by our senses, form, at least
in a large part of all nature, a web similarly held together. We are
able, by reasoning from a few fundamental truths, to explain and predict
the phenomena of material objects: and what is still more remarkable,
the fundamental truths were themselves found out by reasoning; for they
are not such as are obvious to the senses, but had to be inferred by a
mathematical process from a mass of minute details, which alone came
within the direct reach of human observation. When Newton, in this
manner, discovered the laws of the solar system, he created, for all
posterity, the true idea of science. He gave the most perfect example we
are ever likely to have, of that union of reasoning and observation,
which by means of facts that can be directly observed, ascends to laws
which govern multitudes of other facts—laws which not only explain and
account for what we see, but give us assurance beforehand of much that
we do not see, much that we never could have found out by observation,
though, having been found out, it is always verified by the result.

While mathematics, and the mathematical sciences, supply us with a
typical example of the ascertainment of truth by reasoning; those
physical sciences which are not mathematical, such as chemistry, and
purely experimental physics, shew us in equal perfection the other mode
of arriving at certain truth, by observation, in its most accurate form,
that of experiment. The value of mathematics in a logical point of view
is an old topic with mathematicians, and has even been insisted on so
exclusively as to provoke a counter-exaggeration, of which a well-known
essay by Sir William Hamilton is an example:[*] but the logical value of
experimental science is comparatively a new subject, yet there is no
intellectual discipline more important than that which the experimental
sciences afford. Their whole occupation consists in doing well, what all
of us, during the whole of life, are engaged in doing, for the most part
badly. All men do not affect to be reasoners, but all profess, and
really attempt, to draw inferences from experience: yet hardly Edition:
current; Page: [237] any one, who has not been a student of the physical
sciences, sets out with any just idea of what the process of
interpreting experience really is. If a fact has occurred once or
oftener, and another fact has followed it, people think they have got an
experiment, and are well on the road towards shewing that the one fact
is the cause of the other. If they did but know the immense amount of
precaution necessary to a scientific experiment; with what sedulous care
the accompanying circumstances are contrived and varied, so as to
exclude every agency but that which is the subject of the experiment—or,
when disturbing agencies cannot be excluded, the minute accuracy with
which their influence is calculated and allowed for, in order that the
residue may contain nothing but what is due to the one agency under
examination: if these things were attended to, people would be much less
easily satisfied that their opinions have the evidence of experience,
many popular notions and generalizations which are in all mouths, would
be thought a great deal less certain than they are supposed to be; but
we should begin to lay the foundation of really experimental knowledge,
on things which are now the subjects of mere vague discussion, where one
side finds as much to say and says it as confidently as another, and
each person’s opinion is less determined by evidence than by his
accidental interest or prepossession. In politics, for instance, it is
evident to whoever comes to the study from that of the experimental
sciences, that no political conclusions of any value for practice can be
arrived at by direct experience. Such specific experience as we can
have, serves only to verify, and even that insufficiently, the
conclusions of reasoning. Take any active force you please in politics,
take the liberties of England, or free trade how should we know that
either of these things conduced to prosperity, if we could discern no
tendency in the things themselves to produce it? If we had only the
evidence of what is called our experience, such prosperity as we enjoy
might be owing to a hundred other causes, and might have been
obstructed, not promoted, by these. All true political science is, in
one sense of the phrase, à priori, being deduced from the tendencies of
things, tendencies known either through our general experience of human
nature, or as the result of an analysis of the course of history,
considered as a progressive evolution. It requires, therefore, the union
of induction and deduction, and the mind that is equal to it must have
been well disciplined in both. But familiarity with scientific
experiment at least does the useful service of inspiring a wholesome
scepticism about the conclusions which the mere surface of experience
suggests.

The study, on the one hand, of mathematics and its applications, on the
other, of experimental science, prepares us for the principal business
of the intellect, by the practice of it in the most characteristic
cases, and by familiarity with the most perfect and successful models of
it. But in great things as in small, examples and models are not
sufficient: we want rules as well. Familiarity with the correct use of a
language in conversation and writing does not make rules of grammar
unnecessary; nor does the amplest knowledge of sciences of reasoning and
experiment Edition: current; Page: [238] dispense with rules of logic.
We may have heard correct reasonings and seen skilful experiments all
our lives—we shall not learn by mere imitation to do the like, unless we
pay careful attention to how it is done. It is much easier in these
abstract matters, than in purely mechanical ones, to mistake bad work
for good. To mark out the difference between them is the province of
logic. Logic lays down the general principles and laws of the search
after truth; the conditions which, whether recognised or not, must
actually have been observed if the mind has done its work rightly. Logic
is the intellectual complement of mathematics and physics. Those
sciences give the practice, of which Logic is the theory. It declares
the principles, rules, and precepts, of which they exemplify the
observance.

The science of Logic has two parts; ratiocinative and inductive logic.
The one helps to keep us right in reasoning from premises, the other in
concluding from observation. Ratiocinative logic is much older than
inductive, because reasoning in the narrower sense of the word is an
easier process than induction, and the science which works by mere
reasoning, pure mathematics, had been carried to a considerable height
while the sciences of observation were still in the purely empirical
period. The principles of ratiocination, therefore, were the earliest
understood and systematized, and the logic of ratiocination is even now
suitable to an earlier stage in education than that of induction. The
principles of induction cannot be properly understood without some
previous study of the inductive sciences; but the logic of reasoning,
which was already carried to a high degree of perfection by Aristotle,
does not absolutely require even a knowledge of mathematics, but can be
sufficiently exemplified and illustrated from the practice of daily
life.

Of Logic I venture to say, even if limited to that of mere
ratiocination, the theory of names, propositions, and the syllogism,
that there is no part of intellectual education which is of greater
value, or whose place can so ill be supplied by anything else. Its uses,
it is true, are chiefly negative; its function is, not so much to teach
us to go right, as to keep us from going wrong. But in the operations of
the intellect it is so much easier to go wrong than right, it is so
utterly impossible for even the most vigorous mind to keep itself in the
path but by maintaining a vigilant watch against all deviations, and
noting all the byways by which it is possible to go astray—that the
chief difference between one reasoner and another consists in their less
or greater liability to be misled. Logic points out all the possible
ways in which, starting from true premises, we may draw false
conclusions. By its analysis of the reasoning process, and the forms it
supplies for stating and setting forth our reasonings, it enables us to
guard the points at which a fallacy is in danger of slipping in, or to
lay our fingers upon the place where it has slipped in. When I consider
how very simple the theory of reasoning is, and how short a time is
sufficient for acquiring a thorough knowledge of its principles and
rules, and even considerable expertness in applying them, I can find no
excuse for omission to study it on the part of any one who aspires to
succeed in any intellectual pursuit. Edition: current; Page: [239] Logic
is the great disperser of hazy and confused thinking: it clears up the
fogs which hide from us our own ignorance, and make us believe that we
understand a subject when we do not. We must not be led away by talk
about inarticulate giants who do great deeds without knowing how, and
see into the most recondite truths without any of the ordinary helps,
and without being able to explain to other people how they reach their
conclusions, nor consequently to convince any other people of the truth
of them. There may be such men, as there are deaf and dumb persons who
do clever things, but for all that, speech and hearing are faculties by
no means to be dispensed with. If you want to know whether you are
thinking rightly, put your thoughts into words. In the very attempt to
do this you will find yourselves, consciously or unconsciously, using
logical forms. Logic compels us to throw our meaning into distinct
propositions, and our reasonings into distinct steps. It makes us
conscious of all the implied assumptions on which we are proceeding, and
which, if not true, vitiate the entire process. It makes us aware what
extent of doctrine we commit ourselves to by any course of reasoning,
and obliges us to look the implied premises in the face, and make up our
minds whether we can stand to them. It makes our opinions consistent
with themselves and with one another, and forces us to think clearly,
even when it cannot make us think correctly. It is true that error may
be consistent and systematic as well as truth, but this is not the
common case. It is no small advantage to see clearly the principles and
consequences involved in our opinions, and which we must either accept,
or else abandon those opinions. We are much nearer to finding truth when
we search for it in broad daylight. Error, pursued rigorously to all
that is implied in it, seldom fails to get detected by coming into
collision with some known and admitted fact.

You will find abundance of people to tell you that logic is no help to
thought, and that people cannot be taught to think by rules. Undoubtedly
rules by themselves, without practice, go but a little way in teaching
anything. But if the practice of thinking is not improved by rules, I
venture to say it is the only difficult thing done by human beings that
is not so. A man learns to saw wood principally by practice, but there
are rules for doing it, grounded on the nature of the operation, and if
he is not taught the rules, he will not saw well until he has discovered
them for himself. Wherever there is a right way and a wrong, there must
be a difference between them, and it must be possible to find out what
the difference is, and when found out and expressed in words, it is a
rule for the operation. If any one is inclined to disparage rules, I say
to him, try to learn anything which there are rules for, without knowing
the rules, and see how you succeed. To those who think lightly of the
school logic, I say, take the trouble to learn it. You will easily do so
in a few weeks, and you will see whether it is of no use to you in
making your mind clear, and keeping you from stumbling in the dark over
the most outrageous fallacies. Nobody, I believe, who has really learnt
it, and who goes on using his mind, is insensible to its benefits,
unless he started with a prejudice, or, like some eminent English and
Scottish thinkers of the past century, is under the influence of a
Edition: current; Page: [240] reaction against the exaggerated
pretensions made by the schoolmen, not so much in behalf of logic as of
the reasoning process itself. Still more highly must the use of logic be
estimated, if we include in it, as we ought to do, the principles and
rules of Induction as well as of Ratiocination. As the one logic guards
us against bad deduction, so does the other against bad generalization,
which is a still more universal error. If men easily err in arguing from
one general proposition to another, still more easily do they go wrong
in interpreting the observations made by themselves and others. There is
nothing in which an untrained mind shows itself more hopelessly
incapable, than in drawing the proper general conclusions from its own
experience. And even trained minds, when all their training is on a
special subject, and does not extend to the general principles of
induction, are only kept right when there are ready opportunities of
verifying their inferences by facts. Able scientific men, when they
venture upon subjects in which they have no facts to check them, are
often found drawing conclusions or making generalizations from their
experimental knowledge, such as any sound theory of induction would shew
to be utterly unwarranted. So true is it that practice alone, even of a
good kind, is not sufficient without principles and rules. Lord Bacon
had the great merit of seeing that rules were necessary, and conceiving,
to a very considerable extent, their true character.[*] The defects of
his conception were such as were inevitable while the inductive sciences
were only in the earliest stage of their progress, and the highest
efforts of the human mind in that direction had not yet been made.
Inadequate as the Baconian view of induction was, and rapidly as the
practice outgrew it, it is only within a generation or two that any
considerable improvement has been made in the theory; very much through
the impulse given by two of the many distinguished men who have adorned
the Scottish universities, Dugald Stewart and Brown.

I have given a very incomplete and summary view of the educational
benefits derived from instruction in the more perfect sciences, and in
the rules for the proper use of the intellectual faculties which the
practice of those sciences has suggested. There are other sciences,
which are in a more backward state, and tax the whole powers of the mind
in its mature years, yet a beginning of which may be beneficially made
in university studies, while a tincture of them is valuable even to
those who are never likely to proceed further. The first is physiology;
the science of the laws of organic and animal life, and especially of
the structure and functions of the human body. It would be absurd to
pretend that a profound knowledge of this difficult subject can be
acquired in youth, or as a part of general education. Yet an
acquaintance with its leading truths is one of those acquirements which
ought not to be the exclusive property of a particular profession. The
value of such knowledge for daily uses has been made familiar to us all
by the sanitary discussions Edition: current; Page: [241] of late years.
There is hardly one among us who may not, in some position of authority,
be required to form an opinion and take part in public action on
sanitary subjects. And the importance of understanding the true
conditions of health and disease—of knowing how to acquire and preserve
that healthy habit of body which the most tedious and costly medical
treatment so often fails to restore when once lost, should secure a
place in general education for the principal maxims of hygiene, and some
of those even of practical medicine. For those who aim at high
intellectual cultivation, the study of physiology has still greater
recommendations, and is, in the present state of advancement of the
higher studies, a real necessity. The practice which it gives in the
study of nature is such as no other physical science affords in the same
kind, and is the best introduction to the difficult questions of
politics and social life. Scientific education, apart from professional
objects, is but a preparation for judging rightly of Man, and of his
requirements and interests. But to this final pursuit, which has been
called par excellence the proper study of mankind,[*] physiology is the
most serviceable of the sciences, because it is the nearest. Its subject
is already Man: the same complex and manifold being, whose properties
are not independent of circumstance, and immovable from age to age, like
those of the ellipse and hyperbola, or of sulphur and phosphorus, but
are infinitely various, indefinitely modifiable by art or accident,
graduating by the nicest shades into one another, and reacting upon one
another in a thousand ways, so that they are seldom capable of being
isolated and observed separately. With the difficulties of the study of
a being so constituted, the physiologist, and he alone among scientific
enquirers, is already familiar. Take what view we will of man as a
spiritual being, one part of his nature is far more like another than
either of them is like anything else. In the organic world we study
nature under disadvantages very similar to those which affect the study
of moral and political phenomena: our means of making experiments are
almost as limited, while the extreme complexity of the facts makes the
conclusions of general reasoning unusually precarious, on account of the
vast number of circumstances that conspire to determine every result.
Yet in spite of these obstacles, it is found possible in physiology to
arrive at a considerable number of well-ascertained and important
truths. This therefore is an excellent school in which to study the
means of overcoming similar difficulties elsewhere. It is in physiology
too that we are first introduced to some of the conceptions which play
the greatest part in the moral and social sciences, but which do not
occur at all in those of inorganic nature. As, for instance, the idea of
predisposition, and of predisposing causes, as distinguished from
exciting causes. The operation of all moral forces is immensely
influenced by predisposition; without that element, it is impossible to
explain the commonest facts of history and social life. Physiology is
also the first science in Edition: current; Page: [242] which we
recognise the influence of habit—the tendency of something to happen
again merely because it has happened before. From physiology, too, we
get our clearest notion of what is meant by development or evolution.
The growth of a plant or animal from the first germ is the typical
specimen of a phenomenon which rules through the whole course of the
history of man and society—increase of function, through expansion and
differentiation of structure by internal forces. I cannot enter into the
subject at greater length; it is enough if I throw out hints which may
be germs of further thought in yourselves. Those who aim at high
intellectual achievements may be assured that no part of their time will
be less wasted, than that which they employ in becoming familiar with
the methods and with the main conceptions of the science of organization
and life.

Physiology, at its upper extremity, touches on Psychology, or the
Philosophy of Mind: and without raising any disputed questions about the
limits between Matter and Spirit, the nerves and brain are admitted to
have so intimate a connexion with the mental operations, that the
student of the last cannot dispense with a considerable knowledge of the
first. The value of psychology itself need hardly be expatiated upon in
a Scottish university; for it has always been there studied with
brilliant success. Almost everything which has been contributed from
these islands towards its advancement since Locke and Berkeley, has
until very lately, and much of it even in the present generation,
proceeded from Scottish authors and Scottish professors. Psychology, in
truth, is simply the knowledge of the laws of human nature. If there is
anything that deserves to be studied by man, it is his own nature and
that of his fellow-men, and if it is worth studying at all, it is worth
studying scientifically, so as to reach the fundamental laws which
underlie and govern all the rest. With regard to the suitableness of
this subject for general education, a distinction must be made. There
are certain observed laws of our thoughts and of our feelings which rest
upon experimental evidence, and, once seized, are a clue to the
interpretation of much that we are conscious of in ourselves, and
observe in one another. Such, for example, are the laws of association.
Psychology, so far as it consists of such laws—I speak of the laws
themselves, not of their disputed applications—is as positive and
certain a science as chemistry, and fit to be taught as such. When,
however, we pass beyond the bounds of these admitted truths, to
questions which are still in controversy among the different
philosophical schools—how far the higher operations of the mind can be
explained by association, how far we must admit other primary
principles—what faculties of the mind are simple, what complex, and what
is the composition of the latter—above all, when we embark upon the sea
of metaphysics properly so called, and enquire, for instance, whether
time and space are real existences, as is our spontaneous impression, or
forms of our sensitive faculty, as is maintained by Kant,[*] or complex
ideas generated by association, whether Edition: current; Page: [243]
matter and spirit are conceptions merely relative to our faculties, or
facts existing per se, and in the latter case, what is the nature and
limit of our knowledge of them; whether the will of man is free or
determined by causes, and what is the real difference between the two
doctrines, matters on which the most thinking men, and those who have
given most study to the subjects, are still divided, it is neither to be
expected nor desired that those who do not specially devote themselves
to the higher departments of speculation should employ much of their
time in attempting to get to the bottom of these questions. But it is a
part of liberal education to know that such controversies exist, and, in
a general way, what has been said on both sides of them. It is
instructive to know the failures of the human intellect as well as its
successes, its imperfect as well as its perfect attainments; to be aware
of the open questions, as well as of those which have been definitively
resolved. A very summary view of these disputed matters may suffice for
the many; but a system of education is not intended solely for the many,
it has to kindle the aspirations and aid the efforts of those who are
destined to stand forth as thinkers above the multitude: and for these
there is hardly to be found any discipline comparable to that which
these metaphysical controversies afford. For they are essentially
questions about the estimation of evidence; about the ultimate grounds
of belief, the conditions required to justify our most familiar and
intimate convictions, and the real meaning and import of words and
phrases which we have used from infancy as if we understood all about
them, which are even at the foundation of human language, yet of which
no one except a metaphysician has rendered to himself a complete
account. Whatever philosophical opinions the study of these questions
may lead us to adopt, no one ever came out of the discussion of them
without increased vigour of understanding, an increased demand for
precision of thought and language, and a more careful and exact
appreciation of the nature of proof. There never was any sharpener of
the intellectual faculties superior to the Berkeleian controversy. There
is even now no reading more profitable to students—confining myself to
writers in our own language, and notwithstanding that so many of their
speculations are already obsolete—than Hobbes and Locke, Reid and
Stewart, Hume, Hartley, and Brown, on condition that these great
thinkers are not read passively, as masters to be followed, but
actively, as supplying materials and incentives to thought. To come to
our own contemporaries, he who has mastered Sir William Hamilton and
your own lamented Ferrier as distinguished representatives of one of the
two great schools of philosophy, and an eminent Professor in a
neighbouring University, Professor Bain, probably the greatest living
authority in the other, has gained a practice in the most searching
methods of philosophic investigation applied to the most arduous
subjects, which is no inadequate preparation for any intellectual
difficulties that he is ever likely to be called on to resolve.

In this brief outline of a complete scientific education, I have said
nothing about direct instruction in that which it is the chief of all
the ends of intellectual education to qualify us for—the exercise of
thought on the great interests of mankind as Edition: current; Page:
[244] moral and social beings—ethics and politics, in the largest sense.
These things are not, in the existing state of human knowledge, the
subject of a science, generally admitted and accepted. Politics cannot
be learnt once for all, from a text-book, or the instructions of a
master. What we require to be taught on that subject, is to be our own
teachers. It is a subject on which we have no masters to follow; each
must explore for himself, and exercise an independent judgment.
Scientific politics do not consist in having a set of conclusions ready
made, to be applied everywhere indiscriminately, but in setting the mind
to work in a scientific spirit to discover in each instance the truths
applicable to the given case. And this, at present, scarcely any two
persons do in the same way. Education is not entitled, on this subject,
to recommend any set of opinions as resting on the authority of
established science. But it can supply the student with materials for
his own mind, and helps to use them. It can make him acquainted with the
best speculations on the subject, taken from different points of view:
none of which will be found complete, while each embodies some
considerations really relevant, really requiring to be taken into the
account. Education may also introduce us to the principal facts which
have a direct bearing on the subject, namely the different modes or
stages of civilization that have been found among mankind, and the
characteristic properties of each. This is the true purpose of
historical studies, as prosecuted in an University. The leading facts of
ancient and modern history should be known by the student from his
private reading: if that knowledge be wanting, it cannot possibly be
supplied here. What a Professor of History has to teach, is the meaning
of those facts. His office is to help the student in collecting from
history what are the main differences between human beings, and between
the institutions of society, at one time or place and at another: in
picturing to himself human life and the human conception of life, as
they were at the different stages of human development: in
distinguishing between what is the same in all ages and what is
progressive, and forming some incipient conception of the causes and
laws of progress. All these things are as yet very imperfectly
understood even by the most philosophic enquirers, and are quite unfit
to be taught dogmatically. The object is to lead the student to attend
to them; to make him take interest in history not as a mere narrative,
but as a chain of causes and effects still unwinding itself before his
eyes, and full of momentous consequences to himself and his descendants;
the unfolding of a great epic or dramatic action, to terminate in the
happiness or misery, the elevation or degradation, of the human race; an
unremitting conflict between good and evil powers, of which every act
done by any of us, insignificant as we are, forms one of the incidents;
a conflict in which even the smallest of us cannot escape from taking
part, in which whoever does not help the right side is helping the
wrong, and for our share in which, whether it be greater or smaller, and
let its actual consequences be visible or in the main invisible, no one
of us can escape the responsibility. Though education cannot arm and
equip its pupils for this fight with any complete philosophy either of
politics or of history, there is much positive instruction that it can
give them, Edition: current; Page: [245] having a direct bearing on the
duties of citizenship. They should be taught the outlines of the civil
and political institutions of their own country, and in a more general
way, of the more advanced of the other civilized nations. Those branches
of politics, or of the laws of social life, in which there exists a
collection of facts or thoughts sufficiently sifted and methodized to
form the beginning of a science, should be taught ex professo. Among the
chief of these is Political Economy; the sources and conditions of
wealth and material prosperity for aggregate bodies of human beings.
This study approaches nearer to the rank of a science, in the sense in
which we apply that name to the physical sciences, than anything else
connected with politics yet does. I need not enlarge on the important
lessons which it affords for the guidance of life, and for the
estimation of laws and institutions, or on the necessity of knowing all
that it can teach in order to have true views of the course of human
affairs, or form plans for their improvement which will stand actual
trial. The same persons who cry down Logic will generally warn you
against Political Economy. It is unfeeling, they will tell you. It
recognises unpleasant facts. For my part, the most unfeeling thing I
know of is the law of gravitation: it breaks the neck of the best and
most amiable person without scruple, if he forgets for a single moment
to give heed to it. The winds and waves too are very unfeeling. Would
you advise those who go to sea to deny the winds and waves—or to make
use of them, and find the means of guarding against their dangers? My
advice to you is to study the great writers on Political Economy, and
hold firmly by whatever in them you find true; and depend upon it that
if you are not selfish or hard-hearted already, Political Economy will
not make you so. Of no less importance than Political Economy is the
study of what is called Jurisprudence; the general principles of law;
the social necessities which laws are required to meet; the features
common to all systems of law, and the differences between them; the
requisites of good legislation, the proper mode of constructing a legal
system, and the best constitution of courts of justice and modes of
legal procedure. These things are not only the chief part of the
business of government, but the vital concern of every citizen; and
their improvement affords a wide scope for the energies of any duly
prepared mind, ambitious of contributing towards the better condition of
the human race. For this, too, admirable helps have been provided by
writers of our own or of a very recent time. At the head of them stands
Bentham, undoubtedly the greatest master who ever devoted the labour of
a life to let in light on the subject of law; and who is the more
intelligible to non-professional persons, because, as his way is, he
builds up the subject from its foundation in the facts of human life,
and shows by careful consideration of ends and means, what law might and
ought to be, in deplorable contrast with what it is. Other enlightened
jurists have followed with contributions of two kinds, as the type of
which I may take two works, equally admirable in their respective
blinesb. Mr. Austin, in his Lectures on Jurisprudence,[*] Edition:
current; Page: [246] takes for his basis the Roman law, the most
elaborately consistent legal system which history has shewn us in actual
operation, and that which the greatest number of accomplished minds have
employed themselves in harmonizing. From this he singles out the
principles and distinctions which are of general applicability, and
employs the powers and resources of a most precise and analytic mind to
give to those principles and distinctions a philosophic basis, grounded
in the universal reason of mankind, and not in mere technical
convenience. Mr. Maine, in his treatise on Ancient Law in its relations
to Modern Thought,[†] shews from the history of law, and from what is
known of the primitive institutions of mankind, the origin of much that
has lasted till now, and has a firm footing both in the laws and in the
ideas of modern times; shewing that many of these things never
originated in reason, but are relics of the institutions of barbarous
society, modified more or less by civilization, but kept standing by the
persistency of ideas which were the offspring of those barbarous
institutions, and have survived their parent. The path opened by Mr.
Maine has been followed up by others, with additional illustrations of
the influence of obsolete ideas on modern institutions, and of obsolete
institutions on modern ideas, an action and reaction which perpetuate,
in many of the greatest concerns, a mitigated barbarism, things being
continually accepted as dictates of nature and necessities of life,
which, if we knew all, we should see to have originated in artificial
arrangements of society, long since abandoned and condemned.

To these studies I would add International Law; which I decidedly think
should be taught in all universities, and should form part of all
liberal education. The need of it is far from being limited to
diplomatists and lawyers; it extends to every citizen. What is called
the Law of Nations is not properly law, but a part of ethics: a set of
moral rules, accepted as authoritative by civilized states. It is true
that these rules neither are nor ought to be of eternal obligation, but
do and must vary more or less from age to age, as the consciences of
nations become more enlightened and the exigencies of political society
undergo change. But the rules mostly were at their origin, and still
are, an application of the maxims of honesty and humanity to the
intercourse of states. They were introduced by the moral sentiments of
mankind, or by their sense of the general interest, to mitigate the
crimes and sufferings of a state of war, and to restrain governments and
nations from unjust or dishonest conduct towards one another in time of
peace. Since every country stands in numerous and various relations with
the other countries of the world, and many, our own among the number,
exercise actual authority over some of these, a knowledge of the
established rules of international morality is essential to the duty of
every nation, and therefore of every person in it who helps to make up
the Edition: current; Page: [247] nation, and whose voice and feeling
form a part of what is called public opinion. Let not any one pacify his
conscience by the delusion that he can do no harm if he takes no part,
and forms no opinion. Bad men need nothing more to compass their ends,
than that good men should look on and do nothing. He is not a good man
who, without a protest, allows wrong to be committed in his name, and
with the means which he helps to supply, because he will not trouble
himself to use his mind on the subject. It depends on the habit of
attending to and looking into public transactions, and on the degree of
information and solid judgment respecting them that exists in the
community, whether the conduct of the nation as a nation, both within
itself and towards others, shall be selfish, corrupt, and tyrannical, or
rational and enlightened, just and noble.

Of these more advanced studies, only a small commencement can be made at
schools and universities; but even this is of the highest value, by
awakening an interest in the subjects, by conquering the first
difficulties, and inuring the mind to the kind of exertion which the
studies require, by implanting a desire to make further progress, and
directing the student to the best tracks and the best helps. So far as
these branches of knowledge have been acquired, we have learnt, or been
put into the way of learning, our duty, and our work in life. Knowing
it, however, is but half the work of education; it still remains, that
what we know, we shall be willing and determined to put in practice.
Nevertheless, to know the truth is already a great way towards disposing
us to act upon it. What we see clearly and apprehend keenly, we have a
natural desire to act out. “To see the best, and yet the worst
pursue,”[*] is a possible but not a common state of mind, those who
follow the wrong have generally first taken care to be voluntarily
ignorant of the right. They have silenced their conscience, but they are
not knowingly disobeying it. If you take an average human mind while
still young, before the objects it has chosen in life have given it a
turn in any bad direction, you will generally find it desiring what is
good, right, and for the benefit of all; and if that season is properly
used to implant the knowledge and give the training which shall render
rectitude of judgment more habitual than sophistry, a serious barrier
will have been erected against the inroads of selfishness and falsehood.
Still, it is a very imperfect education which trains the intelligence
only, but not the will. No one can dispense with an education directed
expressly to the moral as well as the intellectual part of his being.
Such education, so far as it is direct, is either moral or religious,
and these may either be treated as distinct, or as different aspects of
the same thing. The subject we are now considering is not education as a
whole, but scholastic education, and we must keep in view the inevitable
limitations of what schools and universities can do. It is beyond their
power to educate morally or religiously. Moral and religious education
consist in training the feelings and the daily habits, Edition: current;
Page: [248] and these are, in the main, beyond the sphere and
inaccessible to the control of public education. It is the home, the
family, which gives us the moral or religious education we really
receive: and this is completed, and modified, sometimes for the better,
often for the worse, by society, and the opinions and feelings with
which we are there surrounded. The moral or religious influence which an
university can exercise, consists less in any express teaching, than in
the pervading tone of the place. Whatever it teaches, it should teach as
penetrated by a sense of duty; it should present all knowledge as
chiefly a means to worthiness of life, given for the double purpose of
making each of us practically useful to his fellow-creatures, and of
elevating the character of the species itself, exalting and dignifying
our nature. There is nothing which spreads more contagiously from
teacher to pupil than elevation of sentiment: often and often have
students caught from the living influence of a professor, a contempt for
mean and selfish objects, and a noble ambition to leave the world better
than they found it, which they have carried with them throughout life.
In these respects, teachers of every kind have natural and peculiar
means of doing with effect, what every one who mixes with his
fellow-beings, or addresses himself to them in any character, should
feel bound to do to the extent of his capacity and opportunities. What
is special to an university on these subjects belongs chiefly, like the
rest of its work, to the intellectual department. An university exists
for the purpose of laying open to each succeeding generation, as far as
the conditions of the case admit, the accumulated treasure of the
thoughts of mankind. As an indispensable part of this, it has to make
known to them what mankind at large, their own country, and the best and
wisest individual men, have thought on the great subjects of morals and
religion. There should be, and there is in most universities,
professorial instruction in moral philosophy; but I could wish that this
instruction were of a somewhat different type from what is ordinarily
met with. I could wish that it were more expository, less polemical, and
above all less dogmatic. The learner should be made acquainted with the
principal systems of moral philosophy which have existed and been
practically operative among mankind, and should hear what there is to be
said for each: the Aristotelian, the Epicurean, the Stoic, the Judaic,
the Christian in the various modes of its interpretation, which differ
almost as much from one another as the teachings of those earlier
schools. He should be made familiar with the different standards of
right and wrong which have been taken as the basis of ethics, general
utility, natural justice, natural rights, a moral sense, principles of
practical reason, and the rest. Among all these, it is not so much the
teacher’s business to take a side, and fight stoutly for some one
against the rest, as it is to direct them all towards the establishment
and preservation of the rules of conduct most advantageous to mankind.
There is not one of these systems which has not its good side; not one
from which there is not something to be learnt by the votaries of the
others; not one which is not suggested by a keen, though it may not
always be a clear, perception of some important truths, which are the
prop of the system, and Edition: current; Page: [249] the neglect or
undervaluing of which in other systems is their characteristic
infirmity. A system which may be as a whole erroneous, is still
valuable, until it has forced upon mankind a sufficient attention to the
portion of truth which suggested it. The ethical teacher does his part
best, when he points out how each system may be strengthened even on its
own basis, by taking into more complete account the truths which other
systems have realized more fully and made more prominent. I do not mean
that he should encourage an essentially sceptical eclecticism. While
placing every system in the best aspect it admits of, and endeavouring
to draw from all of them the most salutary consequences compatible with
their nature, I would by no means debar him from enforcing by his best
arguments his own preference for some one of the number. They cannot be
all true, though those which are false as theories may contain
particular truths, indispensable to the completeness of the true theory.
But on this subject, even more than on any of those I have previously
mentioned, it is not the teacher’s business to impose his own judgment,
but to inform and discipline that of his pupil.

And this same clue, if we keep hold of it, will guide us through the
labyrinth of conflicting thought into which we enter when we touch the
great question of the relation of education to religion. As I have
already said, the only really effective religious education is the
parental—that of home and childhood. All that social and public
education has in its power to do, further than by a general pervading
tone of reverence and duty, amounts to little more than the information
which it can give; but this is extremely valuable. I shall not enter
into the question which has been debated with so much vehemence in the
last and present generation, whether religion ought to be taught at all
in universities and public schools, seeing that religion is the subject
of all others on which men’s opinions are most widely at variance. On
neither side of this controversy do the disputants seem to me to have
sufficiently freed their minds from the old notion of education, that it
consists in the dogmatic inculcation from authority, of what the teacher
deems true. Why should it be impossible, that information of the
greatest value, on subjects connected with religion, should be brought
before the student’s mind, that he should be made acquainted with so
important a part of the national thought, and of the intellectual
labours of past generations, as those relating to religion, without
being taught dogmatically the doctrines of any church or sect?
Christianity being a historical religion, the sort of religious
instruction which seems to me most appropriate to an University is the
study of ecclesiastical history. If teaching, even on matters of
scientific certainty, should aim quite as much at showing how the
results are arrived at, as at teaching the results themselves, far more,
then, should this be the case on subjects where there is the widest
diversity of opinion among men of equal ability, and who have taken
equal pains to arrive at the truth. This diversity should of itself be a
warning to a conscientious teacher that he has no right to impose his
opinion authoritatively upon a youthful mind. His teaching should not be
in the spirit of dogmatism, but in that of enquiry. The pupil should not
be Edition: current; Page: [250] addressed as if his religion had been
chosen for him, but as one who will have to choose it for himself. The
various Churches, established and unestablished, are quite competent to
the task which is peculiarly theirs, that of teaching each its own
doctrines, as far as necessary, to its own rising generation. The proper
business of an University is different, not to tell us from authority
what we ought to believe, and make us accept the belief as a duty, but
to give us information and training, and help us to form our own belief
in a manner worthy of intelligent beings, who seek for truth at all
hazards, and demand to know all the difficulties, in order that they may
be better qualified to find, or recognise, the most satisfactory mode of
resolving them. The vast importance of these questions—the great results
as regards the conduct of our lives, which depend upon our choosing one
belief or another—are the strongest reasons why we should not trust our
judgment when it has been formed in ignorance of the evidence, and why
we should not consent to be restricted to a one-sided teaching, which
informs us of what a particular teacher or association of teachers
receive as true doctrine and sound argument, but of nothing more.

I do not affirm that an University, if it represses free thought and
enquiry, must be altogether a failure, for the freest thinkers have
often been trained in the most slavish seminaries of learning. The great
Christian reformers were taught in Roman Catholic Universities; the
sceptical philosophers of France were mostly educated by the Jesuits.
The human mind is sometimes impelled all the more violently in one
direction, by an over zealous and demonstrative attempt to drag it in
the opposite. But this is not what Universities are appointed for—to
drive men from them, even into good, by excess of evil. An University
ought to be a place of free speculation. The more diligently it does its
duty in all other respects, the more certain it is to be that. The old
English Universities, in the present generation, are doing better work
than they have done within human memory in teaching the ordinary studies
of their curriculum; and one of the consequences has been, that whereas
they formerly seemed to exist mainly for the repression of independent
thought, and the chaining up of the individual intellect and conscience,
they are now the great foci of free and manly enquiry, to the higher and
professional classes, south of the Tweed. The ruling minds of those
ancient seminaries have at last remembered that to place themselves in
hostility to the free use of the understanding, is to abdicate their own
best privilege, that of guiding it. A modest deference, at least
provisional, to the united authority of the specially instructed, is
becoming in a youthful and imperfectly formed mind; but when there is no
united authority—when the specially instructed are so divided and
scattered that almost any opinion can boast of some high authority, and
no opinion whatever can claim all; when, therefore, it can never be
deemed extremely improbable that one who uses his mind freely may see
reason to change his first opinion; then, whatever you do, keep, at all
risks, your minds open: do not barter away your freedom of thought.
Those of you who are destined for the clerical profession are, no doubt,
so Edition: current; Page: [251] far held to a certain number of
doctrines, that if they ceased to believe them they would not be
justified in remaining in a position in which they would be required to
teach insincerely. But use your influence to make those doctrines as few
as possible. It is not right that men should be bribed to hold out
against conviction—to shut their ears against objections, or, if the
objections penetrate, to continue professing full and unfaltering belief
when their confidence is already shaken. Neither is it right that if men
honestly profess to have changed some of their religious opinions, their
honesty should as a matter of course exclude them from taking a part for
which they may be admirably qualified, in the spiritual instruction of
the nation. The tendency of the age, on both sides of the ancient
Border, is towards the relaxation of formularies, and a less rigid
construction of articles. This very circumstance, by making the limits
of orthodoxy less definite, and obliging every one to draw the line for
himself, is an embarrassment to consciences. But I hold entirely with
those clergymen who elect to remain in the national church, so long as
they are able to accept its articles and confessions in any sense or
with any interpretation consistent with common honesty, whether it be
the generally received interpretation or not. If all were to desert the
church who put a large and liberal construction on its terms of
communion, or who would wish to see those terms widened, the national
provision for religious teaching and worship would be left utterly to
those who take the narrowest, the most literal, and purely textual view
of the formularies; who, though by no means necessarily bigots, are
under the great disadvantage of having the bigots for their allies, and
who, however great their merits may be, and they are often very great,
yet if the church is improvable, are not the most likely persons to
improve it. Therefore, if it were not an impertinence in me to tender
advice in such a matter, I should say, let all who conscientiously can,
remain in the church. A church is far more easily improved from within
than from without. Almost all the illustrious reformers of religion
began by being clergymen: but they did not think that their profession
as clergymen was inconsistent with being reformers. They mostly indeed
ended their days outside the churches in which they were born; but it
was because the churches, in an evil hour for themselves, cast them out.
They did not think it any business of theirs to withdraw. They thought
they had a better right to remain in the fold, than those had who
expelled them.

I have now said what I had to say on the two kinds of education which
the system of schools and universities is intended to
promote—intellectual education, and moral education: knowledge and the
training of the knowing faculty, conscience and that of the moral
faculty. These are the two main ingredients of human culture, but they
do not exhaust the whole of it. There is a third division, which, it
subordinate, and owing allegiance to the two others, is barely inferior
to them, and not less needful to the completeness of the human being: I
mean the aesthetic branch; the culture which comes through poetry and
art, and may be described as the education of the feelings, and the
cultivation of the beautiful. This department Edition: current; Page:
[252] of things deserves to be regarded in a far more serious light than
is the custom of these countries. It is only of late, and chiefly by a
superficial imitation of foreigners, that we have begun to use the word
Art by itself, and to speak of Art as we speak of Science, or
Government, or Religion: we used to talk of the Arts, and more
specifically of the Fine Arts: and even by them were vulgarly meant only
two forms of art, Painting and Sculpture, the two which as a people we
cared least about—which were regarded even by the more cultivated among
us as little more than branches of domestic ornamentation, a kind of
elegant upholstery. The very words “Fine Arts” called up a notion of
frivolity, of great pains expended on a rather trifling object—on
something which differed from the cheaper and commoner arts of producing
pretty things, mainly by being more difficult, and by giving fops an
opportunity of pluming themselves on caring for it and on being able to
talk about it. This estimate extended in no small degree, though not
altogether, even to poetry; the queen of arts, but, in Great Britain,
hardly included under the name. It cannot exactly be said that poetry
was little thought of; we were proud of our Shakespeare and Milton, and
in one period at least of our history, that of Queen Anne, it was a high
literary distinction to be a poet; but poetry was hardly looked upon in
any serious light, or as having much value except as an amusement or
excitement, the superiority of which over others principally consisted
in being that of a more refined order of minds. Yet the celebrated
saying of Fletcher of Saltoun, “Let who will make the laws of a people
if I write their songs,”[*] might have taught us how great an instrument
for acting on the human mind we were undervaluing. It would be difficult
for anybody to imagine that “Rule Britannia,” for example, or “Scots wha
hae,”[†] had no permanent influence on the higher region of human
character, some of Moore’s songs have done more for Ireland than all
Grattan’s speeches: and songs are far from being the highest or most
impressive form of poetry. On these subjects, the mode of thinking and
feeling of other countries was not only not intelligible, but not
credible, to an average Englishman. To find Art ranking on a complete
equality, in theory at least, with Philosophy, Learning, and Science—as
holding an equally important place among the agents of civilization and
among the elements of the worth of humanity; to find even painting and
sculpture treated as great social powers, and the art of a country as a
feature in its character and condition, little inferior in importance to
either its religion or its government, all this only did not amaze and
puzzle Englishmen, because it was too strange for them to be able to
realize it, or, in truth, to believe it possible: and the radical
difference of feeling on this matter between the British Edition:
current; Page: [253] people and those of France, Germany, and the
Continent generally, is one among the causes of that extraordinary
inability to understand one another, which exists between England and
the rest of Europe, while it does not exist to anything like the same
degree between one nation of Continental Europe and another. It may be
traced to the two influences which have chiefly shaped the British
character since the days of the Stuarts, commercial money-getting
business, and religious Puritanism. Business, demanding the whole of the
faculties, and whether pursued from duty or the love of gain, regarding
as a loss of time whatever does not conduce directly to the end:
Puritanism, which looking upon every feeling of human nature, except
fear and reverence for God, as a snare, if not as partaking of sin,
looked coldly, if not disapprovingly, on the cultivation of the
sentiments. Different causes have produced different effects in the
Continental nations, among whom it is even now observable that virtue
and goodness are generally for the most part an affair of the
sentiments, while with us they are almost exclusively an affair of duty.
Accordingly, the kind of advantage which we have had over many other
countries in point of morals—I am not sure that we are not losing it—has
consisted in greater tenderness of conscience. In this we have had on
the whole a real superiority, though one principally negative; for
conscience is with most men a power chiefly in the way of restraint—a
power which acts rather in staying our hands from any great wickedness,
than by the direction it gives to the general course of our desires and
sentiments. One of the commonest types of character among us is that of
a man all whose ambition is self-regarding, who has no higher purpose in
life than to enrich or raise in the world himself and his family, who
never dreams of making the good of his fellow-creatures or of his
country an habitual object, further than giving away, annually or from
time to time, certain sums in charity; but who has a conscience
sincerely alive to whatever is generally considered wrong, and would
scruple to use any very illegitimate means for attaining his
self-interested objects. While it will often happen in other countries
that men whose feelings and whose active energies point strongly in an
unselfish direction, who have the love of their country, of human
improvement, of human freedom, even of virtue, in great strength, and of
whose thoughts and activity a large share is devoted to disinterested
objects, will yet, in the pursuit of these or of any other objects that
they strongly desire, permit themselves to do wrong things which the
other man, though intrinsically, and taking the whole of his character,
farther removed from what a human being ought to be, could not bring
himself to commit. It is of no use to debate which of these two states
of mind is the best, or rather the least bad. It is quite possible to
cultivate the conscience and the sentiments too. Nothing hinders us from
so training a man that he will not, even for a disinterested purpose,
violate the moral law, and also feeding and encouraging those high
feelings, on which we mainly rely for lifting men above low and sordid
objects, and giving them a higher conception of what constitutes success
in life. If we wish men to practise virtue, it is worth while trying to
make them love virtue, Edition: current; Page: [254] and feel it an
object in itself, and not a tax paid for leave to pursue other objects.
It is worth training them to feel, not only actual wrong or actual
meanness, but the absence of noble aims and endeavours, as not merely
blameable but also degrading: to have a feeling of the miserable
smallness of mere self in the face of this great universe, of the
collective mass of our fellow creatures, in the face of past history and
of the indefinite future—the poorness and insignificance of human life
if it is to be all spent in making things comfortable for ourselves and
our kin, and raising ourselves and them a step or two on the social
ladder. Thus feeling, we learn to respect ourselves only so far as we
feel capable of nobler objects: and if unfortunately those by whom we
are surrounded do not share our aspirations, perhaps disapprove the
conduct to which we are prompted by them—to sustain ourselves by the
ideal sympathy of the great characters in history, or even in fiction,
and by the contemplation of an idealized posterity: shall I add, of
ideal perfection embodied in a Divine Being? Now, of this elevated tone
of mind the great source of inspiration is poetry, and all literature so
far as it is poetical and artistic. We may imbibe exalted feelings from
Plato, or Demosthenes, or Tacitus, but it is in so far as those great
men are not solely philosophers or orators or historians, but poets and
artists. Nor is it only loftiness, only the heroic feelings, that are
bred by poetic cultivation. Its power is as great in calming the soul as
in elevating it—in fostering the milder emotions, as the more exalted.
It brings home to us all those aspects of life which take hold of our
nature on its unselfish side, and lead us to identify our joy and grief
with the good or ill of the system of which we form a part; and all
those solemn or pensive feelings, which, without having any direct
application to conduct, incline us to take life seriously, and
predispose us to the reception of anything which comes before us in the
shape of duty. Who does not feel a better man after a course of Dante,
or of Wordsworth, or, I will add, of Lucretius or the Georgics, or after
brooding over Gray’s Elegy, or Shelley’s “Hymn to Intellectual
Beauty”?[*] I have spoken of poetry, but all the other modes of art
produce similar effects in their degree. The races and nations whose
senses are naturally finer and their sensuous perceptions more exercised
than ours, receive the same kind of impressions from painting and
sculpture: and many of the more delicately organized among ourselves do
the same. All the arts of expression tend to keep alive and in activity
the feelings they express. Do you think that the great Italian painters
would have filled the place they did in the European mind, would
Edition: current; Page: [255] have been universally ranked among the
greatest men of their time, if their productions had done nothing for it
but to serve as the decoration of a public hall or a private salon?
Their Nativities and Crucifixions, their glorious Madonnas and Saints,
were to their susceptible Southern countrymen the great school not only
of devotional, but of all the elevated and all the imaginative feelings.
We colder Northerns may approach to a conception of this function of art
when we listen to an oratorio of Handel, or give ourselves up to the
emotions excited by a Gothic cathedral. Even apart from any specific
emotional expression, the mere contemplation of beauty of a high order
produces in no small degree this elevating effect on the character. The
power of natural scenery addresses itself to the same region of human
nature which corresponds to Art. There are few capable of feeling the
sublimer order of natural beauty, such as your own Highlands and other
mountain regions afford, who are not, at least temporarily, raised by it
above the littlenesses of humanity, and made to feel the puerility of
the petty objects which set men’s interests at variance, contrasted with
the nobler pleasures which all might share. To whatever avocations we
may be called in life, let us never quash these susceptibilities within
us, but carefully seek the opportunities of maintaining them in
exercise. The more prosaic our ordinary duties, the more necessary it is
to keep up the tone of our minds by frequent visits to that higher
region of thought and feeling, in which every work seems dignified in
proportion to the ends for which, and the spirit in which, it is done;
where we learn, while eagerly seizing every opportunity of exercising
higher faculties and performing higher duties, to regard all useful and
honest work as a public function, which may be ennobled by the mode of
performing it—which has not properly any other nobility than what that
gives—and which, if ever so humble, is never mean but when it is meanly
done, and when the motives from which it is done are mean motives. There
is, besides, a natural affinity between goodness and the cultivation of
the Beautiful, when it is real cultivation, and not a mere unguided
instinct. He who has learnt what beauty is, if he be of a virtuous
character, will desire to realize it in his own life—will keep before
himself a type of perfect beauty in human character, to light his
attempts at self-culture. There is a true meaning in the saying of
Goethe, though liable to be misunderstood and perverted, that the
Beautiful is greater than the Good,[*] for it includes the Good, and
adds something to it: it is the Good made perfect, and fitted with all
the collateral perfections which make it a finished and completed thing.
Now, this sense of perfection, which would make us demand from every
creation of man the very utmost that it ought to give, and render us
intolerant of the smallest fault in ourselves or in anything we do, is
one of the results of Art cultivation. No other human productions come
so near to perfection as works of pure Art. In all other things, we are,
and may reasonably be, satisfied if the degree of excellence Edition:
current; Page: [256] is as great as the object immediately in view seems
to us to be worth: but in Art, the perfection is itself the object. If I
were to define Art, I should be inclined to call it, the endeavour after
perfection in execution. If we meet with even a piece of mechanical work
which bears the marks of being done in this spirit—which is done as if
the workman loved it, and tried to make it as good as possible, though
something less good would have answered the purpose for which it was
ostensibly made—we say that he has worked like an artist. Art, when
really cultivated, and not merely practised empirically, maintains, what
it first gave the conception of, an ideal Beauty, to be eternally aimed
at, though surpassing what can be actually attained; and by this idea it
trains us never to be completely satisfied with imperfection in what we
ourselves do and are: to idealize, as much as possible, every work we
do, and most of all, our own characters and lives.

And now, having travelled with you over the whole range of the materials
and training which an University supplies as a preparation for the
higher uses of life, it is almost needless to add any exhortation to you
to profit by the gift. Now is your opportunity for gaining a degree of
insight into subjects larger and far more ennobling than the minutiae of
a business or a profession, and for acquiring a facility of using your
minds on all that concerns the higher interests of man, which you will
carry with you into the occupations of active life, and which will
prevent even the short intervals of time which that may leave you, from
being altogether lost for noble purposes. Having once conquered the
first difficulties, the only ones of which the irksomeness surpasses the
interest; having turned the point beyond which what was once a task
becomes a pleasure; in even the busiest after-life, the higher powers of
your mind will make progress imperceptibly, by the spontaneous exercise
of your thoughts, and by the lessons you will know how to learn from
daily experience. So, at least, it will be if in your early studies you
have fixed your eyes upon the ultimate end from which those studies take
their chief value—that of making you more effective combatants in the
great fight which never ceases to rage between Good and Evil, and more
equal to coping with the ever new problems which the changing course of
human nature and human society present to be resolved. Aims like these
commonly retain the footing which they have once established in the
mind; and their presence in our thoughts keeps our higher faculties in
exercise, and makes us consider the acquirements and powers which we
store up at any time of our lives, as a mental capital, to be freely
expended in helping forward any mode which presents itself of making
mankind in any respect wiser or better, or placing any portion of human
affairs on a more sensible and rational footing than its existing one.
There is not one of us who may not qualify himself so to improve the
average amount of opportunities, as to leave his fellow creatures some
little the better for the use he has known how to make of his intellect.
To make this little greater, let us strive to keep ourselves acquainted
with the best thoughts that are brought forth by the original minds of
the age; that we may know what movements stand most in need of our aid,
and that, as far as Edition: current; Page: [257] depends on us, the
good seed may not fall on a rock, and perish without reaching the soil
in which it might have germinated and flourished.[*] You are to be a
part of the public who are to welcome, encourage, and help forward the
future intellectual benefactors of humanity; and you are, if possible,
to furnish your contingent to the number of those benefactors. Nor let
any one be discouraged by what may seem, in moments of despondency, the
lack of time and of opportunity. Those who know how to employ
opportunities will often find that they can create them: and what we
achieve depends less on the amount of time we possess, than on the use
we make of our time. You and your like are the hope and resource of your
country in the coming generation. All great things which that generation
is destined to do, have to be done by some like you; several will
assuredly be done by persons for whom society has done much less, to
whom it has given far less preparation, than those whom I am now
addressing. I do not attempt to instigate you by the prospect of direct
rewards, either earthly or heavenly; the less we think about being
rewarded in either way, the better for us. But there is one reward which
will not fail you, and which may be called disinterested, because it is
not a consequence, but is inherent in the very fact of deserving it, the
deeper and more varied interest you will feel in life, which will give
it tenfold its value, and a value which will last to the end. All merely
personal objects grow less valuable as we advance in life: this not only
endures but increases.




Chapter I

the object of this essay is to explain as clearly as I am able, the
grounds of an opinion which I have held from the very earliest period
when I had formed any opinions at all on social or political matters,
and which, instead of being weakened or modified, has been constantly
growing stronger by the progress of reflection and the experience of
life: That the principle which regulates the existing social relations
between the two sexes—the legal subordination of one sex to the other—is
wrong in itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human
improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect
equality, admitting no power or privilege on the one side, nor
disability on the other.

The very words necessary to express the task I have undertaken, show how
arduous it is. But it would be a mistake to suppose that the difficulty
of the case must lie in the insufficiency or obscurity of the grounds of
reason on which my conviction rests. The difficulty is that which exists
in all cases in which there is a mass of feeling to be contended
against. So long as an opinion is strongly rooted in the feelings, it
gains rather than loses in stability by having a preponderating weight
of argument against it. For if it were accepted as a result of argument,
the refutation of the argument might shake the solidity of the
conviction; but when it rests solely on feeling, the worse it fares in
argumentative contest, the more persuaded its adherents are that their
feeling must have some deeper ground, which the arguments do not reach;
and while the feeling remains, it is always throwing up fresh
intrenchments of argument to repair any breach made in the old. And
there are so many causes tending to make the feelings connected with
this subject the most intense and most deeply-rooted of all those which
gather round and protect old institutions and customs, that we need not
wonder to find them as yet less undermined and loosened than any of the
rest by the progress of the great modern spiritual and social
transition; nor suppose that the barbarisms to which men cling longest
must be less barbarisms than those which they earlier shake off.

In every respect the burthen is hard on those who attack an almost
universal opinion. They must be very fortunate as well as unusually
capable if they obtain a hearing at all. They have more difficulty in
obtaining a trial, than any other litigants have in getting a verdict.
If they do extort a hearing, they are subjected to a set of logical
requirements totally different from those exacted from other people. In
all other cases, the burthen of proof is supposed to lie with the
affirmative. If a Edition: current; Page: [262] person is charged with a
murder, it rests with those who accuse him to give proof of his guilt,
not with himself to prove his innocence. If there is a difference of
opinion about the reality of any alleged historical event, in which the
feelings of men in general are not much interested, as the Siege of Troy
for example, those who maintain that the event took place are expected
to produce their proofs, before those who take the other side can be
required to say anything; and at no time are these required to do more
than show that the evidence produced by the others is of no value.
Again, in practical matters, the burthen of proof is supposed to be with
those who are against liberty; who contend for any restriction or
prohibition, either any limitation of the general freedom of human
action, or any disqualification or disparity of privilege affecting one
person or kind of persons, as compared with others. The à priori
presumption is in favour of freedom and impartiality. It is held that
there should be no restraint not required by the general good, and that
the law should be no respecter of persons, but should treat all alike,
save where dissimilarity of treatment is required by positive reasons,
either of justice or of policy. But of none of these rules of evidence
will the benefit be allowed to those who maintain the opinion I profess.
It is useless for me to say that those who maintain the doctrine that
men have a right to command and women are under an obligation to obey,
or that men are fit for government and women unfit, are on the
affirmative side of the question, and that they are bound to show
positive evidence for the assertions, or submit to their rejection. It
is equally unavailing for me to say that those who deny to women any
freedom or privilege rightly allowed to men, having the double
presumption against them that they are opposing freedom and recommending
partiality, must be held to the strictest proof of their case, and
unless their success be such as to exclude all doubt, the judgment ought
to go against them. These would be thought good pleas in any common
case; but they will not be thought so in this instance. Before I could
hope to make any impression, I should be expected not only to answer all
that has ever been said by those who take the other side of the
question, but to imagine all that could be said by them—to find them in
reasons, as well as answer all I find: and besides refuting all
arguments for the affirmative, I shall be called upon for invincible
positive arguments to prove a negative. And even if I could do all this,
and leave the opposite party with a host of unanswered arguments against
them, and not a single unrefuted one on their side, I should be thought
to have done little; for a cause supported on the one hand by universal
usage, and on the other by so great a preponderance of popular
sentiment, is supposed to have a presumption in its favour, superior to
any conviction which an appeal to reason has power to produce in any
intellects but those of a high class.

I do not mention these difficulties to complain of them; first, because
it would be useless; they are inseparable from having to contend through
people’s understandings against the hostility of their feelings and
practical tendencies: and truly the understandings of the majority of
mankind would need to be much better cultivated Edition: current; Page:
[263] than has ever yet been the case, before they can be asked to place
such reliance in their own power of estimating arguments, as to give up
practical principles in which they have been born and bred and which are
the basis of much of the existing order of the world, at the first
argumentative attack which they are not capable of logically resisting.
I do not therefore quarrel with them for having too little faith in
argument, but for having too much faith in custom and the general
feeling. It is one of the characteristic prejudices of the reaction of
the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, to accord to the
unreasoning elements in human nature the infallibility which the
eighteenth century is supposed to have ascribed to the reasoning
elements. For the apotheosis of Reason we have substituted that of
Instinct; and we call everything instinct which we find in ourselves and
for which we cannot trace any rational foundation. This idolatry,
infinitely more degrading than the other, and the most pernicious of the
false worships of the present day, of all of which it is now the main
support, will probably hold its ground until it gives way before a sound
psychology, laying bare the real root of much that is bowed down to as
the intention of Nature and the ordinance of God. As regards the present
question, I am willing to accept the unfavourable conditions which the
prejudice assigns to me. I consent that established custom, and the
general feeling, should be deemed conclusive against me, unless that
custom and feeling from age to age can be shown to have owed their
existence to other causes than their soundness, and to have derived
their power from the worse rather than the better parts of human nature.
I am willing that judgment should go against me, unless I can show that
my judge has been tampered with. The concession is not so great as it
might appear, for to prove this, is by far the easiest portion of my
task.

The generality of a practice is in some cases a strong presumption that
it is, or at all events once was, conducive to laudable ends. This is
the case, when the practice was first adopted, or afterwards kept up, as
a means to such ends, and was grounded on experience of the mode in
which they could be most effectually attained. If the authority of men
over women, when first established, had been the result of a
conscientious comparison between different modes of constituting the
government of society; if, after trying various other modes of social
organization—the government of women over men, equality between the two,
and such mixed and divided modes of government as might be invented—it
had been decided, on the testimony of experience, that the mode in which
women are wholly under the rule of men, having no share at all in public
concerns, and each in private being under the legal obligation of
obedience to the man with whom she has associated her destiny, was the
arrangement most conducive to the happiness and well being of both, its
general adoption might then be fairly thought to be some evidence that,
at the time when it was adopted, it was the best, though even then the
considerations which recommended it may, like so many other primeval
social facts of the greatest importance, have subsequently, in the
course of ages, ceased to exist. But the state of the case is in every
respect the reverse of this. In the first Edition: current; Page: [264]
place, the opinion in favour of the present system, which entirely
subordinates the weaker sex to the stronger, rests upon theory only; for
there never has been trial made of any other: so that experience, in the
sense in which it is vulgarly opposed to theory, cannot be pretended to
have pronounced any verdict. And in the second place, the adoption of
this system of inequality never was the result of deliberation, or
forethought, or any social ideas, or any notion whatever of what
conduced to the benefit of humanity or the good order of society. It
arose simply from the fact that from the very earliest twilight of human
society, every woman (owing to the value attached to her by men,
combined with her inferiority in muscular strength) was found in a state
of bondage to some man. Laws and systems of polity always begin by
recognising the relations they find already existing between
individuals. They convert what was a mere physical fact into a legal
right, give it the sanction of society, and principally aim at the
substitution of public and organized means of asserting and protecting
these rights, instead of the irregular and lawless conflict of physical
strength. Those who had already been compelled to obedience became in
this manner legally bound to it. Slavery, from being a mere affair of
force between the master and the slave, became regularized and a matter
of compact among the masters, who, binding themselves to one another for
common protection, guaranteed by their collective strength the private
possessions of each, including his slaves. In early times, the great
majority of the male sex were slaves, as well as the whole of the
female. And many ages elapsed, some of them ages of high cultivation,
before any thinker was bold enough to question the rightfulness, and the
absolute social necessity, either of the one slavery or of the other. By
degrees such thinkers did arise: and (the general progress of society
assisting) the slavery of the male sex has, in all the countries of
Christian Europe at least (though, in one of them, only within the last
few years) been at length abolished, and that of the female sex has been
gradually changed into a milder form of dependence. But this dependence,
as it exists at present, is not an original institution, taking a fresh
start from considerations of justice and social expediency—it is the
primitive state of slavery lasting on, through successive mitigations
and modifications occasioned by the same causes which have softened the
general manners, and brought all human relations more under the control
of justice and the influence of humanity. It has not lost the taint of
its brutal origin. No presumption in its favour, therefore, can be drawn
from the fact of its existence. The only such presumption which it could
be supposed to have, must be grounded on its having lasted till now,
when so many other things which came down from the same odious source
have been done away with. And this, indeed, is what makes it strange to
ordinary ears, to hear it asserted that the inequality of rights between
men and women has no other source than the law of the strongest.

That this statement should have the effect of a paradox, is in some
respects creditable to the progress of civilization, and the improvement
of the moral sentiments of mankind. We now live—that is to say, one or
two of the most Edition: current; Page: [265] advanced nations of the
world now live—in a state in which the law of the strongest seems to be
entirely abandoned as the regulating principle of the world’s affairs:
nobody professes it, and, as regards most of the relations between human
beings, nobody is permitted to practise it. When any one succeeds in
doing so, it is under cover of some pretext which gives him the
semblance of having some general social interest on his side. This being
the ostensible state of things, people flatter themselves that the rule
of mere force is ended; that the law of the strongest cannot be the
reason of existence of anything which has remained in full operation
down to the present time. However any of our present institutions may
have begun, it can only, they think, have been preserved to this period
of advanced civilization by a well-grounded feeling of its adaptation to
human nature, and conduciveness to the general good. They do not
understand the great vitality and durability of institutions which place
right on the side of might; how intensely they are clung to, how the
good as well as the bad propensities and sentiments of those who have
power in their hands, become identified with retaining it, how slowly
these bad institutions give way, one at a time, the weakest first,
beginning with those which are least interwoven with the daily habits of
life, and how very rarely those who have obtained legal power because
they first had physical, have ever lost their hold of it until the
physical power had passed over to the other side. Such shifting of the
physical force not having taken place in the case of women; this fact,
combined with all the peculiar and characteristic features of the
particular case, made it certain from the first that this branch of the
system of right founded on might, though softened in its most atrocious
features at an earlier period than several of the others, would be the
very last to disappear. It was inevitable that this one case of a social
relation grounded on force, would survive through generations of
institutions grounded on equal justice, an almost solitary exception to
the general character of their laws and customs; but which, so long as
it does not proclaim its own origin, and as discussion has not brought
out its true character, is not felt to jar with modern civilization, any
more than domestic slavery among the Greeks jarred with their notion of
themselves as a free people.

The truth is, that people of the present and the last two or three
generations have lost all practical sense of the primitive condition of
humanity; and only the few who have studied history accurately, or have
much frequented the parts of the world occupied by the living
representatives of ages long past, are able to form any mental picture
of what society then was. People are not aware how entirely, in former
ages, the law of superior strength was the rule of life; how publicly
and openly it was avowed, I do not say cynically or shamelessly—for
these words imply a feeling that there was something in it to be ashamed
of, and no such notion could find a place in the faculties of any person
in those ages, except a philosopher or a saint. History gives a cruel
experience of human nature, in shewing how exactly the regard due to the
life, possessions, and entire earthly happiness of any class of persons,
was measured by what they had the power of enforcing; how all Edition:
current; Page: [266] who made any resistance to authorities that had
arms in their hands, however dreadful might be the provocation, had not
only the law of force but all other laws, and all the notions of social
obligation against them; and in the eyes of those whom they resisted,
were not only guilty of crime, but of the worst of all crimes, deserving
the most cruel chastisement which human beings could inflict. The first
small vestige of a feeling of obligation in a superior to acknowledge
any right in inferiors, began when he had been induced, for convenience,
to make some promise to them. Though these promises, even when
sanctioned by the most solemn oaths, were for many ages revoked or
violated on the most trifling provocation or temptation, it is probable
that this, except by persons of still worse than the average morality,
was seldom done without some twinges of conscience. The ancient
republics, being mostly grounded from the first upon some kind of mutual
compact, or at any rate formed by an union of persons not very unequal
in strength, afforded, in consequence, the first instance of a portion
of human relations fenced round, and placed under the dominion of
another law than that of force. And though the original law of force
remained in full operation between them and their slaves, and also
(except so far as limited by express compact) between a commonwealth and
its subjects, or other independent commonwealths; the banishment of that
primitive law even from so narrow a field, commenced the regeneration of
human nature, by giving birth to sentiments of which experience soon
demonstrated the immense value even for material interests, and which
thenceforward only required to be enlarged, not created. Though slaves
were no part of the commonwealth, it was in the free states that slaves
were first felt to have rights as human beings. The Stoics were, I
believe, the first (except so far as the Jewish law constitutes an
exception) who taught as a part of morality that men were bound by moral
obligations to their slaves. No one, after Christianity became
ascendant, could ever again have been a stranger to this belief, in
theory; nor, after the rise of the Catholic Church, was it ever without
persons to stand up for it. Yet to enforce it was the most arduous task
which Christianity ever had to perform. For more than a thousand years
the Church kept up the contest, with hardly any perceptible success. It
was not for want of power over men’s minds. Its power was prodigious. It
could make kings and nobles resign their most valued possessions to
enrich the Church. It could make thousands, in the prime of life and the
height of worldly advantages, shut themselves up in convents to work out
their salvation by poverty, fasting, and prayer. It could send hundreds
of thousands across land and sea, Europe and Asia, to give their lives
for the deliverance of the Holy Sepulchre. It could make kings
relinquish wives who were the object of their passionate attachment,
because the Church declared that they were within the seventh (by our
calculation the fourteenth) degree of relationship. All this it did; but
it could not make men fight less with one another, nor tyrannize less
cruelly over the serfs, and when they were able, over burgesses. It
could not make them renounce either of the applications of force; force
militant, or force triumphant. This they could never Edition: current;
Page: [267] be induced to do until they were themselves in their turn
compelled by superior force. Only by the growing power of kings was an
end put to fighting except between kings, or competitors for kingship;
only by the growth of a wealthy and warlike bourgeoisie in the fortified
towns, and of a plebeian infantry which proved more powerful in the
field than the undisciplined chivalry, was the insolent tyranny of the
nobles over the bourgeoisie and peasantry brought within some bounds. It
was persisted in not only until, but long after, the oppressed had
obtained a power enabling them often to take conspicuous vengeance: and
on the Continent much of it continued to the time of the French
Revolution, though in England the earlier and better organization of the
democratic classes put an end to it sooner, by establishing equal laws
and free national institutions.

If people are mostly so little aware how completely, during the greater
part of the duration of our species, the law of force was the avowed
rule of general conduct, any other being only a special and exceptional
consequence of peculiar ties—and from how very recent a date it is that
the affairs of society in general have been even pretended to be
regulated according to any moral law; as little do people remember or
consider, how institutions and customs which never had any ground but
the law of force, last on into ages and states of general opinion which
never would have permitted their first establishment. Less than forty
years ago, Englishmen might still by law hold human beings in bondage as
saleable property: within the present century they might kidnap them and
carry them off, and work them literally to death. This absolutely
extreme case of the law of force, condemned by those who can tolerate
almost every other form of arbitrary power, and which, of all others,
presents features the most revolting to the feelings of all who look at
it from an impartial position, was the law of civilized and Christian
England within the memory of persons now living: and in one half of
Anglo-Saxon America three or four years ago, not only did slavery exist,
but the slave trade, and the breeding of slaves expressly for it, was a
general practice between slave states. Yet not only was there a greater
strength of sentiment against it, but, in England at least, a less
amount either of feeling or of interest in favour of it, than of any
other of the customary abuses of force: for its motive was the love of
gain, unmixed and undisguised; and those who profited by it were a very
small numerical fraction of the country, while the natural feeling of
all who were not personally interested in it, was unmitigated
abhorrence. So extreme an instance makes it almost superfluous to refer
to any other, but consider the long duration of absolute monarchy. In
England at present it is the almost universal conviction that military
despotism is a case of the law of force, having no other origin or
justification. Yet in all the great nations of Europe except England it
either still exists, or has only just ceased to exist, and has even now
a strong party favourable to it in all ranks of the people, especially
among persons of station and consequence. Such is the power of an
established system, even when far from universal; when not only in
almost every period of history there have been great and well-known
examples of Edition: current; Page: [268] the contrary system, but these
have almost invariably been afforded by the most illustrious and most
prosperous communities. In this case, too, the possessor of the undue
power, the person directly interested in it, is only one person, while
those who are subject to it and suffer from it are literally all the
rest. The yoke is naturally and necessarily humiliating to all persons,
except the one who is on the throne, together with, at most, the one who
expects to succeed to it. How different are these cases from that of the
power of men over women! I am not now prejudging the question of its
justifiableness. I am showing how vastly more permanent it could not but
be, even if not justifiable, than these other dominations which have
nevertheless lasted down to our own time. Whatever gratification of
pride there is in the possession of power, and whatever personal
interest in its exercise, is in this case not confined to a limited
class, but common to the whole male sex. Instead of being, to most of
its supporters, a thing desirable chiefly in the abstract, or, like the
political ends usually contended for by factions, of little private
importance to any but the leaders; it comes home to the person and
hearth of every male head of a family, and of every one who looks
forward to being so. The clodhopper exercises, or is to exercise, his
share of the power equally with the highest nobleman. And the case is
that in which the desire of power is the strongest: for every one who
desires power, desires it most over those who are nearest to him, with
whom his life is passed, with whom he has most concerns in common, and
in whom any independence of his authority is oftenest likely to
interfere with his individual preferences. If, in the other cases
specified, powers manifestly grounded only on force, and having so much
less to support them, are so slowly and with so much difficulty got rid
of, much more must it be so with this, even if it rests on no better
foundation than those. We must consider, too, that the possessors of the
power have facilities in this case, greater than in any other, to
prevent any uprising against it. Every one of the subjects lives under
the very eye, and almost, it may be said, in the hands, of one of the
masters—in closer intimacy with him than with any of her
fellow-subjects; with no means of combining against him, no power of
even locally overmastering him, and, on the other hand, with the
strongest motives for seeking his favour and avoiding to give him
offence. In struggles for political emancipation, everybody knows how
often its champions are bought off by bribes, or daunted by terrors. In
the case of women, each individual of the subject-class is in a chronic
state of bribery and intimidation combined. In setting up the standard
of resistance, a large number of the leaders, and still more of the
followers, must make an almost complete sacrifice of the pleasures or
the alleviations of their own individual lot. If ever any system of
privilege and enforced subjection had its yoke tightly riveted on the
necks of those who are kept down by it, this has. I have not yet shown
that it is a wrong system: but every one who is capable of thinking on
the subject must see that even if it is, it was certain to outlast all
other forms of unjust authority. And when some of the grossest of the
other forms still exist in many civilized countries, and have only
recently been got rid of in others, it would be Edition: current; Page:
[269] strange if that which is so much the deepest-rooted had yet been
perceptibly shaken anywhere. There is more reason to wonder that the
protests and testimonies against it should have been so numerous and so
weighty as they are.

Some will object, that a comparison cannot fairly be made between the
government of the male sex and the forms of unjust power which I have
adduced in illustration of it, since these are arbitrary, and the effect
of mere usurpation, while it on the contrary is natural. But was there
ever any domination which did not appear natural to those who possessed
it? There was a time when the division of mankind into two classes, a
small one of masters and a numerous one of slaves, appeared, even to the
most cultivated minds, to be a natural, and the only natural, condition
of the human race. No less an intellect, and one which contributed no
less to the progress of human thought, than Aristotle, held this opinion
without doubt or misgiving; and rested it on the same premises on which
the same assertion in regard to the dominion of men over women is
usually based, namely that there are different natures among mankind,
free natures, and slave natures; that the Greeks were of a free nature,
the barbarian races of Thracians and Asiatics of a slave nature.[*] But
why need I go back to Aristotle? Did not the slaveowners of the Southern
United States maintain the same doctrine, with all the fanaticism with
which men cling to the theories that justify their passions and
legitimate their personal interests? Did they not call heaven and earth
to witness that the dominion of the white man over the black is natural,
that the black race is by nature incapable of freedom, and marked out
for slavery? some even going so far as to say that the freedom of manual
labourers is an unnatural order of things anywhere. Again, the theorists
of absolute monarchy have always affirmed it to be the only natural form
of government: issuing from the patriarchal, which was the primitive and
spontaneous form of society, framed on the model of the paternal, which
is anterior to society itself, and, as they contend, the most natural
authority of all. Nay, for that matter, the law of force itself, to
those who could not plead any other, has always seemed the most natural
of all grounds for the exercise of authority. Conquering races hold it
to be Nature’s own dictate that the conquered should obey the
conquerors, or, as they euphoniously paraphrase it, that the feebler and
more unwarlike races should submit to the braver and manlier. The
smallest acquaintance with human life in the middle ages, shows how
supremely natural the dominion of the feudal nobility over men of low
condition appeared to the nobility themselves, and how unnatural the
conception seemed, of a person of the inferior class claiming equality
with them, or exercising authority over them. It hardly seemed less so
to the class held in subjection. The emancipated serfs and burgesses,
even in their most vigorous struggles, never made any pretension to a
share of authority; they only demanded more or less of limitation to the
power Edition: current; Page: [270] of tyrannizing over them. So true is
it that unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that everything
which is usual appears natural. The subjection of women to men being a
universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears
unnatural. But how entirely, even in this case, the feeling is dependent
on custom, appears by ample experience. Nothing so much astonishes the
people of distant parts of the world, when they first learn anything
about England, as to be told that it is under a queen: the thing seems
to them so unnatural as to be almost incredible. To Englishmen this does
not seem in the least degree unnatural, because they are used to it; but
they do feel it unnatural that women should be soldiers or members of
Parliament. In the feudal ages, on the contrary, war and politics were
not thought unnatural to women, because not unusual; it seemed natural
that women of the privileged classes should be of manly character,
inferior in nothing but bodily strength to their husbands and fathers.
The independence of women seemed rather less unnatural to the Greeks
than to other ancients, on account of the fabulous Amazons (whom they
believed to be historical), and the partial example afforded by the
Spartan women; who, though no less subordinate by law than in other
Greek states, were more free in fact, and being trained to bodily
exercises in the same manner with men, gave ample proof that they were
not naturally disqualified for them. There can be little doubt that
Spartan experience suggested to Plato, among many other of his
doctrines, that of the social and political equality of the two
sexes.[*]

But, it will be said, the rule of men over women differs from all these
others in not being a rule of force: it is accepted voluntarily; women
make no complaint, and are consenting parties to it. In the first place,
a great number of women do not accept it. Ever since there have been
women able to make their sentiments known by their writings (the only
mode of publicity which society permits to them), an increasing number
of them have recorded protests against their present social condition:
and recently many thousands of them, headed by the most eminent women
known to the public, have petitioned Parliament for their admission to
the Parliamentary Suffrage.[†] The claim of women to be educated as
solidly, and in the same branches of knowledge, as men, is urged with
growing intensity, and with a great prospect of success; while the
demand for their admission into professions and occupations hitherto
closed against them, becomes every year more urgent. Though there are
not in this country, as there are in the United States, periodical
Conventions and an organized party to agitate for the Rights of Women,
there is a numerous and active Society organized and managed by women,
for the Edition: current; Page: [271] more limited object of obtaining
the political franchise. Nor is it only in our own country and in
America that women are beginning to protest, more or less collectively,
against the disabilities under which they labour. France, and Italy, and
Switzerland, and Russia now afford examples of the same thing. How many
more women there are who silently cherish similar aspirations, no one
can possibly know; but there are abundant tokens how many would cherish
them, were they not so strenuously taught to repress them as contrary to
the proprieties of their sex. It must be remembered, also, that no
enslaved class ever asked for complete liberty at once. When Simon de
Montfort called the deputies of the commons to sit for the first time in
Parliament, did any of them dream of demanding that an assembly, elected
by their constituents, should make and destroy ministries, and dictate
to the king in affairs of state? No such thought entered into the
imagination of the most ambitious of them. The nobility had already
these pretensions; the commons pretended to nothing but to be exempt
from arbitrary taxation, and from the gross individual oppression of the
king’s officers. It is a political law of nature that those who are
under any power of ancient origin, never begin by complaining of the
power itself, but only of its oppressive exercise. There is never any
want of women who complain of ill usage by their husbands. There would
be infinitely more, if complaint were not the greatest of all
provocatives to a repetition and increase of the ill usage. It is this
which frustrates all attempts to maintain the power but protect the
woman against its abuses. In no other case (except that of a child) is
the person who has been proved judicially to have suffered an injury,
replaced under the physical power of the culprit who inflicted it.
Accordingly wives, even in the most extreme and protracted cases of
bodily ill usage, hardly ever dare avail themselves of the laws made for
their protection: and if, in a moment of irrepressible indignation, or
by the interference of neighbours, they are induced to do so, their
whole effort afterwards is to disclose as little as they can, and to beg
off their tyrant from his merited chastisement.

All causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that women
should be collectively rebellious to the power of men. They are so far
in a position different from all other subject classes, that their
masters require something more from them than actual service. Men do not
want solely the obedience of women, they want their sentiments. All men,
except the most brutish, desire to have, in the woman most nearly
connected with them, not a forced slave but a willing one, not a slave
merely, but a favourite. They have therefore put everything in practice
to enslave their minds. The masters of all other slaves rely, for
maintaining obedience, on fear; either fear of themselves, or religious
fears. The masters of women wanted more than simple obedience, and they
turned the whole force of education to effect their purpose. All women
are brought up from the very earliest years in the belief that their
ideal of character is the very opposite to that of men; not self-will,
and government by self-control, but submission, and yielding to the
control of others. All the moralities tell them that it is the duty of
women, and all Edition: current; Page: [272] the current
sentimentalities that it is their nature, to live for others; to make
complete abnegation of themselves, and to have no life but in their
affections. And by their affections are meant the only ones they are
allowed to have—those to the men with whom they are connected, or to the
children who constitute an additional and indefeasible tie between them
and a man. When we put together three things—first, the natural
attraction between opposite sexes; secondly, the wife’s entire
dependence on the husband, every privilege or pleasure she has being
either his gift, or depending entirely on his will; and lastly, that the
principal object of human pursuit, consideration, and all objects of
social ambition, can in general be sought or obtained by her only
through him, it would be a miracle if the object of being attractive to
men had not become the polar star of feminine education and formation of
character. And, this great means of influence over the minds of women
having been acquired, an instinct of selfishness made men avail
themselves of it to the utmost as a means of holding women in
subjection, by representing to them meekness, submissiveness, and
resignation of all individual will into the hands of a man, as an
essential part of sexual attractiveness. Can it be doubted that any of
the other yokes which mankind have succeeded in breaking, would have
subsisted till now if the same means had existed, and had been as
sedulously used, to bow down their minds to it? If it had been made the
object of the life of every young plebeian to find personal favour in
the eyes of some patrician, of every young serf with some seigneur; if
domestication with him, and a share of his personal affections, had been
held out as the prize which they all should look out for, the most
gifted and aspiring being able to reckon on the most desirable prizes;
and if, when this prize had been obtained, they had been shut out by a
wall of brass from all interests not centering in him, all feelings and
desires but those which he shared or inculcated; would not serfs and
seigneurs, plebeians and patricians, have been as broadly distinguished
at this day as men and women are? and would not all but a thinker here
and there, have believed the distinction to be a fundamental and
unalterable fact in human nature?

The preceding considerations are amply sufficient to show that custom,
however universal it may be, affords in this case no presumption, and
ought not to create any prejudice, in favour of the arrangements which
place women in social and political subjection to men. But I may go
farther, and maintain that the course of history, and the tendencies of
progressive human society, afford not only no presumption in favour of
this system of inequality of rights, but a strong one against it; and
that, so far as the whole course of human improvement up to this time,
the whole stream of modern tendencies, warrants any inference on the
subject, it is, that this relic of the past is discordant with the
future, and must necessarily disappear.

For, what is the peculiar character of the modern world—the difference
which chiefly distinguishes modern institutions, modern social ideas,
modern life itself, from those of times long past? It is, that human
beings are no longer born to their Edition: current; Page: [273] place
in life, and chained down by an inexorable bond to the place they are
born to, but are free to employ their faculties, and such favourable
chances as offer, to achieve the lot which may appear to them most
desirable. Human society of old was constituted on a very different
principle. All were born to a fixed social position, and were mostly
kept in it by law, or interdicted from any means by which they could
emerge from it. As some men are born white and others black, so some
were born slaves and others freemen and citizens; some were born
patricians, others plebeians; some were born feudal nobles, others
commoners and roturiers. A slave or serf could never make himself free,
nor, except by the will of his master, become so. In most European
countries it was not till towards the close of the middle ages, and as a
consequence of the growth of regal power, that commoners could be
ennobled. Even among nobles, the eldest son was born the exclusive heir
to the paternal possessions, and a long time elapsed before it was fully
established that the father could disinherit him. Among the industrious
classes, only those who were born members of a guild, or were admitted
into it by its members, could lawfully practise their calling within its
local limits; and nobody could practise any calling deemed important, in
any but the legal manner—by processes authoritatively prescribed.
Manufacturers have stood in the pillory for presuming to carry on their
business by new and improved methods. In modern Europe, and most in
those parts of it which have participated most largely in all other
modern improvements, diametrically opposite doctrines now prevail. Law
and government do not undertake to prescribe by whom any social or
industrial operation shall or shall not be conducted, or what modes of
conducting them shall be lawful. These things are left to the unfettered
choice of individuals. Even the laws which required that workmen should
serve an apprenticeship, have in this country been repealed: there being
ample assurance that in all cases in which an apprenticeship is
necessary, its necessity will suffice to enforce it. The old theory was,
that the least possible should be left to the choice of the individual
agent, that all he had to do should, as far as practicable, be laid down
for him by superior wisdom. Left to himself he was sure to go wrong. The
modern conviction, the fruit of a thousand years of experience, is, that
things in which the individual is the person directly interested, never
go right but as they are left to his own discretion, and that any
regulation of them by authority, except to protect the rights of others,
is sure to be mischievous. This conclusion, slowly arrived at, and not
adopted until almost every possible application of the contrary theory
had been made with disastrous result, now (in the industrial department)
prevails universally in the most advanced countries, almost universally
in all that have pretensions to any sort of advancement. It is not that
all processes are supposed to be equally good, or all persons to be
equally qualified for everything; but that freedom of individual choice
is now known to be the only thing which procures the adoption of the
best processes, and throws each operation into the hands of those who
are best qualified for it. Nobody thinks it necessary to make a law that
only a strong-armed man shall Edition: current; Page: [274] be a
blacksmith. Freedom and competition suffice to make blacksmiths
strong-armed men, because the weak-armed can earn more by engaging in
occupations for which they are more fit. In consonance with this
doctrine, it is felt to be an overstepping of the proper bounds of
authority to fix beforehand, on some general presumption, that certain
persons are not fit to do certain things. It is now thoroughly known and
admitted that if some such presumptions exist, no such presumption is
infallible. Even if it be well grounded in a majority of cases, which it
is very likely not to be, there will be a minority of exceptional cases
in which it does not hold: and in those it is both an injustice to the
individuals, and a detriment to society, to place barriers in the way of
their using their faculties for their own benefit and for that of
others. In the cases, on the other hand, in which the unfitness is real,
the ordinary motives of human conduct will on the whole suffice to
prevent the incompetent person from making, or from persisting in, the
attempt.

If this general principle of social and economical science is not true;
if individuals, with such help as they can derive from the opinion of
those who know them, are not better judges than the law and the
government, of their own capacities and vocation; the world cannot too
soon abandon this principle, and return to the old system of regulations
and disabilities. But if the principle is true, we ought to act as if we
believed it, and not to ordain that to be born a girl instead of a boy,
any more than to be born black instead of white, or a commoner instead
of a nobleman, shall decide the person’s position through all life—shall
interdict people from all the more elevated social positions, and from
all, except a few, respectable occupations. Even were we to admit the
utmost that is ever pretended as to the superior fitness of men for all
the functions now reserved to them, the same argument applies which
forbids a legal qualification for members of Parliament. If only once in
a dozen years the conditions of eligibility exclude a fit person, there
is a real loss, while the exclusion of thousands of unfit persons is no
gain; for if the constitution of the electoral body disposes them to
choose unfit persons, there are always plenty of such persons to choose
from. In all things of any difficulty and importance, those who can do
them well are fewer than the need, even with the most unrestricted
latitude of choice: and any limitation of the field of selection
deprives society of some chances of being served by the competent,
without ever saving it from the incompetent.

At present, in the more improved countries, the disabilities of women
are the only case, save one, in which laws and institutions take persons
at their birth, and ordain that they shall never in all their lives be
allowed to compete for certain things. The one exception is that of
royalty. Persons still are born to the throne; no one, not of the
reigning family, can ever occupy it, and no one even of that family can,
by any means but the course of hereditary succession, attain it. All
other dignities and social advantages are open to the whole male sex:
many indeed are only attainable by wealth, but wealth may be striven for
by any one, and is actually obtained by many men of the very humblest
origin. The difficulties, to the Edition: current; Page: [275] majority,
are indeed insuperable without the aid of fortunate accidents; but no
male human being is under any legal ban: neither law nor opinion
superadd artificial obstacles to the natural ones. Royalty, as I have
said, is excepted: but in this case every one feels it to be an
exception—an anomaly in the modern world, in marked opposition to its
customs and principles, and to be justified only by extraordinary
special expediencies, which, though individuals and nations differ in
estimating their weight, unquestionably do in fact exist. But in this
exceptional case, in which a high social function is, for important
reasons, bestowed on birth instead of being put up to competition, all
free nations contrive to adhere in substance to the principle from which
they nominally derogate; for they circumscribe this high function by
conditions avowedly intended to prevent the person to whom it ostensibly
belongs from really performing it; while the person by whom it is
performed, the responsible minister, does obtain the post by a
competition from which no full-grown citizen of the male sex is legally
excluded. The disabilities, therefore, to which women are subject from
the mere fact of their birth, are the solitary examples of the kind in
modern legislation. In no instance except this, which comprehends half
the human race, are the higher social functions closed against any one
by a fatality of birth which no exertions, and no change of
circumstances, can overcome; for even religious disabilities (besides
that in England and in Europe they have practically almost ceased to
exist) do not close any career to the disqualified person in case of
conversion.

The social subordination of women thus stands out an isolated fact in
modern social institutions; a solitary breach of what has become their
fundamental law; a single relic of an old world of thought and practice
exploded in everything else, but retained in the one thing of most
universal interest; as if a gigantic dolmen, or a vast temple of Jupiter
Olympius, occupied the site of St. Paul’s and received daily worship,
while the surrounding Christian churches were only resorted to on fasts
and festivals. This entire discrepancy between one social fact and all
those which accompany it, and the radical opposition between its nature
and the progressive movement which is the boast of the modern world, and
which has successively swept away everything else of an analogous
character, surely affords, to a conscientious observer of human
tendencies, serious matter for reflection. It raises a primâ facie
presumption on the unfavourable side, far outweighing any which custom
and usage could in such circumstances create on the favourable; and
should at least suffice to make this, like the choice between
republicanism and royalty, a balanced question.

The least that can be demanded is, that the question should not be
considered as prejudged by existing fact and existing opinion, but open
to discussion on its merits, as a question of justice and expediency:
the decision on this, as on any of the other social arrangements of
mankind, depending on what an enlightened estimate of tendencies and
consequences may show to be most advantageous to humanity in general,
without distinction of sex. And the discussion must be a real Edition:
current; Page: [276] discussion, descending to foundations, and not
resting satisfied with vague and general assertions. It will not do, for
instance, to assert in general terms, that the experience of mankind has
pronounced in favour of the existing system. Experience cannot possibly
have decided between two courses, so long as there has only been
experience of one. If it be said that the doctrine of the equality of
the sexes rests only on theory, it must be remembered that the contrary
doctrine also has only theory to rest upon. All that is proved in its
favour by direct experience, is that mankind have been able to exist
under it, and to attain the degree of improvement and prosperity which
we now see; but whether that prosperity has been attained sooner, or is
now greater, than it would have been under the other system, experience
does not say. On the other hand, experience does say, that every step in
improvement has been so invariably accompanied by a step made in raising
the social position of women, that historians and philosophers have been
led to adopt their elevation or debasement as on the whole the surest
test and most correct measure of the civilization of a people or an age.
Through all the progressive period of human history, the condition of
women has been approaching nearer to equality with men. This does not of
itself prove that the assimilation must go on to complete equality; but
it assuredly affords some presumption that such is the case.

Neither does it avail anything to say that the nature of the two sexes
adapts them to their present functions and position, and renders these
appropriate to them Standing on the ground of common sense and the
constitution of the human mind, I deny that any one knows, or can know,
the nature of the two sexes, as long as they have only been seen in
their present relation to one another. If men had ever been found in
society without women, or women without men, or if there had been a
society of men and women in which the women were not under the control
of the men, something might have been positively known about the mental
and moral differences which may be inherent in the nature of each. What
is now called the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing—the
result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in
others. It may be asserted without scruple, that no other class of
dependents have had their character so entirely distorted from its
natural proportions by their relation with their masters; for, if
conquered and slave races have been, in some respects, more forcibly
repressed, whatever in them has not been crushed down by an iron heel
has generally been let alone, and if left with any liberty of
development, it has developed itself according to its own laws; but in
the case of women, a hot-house and stove cultivation has always been
carried on of some of the capabilities of their nature, for the benefit
and pleasure of their masters. Then, because certain products of the
general vital force sprout luxuriantly and reach a great development in
this heated atmosphere and under this active nurture and watering, while
other shoots from the same root, which are left outside in the wintry
air, with ice purposely heaped all round them, have a stunted growth,
and some are burnt off with fire and disappear; men, with Edition:
current; Page: [277] that inability to recognise their own work which
distinguishes the unanalytic mind, indolently believe that the tree
grows of itself in the way they have made it grow, and that it would die
if one half of it were not kept in a vapour bath and the other half in
the snow.

Of all difficulties which impede the progress of thought, and the
formation of well-grounded opinions on life and social arrangements, the
greatest is now the unspeakable ignorance and inattention of mankind in
respect to the influences which form human character. Whatever any
portion of the human species now are, or seem to be, such, it is
supposed, they have a natural tendency to be: even when the most
elementary knowledge of the circumstances in which they have been
placed, clearly points out the causes that made them what they are.
Because a cottier deeply in arrears to his landlord is not industrious,
there are people who think that the Irish are naturally idle. Because
constitutions can be overthrown when the authorities appointed to
execute them turn their arms against them, there are people who think
the French incapable of free government. Because the Greeks cheated the
Turks, and the Turks only plundered the Greeks, there are persons who
think that the Turks are naturally more sincere: and because women, as
is often said, care nothing about politics except their personalities,
it is supposed that the general good is naturally less interesting to
women than to men. History, which is now so much better understood than
formerly, teaches another lesson, if only by showing the extraordinary
susceptibility of human nature to external influences, and the extreme
variableness of those of its manifestations which are supposed to be
most universal and uniform. But in history, as in travelling, men
usually see only what they already had in their own minds; and few learn
much from history, who do not bring much with them to its study.

Hence, in regard to that most difficult question, what are the natural
differences between the two sexes—a subject on which it is impossible in
the present state of society to obtain complete and correct
knowledge—while almost everybody dogmatizes upon it, almost all neglect
and make light of the only means by which any partial insight can be
obtained into it. This is, an analytic study of the most important
department of psychology, the laws of the influence of circumstances on
character. For, however great and apparently ineradicable the moral and
intellectual differences between men and women might be, the evidence of
their being natural differences could only be negative. Those only could
be inferred to be natural which could not possibly be artificial—the
residuum, after deducting every characteristic of either sex which can
admit of being explained from education or external circumstances. The
profoundest knowledge of the laws of the formation of character is
indispensable to entitle any one to affirm even that there is any
difference, much more what the difference is, between the two sexes
considered as moral and rational beings; and since no one, as yet, has
that knowledge, (for there is hardly any subject which, in proportion to
its importance, has been so little studied), no one is thus far entitled
to any positive opinion on the Edition: current; Page: [278] subject.
Conjectures are all that can at present be made; conjectures more or
less probable, according as more or less authorized by such knowledge as
we yet have of the laws of psychology, as applied to the formation of
character.

Even the preliminary knowledge, what the differences between the sexes
now are, apart from all question as to how they are made what they are,
is still in the crudest and most incomplete state. Medical practitioners
and physiologists have ascertained, to some extent, the differences in
bodily constitution; and this is an important element to the
psychologist: but hardly any medical practitioner is a psychologist.
Respecting the mental characteristics of women; their observations are
of no more worth than those of common men. It is a subject on which
nothing final can be known, so long as those who alone can really know
it, women themselves, have given but little testimony, and that little,
mostly suborned. It is easy to know stupid women. Stupidity is much the
same all the world over. A stupid person’s notions and feelings may
confidently be inferred from those which prevail in the circle by which
the person is surrounded. Not so with those whose opinions and feelings
are an emanation from their own nature and faculties. It is only a man
here and there who has any tolerable knowledge of the character even of
the women of his own family. I do not mean, of their capabilities; these
nobody knows, not even themselves, because most of them have never been
called out. I mean their actually existing thoughts and feelings. Many a
man thinks he perfectly understands women, because he has had amatory
relations with several, perhaps with many of them. If he is a good
observer, and his experience extends to quality as well as quantity, he
may have learnt something of one narrow department of their nature—an
important department, no doubt. But of all the rest of it, few persons
are generally more ignorant, because there are few from whom it is so
carefully hidden. The most favourable case which a man can generally
have for studying the character of a woman, is that of his own wife: for
the opportunities are greater, and the cases of complete sympathy not so
unspeakably rare. And in fact, this is the source from which any
knowledge worth having on the subject has, I believe, generally come.
But most men have not had the opportunity of studying in this way more
than a single case: accordingly one can, to an almost laughable degree,
infer what a man’s wife is like, from his opinions about women in
general. To make even this one case yield any result, the woman must be
worth knowing, and the man not only a competent judge, but of a
character so sympathetic in itself, and so well adapted to hers, that he
can either read her mind by sympathetic intuition, or has nothing in
himself which makes her shy of disclosing it. Hardly anything, I
believe, can be more rare than this conjunction. It often happens that
there is the most complete unity of feeling and community of interests
as to all external things, yet the one has as little admission into the
internal life of the other as if they were common acquaintance. Even
with true affection, authority on the one side and subordination on the
other prevent perfect confidence. Though nothing may be intentionally
withheld, much is not shown. In the analogous relation Edition: current;
Page: [279] of parent and child, the corresponding phenomenon must have
been in the observation of every one. As between father and son, how
many are the cases in which the father, in spite of real affection on
both sides, obviously to all the world does not know, nor suspect, parts
of the son’s character familiar to his companions and equals. The truth
is, that the position of looking up to another is extremely unpropitious
to complete sincerity and openness with him. The fear of losing ground
in his opinion or in his feelings is so strong, that even in an upright
character, there is an unconscious tendency to show only the best side,
or the side which, though not the best, is that which he most likes to
see: and it may be confidently said that thorough knowledge of one
another hardly ever exists, but between persons who, besides being
intimates, are equals. How much more true, then, must all this be, when
the one is not only under the authority of the other, but has it
inculcated on her as a duty to reckon everything else subordinate to his
comfort and pleasure, and to let him neither see nor feel anything
coming from her, except what is agreeable to him. All these difficulties
stand in the way of a man’s obtaining any thorough knowledge even of the
one woman whom alone, in general, he has sufficient opportunity of
studying. When we further consider that to understand one woman is not
necessarily to understand any other woman; that even if he could study
many women of one rank, or of one country, he would not thereby
understand women of other ranks or countries, and even if he did, they
are still only the women of a single period of history; we may safely
assert that the knowledge which men can acquire of women, even as they
have been and are, without reference to what they might be, is
wretchedly imperfect and superficial, and always will be so, until women
themselves have told all that they have to tell.

And this time has not come; nor will it come otherwise than gradually.
It is but of yesterday that women have either been qualified by literary
accomplishments, or permitted by society, to tell anything to the
general public. As yet very few of them dare tell anything, which men,
on whom their literary success depends, are unwilling to hear. Let us
remember in what manner, up to a very recent time, the expression, even
by a male author, of uncustomary opinions, or what are deemed eccentric
feelings, usually was, and in some degree still is, received: and we may
form some faint conception under what impediments a woman, who is
brought up to think custom and opinion her sovereign rule, attempts to
express in books anything drawn from the depths of her own nature. The
greatest woman who has left writings behind her sufficient to give her
an eminent rank in the literature of her country, thought it necessary
to prefix as a motto to her boldest work, “Un homme peut braver
l’opinion; une femme doit s’y soumettre.”* The greater part of what
women write about women is mere sycophancy to men. In the case of
unmarried women, much of it seems only intended to increase their chance
of a husband. Many, both married and unmarried, overstep the mark, and
inculcate a servility Edition: current; Page: [280] beyond what is
desired or relished by any man, except the very vulgarest. But this is
not so often the case as, even at a quite late period, it still was.
Literary women are becoming more freespoken, and more willing to express
their real sentiments. Unfortunately, in this country especially, they
are themselves such artificial products, that their sentiments are
compounded of a small element of individual observation and
consciousness, and a very large one of acquired associations. This will
be less and less the case, but it will remain true to a great extent, as
long as social institutions do not admit the same free development of
originality in women which is possible to men. When that time comes, and
not before, we shall see, and not merely hear, as much as it is
necessary to know of the nature of women, and the adaptation of other
things to it.

I have dwelt so much on the difficulties which at present obstruct any
real knowledge by men of the true nature of women, because in this as in
so many other things “opinio copiae inter maximas causas inopiae
est;”[*] and there is little chance of reasonable thinking on the
matter, while people flatter themselves that they perfectly understand a
subject of which most men know absolutely nothing, and of which it is at
present impossible that any man, or all men taken together, should have
knowledge which can qualify them to lay down the law to women as to what
is, or is not, their vocation. Happily, no such knowledge is necessary
for any practical purpose connected with the position of women in
relation to society and life. For, according to all the principles
involved in modern society, the question rests with women themselves—to
be decided by their own experience, and by the use of their own
faculties. There are no means of finding what either one person or many
can do, but by trying—and no means by which any one else can discover
for them what it is for their happiness to do or leave undone.

One thing we may be certain of—that what is contrary to women’s nature
to do, they never will be made to do by simply giving their nature free
play. The anxiety of mankind to interfere in behalf of nature, for fear
lest nature should not succeed in effecting its purpose, is an
altogether unnecessary solicitude. What women by nature cannot do, it is
quite superfluous to forbid them from doing. What they can do, but not
so well as the men who are their competitors, competition suffices to
exclude them from; since nobody asks for protective duties and bounties
in favour of women; it is only asked that the present bounties and
protective duties in favour of men should be recalled. If women have a
greater natural inclination for some things than for others, there is no
need of laws or social inculcation to make the majority of them do the
former in preference to the latter. Whatever women’s services are most
wanted for, the free play of competition will hold out the strongest
inducements to them to undertake. And, as the words imply, they are most
wanted for the things for which they are most fit; by the apportionment
of Edition: current; Page: [281] which to them, the collective faculties
of the two sexes can be applied on the whole with the greatest sum of
valuable result.

The general opinion of men is supposed to be, that the natural vocation
of a woman is that of a wife and mother. I say, is supposed to be,
because, judging from acts—from the whole of the present constitution of
society—one might infer that their opinion was the direct contrary. They
might be supposed to think that the alleged natural vocation of women
was of all things the most repugnant to their nature; insomuch that if
they are free to do anything else—if any other means of living, or
occupation of their time and faculties, is open, which has any chance of
appearing desirable to them—there will not be enough of them who will be
willing to accept the condition said to be natural to them. If this is
the real opinion of men in general, it would be well that it should be
spoken out. I should like to hear somebody openly enunciating the
doctrine (it is already implied in much that is written on the
subject)—“It is necessary to society that women should marry and produce
children. They will not do so unless they are compelled. Therefore it is
necessary to compel them.” The merits of the case would then be clearly
defined. It would be exactly that of the slaveholders of South Carolina
and Louisiana. “It is necessary that cotton and sugar should be grown.
White men cannot produce them. Negroes will not, for any wages which we
choose to give. Ergo they must be compelled.” An illustration still
closer to the point is that of impressment. Sailors must absolutely be
had to defend the country. It often happens that they will not
voluntarily enlist. Therefore there must be the power of forcing them.
How often has this logic been used! and, but for one flaw in it, without
doubt it would have been successful up to this day. But it is open to
the retort—First pay the sailors the honest value of their labour. When
you have made it as well worth their while to serve you, as to work for
other employers, you will have no more difficulty than others have in
obtaining their services. To this there is no logical answer except “I
will not:” and as people are now not only ashamed, but are not desirous,
to rob the labourer of his hire,[*] impressment is no longer advocated.
Those who attempt to force women into marriage by closing all other
doors against them, lay themselves open to a similar retort. If they
mean what they say, their opinion must evidently be, that men do not
render the married condition so desirable to women, as to induce them to
accept it for its own recommendations. It is not a sign of one’s
thinking the boon one offers very attractive, when one allows only
Hobson’s choice, “that or none.” And here, I believe, is the clue to the
feelings of those men, who have a real antipathy to the equal freedom of
women. I believe they are afraid, not lest women should be unwilling to
marry, for I do not think that any one in reality has that apprehension,
but lest they should insist that marriage should be on equal conditions;
lest all women of spirit and capacity should prefer doing almost
anything else, not in their own eyes degrading, rather than marry, when
marrying Edition: current; Page: [282] is giving themselves a master,
and a master too of all their earthly possessions. And truly, if this
consequence were necessarily incident to marriage, I think that the
apprehension would be very well founded. I agree in thinking it probable
that few women, capable of anything else, would, unless under an
irresistible entrainement, rendering them for the time insensible to
anything but itself, choose such a lot, when any other means were open
to them of filling a conventionally honourable place in life: and if men
are determined that the law of marriage shall be a law of despotism,
they are quite right, in point of mere policy, in leaving to women only
Hobson’s choice. But, in that case, all that has been done in the modern
world to relax the chain on the minds of women, has been a mistake. They
never should have been allowed to receive a literary education. Women
who read, much more women who write, are, in the existing constitution
of things, a contradiction and a disturbing element: and it was wrong to
bring women up with any acquirements but those of an odalisque, or of a
domestic servant.

Edition: current; Page: [283]


Chapter II

it will be well to commence the detailed discussion of the subject by
the particular branch of it to which the course of our observations has
led us, the conditions which the laws of this and all other countries
annex to the marriage contract. Marriage being the destination appointed
by society for women, the prospect they are brought up to, and the
object which it is intended should be sought by all of them, except
those who are too little attractive to be chosen by any man as his
companion; one might have supposed that everything would have been done
to make this condition as eligible to them as possible, that they might
have no cause to regret being denied the option of any other. Society,
however, both in this, and, at first, in all other cases, has preferred
to attain its object by foul rather than fair means: but this is the
only case in which it has substantially persisted in them even to the
present day. Originally women were taken by force, or regularly sold by
their father to the husband. Until a late period in European history,
the father had the power to dispose of his daughter in marriage at his
own will and pleasure, without any regard to hers. The Church, indeed,
was so far faithful to a better morality as to require a formal “yes”
from the woman at the marriage ceremony; but there was nothing to shew
that the consent was other than compulsory; and it was practically
impossible for the girl to refuse compliance if the father persevered,
except perhaps when she might obtain the protection of religion by a
determined resolution to take monastic vows. After marriage, the man had
anciently (but this was anterior to Christianity) the power of life and
death over his wife. She could invoke no law against him; he was her
sole tribunal and law. For a long time he could repudiate her, but she
had no corresponding power in regard to him. By the old laws of England,
the husband was called the lord of the wife; he was literally regarded
as her sovereign, inasmuch that the murder of a man by his wife was
called treason (petty as distinguished from high treason), and was more
cruelly avenged than was usually the case with high treason, for the
penalty was burning to death. Because these various enormities have
fallen into disuse (for most of them were never formally abolished, or
not until they had long ceased to be practised)[*] men suppose that all
is now as it should be in regard to the marriage Edition: current; Page:
[284] contract; and we are continually told that civilization and
Christianity have restored to the woman her just rights. Meanwhile the
wife is the actual bondservant of her husband: no less so, as far as
legal obligation goes, than slaves commonly so called. She vows a
lifelong obedience to him at the altar, and is held to it all through
her life by law. Casuists may say that the obligation of obedience stops
short of participation in crime, but it certainly extends to everything
else. She can do not act whatever but by his permission, at least tacit.
She can acquire no property but for him: the instant it becomes hers,
even if by inheritance, it becomes ipso facto his. In this respect the
wife’s position under the common law of England is worse than that of
slaves in the laws of many countries: by the Roman law, for example, a
slave might have his peculium, which to a certain extent the law
guaranteed to him for his exclusive use. The higher classes in this
country have given an analogous advantage to their women, through
special contracts setting aside the law, by conditions of pin-money,
&c.: since parental feeling being stronger with fathers than the class
feeling of their own sex, a father generally prefers his own daughter to
a son-in-law who is a stranger to him. By means of settlements, the rich
usually contrive to withdraw the whole or part of the inherited property
of the wife from the absolute control of the husband: but they do not
succeed in keeping it under her own control; the utmost they can do only
prevents the husband from squandering it, at the same time debarring the
rightful owner from its use. The property itself is out of the reach of
both; and as to the income derived from it, the form of settlement most
favourable to the wife (that called “to her separate use”) only
precludes the husband from receiving it instead of her: it must pass
through her hands, but if he takes it from her by personal violence as
soon as she receives it, he can neither be punished, nor compelled to
restitution. This is the amount of the protection which, under the laws
of this country, the most powerful nobleman can give to his own daughter
as respects her husband. In the immense majority of cases there is no
settlement: and the absorption of all rights, all property, as well as
all freedom of action, is complete. The two are called “one person in
law,” for the purpose of inferring that whatever is hers is his, but the
parallel inference is never drawn that whatever is his is hers; the
maxim is not applied against the man, except to make him responsible to
third parties for her acts, as a master is for the acts of his slaves or
of his cattle. I am far from pretending that wives are in general no
better treated than slaves; but no slave is a slave to the same lengths,
and in so full a sense of the word, as a wife is. Hardly any slave,
except one immediately attached to the master’s person, is a slave at
all hours and all minutes; in general he has, like a soldier, his fixed
task, and when it is done, or when he is off duty, he disposes, within
certain limits, of his own time, and has a family life into which the
master rarely intrudes. “Uncle Tom” under his first master had his own
life in his “cabin,”[*] almost as much as any man whose work Edition:
current; Page: [285] takes him away from home, is able to have in his
own family. But it cannot be so with the wife. Above all, a female slave
has (in Christian countries) an admitted right, and is considered under
a moral obligation, to refuse to her master the last familiarity. Not so
the wife: however brutal a tyrant she may unfortunately be chained
to—though she may know that he hates her, though it may be his daily
pleasure to torture her, and though she may feel it impossible not to
loathe him—he can claim from her and enforce the lowest degradation of a
human being, that of being made the instrument of an animal function
contrary to her inclinations. While she is held in this worst
description of slavery as to her own person, what is her position in
regard to the children in whom she and her master have a joint interest?
They are by law his children. He alone has any legal rights over them.
Not one act can she do towards or in relation to them, except by
delegation from him. Even after he is dead she is not their legal
guardian, unless he by will has made her so. He could even send them
away from her, and deprive her of the means of seeing or corresponding
with them, until this power was in some degree restricted by Serjeant
Talfourd’s Act.[*] This is her legal state. And from this state she has
no means of withdrawing herself. If she leaves her husband, she can take
nothing with her, neither her children nor anything which is rightfully
her own. If he chooses, he can compel her to return, by law, or by
physical force; or he may content himself with seizing for his own use
anything which she may earn, or which may be given to her by her
relations. It is only legal separation by a decree of a court of
justice, which entitles her to live apart, without being forced back
into the custody of an exasperated jailer—or which empowers her to apply
any earnings to her own use, without fear that a man whom perhaps she
has not seen for twenty years will pounce upon her some day and carry
all off. This legal separation, until lately,[†] the courts of justice
would only give at an expense which made it inaccessible to any one out
of the higher ranks. Even now it is only given in cases of desertion, or
of the extreme of cruelty; and yet complaints are made every day that it
is granted too easily. Surely, if a woman is denied any lot in life but
that of being the personal body-servant of a despot, and is dependent
for everything upon the chance of finding one who may be disposed to
make a favourite of her instead of merely a drudge, it is a very cruel
aggravation of her fate that she should be allowed to try this chance
only once. The natural sequel and corollary from this state of things
would be, that since her all in life depends upon obtaining a good
master, she should be allowed to change again and again until she finds
one. I am not saying that she ought to be allowed this privilege. That
is a totally different consideration. The question of divorce, in the
sense involving liberty of remarriage, is one into which it is foreign
to my purpose to enter. All I now say is, that to those to whom nothing
but servitude is allowed, the free choice of servitude is the only,
though a Edition: current; Page: [286] most insufficient, alleviation.
Its refusal completes the assimilation of the wife to the slave—and the
slave under not the mildest form of slavery: for in some slave codes the
slave could, under certain circumstances of ill usage, legally compel
the master to sell him. But no amount of ill usage, without adultery
superadded, will in England free a wife from her tormentor.

I have no desire to exaggerate, nor does the case stand in any need of
exaggeration. I have described the wife’s legal position, not her actual
treatment. The laws of most countries are far worse than the people who
execute them, and many of them are only able to remain laws by being
seldom or never carried into effect. If married life were all that it
might be expected to be, looking to the laws alone, society would be a
hell upon earth. Happily there are both feelings and interests which in
many men exclude, and in most, greatly temper, the impulses and
propensities which lead to tyranny; and of those feelings, the tie which
connects a man with his wife affords, in a normal state of things,
incomparably the strongest example. The only tie which at all approaches
to it, that between him and his children, tends, in all save exceptional
cases, to strengthen, instead of conflicting with, the first. Because
this is true; because men in general do not inflict, nor women suffer,
all the misery which could be inflicted and suffered if the full power
of tyranny with which the man is legally invested were acted on; the
defenders of the existing form of the institution think that all its
iniquity is justified, and that any complaint is merely quarrelling with
the evil which is the price paid for every great good. But the
mitigations in practice, which are compatible with maintaining in full
legal force this or any other kind of tyranny, instead of being any
apology for despotism, only serve to prove what power human nature
possesses of reacting against the vilest institutions, and with what
vitality the seeds of good as well as those of evil in human character
diffuse and propagate themselves. Not a word can be said for despotism
in the family which cannot be said for political despotism. Every
absolute king does not sit at his window to enjoy the groans of his
tortured subjects, nor strips them of their last rag and turns them out
to shiver in the road. The despotism of Louis XVI was not the despotism
of Philippe le Bel, or of Nadir Shah, or of Caligula; but it was bad
enough to justify the French Revolution, and to palliate even its
horrors. If an appeal be made to the intense attachments which exist
between wives and their husbands, exactly as much may be said of
domestic slavery. It was quite an ordinary fact in Greece and Rome for
slaves to submit to death by torture rather than betray their masters.
In the proscriptions of the Roman civil wars it was remarked that wives
and slaves were heroically faithful, sons very commonly treacherous. Yet
we know how cruelly many Romans treated their slaves. But in truth these
intense individual feelings nowhere rise to such a luxuriant height as
under the most atrocious institutions. It is part of the irony of life,
that the strongest feelings of devoted gratitude of which human nature
seems to be susceptible, are called forth in human beings towards those
who, having the power entirely to crush their earthly Edition: current;
Page: [287] existence, voluntarily refrain from using that power. How
great a place in most men this sentiment fills, even in religious
devotion, it would be cruel to inquire. We daily see how much their
gratitude to Heaven appears to be stimulated by the contemplation of
fellow-creatures to whom God has not been so merciful as he has to
themselves.

Whether the institution to be defended is slavery, political absolutism,
or the absolutism of the head of a family, we are always expected to
judge of it from its best instances; and we are presented with pictures
of loving exercise of authority on one side, loving submission to it on
the other—superior wisdom ordering all things for the greatest good of
the dependents, and surrounded by their smiles and benedictions. All
this would be very much to the purpose if any one pretended that there
are no such things as good men. Who doubts that there may be great
goodness, and great happiness, and great affection, under the absolute
government of a good man? Meanwhile, laws and institutions require to be
adapted, not to good men, but to bad. Marriage is not an institution
designed for a select few. Men are not required, as a preliminary to the
marriage ceremony, to prove by testimonials that they are fit to be
trusted with the exercise of absolute power. The tie of affection and
obligation to a wife and children is very strong with those whose
general social feelings are strong, and with many who are little
sensible to any other social ties; but there are all degrees of
sensibility and insensibility to it, as there are all grades of goodness
and wickedness in men, down to those whom no ties will bind, and on whom
society has no action but through its ultima ratio, the penalties of the
law. In every grade of this descending scale are men to whom are
committed all the legal powers of a husband. The vilest malefactor has
some wretched woman tied to him, against whom he can commit any atrocity
except killing her, and, if tolerably cautious, can do that without much
danger of the legal penalty. And how many thousands are there among the
lowest classes in every country, who, without being in a legal sense
malefactors in any other respect, because in every other quarter their
aggressions meet with resistance, indulge the utmost habitual excesses
of bodily violence towards the unhappy wife, who alone, at least of
grown persons, can neither repel nor escape from their brutality; and
towards whom the excess of dependence inspires their mean and savage
natures, not with a generous forbearance, and a point of honour to
behave well to one whose lot in life is trusted entirely to their
kindness, but on the contrary with a notion that the law has delivered
her to them as their thing, to be used at their pleasure, and that they
are not expected to practise the consideration towards her which is
required from them towards everybody else. The law, which till lately
left even these atrocious extremes of domestic oppression practically
unpunished, has within these few years made some feeble attempts to
repress them. But its attempts have done little, and cannot be expected
to do much, because it is contrary to reason and experience to suppose
that there can be any real check to brutality, consistent with leaving
the victim still in the power of the executioner. Until a conviction for
Edition: current; Page: [288] personal violence, or at all events a
repetition of it after a first conviction, entitles the woman ipso facto
to a divorce, or at least to a judicial separation, the attempt to
repress these “aggravated assaults”[*] by legal penalties will break
down for want of a prosecutor, or for want of a witness.

When we consider how vast is the number of men, in any great country,
who are little higher than brutes, and that this never prevents them
from being able, through the law of marriage, to obtain a victim, the
breadth and depth of human misery caused in this shape alone by the
abuse of the institution swells to something appalling. Yet these are
only the extreme cases. They are the lowest abysses, but there is a sad
succession of depth after depth before reaching them. In domestic as in
political tyranny, the case of absolute monsters chiefly illustrates the
institution by showing that there is scarcely any horror which may not
occur under it if the despot pleases, and thus setting in a strong light
what must be the terrible frequency of things only a little less
atrocious. Absolute fiends are as rare as angels, perhaps rarer:
ferocious savages, with occasional touches of humanity, are however very
frequent: and in the wide interval which separates these from any worthy
representatives of the human species, how many are the forms and
gradations of animalism and selfishness, often under an outward varnish
of civilization and even cultivation, living at peace with the law,
maintaining a creditable appearance to all who are not under their
power, yet sufficient often to make the lives of all who are so, a
torment and a burthen to them! It would be tiresome to repeat the
commonplaces about the unfitness of men in general for power, which,
after the political discussions of centuries, every one knows by heart,
were it not that hardly any one thinks of applying these maxims to the
case in which above all others they are applicable, that of power, not
placed in the hands of a man here and there, but offered to every adult
male, down to the basest and most ferocious. It is not because a man is
not known to have broken any of the Ten Commandments,[†] of because he
maintains a respectable character in his dealings with those whom he
cannot compel to have intercourse with him, or because he does not fly
out into violent bursts of ill-temper against those who are not obliged
to bear with him, that it is possible to surmise of what sort his
conduct will be in the unrestraint of home. Even the commonest men
reserve the violent, the sulky, the undisguisedly selfish side of their
character for those who have no power to withstand it. The relation of
superiors to dependents is the nursery of these vices of character,
which, wherever else they exist, are an overflowing from that source. A
man who is morose or violent to his equals, is sure to be one who has
lived among inferiors, whom he could frighten or worry into submission.
If the family in its best forms is, as it is often said to be, a school
of sympathy, tenderness, and loving forgetfulness of self, it is still
oftener, as respects its chief, a Edition: current; Page: [289] school
of wilfulness, overbearingness, unbounded self-indulgence, and a
double-dyed and idealized selfishness, of which sacrifice itself is only
a particular form: the care for the wife and children being only care
for them as parts of the man’s own interests and belongings, and their
individual happiness being immolated in every shape to his smallest
preferences. What better is to be looked for under the existing form of
the institution? We know that the bad propensities of human nature are
only kept within bounds when they are allowed no scope for their
indulgence. We know that from impulse and habit, when not from
deliberate purpose, almost every one to whom others yield, goes on
encroaching upon them, until a point is reached at which they are
compelled to resist. Such being the common tendency of human nature; the
almost unlimited power which present social institutions give to the man
over at least one human being—the one with whom he resides, and whom he
has always present—this power seeks out and evokes the latent germs of
selfishness in the remotest corners of his nature—fans its faintest
sparks and smouldering embers—offers to him a license for the indulgence
of those points of his original character which in all other relations
he would have found it necessary to repress and conceal, and the
repression of which would in time have become a second nature. I know
that there is another side to the question. I grant that the wife, if
she cannot effectually resist, can at least retaliate, she, too, can
make the man’s life extremely uncomfortable, and by that power is able
to carry many points which she ought, and many which she ought not, to
prevail in. But this instrument of self-protection—which may be called
the power of the scold, or the shrewish sanction—has the fatal defect,
that it avails most against the least tyrannical superiors, and in
favour of the least deserving dependents. It is the weapon of irritable
and self-willed women; of those who would make the worst use of power if
they themselves had it, and who generally turn this power to a bad use.
The amiable cannot use such an instrument, the highminded disdain it.
And on the other hand, the husbands against whom it is used most
effectively are the gentler and more inoffensive; those who cannot be
induced, even by provocation, to resort to any very harsh exercise of
authority. The wife’s power of being disagreeable generally only
establishes a countertyranny, and makes victims in their turn chiefly of
those husbands who are least inclined to be tyrants.

What is it, then, which really tempers the corrupting effects of the
power, and makes it compatible with such amount of good as we actually
see? Mere feminine blandishments, though of great effect in individual
instances, have very little effect in modifying the general tendencies
of the situation; for their power only lasts while the woman is young
and attractive, often only while her charm is new, and not dimmed by
familiarity; and on many men they have not much influence at any time.
The real mitigating causes are, the personal affection which is the
growth of time, in so far as the man’s nature is susceptible of it, and
the woman’s character sufficiently congenial with his to excite it,
their common interests as regards the Edition: current; Page: [290]
children, and their general community of interest as concerns third
persons (to which however there are very great limitations); the real
importance of the wife to his daily comforts and enjoyments, and the
value he consequently attaches to her on his personal account, which, in
a man capable of feeling for others, lays the foundation of caring for
her on her own; and lastly, the influence naturally acquired over almost
all human beings by those near to their persons (if not actually
disagreeable to them): who, both by their direct entreaties, and by the
insensible contagion of their feelings and dispositions, are often able,
unless counteracted by some equally strong personal influence, to obtain
a degree of command over the conduct of the superior, altogether
excessive and unreasonable. Through these various means, the wife
frequently exercises even too much power over the man; she is able to
affect his conduct in things in which she may not be qualified to
influence it for good—in which her influence may be not only
unenlightened, but employed on the morally wrong side; and in which he
would act better if left to his own prompting. But neither in the
affairs of families nor in those of states is power a compensation for
the loss of freedom. Her power often gives her what she has no right to,
but does not enable her to assert her own rights. A Sultan’s favourite
slave has slaves under her, over whom she tyrannizes; but the desirable
thing would be that she should neither have slaves nor be a slave. By
entirely sinking her own existence in her husband; by having no will (or
persuading him that she has no will) but his, in anything which regards
their joint relation, and by making it the business of her life to work
upon his sentiments, a wife may gratify herself by influencing, and very
probably perverting, his conduct, in those of his external relations
which she has never qualified herself to judge of, or in which she is
herself wholly influenced by some personal or other partiality or
prejudice. Accordingly, as things now are, those who act most kindly to
their wives, are quite as often made worse, as better, by the wife’s
influence, in respect to all interests extending beyond the family. She
is taught that she has no business with things out of that sphere; and
accordingly she seldom has any honest and conscientious opinion on them;
and therefore hardly ever meddles with them for any legitimate purpose,
but generally for an interested one. She neither knows nor cares which
is the right side in politics, but she knows what will bring in money or
invitations, give her husband a title, her son a place, or her daughter
a good marriage.

But how, it will be asked, can any society exist without government? In
a family, as in a state, some one person must be the ultimate ruler. Who
shall decide when married people differ in opinion? Both cannot have
their way, yet a decision one way or the other must be come to.

It is not true that in all voluntary association between two people, one
of them must be absolute master: still less that the law must determine
which of them it shall be. The most frequent case of voluntary
association, next to marriage, is partnership in business: and it is not
found or thought necessary to enact that in Edition: current; Page:
[291] every partnership, one partner shall have entire control over the
concern, and the others shall be bound to obey his orders. No one would
enter into partnership on terms which would subject him to the
responsibilities of a principal, with only the powers and privileges of
a clerk or agent. If the law dealt with other contracts as it does with
marriage, it would ordain that one partner should administer the common
business as if it was his private concern; that the others should have
only delegated powers; and that this one should be designated by some
general presumption of law, for example as being the eldest. The law
never does this: nor does experience show it to be necessary that any
theoretical inequality of power should exist between the partners, or
that the partnership should have any other conditions than what they may
themselves appoint by their articles of agreement. Yet it might seem
that the exclusive power might be conceded with less danger to the
rights and interests of the inferior, in the case of partnership than in
that of marriage, since he is free to cancel the power by withdrawing
from the connexion. The wife has no such power, and even if she had, it
is almost always desirable that she should try all measures before
resorting to it.

It is quite true that things which have to be decided every day, and
cannot adjust themselves gradually, or wait for a compromise, ought to
depend on one will: one person must have their sole control. But it does
not follow that this should always be the same person. The natural
arrangement is a division of powers between the two; each being absolute
in the executive branch of their own department, and any change of
system and principle requiring the consent of both. The division neither
can nor should be pre-established by the law, since it must depend on
individual capacities and suitabilities. If the two persons chose, they
might pre-appoint it by the marriage contract, as pecuniary arrangements
are now often pre-appointed. There would seldom be any difficulty in
deciding such things by mutual consent, unless the marriage was one of
those unhappy ones in which all other things, as well as this, become
subjects of bickering and dispute. The division of rights would
naturally follow the division of duties and functions; and that is
already made by consent, or at all events not by law, but by general
custom, modified and modifiable at the pleasure of the persons
concerned.

The real practical decision of affairs, to whichever may be given the
legal authority, will greatly depend, as it even now does, upon
comparative qualifications. The mere fact that he is usually the eldest,
will in most cases give the preponderance to the man; at least until
they both attain a time of life at which the difference in their years
is of no importance. There will naturally also be a more potential voice
on the side, whichever it is, that brings the means of support.
Inequality from this source does not depend on the law of marriage, but
on the general conditions of human society, as now constituted. The
influence of mental superiority, either general or special, and of
superior decision of character, will necessarily tell for much. It
always does so at present. And this fact shows how little foundation
there is for the apprehension that the powers and responsibilities
Edition: current; Page: [292] of partners in life (as of partners in
business), cannot be satisfactorily apportioned by agreement between
themselves. They always are so apportioned, except in cases in which the
marriage institution is a failure. Things never come to an issue of
downright power on one side, and obedience on the other, except where
the connexion altogether has been a mistake, and it would be a blessing
to both parties to be relieved from it. Some may say that the very thing
by which an amicable settlement of differences becomes possible, is the
power of legal compulsion known to be in reserve; as people submit to an
arbitration because there is a court of law in the background, which
they know that they can be forced to obey. But to make the cases
parallel, we must suppose that the rule of the court of law was, not to
try the cause, but to give judgment always for the same side, suppose
the defendant. If so, the amenability to it would be a motive with the
plaintiff to agree to almost any arbitration, but it would be just the
reverse with the defendant. The despotic power which the law gives to
the husband may be a reason to make the wife assent to any compromise by
which power is practically shared between the two, but it cannot be the
reason why the husband does. That there is always among decently
conducted people a practical compromise, though one of them at least is
under no physical or moral necessity of making it, shows that the
natural motives which lead to a voluntary adjustment of the united life
of two persons in a manner acceptable to both, do on the whole, except
in unfavourable cases, prevail. The matter is certainly not improved by
laying down as an ordinance of law, that the superstructure of free
government shall be raised upon a legal basis of despotism on one side
and subjection on the other, and that every concession which the despot
makes may, at his mere pleasure, and without any warning, be recalled.
Besides that no freedom is worth much when held on so precarious a
tenure, its conditions are not likely to be the most equitable when the
law throws so prodigious a weight into one scale; when the adjustment
rests between two persons one of whom is declared to be entitled to
everything, the other not only entitled to nothing except during the
good pleasure of the first, but under the strongest moral and religious
obligation not to rebel under any excess of oppression.

A pertinacious adversary, pushed to extremities, may say, that husbands
indeed are willing to be reasonable, and to make fair concessions to
their partners without being compelled to it, but that wives are not:
that if allowed any rights of their own, they will acknowledge no rights
at all in any one else, and never will yield in anything, unless they
can be compelled, by the man’s mere authority, to yield in everything.
This would have been said by many persons some generations ago, when
satires on women were in vogue, and men thought it a clever thing to
insult women for being what men made them. But it will be said by no one
now who is worth replying to. It is not the doctrine of the present day
that women are less susceptible of good feeling, and consideration for
those with whom they are united by the strongest ties, than men are. On
the contrary, we are perpetually told that women are better than men, by
those who are totally opposed to treating them as if Edition: current;
Page: [293] they were as good; so that the saying has passed into a
piece of tiresome cant, intended to put a complimentary face upon an
injury, and resembling those celebrations of royal clemency which,
according to Gulliver, the king of Lilliput always prefixed to his most
sanguinary decrees.[*] If women are better than men in anything, it
surely is in individual self-sacrifice for those of their own family.
But I lay little stress on this, so long as they are universally taught
that they are born and created for self-sacrifice. I believe that
equality of rights would abate the exaggerated self-abnegation which is
the present artificial ideal of feminine character, and that a good
woman would not be more self-sacrificing than the best man: but on the
other hand, men would be much more unselfish and self-sacrificing than
at present, because they would no longer be taught to worship their own
will as such a grand thing that it is actually the law for another
rational being. There is nothing which men so easily learn as this
self-worship: all privileged persons, and all privileged classes, have
had it. The more we descend in the scale of humanity, the intenser it
is; and most of all in those who are not, and can never expect to be,
raised above any one except an unfortunate wife and children. The
honourable exceptions are proportionally fewer than in the case of
almost any other human infirmity. Philosophy and religion, instead of
keeping it in check, are generally suborned to defend it; and nothing
controls it but that practical feeling of the equality of human beings,
which is the theory of Christianity, but which Christianity will never
practically teach, while it sanctions institutions grounded on an
arbitrary preference of one human being over another.

There are, no doubt, women, as there are men, whom equality of
consideration will not satisfy, with whom there is no peace while any
will or wish is regarded but their own. Such persons are a proper
subject for the law of divorce. They are only fit to live alone, and no
human beings ought to be compelled to associate their lives with them.
But the legal subordination tends to make such characters among women
more, rather than less, frequent. If the man exerts his whole power, the
woman is of course crushed: but if she is treated with indulgence, and
permitted to assume power, there is no rule to set limits to her
encroachments. The law, not determining her rights, but theoretically
allowing her none at all, practically declares that the measure of what
she has a right to, is what she can contrive to get.

The equality of married persons before the law, is not only the sole
mode in which that particular relation can be made consistent with
justice to both sides, and conducive to the happiness of both, but it is
the only means of rendering the daily life of mankind, in any high
sense, a school of moral cultivation. Though the truth may not be felt
or generally acknowledged for generations to come, the only school of
genuine moral sentiment is society between equals. The moral education
Edition: current; Page: [294] of mankind has hitherto emanated chiefly
from the law of force, and is adapted almost solely to the relations
which force creates. In the less advanced states of society, people
hardly recognise any relation with their equals. To be an equal is to be
an enemy. Society, from its highest place to its lowest, is one long
chain, or rather ladder, where every individual is either above or below
his nearest neighbour, and wherever he does not command he must obey.
Existing moralities, accordingly, are mainly fitted to a relation of
command and obedience. Yet command and obedience are but unfortunate
necessities of human life: society in equality is its normal state.
Already in modern life, and more and more as it progressively improves,
command and obedience become exceptional facts in life, equal
association its general rule. The morality of the first ages rested on
the obligation to submit to power; that of the ages next following, on
the right of the weak to the forbearance and protection of the strong.
How much longer is one form of society and life to content itself with
the morality made for another? We have had the morality of submission,
and the morality of chivalry and generosity; the time is now come for
the morality of justice. Whenever, in former ages, any approach has been
made to society in equality, Justice has asserted its claims as the
foundation of virtue. It was thus in the free republics of antiquity.
But even in the best of these, the equals were limited to the free male
citizens; slaves, women, and the unenfranchised residents were under the
law of force. The joint influence of Roman civilization and of
Christianity obliterated these distinctions, and in theory (if only
partially in practice) declared the claims of the human being, as such,
to be paramount to those of sex, class, or social position. The barriers
which had begun to be levelled were raised again by the northern
conquests; and the whole of modern history consists of the slow process
by which they have since been wearing away. We are entering into an
order of things in which justice will again be the primary virtue;
grounded as before on equal, but now also on sympathetic association,
having its root no longer in the instinct of equals for self-protection,
but in a cultivated sympathy between them; and no one being now left
out, but an equal measure being extended to all. It is no novelty that
mankind do not distinctly foresee their own changes, and that their
sentiments are adapted to past, not to coming ages. To see the futurity
of the species has always been the privilege of the intellectual élite,
or of those who have learnt from them; to have the feelings of that
futurity has been the distinction, and usually the martyrdom, of a still
rarer élite. Institutions, books, education, society, all go on training
human beings for the old, long after the new has come; much more when it
is only coming. But the true virtue of human beings is fitness to live
together as equals; claiming nothing for themselves but what they as
freely concede to every one else; regarding command of any kind as an
exceptional necessity, and in all cases a temporary one; and preferring,
whenever possible, the society of those with whom leading and following
can be alternate and reciprocal. To these virtues, nothing in life as at
present constituted gives cultivation by exercise. The family is a
school of Edition: current; Page: [295] despotism, in which the virtues
of despotism, but also its vices, are largely nourished. Citizenship, in
free countries, is partly a school of society in equality, but
citizenship fills only a small place in modern life, and does not come
near the daily habits or inmost sentiments. The family, justly
constituted, would be the real school of the virtues of freedom. It is
sure to be a sufficient one of everything else. It will always be a
school of obedience for the children, of command for the parents. What
is needed is, that it should be a school of sympathy in equality, of
living together in love, without power on one side or obedience on the
other. This it ought to be between the parents. It would then be an
exercise of those virtues which each requires to fit them for all other
association, and a model to the children of the feelings and conduct
which their temporary training by means of obedience is designed to
render habitual, and therefore natural, to them. The moral training of
mankind will never be adapted to the conditions of the life for which
all other human progress is a preparation, until they practise in the
family the same moral rule which is adapted to the normal constitution
of human society. Any sentiment of freedom which can exist in a man
whose nearest and dearest intimacies are with those of whom he is
absolute master, is not the genuine or Christian love of freedom, but,
what the love of freedom generally was in the ancients and in the middle
ages—an intense feeling of the dignity and importance of his own
personality; making him disdain a yoke for himself, of which he has no
abhorrence whatever in the abstract, but which he is abundantly ready to
impose on others for his own interest or glorification.

I readily admit (and it is the very foundation of my hopes) that numbers
of married people even under the present law, (in the higher classes of
England probably a great majority,) live in the spirit of a just law of
equality. Laws never would be improved, if there were not numerous
persons whose moral sentiments are better than the existing laws. Such
persons ought to support the principles here advocated; of which the
only object is to make all other married couples similar to what these
are now. But persons even of considerable moral worth, unless they are
also thinkers, are very ready to believe that laws or practices, the
evils of which they have not personally experienced, do not produce any
evils, but (if seeming to be generally approved of) probably do good,
and that it is wrong to object to them. It would, however, be a great
mistake in such married people to suppose, because the legal conditions
of the tie which unites them do not occur to their thoughts once in a
twelvemonth, and because they live and feel in all respects as if they
were legally equals, that the same is the case with all other married
couples, wherever the husband is not a notorious ruffian. To suppose
this, would be to show equal ignorance of human nature and of fact. The
less fit a man is for the possession of power—the less likely to be
allowed to exercise it over any person with that person’s voluntary
consent—the more does he hug himself in the consciousness of the power
the law gives him, exact its legal rights to the utmost point which
custom (the custom of men like himself) will tolerate, and take pleasure
in using the Edition: current; Page: [296] power, merely to enliven the
agreeable sense of possessing it. What is more; in the most naturally
brutal and morally uneducated part of the lower classes, the legal
slavery of the woman, and something in the merely physical subjection to
their will as an instrument, causes them to feel a sort of disrespect
and contempt towards their own wife which they do not feel towards any
other woman, or any other human being, with whom they come in contact;
and which makes her seem to them an appropriate subject for any kind of
indignity. Let an acute observer of the signs of feeling, who has the
requisite opportunities, judge for himself whether this is not the case:
and if he finds that it is, let him not wonder at any amount of disgust
and indignation that can be felt against institutions which lead
naturally to this depraved state of the human mind.

We shall be told, perhaps, that religion imposes the duty of obedience;
as every established fact which is too bad to admit of any other
defence, is always presented to us as an injunction of religion. The
Church, it is very true, enjoins it in her formularies,[*] but it would
be difficult to derive any such injunction from Christianity. We are
told that St. Paul said, “Wives, obey your husbands:” but he also said,
“Slaves, obey your masters.”[†] It was not St. Paul’s business, nor was
it consistent with his object, the propagation of Christianity, to
incite any one to rebellion against existing laws. The apostle’s
acceptance of all social institutions as he found them, is no more to be
construed as a disapproval of attempts to improve them at the proper
time, than his declaration, “The powers that be are ordained of God,”[‡]
gives his sanction to military despotism, and to that alone, as the
Christian form of political government, or commands passive obedience to
it. To pretend that Christianity was intended to stereotype existing
forms of government and society, and protect them against change, is to
reduce it to the level of Islamism or of Brahminism. It is precisely
because Christianity has not done this, that it has been the religion of
the progressive portion of mankind, and Islamism, Brahminism, &c., have
been those of the stationary portions; or rather (for there is no such
thing as a really stationary society) of the declining portions. There
have been abundance of people, in all ages of Christianity, who tried to
make it something of the same kind; to convert us into a sort of
Christian Mussulmans, with the Bible for a Koran, prohibiting all
improvement: and great has been their power, and many have had to
sacrifice their lives in resisting them. But they have been resisted,
and the resistance has made us what we are, and will yet make us what we
are to be.

After what has been said respecting the obligation of obedience, it is
almost superfluous to say anything concerning the more special point
included in the Edition: current; Page: [297] general one—a woman’s
right to her own property; for I need not hope that this treatise can
make any impression upon those who need anything to convince them that a
woman’s inheritance or gains ought to be as much her own after marriage
as before. The rule is simple: whatever would be the husband’s or wife’s
if they were not married, should be under their exclusive control during
marriage, which need not interfere with the power to tie up property by
settlement, in order to preserve it for children. Some people are
sentimentally shocked at the idea of a separate interest in money
matters, as inconsistent with the ideal fusion of two lives into one.
For my own part, I am one of the strongest supporters of community of
goods, when resulting from an entire unity of feeling in the owners,
which makes all things common between them. But I have no relish for a
community of goods resting on the doctrine, that what is mine is yours
but what is yours is not mine; and I should prefer to decline entering
into such a compact with any one, though I were myself the person to
profit by it.

This particular injustice and oppression to women, which is, to common
apprehensions, more obvious than all the rest, admits of remedy without
interfering with any other mischiefs: and there can be little doubt that
it will be one of the earliest remedied. Already, in many of the new and
several of the old States of the American Confederation, provisions have
been inserted even in the written Constitutions, securing to women
equality of rights in this respect:[*] and thereby improving materially
the position, in the marriage relation, of those women at least who have
property, by leaving them one instrument of power which they have not
signed away; and preventing also the scandalous abuse of the marriage
institution, which is perpetrated when a man entraps a girl into
marrying him without a settlement, for the sole purpose of getting
possession of her money. When the support of the family depends, not on
property, but on earnings, the common arrangement, by which the man
earns the income and the wife superintends the domestic expenditure,
seems to me in general the most suitable division of labour between the
two persons. If, in addition to the physical suffering of bearing
children, and the whole responsibility of their care and education in
early years, the wife undertakes the careful and economical application
of the husband’s earnings to the general comfort of the family; she
takes not only her fair share, but usually the larger share, of the
bodily and mental exertion required by their joint existence. If she
undertakes any additional portion, it seldom relieves her from this, but
only prevents her from performing it properly. The care which she is
Edition: current; Page: [298] herself disabled from taking of the
children and the household, nobody else takes; those of the children who
do not die, grow up as they best can, and the management of the
household is likely to be so bad, as even in point of economy to be a
great drawback from the value of the wife’s earnings. In an otherwise
just state of things, it is not, therefore, I think, a desirable custom,
that the wife should contribute by her labour to the income of the
family. In an unjust state of things, her doing so may be useful to her,
by making her of more value in the eyes of the man who is legally her
master; but, on the other hand, it enables him still farther to abuse
his power, by forcing her to work, and leaving the support of the family
to her exertions, while he spends most of his time in drinking and
idleness. The power of earning is essential to the dignity of a woman,
if she has not independent property. But if marriage were an equal
contract, not implying the obligation of obedience; if the connexion
were no longer enforced to the oppression of those to whom it is purely
a mischief, but a separation, on just terms (I do not now speak of a
divorce), could be obtained by any woman who was morally entitled to it;
and if she would then find all honourable employments as freely open to
her as to men; it would not be necessary for her protection, that during
marriage she should make this particular use of her faculties. Like a
man when he chooses a profession, so, when a woman marries, it may in
general be understood that she makes choice of the management of a
household, and the bringing up of a family, as the first call upon her
exertions, during as many years of her life as may be required for the
purpose; and that she renounces, not all other objects and occupations,
but all which are not consistent with the requirements of this. The
actual exercise, in a habitual or systematic manner, of outdoor
occupations, or such as cannot be carried on at home, would by this
principle be practically interdicted to the greater number of married
women. But the utmost latitude ought to exist for the adaptation of
general rules to individual suitabilities; and there ought to be nothing
to prevent faculties exceptionally adapted to any other pursuit, from
obeying their vocation notwithstanding marriage: due provision being
made for supplying otherwise any falling-short which might become
inevitable, in her full performance of the ordinary functions of
mistress of a family. These things, if once opinion were rightly
directed on the subject, might with perfect safety be left to be
regulated by opinion, without any interference of law.

Edition: current; Page: [299]


Chapter III

on the other point which is involved in the just equality of women,
their admissibility to all the functions and occupations hitherto
retained as the monopoly of the stronger sex, I should anticipate no
difficulty in convincing any one who has gone with me on the subject of
the equality of women in the family. I believe that their disabilities
elsewhere are only clung to in order to maintain their subordination in
domestic life; because the generality of the male sex cannot yet
tolerate the idea of living with an equal. Were it not for that, I think
that almost every one, in the existing state of opinion in politics and
political economy, would admit the injustice of excluding half the human
race from the greater number of lucrative occupations, and from almost
all high social functions; ordaining from their birth either that they
are not, and cannot by any possibility become, fit for employments which
are legally open to the stupidest and basest of the other sex, or else
that however fit they may be, those employments shall be interdicted to
them, in order to be preserved for the exclusive benefit of males. In
the last two centuries, when (which was seldom the case) any reason
beyond the mere existence of the fact was thought to be required to
justify the disabilities of women, people seldom assigned as a reason
their inferior mental capacity; which, in times when there was a real
trial of personal faculties (from which all women were not excluded) in
the struggles of public life, no one really believed in. The reason
given in those days was not women’s unfitness, but the interest of
society, by which was meant the interest of men: just as the raison
d’état, meaning the convenience of the government, and the support of
existing authority, was deemed a sufficient explanation and excuse for
the most flagitious crimes. In the present day, power holds a smoother
language, and whomsoever it oppresses, always pretends to do so for
their own good: accordingly, when anything is forbidden to women, it is
thought necessary to say, and desirable to believe, that they are
incapable of doing it, and that they depart from their real path of
success and happiness when they aspire to it. But to make this reason
plausible (I do not say valid), those by whom it is urged must be
prepared to carry it to a much greater length than any one ventures to
do in the face of present experience. It is not sufficient to maintain
that women on the average are less gifted than men on the average, with
certain of the higher mental faculties, or that a smaller number of
women than of men are fit for occupations and functions of the highest
intellectual character. It is necessary to Edition: current; Page: [300]
maintain that no women at all are fit for them, and that the most
eminent women are inferior in mental faculties to the most mediocre of
the men on whom those functions at present devolve. For if the
performance of the function is decided either by competition, or by any
mode of choice which secures regard to the public interest, there needs
be no apprehension that any important employments will fall into the
hands of women inferior to average men, or to the average of their male
competitors. The only result would be that there would be fewer women
than men in such employments; a result certain to happen in any case, if
only from the preference always likely to be felt by the majority of
women for the one vocation in which there is nobody to compete with
them. Now, the most determined depreciator of women will not venture to
deny, that when we add the experience of recent times to that of ages
past, women, and not a few merely, but many women, have proved
themselves capable of everything, perhaps without a single exception,
which is done by men, and of doing it successfully and creditably. The
utmost that can be said is, that there are many things which none of
them have succeeded in doing as well as they have been done by some
men—many in which they have not reached the very highest rank. But there
are extremely few, dependent only on mental faculties, in which they
have not attained the rank next to the highest. Is not this enough, and
much more than enough, to make it a tyranny to them, and a detriment to
society, that they should not be allowed to compete with men for the
exercise of these functions? Is it not a mere truism to say, that such
functions are often filled by men far less fit for them than numbers of
women, and who would be beaten by women in any fair field of
competition? What difference does it make that there may be men
somewhere, fully employed about other things, who may be still better
qualified for the things in question than these women? Does not this
take place in all competitions? Is there so great a superfluity of men
fit for high duties, that society can afford to reject the service of
any competent person? Are we so certain of always finding a man made to
our hands for any duty or function of social importance which falls
vacant, that we lose nothing by putting a ban upon one-half of mankind,
and refusing beforehand to make their faculties available, however
distinguished they may be? And even if we could do without them, would
it be consistent with justice to refuse to them their fair share of
honour and distinction, or to deny to them the equal moral right of all
human beings to choose their occupation (short of injury to others)
according to their own preferences, at their own risk? Nor is the
injustice confined to them, it is shared by those who are in a position
to benefit by their services. To ordain that any kind of persons shall
not be physicians, or shall not be advocates, or shall not be members of
parliament, is to injure not them only, but all who employ physicians or
advocates, or elect members of parliament, and who are deprived of the
stimulating effect of greater competition on the exertions of the
competitors, as well as restricted to a narrower range of individual
choice.

It will perhaps be sufficient if I confine myself, in the details of my
argument, to Edition: current; Page: [301] functions of a public nature:
since, if I am successful as to those, it probably will be readily
granted that women should be admissible to all other occupations to
which it is at all material whether they are admitted or not. And here
let me begin by marking out one function, broadly distinguished from all
others, their right to which is entirely independent of any question
which can be raised concerning their faculties. I mean the suffrage,
both parliamentary and municipal. The right to share in the choice of
those who are to exercise a public trust, is altogether a distinct thing
from that of competing for the trust itself. If no one could vote for a
member of parliament who was not fit to be a candidate, the government
would be a narrow oligarchy indeed. To have a voice in choosing those by
whom one is to be governed, is a means of self-protection due to every
one, though he were to remain for ever excluded from the function of
governing: and that women are considered fit to have such a choice, may
be presumed from the fact, that the law already gives it to women in the
most important of all cases to themselves: for the choice of the man who
is to govern a woman to the end of life, is always supposed to be
voluntarily made by herself. In the case of election to public trusts,
it is the business of constitutional law to surround the right of
suffrage with all needful securities and limitations, but whatever
securities are sufficient in the case of the male sex, no others need be
required in the case of women. Under whatever conditions, and within
whatever limits, men are admitted to the suffrage, there is not a shadow
of justification for not admitting women under the same. The majority of
the women of any class are not likely to differ in political opinion
from the majority of the men of the same class, unless the question be
one in which the interests of women, as such, are in some way involved;
and if they are so, women require the suffrage, as their guarantee of
just and equal consideration. This ought to be obvious even to those who
coincide in no other of the doctrines for which I contend. Even if every
woman were a wife, and if every wife ought to be a slave, all the more
would these slaves stand in need of legal protection: and we know what
legal protection the slaves have, where the laws are made by their
masters.

With regard to the fitness of women, not only to participate in
elections, but themselves to hold offices or practise professions
involving important public responsibilities; I have already observed
that this consideration is not essential to the practical question in
dispute: since any woman, who succeeds in an open profession, proves by
that very fact that she is qualified for it. And in the case of public
offices, if the political system of the country is such as to exclude
unfit men, it will equally exclude unfit women: while if it is not,
there is no additional evil in the fact that the unfit persons whom it
admits may be either women or men. As long therefore as it is
acknowledged that even a few women may be fit for these duties, the laws
which shut the door on those exceptions cannot be justified by any
opinion which can be held respecting the capacities of women in general.
But, though this last consideration is not essential, it is far from
being irrelevant. An unprejudiced view of it gives additional strength
to the arguments against the Edition: current; Page: [302] disabilities
of women, and reinforces them by high considerations of practical
utility.

Let us at first make entire abstraction of all psychological
considerations tending to show, that any of the mental differences
supposed to exist between women and men are but the natural effect of
the differences in their education and circumstances, and indicate no
radical difference, far less radical inferiority, of nature. Let us
consider women only as they already are, or as they are known to have
been; and the capacities which they have already practically shown. What
they have done, that at least, if nothing else, it is proved that they
can do. When we consider how sedulously they are all trained away from,
instead of being trained towards, any of the occupations or objects
reserved for men, it is evident that I am taking a very humble ground
for them, when I rest their case on what they have actually achieved.
For, in this case, negative evidence is worth little, while any positive
evidence is conclusive. It cannot be inferred to be impossible that a
woman should be a Homer, or an Aristotle, or a Michael Angelo, or a
Beethoven, because no woman has yet actually produced works comparable
to theirs in any of those lines of excellence. This negative fact at
most leaves the question uncertain, and open to psychological
discussion. But it is quite certain that a woman can be a Queen
Elizabeth, or a Deborah,[*] or a Joan of Arc, since this is not
inference, but fact. Now it is a curious consideration, that the only
things which the existing law excludes women from doing, are the things
which they have proved that they are able to do. There is no law to
prevent a woman from having written all the plays of Shakspeare, or
composed all the operas of Mozart. But Queen Elizabeth or Queen
Victoria, had they not inherited the throne, could not have been
intrusted with the smallest of the political duties, of which the former
showed herself equal to the greatest.

If anything conclusive could be inferred from experience, without
psychological analysis, it would be that the things which women are not
allowed to do are the very ones for which they are peculiarly qualified;
since their vocation for government has made its way, and become
conspicuous, through the very few opportunities which have been given;
while in the lines of distinction which apparently were freely open to
them, they have by no means so eminently distinguished themselves. We
know how small a number of reigning queens history presents, in
comparison with that of kings. Of this smaller number a far larger
proportion have shown talents for rule; though many of them have
occupied the throne in difficult periods. It is remarkable, too, that
they have, in a great number of instances, been distinguished by merits
the most opposite to the imaginary and conventional character of women:
they have been as much remarked for the firmness and vigour of their
rule, as for its intelligence. When, to queens and empresses, we add
regents, and viceroys of provinces, the list of Edition: current; Page:
[303] women who have been eminent rulers of mankind swells to a great
length.* This fact is so undeniable, that some one, long ago, tried to
retort the argument, and turned the admitted truth into an additional
insult, by saying that queens are better than kings, because under kings
women govern, but under queens, men.

It may seem a waste of reasoning to argue against a bad joke; but such
things do affect people’s minds; and I have heard men quote this saying,
with an air as if they thought that there was something in it. At any
rate, it will serve as well as anything else for a starting point in
discussion. I say, then, that it is not true that under kings, women
govern. Such cases are entirely exceptional: and weak kings have quite
as often governed ill through the influence of male favourites, as of
female. When a king is governed by a woman merely through his amatory
propensities, good government is not probable, though even then there
are exceptions. But French history counts two kings who have voluntarily
given the direction of affairs during many years, the one to his mother,
the other to his sister:[*] one of them, Charles VIII, was a mere boy,
but in doing so he followed the intentions of his father Louis XI, the
ablest monarch of his age. The other, Saint Louis, was the best, and one
of the most vigorous rulers, since the time of Charlemagne. Both these
princesses ruled in a manner hardly equalled by any prince among their
cotemporaries. The emperor Charles V, the most politic prince of his
time, who had as great a number of able men in his service as a ruler
ever had, and was one of the least likely of all sovereigns to sacrifice
his interest to personal feelings, made two princesses of his family
successively Governors of the Netherlands, and kept one or other of them
in that post during his whole life, (they were afterwards succeeded by a
third).[†] Both ruled very successfully, and one of them, Margaret of
Austria, was one of the ablest politicians of the age. So much for one
side of the question. Now Edition: current; Page: [304] as to the other.
When it is said that under queens men govern, is the same meaning to be
understood as when kings are said to be governed by women? Is it meant
that queens choose as their instruments of government, the associates of
their personal pleasures? The case is rare even with those who are as
unscrupulous on the latter point as Catherine II: and it is not in these
cases that the good government, alleged to arise from male influence, is
to be found. If it be true, then, that the administration is in the
hands of better men under a queen than under an average king, it must be
that queens have a superior capacity for choosing them; and women must
be better qualified than men both for the position of sovereign, and for
that of chief minister; for the principal business of a prime minister
is not to govern in person, but to find the fittest persons to conduct
every department of public affairs. The more rapid insight into
character, which is one of the admitted points of superiority in women
over men, must certainly make them, with anything like parity of
qualifications in other respects, more apt than men in that choice of
instruments, which is nearly the most important business of every one
who has to do with governing mankind. Even the unprincipled Catherine
de’ Medici could feel the value of a Chancellor de l’Hôpital. But it is
also true that most great queens have been great by their own talents
for government, and have been well served precisely for that reason.
They retained the supreme direction of affairs in their own hands: and
if they listened to good advisers, they gave by that fact the strongest
proof that their judgment fitted them for dealing with the great
questions of government.

Is it reasonable to think that those who are fit for the greater
functions of politics, are incapable of qualifying themselves for the
less? Is there any reason in the nature of things, that the wives and
sisters of princes should, whenever called on, be found as competent as
the princes themselves to their business, but that the wives and sisters
of statesmen, and administrators, and directors of companies, and
managers of public institutions, should be unable to do what is done by
their brothers and husbands? The real reason is plain enough; it is that
princesses, being more raised above the generality of men by their rank
than placed below them by their sex, have never been taught that it was
improper for them to concern themselves with politics, but have been
allowed to feel the liberal interest natural to any cultivated human
being, in the great transactions which took place around them, and in
which they might be called on to take a part. The ladies of reigning
families are the only women who are allowed the same range of interests
and freedom of development as men; and it is precisely in their case
that there is not found to be any inferiority. Exactly where and in
proportion as women’s capacities for government have been tried, in that
proportion have they been found adequate.

This fact is in accordance with the best general conclusions which the
world’s imperfect experience seems as yet to suggest, concerning the
peculiar tendencies and aptitudes characteristic of women, as women have
hitherto been. I do not say, as they will continue to be; for, as I have
already said more than once, I consider it Edition: current; Page: [305]
presumption in any one to pretend to decide what women are or are not,
can or cannot be, by natural constitution. They have always hitherto
been kept, as far as regards spontaneous development, in so unnatural a
state, that their nature cannot but have been greatly distorted and
disguised; and no one can safely pronounce that if women’s nature were
left to choose its direction as freely as men’s, and if no artificial
bent were attempted to be given to it except that required by the
conditions of human society, and given to both sexes alike, there would
be any material difference, or perhaps any difference at all, in the
character and capacities which would unfold themselves. I shall
presently show, that even the least contestable of the differences which
now exist, are such as may very well have been produced merely by
circumstances, without any difference of natural capacity. But, looking
at women as they are known in experience, it may be said of them, with
more truth than belongs to most other generalizations on the subject,
that the general bent of their talents is towards the practical. This
statement is conformable to all the public history of women, in the
present and the past. It is no less borne out by common and daily
experience. Let us consider the special nature of the mental capacities
most characteristic of a woman of talent. They are all of a kind which
fits them for practice, and makes them tend towards it. What is meant by
a woman’s capacity of intuitive perception? It means, a rapid and
correct insight into present fact. It has nothing to do with general
principles. Nobody ever perceived a scientific law of nature by
intuition, nor arrived at a general rule of duty or prudence by it.
These are results of slow and careful collection and comparison of
experience; and neither the men nor the women of intuition usually shine
in this department, unless, indeed, the experience necessary is such as
they can acquire by themselves. For what is called their intuitive
sagacity makes them peculiarly apt in gathering such general truths as
can be collected from their individual means of observation. When,
consequently, they chance to be as well provided as men are with the
results of other people’s experience, by reading and education, (I use
the word chance advisedly, for, in respect to the knowledge that tends
to fit them for the greater concerns of life, the only educated women
are the self-educated) they are better furnished than men in general
with the essential requisites of skilful and successful practice. Men
who have been much taught, are apt to be deficient in the sense of
present fact; they do not see, in the facts which they are called upon
to deal with, what is really there, but what they have been taught to
expect. This is seldom the case with women of any ability. Their
capacity of “intuition” preserves them from it. With equality of
experience and of general faculties, a woman usually sees much more than
a man of what is immediately before her. Now this sensibility to the
present, is the main quality on which the capacity for practice, as
distinguished from theory, depends. To discover general principles,
belongs to the speculative faculty: to discern and discriminate the
particular cases in which they are and are not applicable, constitutes
practical talent: and for this, women as they now are have a peculiar
aptitude. I admit that Edition: current; Page: [306] there can be no
good practice without principles, and that the predominant place which
quickness of observation holds among a woman’s faculties, makes her
particularly apt to build over-hasty generalizations upon her own
observation; though at the same time no less ready in rectifying those
generalizations, as her observation takes a wider range. But the
corrective to this defect, is access to the experience of the human
race; general knowledge—exactly the thing which education can best
supply. A woman’s mistakes are specifically those of a clever
self-educated man, who often sees what men trained in routine do not
see, but falls into errors for want of knowing things which have long
been known. Of course he has acquired much of the pre-existing
knowledge, or he could not have got on at all; but what he knows of it
he has picked up in fragments and at random, as women do.

But this gravitation of women’s minds to the present, to the real, to
actual fact, while in its exclusiveness it is a source of errors, is
also a most useful counteractive of the contrary error. The principal
and most characteristic aberration of speculative minds as such,
consists precisely in the deficiency of this lively perception and
ever-present sense of objective fact. For want of this, they often not
only overlook the contradiction which outward facts oppose to their
theories, but lose sight of the legitimate purpose of speculation
altogether, and let their speculative faculties go astray into regions
not peopled with real beings, animate or inanimate, even idealized, but
with personified shadows created by the illusions of metaphysics or by
the mere entanglement of words, and think these shadows the proper
objects of the highest, the most transcendant, philosophy. Hardly
anything can be of greater value to a man of theory and speculation who
employs himself not in collecting materials of knowledge by observation,
but in working them up by processes of thought into comprehensive truths
of science and laws of conduct, than to carry on his speculations in the
companionship, and under the criticism, of a really superior woman.
There is nothing comparable to it for keeping his thoughts within the
limits of real things, and the actual facts of nature. A woman seldom
runs wild after an abstraction. The habitual direction of her mind to
dealing with things as individuals rather than in groups, and (what is
closely connected with it) her more lively interest in the present
feelings of persons, which makes her consider first of all, in anything
which claims to be applied to practice, in what manner persons will be
affected by it—these two things make her extremely unlikely to put faith
in any speculation which loses sight of individuals, and deals with
things as if they existed for the benefit of some imaginary entity, some
mere creation of the mind, not resolvable into the feelings of living
beings. Women’s thoughts are thus as useful in giving reality to those
of thinking men, as men’s thoughts in giving width and largeness to
those of women. In depth, as distinguished from breadth, I greatly doubt
if even now, women, compared with men, are at any disadvantage.

If the existing mental characteristics of women are thus valuable even
in aid of Edition: current; Page: [307] speculation, they are still more
important, when speculation has done its work, for carrying out the
results of speculation into practice. For the reasons already given,
women are comparatively unlikely to fall into the common error of men,
that of sticking to their rules in a case whose specialities either take
it out of the class to which the rules are applicable, or require a
special adaptation of them. Let us now consider another of the admitted
superiorities of clever women, greater quickness of apprehension. Is not
this pre-eminently a quality which fits a person for practice? In
action, everything continually depends upon deciding promptly. In
speculation, nothing does. A mere thinker can wait, can take time to
consider, can collect additional evidence, he is not obliged to complete
his philosophy at once, lest the opportunity should go by. The power of
drawing the best conclusion possible from insufficient data is not
indeed useless in philosophy; the construction of a provisional
hypothesis consistent with all known facts is often the needful basis
for further inquiry. But this faculty is rather serviceable in
philosophy, than the main qualification for it: and, for the auxiliary
as well as for the main operation, the philosopher can allow himself any
time he pleases. He is in no need of the capacity of doing rapidly what
he does; what he rather needs is patience, to work on slowly until
imperfect lights have become perfect, and a conjecture has ripened into
a theorem. For those, on the contrary, whose business is with the
fugitive and perishable—with individual facts, not kinds of
facts—rapidity of thought is a qualification next only in importance to
the power of thought itself. He who has not his faculties under
immediate command, in the contingencies of action, might as well not
have them at all. He may be fit to criticize, but he is not fit to act.
Now it is in this that women, and the men who are most like women,
confessedly excel. The other sort of man, however pre-eminent may be his
faculties, arrives slowly at complete command of them: rapidity of
judgment and promptitude of judicious action, even in the things he
knows best, are the gradual and late result of strenuous effort grown
into habit.

It will be said, perhaps, that the greater nervous susceptibility of
women is a disqualification for practice, in anything but domestic life,
by rendering them mobile, changeable, too vehemently under the influence
of the moment, incapable of dogged perseverance, unequal and uncertain
in the power of using their faculties. I think that these phrases sum up
the greater part of the objections commonly made to the fitness of women
for the higher class of serious business. Much of all this is the mere
overflow of nervous energy run to waste, and would cease when the energy
was directed to a definite end. Much is also the result of conscious or
unconscious cultivation; as we see by the almost total disappearance of
“hysterics” and fainting fits, since they have gone out of fashion.
Moreover, when people are brought up, like many women of the higher
classes (though less so in our own country than in any other) a kind of
hot-house plants, shielded from the wholesome vicissitudes of air and
temperature, and untrained in any of the occupations and exercises which
give stimulus and development to the circulatory Edition: current; Page:
[308] and muscular system, while their nervous system, especially in its
emotional department, is kept in unnaturally active play; it is no
wonder if those of them who do not die of consumption, grow up with
constitutions liable to derangement from slight causes, both internal
and external, and without stamina to support any task, physical or
mental, requiring continuity of effort. But women brought up to work for
their livelihood show none of these morbid characteristics, unless
indeed they are chained to an excess of sedentary work in confined and
unhealthy rooms. Women who in their early years have shared in the
healthful physical education and bodily freedom of their brothers, and
who obtain a sufficiency of pure air and exercise in after-life, very
rarely have any excessive susceptibility of nerves which can disqualify
them for active pursuits. There is indeed a certain proportion of
persons, in both sexes, in whom an unusual degree of nervous sensibility
is constitutional, and of so marked a character as to be the feature of
their organization which exercises the greatest influence over the whole
character of the vital phenomena. This constitution, like other physical
conformations, is hereditary, and is transmitted to sons as well as
daughters; but it is possible, and probable, that the nervous
temperament (as it is called) is inherited by a greater number of women
than of men. We will assume this as a fact: and let me then ask, are men
of nervous temperament found to be unfit for the duties and pursuits
usually followed by men? If not, why should women of the same
temperament be unfit for them? The peculiarities of the temperament are,
no doubt, within certain limits, an obstacle to success in some
employments, though an aid to it in others. But when the occupation is
suitable to the temperament, and sometimes even when it is unsuitable,
the most brilliant examples of success are continually given by the men
of high nervous sensibility. They are distinguished in their practical
manifestations chiefly by this, that being susceptible of a higher
degree of excitement than those of another physical constitution, their
powers when excited differ more than in the case of other people, from
those shown in their ordinary state: they are raised, as it were, above
themselves, and do things with ease which they are wholly incapable of
at other times. But this lofty excitement is not, except in weak bodily
constitutions, a mere flash, which passes away immediately, leaving no
permanent traces, and incompatible with persistent and steady pursuit of
an object. It is the character of the nervous temperament to be capable
of sustained excitement, holding out through long continued efforts. It
is what is meant by spirit. It is what makes the high-bred racehorse run
without slackening speed till he drops down dead. It is what has enabled
so many delicate women to maintain the most sublime constancy not only
at the stake, but through a long preliminary succession of mental and
bodily tortures. It is evident that people of this temperament are
particularly apt for what may be called the executive department of the
leadership of mankind. They are the material of great orators, great
preachers, impressive diffusers of moral influences. Their constitution
might be deemed less favourable to the qualities required from a
statesman in the cabinet, Edition: current; Page: [309] or from a judge.
It would be so, if the consequence necessarily followed that because
people are excitable they must always be in a state of excitement. But
this is wholly a question of training. Strong feeling is the instrument
and element of strong self-control: but it requires to be cultivated in
that direction. When it is, it forms not the heroes of impulse only, but
those also of self-conquest. History and experience prove that the most
passionate characters are the most fanatically rigid in their feelings
of duty, when their passion has been trained to act in that direction.
The judge who gives a just decision in a case where his feelings are
intensely interested on the other side, derives from that same strength
of feeling the determined sense of the obligation of justice, which
enables him to achieve this victory over himself. The capability of that
lofty enthusiasm which takes the human being out of his every-day
character, reacts upon the daily character itself. His aspirations and
powers when he is in this exceptional state, become the type with which
he compares, and by which he estimates, his sentiments and proceedings
at other times: and his habitual purposes assume a character moulded by
and assimilated to the moments of lofty excitement, although those, from
the physical nature of a human being, can only be transient. Experience
of races, as well as of individuals, does not show those of excitable
temperament to be less fit, on the average, either for speculation or
practice, than the more unexcitable. The French, and the Italians, are
undoubtedly by nature more nervously excitable than the Teutonic races,
and, compared at least with the English, they have a much greater
habitual and daily emotional life: but have they been less great in
science, in public business, in legal and judicial eminence, or in war?
There is abundant evidence that the Greeks were of old, as their
descendants and successors still are, one of the most excitable of the
races of mankind. It is superfluous to ask, what among the achievements
of men they did not excel in. The Romans, probably, as an equally
southern people, had the same original temperament, but the stern
character of their national discipline, like that of the Spartans, made
them an example of the opposite type of national character, the greater
strength of their natural feelings being chiefly apparent in the
intensity which the same original temperament made it possible to give
to the artificial. If these cases exemplify what a naturally excitable
people may be made, the Irish Celts afford one of the aptest examples of
what they are when left to themselves (if those can be said to be left
to themselves who have been for centuries under the indirect influence
of bad government, and the direct training of a Catholic hierarchy and
of a sincere belief in the Catholic religion). The Irish character must
be considered, therefore, as an unfavourable case: yet, whenever the
circumstances of the individual have been at all favourable, what people
have shown greater capacity for the most varied and multifarious
individual eminence? Like the French compared with the English, the
Irish with the Swiss, the Greeks or Italians compared with the German
races, so women compared with men may be found, on the average, to do
the same things with some variety in the particular kind of excellence.
But, that they would do Edition: current; Page: [310] them fully as well
on the whole, if their education and cultivation were adapted to
correcting instead of aggravating the infirmities incident to their
temperament, I see not the smallest reason to doubt.

Supposing it, however, to be true that women’s minds are by nature more
mobile than those of men, less capable of persisting long in the same
continuous effort, more fitted for dividing their faculties among many
things than for travelling in any one path to the highest point which
can be reached by it: this may be true of women as they now are (though
not without great and numerous exceptions), and may account for their
having remained behind the highest order of men in precisely the things
in which this absorption of the whole mind in one set of ideas and
occupations may seem to be most requisite. Still, this difference is one
which can only affect the kind of excellence, not the excellence itself,
or its practical worth, and it remains to be shown whether this
exclusive working of a part of the mind, this absorption of the whole
thinking faculty in a single subject, and concentration of it on a
single work, is the normal and healthful condition of the human
faculties, even for speculative uses. I believe that what is gained in
special development by this concentration, is lost in the capacity of
the mind for the other purposes of life; and even in abstract thought,
it is my decided opinion that the mind does more by frequently returning
to a difficult problem, than by sticking to it without interruption. For
the purposes, at all events, of practice, from its highest to its
humblest departments, the capacity of passing promptly from one subject
of consideration to another, without letting the active spring of the
intellect run down between the two, is a power far more valuable; and
this power women pre-eminently possess, by virtue of the very mobility
of which they are accused. They perhaps have it from nature, but they
certainly have it by training and education; for nearly the whole of the
occupations of women consist in the management of small but
multitudinous details, on each of which the mind cannot dwell even for a
minute, but must pass on to other things, and if anything requires
longer thought, must steal time at odd moments for thinking of it. The
capacity indeed which women show for doing their thinking in
circumstances and at times which almost any man would make an excuse to
himself for not attempting it, has often been noticed: and a woman’s
mind, though it may be occupied only with small things, can hardly ever
permit itself to be vacant, as a man’s so often is when not engaged in
what he chooses to consider the business of his life. The business of a
woman’s ordinary life is things in general, and can as little cease to
go on as the world to go round.

But (it is said) there is anatomical evidence of the superior mental
capacity of men compared with women: they have a larger brain. I reply,
that in the first place the fact itself is doubtful. It is by no means
established that the brain of a woman is smaller than that of a man. If
it is inferred merely because a woman’s bodily frame generally is of
less dimensions than a man’s, this criterion would lead to strange
consequences. A tall and large-boned man must on this showing be
wonderfully Edition: current; Page: [311] superior in intelligence to a
small man, and an elephant or a whale must prodigiously excel mankind.
The size of the brain in human beings, anatomists say, varies much less
than the size of the body, or even of the head, and the one cannot be at
all inferred from the other. It is certain that some women have as large
a brain as any man. It is within my knowledge that a man who had weighed
many human brains, said that the heaviest he knew of, heavier even than
Cuvier’s (the heaviest previously recorded,) was that of a woman.[*]
Next, I must observe that the precise relation which exists between the
brain and the intellectual powers is not yet well understood, but is a
subject of great dispute. That there is a very close relation we cannot
doubt. The brain is certainly the material organ of thought and feeling;
and (making abstraction of the great unsettled controversy respecting
the appropriation of different parts of the brain to different mental
faculties) I admit that it would be an anomaly, and an exception to all
we know of the general laws of life and organization, if the size of the
organ were wholly indifferent to the function; if no accession of power
were derived from the greater magnitude of the instrument. But the
exception and the anomaly would be fully as great if the organ exercised
influence by its magnitude only. In all the more delicate operations of
nature—of which those of the animated creation are the most delicate,
and those of the nervous system by far the most delicate of
these—differences in the effect depend as much on differences of quality
in the physical agents, as on their quantity; and if the quality of an
instrument is to be tested by the nicety and delicacy of the work it can
do, the indications point to a greater average fineness of quality in
the brain and nervous system of women than of men. Dismissing abstract
difference of quality, a thing difficult to verify, the efficiency of an
organ is known to depend not solely on its size but on its activity; and
of this we have an approximate measure in the energy with which the
blood circulates through it, both the stimulus and the reparative force
being mainly dependent on the circulation. It would not be surprising—it
is indeed an hypothesis which accords well with the differences actually
observed between the mental operations of the two sexes—if men on the
average should have the advantage in the size of the brain, and women in
activity of cerebral circulation. The results which conjecture, founded
on analogy, would lead us to expect from this difference of
organization, would correspond to some of those which we most commonly
see. In the first place, the mental operations of men might be expected
to be slower. They would neither be so prompt as women in thinking, nor
so quick to feel. Large bodies take more time to get into full action.
On the other hand, when once got thoroughly into play, men’s brain would
bear more work. It would be more persistent in the line first taken; it
would have more difficulty in changing from one mode of action to
another, but, in the one thing it was doing, it could go on longer
without loss of Edition: current; Page: [312] power or sense of fatigue.
And do we not find that the things in which men most excel women are
those which require most plodding and long hammering at a single
thought, while women do best what must be done rapidly? A woman’s brain
is sooner fatigued, sooner exhausted; but given the degree of
exhaustion, we should expect to find that it would recover itself
sooner. I repeat that this speculation is entirely hypothetical; it
pretends to no more than to suggest a line of enquiry. I have before
repudiated the notion of its being yet certainly known that there is any
natural difference at all in the average strength or direction of the
mental capacities of the two sexes, much less what that difference is.
Nor is it possible that this should be known, so long as the
psychological laws of the formation of character have been so little
studied, even in a general way, and in the particular case never
scientifically applied at all; so long as the most obvious external
causes of difference of character are habitually disregarded—left
unnoticed by the observer, and looked down upon with a kind of
supericilious contempt by the prevalent schools both of natural history
and of mental philosophy: who, whether they look for the source of what
mainly distinguishes human beings from one another, in the world of
matter or in that of spirit, agree in running down those who prefer to
explain these differences by the different relations of human beings to
society and life.

To so ridiculous an extent are the notions formed of the nature of
women, mere empirical generalizations, framed, without philosophy or
analysis, upon the first instances which present themselves, that the
popular idea of it is different in different countries, according as the
opinions and social circumstances of the country have given to the women
living in it any speciality of development or non-development. An
Oriental thinks that women are by nature peculiarly voluptuous; see the
violent abuse of them on this ground in Hindoo writings. An Englishman
usually thinks that they are by nature cold. The sayings about women’s
fickleness are mostly of French origin; from the famous distich of
Francis I,[*] upward and downward. In England it is a common remark, how
much more constant women are than men. Inconstancy has been longer
reckoned discreditable to a woman, in England than in France; and
Englishwomen are besides, in their inmost nature, much more subdued to
opinion. It may be remarked by the way, that Englishmen are in
peculiarly unfavourable circumstances for attempting to judge what is or
is not natural, not merely to women, but to men, or to human beings
altogether, at least if they have only English experience Edition:
current; Page: [313] to go upon: because there is no place where human
nature shows so little of its original lineaments. Both in a good and a
bad sense, the English are farther from a state of nature than any other
modern people. They are, more than any other people, a product of
civilization and discipline. England is the country in which social
discipline has most succeeded, not so much in conquering, as in
suppressing, whatever is liable to conflict with it. The English, more
than any other people, not only act but feel according to rule. In other
countries, the taught opinion, or the requirement of society, may be the
stronger power, but the promptings of the individual nature are always
visible under it, and often resisting it: rule may be stronger than
nature, but nature is still there. In England, rule has to a great
degree substituted itself for nature. The greater part of life is
carried on, not by following inclination under the control of rule, but
by having no inclination but that of following a rule. Now this has its
good side doubtless, though it has also a wretchedly bad one; but it
must render an Englishman peculiarly ill-qualified to pass a judgment on
the original tendencies of human nature from his own experience. The
errors to which observers elsewhere are liable on the subject, are of a
different character. An Englishman is ignorant respecting human nature,
a Frenchman is prejudiced. An Englishman’s errors are negative, a
Frenchman’s positive. An Englishman fancies that things do not exist,
because he never sees them; a Frenchman thinks they must always and
necessarily exist, because he does see them. An Englishman does not know
nature, because he has had no opportunity of observing it; a Frenchman
generally knows a great deal of it, but often mistakes it, because he
has only seen it sophisticated and distorted. For the artificial state
superinduced by society disguises the natural tendencies of the thing
which is the subject of observation, in two different ways: by
extinguishing the nature, or by transforming it. In the one case there
is but a starved residuum of nature remaining to be studied; in the
other case there is much, but it may have expanded in any direction
rather than that in which it would spontaneously grow.

I have said that it cannot now be known how much of the existing mental
differences between men and women is natural, and how much artificial;
whether there are any natural differences at all; or, supposing all
artificial causes of difference to be withdrawn, what natural character
would be revealed. I am not about to attempt what I have pronounced
impossible, but doubt does not forbid conjecture, and where certainty is
unattainable, there may yet be the means of arriving at some degree of
probability. The first point, the origin of the differences actually
observed, is the one most accessible to speculation, and I shall attempt
to approach it, by the only path by which it can be reached; by tracing
the mental consequences of external influences. We cannot isolate a
human being from the circumstances of his condition, so as to ascertain
experimentally what he would have been by nature; but we can consider
what he is, and what his circumstances have been, and whether the one
would have been capable of producing the other.

Let us take, then, the only marked case which observation affords, of
apparent Edition: current; Page: [314] inferiority of women to men, if
we except the merely physical one of bodily strength. No production in
philosophy, science, or art, entitled to the first rank, has been the
work of a woman. Is there any mode of accounting for this, without
supposing that women are naturally incapable of producing them?

In the first place, we may fairly question whether experience has
afforded sufficient grounds for an induction. It is scarcely three
generations since women, saving very rare exceptions, have begun to try
their capacity in philosophy, science, or art. It is only in the present
generation that their attempts have been at all numerous; and they are
even now extremely few, everywhere but in England and France. It is a
relevant question, whether a mind possessing the requisites of
first-rate eminence in speculation or creative art could have been
expected, on the mere calculation of chances, to turn up during that
lapse of time, among the women whose tastes and personal position
admitted of their devoting themselves to these pursuits. In all things
which there has yet been time for—in all but the very highest grades in
the scale of excellence, especially in the department in which they have
been longest engaged, literature (both prose and poetry)—women have done
quite as much, have obtained fully as high prizes and as many of them,
as could be expected from the length of time and the number of
competitors. If we go back to the earlier period when very few women
made the attempt, yet some of those few made it with distinguished
success. The Greeks always accounted Sappho among their great poets, and
we may well suppose that Myrtis, said to have been the teacher of
Pindar, and Corinna, who five times bore away from him the prize of
poetry, must at least have had sufficient merit to admit of being
compared with that great name. Aspasia did not leave any philosophical
writings; but it is an admitted fact that Socrates resorted to her for
instruction, and avowed himself to have obtained it.

If we consider the works of women in modern times, and contrast them
with those of men, either in the literary or the artistic department,
such inferiority as may be observed resolves itself essentially into one
thing: but that is a most material one; deficiency of originality. Not
total deficiency; for every production of mind which is of any
substantive value, has an originality of its own—is a conception of the
mind itself, not a copy of something else. Thoughts original, in the
sense of being unborrowed—of being derived from the thinker’s own
observations or intellectual processes—are abundant in the writings of
women. But they have not yet produced any of those great and luminous
new ideas which form an era in thought, nor those fundamentally new
conceptions in art, which open a vista of possible effects not before
thought of, and found a new school. Their compositions are mostly
grounded on the existing fund of thought, and their creations do not
deviate widely from existing types. This is the sort of inferiority
which their works manifest: for in point of execution, in the detailed
application of thought, and the perfection of style, there is no
inferiority. Our best novelists in point of composition, and of the
management of detail, have mostly been women, Edition: current; Page:
[315] and there is not in all modern literature a more eloquent vehicle
of thought than the style of Madame de Staël, nor, as a specimen of
purely artistic excellence, anything superior to the prose of Madame
Sand, whose style acts upon the nervous system like a symphony of Haydn
or Mozart. High originality of conception is, as I have said, what is
chiefly wanting. And now to examine if there is any manner in which this
deficiency can be accounted for.

Let us remember, then, so far as regards mere thought, that during all
that period in the world’s existence, and in the progress of
cultivation, in which great and fruitful new truths could be arrived at
by mere force of genius, with little previous study and accumulation of
knowledge—during all that time women did not concern themselves with
speculation at all. From the days of Hypatia to those of the
Reformation, the illustrious Heloisa is almost the only woman to whom
any such achievement might have been possible, and we know not how great
a capacity of speculation in her may have been lost to mankind by the
misfortunes of her life. Never since any considerable number of women
have began to cultivate serious thought, has originality been possible
on easy terms. Nearly all the thoughts which can be reached by mere
strength of original faculties, have long since been arrived at: and
originality, in any high sense of the word, is now scarcely ever
attained but by minds which have undergone elaborate discipline, and are
deeply versed in the results of previous thinking. It is Mr. Maurice, I
think, who has remarked on the present age, that its most original
thinkers are those who have known most thoroughly what had been thought
by their predecessors,[*] and this will always henceforth be the case.
Every fresh stone in the edifice has now to be placed on the top of so
many others, that a long process of climbing, and of carrying up
materials, has to be gone through by whoever aspires to take a share in
the present stage of the work. How many women are there who have gone
through any such process? Mrs. Somerville, alone perhaps of women, knows
as much of mathematics as is now needful for making any considerable
mathematical discovery: is it any proof of inferiority in women, that
she has not happened to be one of the two or three persons who in her
lifetime have associated their names with some striking advancement of
the science? Two women, since political economy has been made a science,
have known enough of it to write usefully on the subject:[†] of how many
of the innumerable men who have written on it during the same time, is
it possible with truth to say more? If no woman has hitherto been a
great historian, what woman has had the necessary erudition? If no woman
is a great philologist, what woman has studied Sanscrit and Slavonic,
the Gothic of Ulphila and the Persic of the Zendavesta? Even in
practical matters we all know Edition: current; Page: [316] what is the
value of the originality of untaught geniuses. It means, inventing over
again in its rudimentary form something already invented and improved
upon by many successive inventors. When women have had the preparation
which all men now require to be eminently original, it will be time
enough to begin judging by experience of their capacity for originality.

It no doubt often happens that a person, who has not widely and
accurately studied the thoughts of others on a subject, has by natural
sagacity a happy intuition, which he can suggest, but cannot prove,
which yet when matured may be an important addition to knowledge: but
even then, no justice can be done to it until some other person, who
does possess the previous acquirements, takes it in hand, tests it,
gives it a scientific or practical form, and fits it into its place
among the existing truths of philosophy or science. Is it supposed that
such felicitous thoughts do not occur to women? They occur by hundreds
to every woman of intellect. But they are mostly lost, for want of a
husband or friend who has the other knowledge which can enable him to
estimate them properly and bring them before the world: and even when
they are brought before it, they generally appear as his ideas, not
their real author’s. Who can tell how many of the most original thoughts
put forth by male writers, belong to a woman by suggestion, to
themselves only by verifying and working out? If I may judge by my own
case, a very large proportion indeed.

If we turn from pure speculation to literature in the narrow sense of
the term, and the fine arts, there is a very obvious reason why women’s
literature is, in its general conception and in its main features, an
imitation of men’s. Why is the Roman literature, as critics proclaim to
satiety, not original, but an imitation of the Greek? Simply because the
Greeks came first. If women lived in a different country from men, and
had never read any of their writings, they would have had a literature
of their own. As it is, they have not created one, because they found a
highly advanced literature already created. If there had been no
suspension of the knowledge of antiquity, or if the Renaissance had
occurred before the Gothic cathedrals were built, they never would have
been built. We see that, in France and Italy, imitation of the ancient
literature stopped the original development even after it had commenced.
All women who write are pupils of the great male writers. A painter’s
early pictures, even if he be a Raffaelle, are undistinguishable in
style from those of his master. Even a Mozart does not display his
powerful originality in his earliest pieces. What years are to a gifted
individual, generations are to a mass. If women’s literature is destined
to have a different collective character from that of men, depending on
any difference of natural tendencies, much longer time is necessary than
has yet elapsed, before it can emancipate itself from the influence of
accepted models, and guide itself by its own impulses. But if, as I
believe, there will not prove to be any natural tendencies common to
women, and distinguishing their genius from that of men, yet every
individual writer among them has her individual tendencies, which at
present are still subdued by the influence of Edition: current; Page:
[317] precedent and example: and it will require generations more,
before their individuality is sufficiently developed to make head
against that influence.

It is in the fine arts, properly so called, that the primâ facie
evidence of inferior original powers in women at first sight appears the
strongest: since opinion (it may be said) does not exclude them from
these, but rather encourages them, and their education, instead of
passing over this department, is in the affluent classes mainly composed
of it. Yet in this line of exertion they have fallen still more short
than in many others, of the highest eminence attained by men. This
shortcoming, however, needs no other explanation than the familiar fact,
more universally true in the fine arts than in anything else; the vast
superiority of professional persons over amateurs. Women in the educated
classes are almost universally taught more or less of some branch or
other of the fine arts, but not that they may gain their living or their
social consequence by it. Women artists are all amateurs. The exceptions
are only of the kind which confirm the general truth. Women are taught
music, but not for the purpose of composing, only of executing it, and
accordingly it is only as composers, that men, in music, are superior to
women. The only one of the fine arts which women do follow, to any
extent, as a profession, and an occupation for life, is the histrionic;
and in that they are confessedly equal, if not superior, to men. To make
the comparison fair, it should be made between the productions of women
in any branch of art, and those of men not following it as a profession.
In musical composition, for example, women surely have produced fully as
good things as have ever been produced by male amateurs. There are now a
few women, a very few, who practise painting as a profession, and these
are already begining to show quite as much talent as could be expected.
Even male painters (pace Mr. Ruskin) have not made any very remarkable
figure these last centuries, and it will be long before they do so. The
reason why the old painters were so greatly superior to the modern, is
that a greatly superior class of men applied themselves to the art. In
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the Italian painters were the
most accomplished men of their age. The greatest of them were men of
encyclopaedical acquirements and powers, like the great men of Greece.
But in their times fine art was, to men’s feelings and conceptions,
among the grandest things in which a human being could excel; and by it
men were made, what only political or military distinction now makes
them, the companions of sovereigns, and the equals of the highest
nobility. In the present age, men of anything like similar calibre find
something more important to do, for their own fame and the uses of the
modern world, than painting, and it is only now and then that a Reynolds
or a Turner (of whose relative rank among eminent men I do not pretend
to an opinion) applies himself to that art. Music belongs to a different
order of things; it does not require the same general powers of mind,
but seems more dependant on a natural gift: and it may be thought
surprising that no one of the great musical composers has been a woman.
But even this natural gift, to be made Edition: current; Page: [318]
available for great creations, requires study, and professional devotion
to the pursuit. The only countries which have produced first-rate
composers, even of the male sex, are Germany and Italy—countries in
which, both in point of special and of general cultivation, women have
remained far behind France and England, being generally (it may be said
without exaggeration) very little educated, and having scarcely
cultivated at all any of the higher faculties of mind. And in those
countries the men who are acquainted with the principles of musical
composition must be counted by hundreds, or more probably by thousands,
the women barely by scores: so that here again, on the doctrine of
averages, we cannot reasonably expect to see more than one eminent woman
to fifty eminent men; and the last three centuries have not produced
fifty eminent male composers either in Germany or in Italy.

There are other reasons, besides those which we have now given, that
help to explain why women remain behind men, even in the pursuits which
are open to both. For one thing, very few women have time for them. This
may seem a paradox; it is an undoubted social fact. The time and
thoughts of every woman have to satisfy great previous demands on them
for things practical. There is, first, the superintendence of the family
and the domestic expenditure, which occupies at least one woman in every
family, generally the one of mature years and acquired experience;
unless the family is so rich as to admit of delegating that task to
hired agency, and submitting to all the waste and malversation
inseparable from that mode of conducting it. The superintendence of a
household, even when not in other respects laborious, is extremely
onerous to the thoughts; it requires incessant vigilance, an eye which
no detail escapes, and presents questions for consideration and
solution, foreseen and unforeseen, at every hour of the day, from which
the person responsible for them can hardly ever shake herself free. If a
woman is of a rank and circumstances which relieve her in a measure from
these cares, she has still devolving on her the management for the whole
family of its intercourse with others—of what is called society, and the
less the call made on her by the former duty, the greater is always the
development of the latter: the dinner parties, concerts, evening
parties, morning visits, letter writing, and all that goes with them.
All this is over and above the engrossing duty which society imposes
exclusively on women, of making themselves charming. A clever woman of
the higher ranks finds nearly a sufficient employment of her talents in
cultivating the graces of manner and the arts of conversation. To look
only at the outward side of the subject: the great and continual
exercise of thought which all women who attach any value to dressing
well (I do not mean expensively, but with taste, and perception of
natural and of artificial convenance) must bestow upon their own dress,
perhaps also upon that of their daughters, would alone go a great way
towards achieving respectable results in art, or science, or literature,
and does actually exhaust much of the time and mental power they might
have to spare for Edition: current; Page: [319] either.* If it were
possible that all this number of little practical interests (which are
made great to them) should leave them either much leisure, or much
energy and freedom of mind, to be devoted to art or speculation, they
must have a much greater original supply of active faculty than the vast
majority of men. But this is not all. Independently of the regular
offices of life which devolve upon a woman, she is expected to have her
time and faculties always at the disposal of everybody. If a man has not
a profession to exempt him from such demands, still, if he has a
pursuit, he offends nobody by devoting his time to it; occupation is
received as a valid excuse for his not answering to every casual demand
which may be made on him. Are a woman’s occupations, especially her
chosen and voluntary ones, ever regarded as excusing her from any of
what are termed the calls of society? Scarcely are her most necessary
and recognised duties allowed as an exemption. It requires an illness in
the family, or something else out of the common way, to entitle her to
give her own business the precedence over other people’s amusement. She
must always be at the beck and call of somebody, generally of everybody.
If she has a study or a pursuit, she must snatch any short interval
which accidentally occurs to be employed in it. A celebrated woman, in a
work which I hope will some day be published, remarks truly that
everything a woman does is done at odd times.[*] Is it wonderful, then,
if she does not attain the highest eminence in things which require
consecutive attention, and the concentration on them of the chief
interest of life? Such is philosophy, and such, above all, is art, in
which, besides the devotion of the thoughts and feelings, the hand also
must be kept in constant exercise to attain high skill.

There is another consideration to be added to all these. In the various
arts and intellectual occupations, there is a degree of proficiency
sufficient for living by it, and there is a higher degree on which
depend the great productions which immortalize a name. To the attainment
of the former, there are adequate motives in the case of all who follow
the pursuit professionally: the other is hardly ever Edition: current;
Page: [320] attained where there is not, or where there has not been at
some period of life, an ardent desire of celebrity. Nothing less is
commonly a sufficient stimulus to undergo the long and patient drudgery,
which, in the case even of the greatest natural gifts, is absolutely
required for great eminence in pursuits in which we already possess so
many splendid memorials of the highest genius. Now, whether the cause be
natural or artificial, women seldom have this eagerness for fame. Their
ambition is generally confined within narrower bounds. The influence
they seek is over those who immediately surround them. Their desire is
to be liked, loved, or admired, by those whom they see with their eyes:
and the proficiency in knowledge, arts, and accomplishments, which is
sufficient for that, almost always contents them. This is a trait of
character which cannot be left out of the account in judging of women as
they are. I do not at all believe that it is inherent in women. It is
only the natural result of their circumstances. The love of fame in men
is encouraged by education and opinion: to “scorn delights and live
laborious days” for its sake, is accounted the part of “noble minds,”
even if spoken of as their “last infirmity,”[*] and is stimulated by the
access which fame gives to all objects of ambition, including even the
favour of women; while to women themselves all these objects are closed,
and the desire of fame itself considered daring and unfeminine. Besides,
how could it be that a woman’s interests should not be all concentrated
upon the impressions made on those who come into her daily life, when
society has ordained that all her duties should be to them, and has
contrived that all her comforts should depend on them? The natural
desire of consideration from our fellow creatures is as strong in a
woman as in a man; but society has so ordered things that public
consideration is, in all ordinary cases, only attainable by her through
the consideration of her husband or of her male relations, while her
private consideration is forfeited by making herself individually
prominent, or appearing in any other character than that of an appendage
to men. Whoever is in the least capable of estimating the influence on
the mind of the entire domestic and social position and the whole habit
of a life, must easily recognise in that influence a complete
explanation of nearly all the apparent differences between women and
men, including the whole of those which imply any inferiority.

As for moral differences, considered as distinguished from intellectual,
the distinction commonly drawn is to the advantage of women. They are
declared to be better than men; an empty compliment, which must provoke
a bitter smile from every woman of spirit, since there is no other
situation in life in which it is the established order, and considered
quite natural and suitable, that the better should obey the worse. If
this piece of idle talk is good for anything, it is only as an admission
by men, of the corrupting influence of power; for that is certainly the
only truth which the fact, if it be a fact, either proves or
illustrates. And it is true Edition: current; Page: [321] that
servitude, except when it actually brutalizes, though corrupting to
both, is less so to the slaves than to the slave-masters. It is
wholesomer for the moral nature to be restrained, even by arbitrary
power, than to be allowed to exercise arbitrary power without restraint.
Women, it is said, seldomer fall under the penal law—contribute a much
smaller number of offenders to the criminal calendar, than men. I doubt
not that the same thing may be said, with the same truth, of negro
slaves. Those who are under the control of others cannot often commit
crimes, unless at the command and for the purposes of their masters. I
do not know a more signal instance of the blindness with which the
world, including the herd of studious men, ignore and pass over all the
influences of social circumstances, than their silly depreciation of the
intellectual, and silly panegyrics on the moral, nature of women.

The complimentary dictum about women’s superior moral goodness may be
allowed to pair off with the disparaging one respecting their greater
liability to moral bias. Women, we are told, are not capable of
resisting their personal partialities: their judgment in grave affairs
is warped by their sympathies and antipathies. Assuming it to be so, it
is still to be proved that women are oftener misled by their personal
feelings than men by their personal interests. The chief difference
would seem in that case to be, that men are led from the course of duty
and the public interest by their regard for themselves, women (not being
allowed to have private interests of their own) by their regard for
somebody else. It is also to be considered, that all the education which
women receive from society inculcates on them the feeling that the
individuals connected with them are the only ones to whom they owe any
duty—the only ones whose interest they are called upon to care for;
while, as far as education is concerned, they are left strangers even to
the elementary ideas which are presupposed in any intelligent regard for
larger interests or higher moral objects. The complaint against them
resolves itself merely into this, that they fulfil only too faithfully
the sole duty which they are taught, and almost the only one which they
are permitted to practise.

The concessions of the privileged to the unprivileged are so seldom
brought about by any better motive than the power of the unprivileged to
extort them, that any arguments against the prerogative of sex are
likely to be little attended to by the generality, as long as they are
able to say to themselves that women do not complain of it. That fact
certainly enables men to retain the unjust privilege some time longer;
but does not render it less unjust. Exactly the same thing may be said
of the women in the harem of an Oriental, they do not complain of not
being allowed the freedom of European women. They think our women
insufferably bold and unfeminine. How rarely it is that even men
complain of the general order of society; and how much rarer still would
such complaint be, if they did not know of any different order existing
anywhere else. Women do not complain of the general lot of women; or
rather they do, for plaintive elegies on it are very common in the
writings of women, and were still more so as long as the lamentations
could Edition: current; Page: [322] not be suspected of having any
practical object. Their complaints are like the complaints which men
make of the general unsatisfactoriness of human life; they are not meant
to imply blame, or to plead for any change. But though women do not
complain of the power of husbands, each complains of her own husband, or
of the husbands of her friends. It is the same in all other cases of
servitude, at least in the commencement of the emancipatory movement.
The serfs did not at first complain of the power of their lords, but
only of their tyranny. The Commons began by claiming a few municipal
privileges; they next asked an exemption for themselves from being taxed
without their own consent; but they would at that time have thought it a
great presumption to claim any share in the king’s sovereign authority.
The case of women is now the only case in which to rebel against
established rules is still looked upon with the same eyes as was
formerly a subject’s claim to the right of rebelling against his king. A
woman who joins in any movement which her husband disapproves, makes
herself a martyr, without even being able to be an apostle, for the
husband can legally put a stop to her apostleship. Women cannot be
expected to devote themselves to the emancipation of women, until men in
considerable number are prepared to join with them in the undertaking.

Edition: current; Page: [323]


Chapter IV

there remains a question, not of less importance than those already
discussed, and which will be asked the most importunately by those
opponents whose conviction is somewhat shaken on the main point. What
good are we to expect from the changes proposed in our customs and
institutions? Would mankind be at all better off if women were free? If
not, why disturb their minds, and attempt to make a social revolution in
the name of an abstract right?

It is hardly to be expected that this question will be asked in respect
to the change proposed in the condition of women in marriage. The
sufferings, immoralities, evils of all sorts, produced in innumerable
cases by the subjection of individual women to individual men, are far
too terrible to be overlooked. Unthinking or uncandid persons, counting
those cases alone which are extreme, or which attain publicity, may say
that the evils are exceptional; but no one can be blind to their
existence, nor, in many cases, to their intensity. And it is perfectly
obvious that the abuse of the power cannot be very much checked while
the power remains. It is a power given, or offered, not to good men, or
to decently respectable men, but to all men; the most brutal, and the
most criminal. There is no check but that of opinion, and such men are
in general within the reach of no opinion but that of men like
themselves. If such men did not brutally tyrannize over the one human
being whom the law compels to bear everything from them, society must
already have reached a paradisiacal state. There could be no need any
longer of laws to curb men’s vicious propensities. Astraea must not only
have returned to earth, but the heart of the worst man must have become
her temple. The law of servitude in marriage is a monstrous
contradiction to all the principles of the modern world, and to all the
experience through which those principles have been slowly and painfully
worked out. It is the sole case, now that negro slavery has been
abolished, in which a human being in the plenitude of every faculty is
delivered up to the tender mercies of another human being, in the hope
forsooth that this other will use the power solely for the good of the
person subjected to it. Marriage is the only actual bondage known to our
law. There remain no legal slaves, except the mistress of every house.

It is not, therefore, on this part of the subject, that the question is
likely to be asked, Cui bono? We may be told that the evil would
outweigh the good, but the reality of the good admits of no dispute. In
regard, however, to the larger question, Edition: current; Page: [324]
the removal of women’s disabilities—their recognition as the equals of
men in all that belongs to citizenship—the opening to them of all
honourable employments, and of the training and education which
qualifies for those employments—there are many persons for whom it is
not enough that the inequality has no just or legitimate defence; they
require to be told what express advantage would be obtained by
abolishing it.

To which let me first answer, the advantage of having the most universal
and pervading of all human relations regulated by justice instead of
injustice. The vast amount of this gain to human nature, it is hardly
possible, by any explanation or illustration, to place in a stronger
light than it is placed by the bare statement, to any one who attaches a
moral meaning to words. All the selfish propensities, the self-worship,
the unjust self-preference, which exist among mankind, have their source
and root in, and derive their principal nourishment from, the present
constitution of the relation between men and women. Think what it is to
a boy, to grow up to manhood in the belief that without any merit or any
exertion of his own, though he may be the most frivolous and empty or
the most ignorant and stolid of mankind, by the mere fact of being born
a male he is by right the superior of all and every one of an entire
half of the human race: including probably some whose real superiority
to himself he has daily or hourly occasion to feel; but even if in his
whole conduct he habitually follows a woman’s guidance, still, if he is
a fool, he thinks that of course she is not, and cannot be, equal in
ability and judgment to himself; and if he is not a fool, he does
worse—he sees that she is superior to him, and believes that,
notwithstanding her superiority, he is entitled to command and she is
bound to obey. What must be the effect on his character, of this lesson?
And men of the cultivated classes are often not aware how deeply it
sinks into the immense majority of male minds. For, among right-feeling
and well-bred people, the inequality is kept as much as possible out of
sight; above all, out of sight of the children. As much obedience is
required from boys to their mother as to their father: they are not
permitted to domineer over their sisters, nor are they accustomed to see
these postponed to them, but the contrary; the compensations of the
chivalrous feeling being made prominent, while the servitude which
requires them is kept in the background. Well brought-up youths in the
higher classes thus often escape the bad influences of the situation in
their early years, and only experience them when, arrived at manhood,
they fall under the dominion of facts as they really exist. Such people
are little aware, when a boy is differently brought up, how early the
notion of his inherent superiority to a girl arises in his mind; how it
grows with his growth and strengthens with his strength; how it is
inoculated by one schoolboy upon another; how early the youth thinks
himself superior to his mother, owing her perhaps forbearance, but no
real respect; and how sublime and sultan-like a sense of superiority he
feels, above all, over the woman whom he honours by admitting her to a
partnership of his life. Is it imagined that all this does not pervert
the whole manner of existence of the man, both as an individual and as
Edition: current; Page: [325] a social being? It is an exact parallel to
the feeling of a hereditary king that he is excellent above others by
being born a king, or a noble by being born a noble. The relation
between husband and wife is very like that between lord and vassal,
except that the wife is held to more unlimited obedience than the vassal
was. However the vassal’s character may have been affected, for better
and for worse, by his subordination, who can help seeing that the lord’s
was affected greatly for the worse? whether he was led to believe that
his vassals were really superior to himself, or to feel that he was
placed in command over people as good as himself, for no merits or
labours of his own, but merely for having, as Figaro says, taken the
trouble to be born.[*] The self-worship of the monarch, or of the feudal
superior, is matched by the self-worship of the male. Human beings do
not grow up from childhood in the possession of unearned distinctions,
without pluming themselves upon them. Those whom privileges not acquired
by their merit, and which they feel to be disproportioned to it, inspire
with additional humility, are always the few, and the best few. The rest
are only inspired with pride, and the worst sort of pride, that which
values itself upon accidental advantages, not of its own achieving.
Above all, when the feeling of being raised above the whole of the other
sex is combined with personal authority over one individual among them;
the situation, if a school of conscientious and affectionate forbearance
to those whose strongest points of character are conscience and
affection, is to men of another quality a regularly constituted Academy
or Gymnasium for training them in arrogance and overbearingness; which
vices, if curbed by the certainty of resistance in their intercourse
with other men, their equals, break out towards all who are in a
position to be obliged to tolerate them, and often revenge themselves
upon the unfortunate wife for the involuntary restraint which they are
obliged to submit to elsewhere.

The example afforded, and the education given to the sentiments, by
laying the foundation of domestic existence upon a relation
contradictory to the first principles of social justice, must, from the
very nature of man, have a perverting influence of such magnitude, that
it is hardly possible with our present experience to raise our
imaginations to the conception of so great a change for the better as
would be made by its removal. All that education and civilization are
doing to efface the influences on character of the law of force, and
replace them by those of justice, remains merely on the surface, as long
as the citadel of the enemy is not attacked. The principle of the modern
movement in morals and politics, is that conduct, and conduct alone,
entitles to respect: that not what men are, but what they do,
constitutes their claim to deference; that, above all, merit, and not
birth, is the only rightful claim to power and authority. If no
authority, not in its nature temporary, were allowed to one human being
over another, society would not be Edition: current; Page: [326]
employed in building up propensities with one hand which it has to curb
with the other. The child would really, for the first time in man’s
existence on earth, be trained in the way he should go, and when he was
old there would be a chance that he would not depart from it. But so
long as the right of the strong to power over the weak rules in the very
heart of society, the attempt to make the equal right of the weak the
principle of its outward actions will always be an uphill struggle; for
the law of justice, which is also that of Christianity, will never get
possession of men’s inmost sentiments; they will be working against it,
even when bending to it.

The second benefit to be expected from giving to women the free use of
their faculties, by leaving them the free choice of their employments,
and opening to them the same field of occupation and the same prizes and
encouragements as to other human beings, would be that of doubling the
mass of mental faculties available for the higher service of humanity.
Where there is now one person qualified to benefit mankind and promote
the general improvement, as a public teacher, or an administrator of
some branch of public or social affairs, there would then be a chance of
two. Mental superiority of any kind is at present everywhere so much
below the demand; there is such a deficiency of persons competent to do
excellently anything which it requires any considerable amount of
ability to do; that the loss to the world, by refusing to make use of
one-half of the whole quantity of talent it possesses, is extremely
serious. It is true that this amount of mental power is not totally
lost. Much of it is employed, and would in any case be employed, in
domestic management, and in the few other occupations open to women; and
from the remainder indirect benefit is in many individual cases
obtained, through the personal influence of individual women over
individual men. But these benefits are partial; their range is extremely
circumscribed; and if they must be admitted, on the one hand, as a
deduction from the amount of fresh social power that would be acquired
by giving freedom to one-half of the whole sum of human intellect, there
must be added, on the other, the benefit of the stimulus that would be
given to the intellect of men by the competition; or (to use a more true
expression) by the necessity that would be imposed on them of deserving
precedency before they could expect to obtain it.

This great accession to the intellectual power of the species, and to
the amount of intellect available for the good management of its
affairs, would be obtained, partly, through the better and more complete
intellectual education of women, which would then improve pari passu
with that of men. Women in general would be brought up equally capable
of understanding business, public affairs, and the higher matters of
speculation, with men in the same class of society; and the select few
of the one as well as of the other sex, who were qualified not only to
comprehend what is done or thought by others, but to think or do
something considerable themselves, would meet with the same facilities
for improving and training their capacities in the one sex as in the
other. In this way, the widening of the sphere of action for women would
operate for good, by raising their education Edition: current; Page:
[327] to the level of that of men, and making the one participate in all
improvements made in the other. But independently of this, the mere
breaking down of the barrier would of itself have an educational virtue
of the highest worth. The mere getting rid of the idea that all the
wider subjects of thought and action, all the things which are of
general and not solely of private interest, are men’s business, from
which women are to be warned off—positively interdicted from most of it,
coldly tolerated in the little which is allowed them—the mere
consciousness a woman would then have of being a human being like any
other, entitled to choose her pursuits, urged or invited by the same
inducements as any one else to interest herself in whatever is
interesting to human beings, entitled to exert the share of influence on
all human concerns which belongs to an individual opinion, whether she
attempted actual participation in them or not—this alone would effect an
immense expansion of the faculties of women, as well as enlargement of
the range of their moral sentiments.

Besides the addition to the amount of individual talent available for
the conduct of human affairs, which certainly are not at present so
abundantly provided in that respect that they can afford to dispense
with one-half of what nature proffers; the opinion of women would then
possess a more beneficial, rather than a greater, influence upon the
general mass of human belief and sentiment. I say a more beneficial,
rather than a greater influence; for the influence of women over the
general tone of opinion has always, or at least from the earliest known
period, been very considerable. The influence of mothers on the early
character of their sons, and the desire of young men to recommend
themselves to young women, have in all recorded times been important
agencies in the formation of character, and have determined some of the
chief steps in the progress of civilization. Even in the Homeric age,
αἰδώς towards the Τρωάδας έλκεσιπεπλους is an acknowledged and powerful
motive of action in the great Hector.[*] The moral influence of women
has had two modes of operation. First, it has been a softening
influence. Those who were most liable to be the victims of violence,
have naturally tended as much as they could towards limiting its sphere
and mitigating its excesses. Those who were not taught to fight, have
naturally inclined in favour of any other mode of settling differences
rather than that of fighting. In general, those who have been the
greatest sufferers by the indulgence of selfish passion, have been the
most earnest supporters of any moral law which offered a means of
bridling passion. Women were powerfully instrumental in inducing the
northern conquerors to adopt the creed of Christianity, a creed so much
more favourable to women than any that preceded it. The conversion of
the Anglo-Saxons and of the Franks may be said to have been begun by the
wives of Ethelbert and Clovis.[†] The other mode in which Edition:
current; Page: [328] the effect of women’s opinion has been conspicuous,
is by giving a powerful stimulus to those qualities in men, which, not
being themselves trained in, it was necessary for them that they should
find in their protectors. Courage, and the military virtues generally,
have at all times been greatly indebted to the desire which men felt of
being admired by women: and the stimulus reaches far beyond this one
class of eminent qualities, since, by a very natural effect of their
position, the best passport to the admiration and favour of women has
always been to be thought highly of by men. From the combination of the
two kinds of moral influence thus exercised by women, arose the spirit
of chivalry: the peculiarity of which is, to aim at combining the
highest standard of the warlike qualities with the cultivation of a
totally different class of virtues—those of gentleness, generosity, and
self-abnegation, towards the non-military and defenceless classes
generally, and a special submission and worship directed towards women;
who were distinguished from the other defenceless classes by the high
rewards which they had it in their power voluntarily to bestow on those
who endeavoured to earn their favour, instead of extorting their
subjection. Though the practice of chivalry fell even more sadly short
of its theoretic standard than practice generally falls below theory, it
remains one of the most precious monuments of the moral history of our
race; as a remarkable instance of a concerted and organized attempt by a
most disorganized and distracted society, to raise up and carry into
practice a moral ideal greatly in advance of its social conditions and
institutions; so much so as to have been completely frustrated in the
main object, yet never entirely inefficacious, and which has left a most
sensible, and for the most part a highly valuable impress on the ideas
and feelings of all subsequent times.

The chivalrous ideal is the acme of the influence of women’s sentiments
on the moral cultivation of mankind: and if women are to remain in their
subordinate situation, it were greatly to be lamented that the
chivalrous standard should have passed away, for it is the only one at
all capable of mitigating the demoralizing influences of that position.
But the changes in the general state of the species rendered inevitable
the substitution of a totally different ideal of morality for the
chivalrous one. Chivalry was the attempt to infuse moral elements into a
state of society in which everything depended for good or evil on
individual prowess, under the softening influences of individual
delicacy and generosity. In modern societies, all things, even in the
military department of affairs, are decided, not by individual effort,
but by the combined operations of numbers; while the main occupation of
society has changed from fighting to business, from military to
industrial life. The exigencies of the new life are no more exclusive of
the virtues of generosity than those of the old, but it no longer
entirely depends on them. The main foundations of the moral life of
modern times must be justice and prudence, the respect of each for the
rights of every other, and the ability of each to take care of himself.
Chivalry left without legal check all forms of wrong which reigned
unpunished throughout society; it only encouraged a few to do right in
preference Edition: current; Page: [329] to wrong, by the direction it
gave to the instruments of praise and admiration. But the real
dependence of morality must always be upon its penal sanctions—its power
to deter from evil. The security of society cannot rest on merely
rendering honour to right, a motive so comparatively weak in all but a
few, and which on very many does not operate at all. Modern society is
able to repress wrong through all departments of life, by a fit exertion
of the superior strength which civilization has given it, and thus to
render the existence of the weaker members of society (no longer
defenceless but protected by law) tolerable to them, without reliance on
the chivalrous feelings of those who are in a position to tyrannize. The
beauties and graces of the chivalrous character are still what they
were, but the rights of the weak, and the general comfort of human life,
now rest on a far surer and steadier support; or rather, they do so in
every relation of life except the conjugal.

At present the moral influence of women is no less real, but it is no
longer of so marked and definite a character, it has more nearly merged
in the general influence of public opinion. Both through the contagion
of sympathy, and through the desire of men to shine in the eyes of
women, their feelings have great effect in keeping alive what remains of
the chivalrous ideal—in fostering the sentiments and continuing the
traditions of spirit and generosity. In these points of character, their
standard is higher than that of men, in the quality of justice, somewhat
lower. As regards the relations of private life it may be said
generally, that their influence is, on the whole, encouraging to the
softer virtues, discouraging to the sterner: though the statement must
be taken with all the modifications dependent on individual character.
In the chief of the greater trials to which virtue is subject in the
concerns of life—the conflict between interest and principle—the
tendency of women’s influence is of a very mixed character. When the
principle involved happens to be one of the very few which the course of
their religious or moral education has strongly impressed upon
themselves, they are potent auxiliaries to virtue: and their husbands
and sons are often prompted by them to acts of abnegation which they
never would have been capable of without that stimulus. But, with the
present education and position of women, the moral principles which have
been impressed on them cover but a comparatively small part of the field
of virtue, and are, moreover, principally negative; forbidding
particular acts, but having little to do with the general direction of
the thoughts and purposes. I am afraid it must be said, that
disinterestedness in the general conduct of life—the devotion of the
energies to purposes which hold out no promise of private advantages to
the family—is very seldom encouraged or supported by women’s influence.
It is small blame to them that they discourage objects of which they
have not learnt to see the advantage, and which withdraw their men from
them, and from the interests of the family. But the consequence is that
women’s influence is often anything but favourable to public virtue.

Women have, however, some share of influence in giving the tone to
public moralities since their sphere of action has been a little
widened, and since a Edition: current; Page: [330] considerable number
of them have occupied themselves practically in the promotion of objects
reaching beyond their own family and household. The influence of women
counts for a great deal in two of the most marked features of modern
European life—its aversion to war, and its addiction to philanthropy.
Excellent characteristics both; but unhappily, if the influence of women
is valuable in the encouragement it gives to these feelings in general,
in the particular applications the direction it gives to them is at
least as often mischievous as useful. In the philanthropic department
more particularly, the two provinces chiefly cultivated by women are
religious proselytism and charity. Religious proselytism at home, is but
another word for embittering of religious animosities: abroad, it is
usually a blind running at an object, without either knowing or heeding
the fatal mischiefs—fatal to the religious object itself as well as to
all other desirable objects—which may be produced by the means employed.
As for charity, it is a matter in which the immediate effect on the
persons directly concerned, and the ultimate consequence to the general
good, are apt to be at complete war with one another: while the
education given to women—an education of the sentiments rather than of
the understanding—and the habit inculcated by their whole life, of
looking to immediate effects on persons, and not to remote effects on
classes of persons—make them both unable to see, and unwilling to admit,
the ultimate evil tendency of any form of charity or philanthropy which
commends itself to their sympathetic feelings. The great and continually
increasing mass of unenlightened and shortsighted benevolence, which,
taking the care of people’s lives out of their own hands, and relieving
them from the disagreeable consequences of their own acts, saps the very
foundations of the self-respect, self-help, and self-control which are
the essential conditions both of individual prosperity and of social
virtue—this waste of resources and of benevolent feelings in doing harm
instead of good, is immensely swelled by women’s contributions, and
stimulated by their influence. Not that this is a mistake likely to be
made by women, where they have actually the practical management of
schemes of beneficence. It sometimes happens that women who administer
public charities—with that insight into present fact, and especially
into the minds and feelings of those with whom they are in immediate
contact, in which women generally excel men—recognise in the clearest
manner the demoralizing influence of the alms given or the help
afforded, and could give lessons on the subject to many a male political
economist. But women who only give their money, and are not brought face
to face with the effects it produces, how can they be expected to
foresee them? A woman born to the present lot of women, and content with
it, how should she appreciate the value of self-dependence? She is not
self-dependent; she is not taught self-dependence; her destiny is to
receive everything from others, and why should what is good enough for
her be bad for the poor? Her familiar notions of good are of blessings
descending from a superior. She forgets that she is not free, and that
the poor are; that if what they need is given to them unearned, they
cannot be compelled to earn Edition: current; Page: [331] it: that
everybody cannot be taken care of by everybody, but there must be some
motive to induce people to take care of themselves; and that to be
helped to help themselves, if they are physically capable of it, is the
only charity which proves to be charity in the end.

These considerations shew how usefully the part which women take in the
formation of general opinion, would be modified for the better by that
more enlarged instruction, and practical conversancy with the things
which their opinions influence, that would necessarily arise from their
social and political emancipation. But the improvement it would work
through the influence they exercise, each in her own family, would be
still more remarkable.

It is often said that in the classes most exposed to temptation, a man’s
wife and children tend to keep him honest and respectable, both by the
wife’s direct influence, and by the concern he feels for their future
welfare. This may be so, and no doubt often is so, with those who are
more weak than wicked; and this beneficial influence would be preserved
and strengthened under equal laws; it does not depend on the woman’s
servitude, but is, on the contrary, diminished by the disrespect which
the inferior class of men always at heart feel towards those who are
subject to their power. But when we ascend higher in the scale, we come
among a totally different set of moving forces. The wife’s influence
tends, as far as it goes, to prevent the husband from falling below the
common standard of approbation of the country. It tends quite as
strongly to hinder him from rising above it. The wife is the auxiliary
of the common public opinion. A man who is married to a woman his
inferior in intelligence, finds her a perpetual dead weight, or, worse
than a dead weight, a drag, upon every aspiration of his to be better
than public opinion requires him to be. It is hardly possible for one
who is in these bonds, to attain exalted virtue. If he differs in his
opinion from the mass—if he sees truths which have not yet dawned upon
them, or if, feeling in his heart truths which they nominally recognise,
he would like to act up to those truths more conscientiously than the
generality of mankind—to all such thoughts and desires, marriage is the
heaviest of drawbacks, unless he be so fortunate as to have a wife as
much above the common level as he himself is.

For, in the first place, there is always some sacrifice of personal
interest required; either of social consequence, or of pecuniary means;
perhaps the risk of even the means of subsistence. These sacrifices and
risks he may be willing to encounter for himself; but he will pause
before he imposes them on his family. And his family in this case means
his wife and daughters; for he always hopes that his sons will feel as
he feels himself, and that what he can do without, they will do without,
willingly, in the same cause. But his daughters—their marriage may
depend upon it: and his wife, who is unable to enter into or understand
the objects for which these sacrifices are made—who, if she thought them
worth any sacrifice, would think so on trust, and solely for his
sake—who can participate in none of the enthusiasm or the
self-approbation he himself may feel, while the things which Edition:
current; Page: [332] he is disposed to sacrifice are all in all to her;
will not the best and most unselfish man hesitate the longest before
bringing on her this consequence? If it be not the comforts of life, but
only social consideration, that is at stake, the burthen upon his
conscience and feelings is still very severe. Whoever has a wife and
children has given hostages to Mrs. Grundy.[*] The approbation of that
potentate may be a matter of indifference to him, but it is of great
importance to his wife. The man himself may be above opinion, or may
find sufficient compensation in the opinion of those of his own way of
thinking. But to the women connected with him, he can offer no
compensation. The almost invariable tendency of the wife to place her
influence in the same scale with social consideration, is sometimes made
a reproach to women, and represented as a peculiar trait of feebleness
and childishness of character in them: surely with great injustice.
Society makes the whole life of a woman, in the easy classes, a
continued self-sacrifice; it exacts from her an unremitting restraint of
the whole of her natural inclinations, and the sole return it makes to
her for what often deserves the name of a martyrdom, is consideration.
Her consideration is inseparably connected with that of her husband, and
after paying the full price for it, she finds that she is to lose it,
for no reason of which she can feel the cogency. She has sacrificed her
whole life to it, and her husband will not sacrifice to it a whim, a
freak, an eccentricity; something not recognised or allowed for by the
world, and which the world will agree with her in thinking a folly, if
it thinks no worse! The dilemma is hardest upon that very meritorious
class of men, who, without possessing talents which qualify them to make
a figure among those with whom they agree in opinion, hold their opinion
from conviction, and feel bound in honour and conscience to serve it, by
making profession of their belief, and giving their time, labour, and
means, to anything undertaken in its behalf. The worst case of all is
when such men happen to be of a rank and position which of itself
neither gives them, nor excludes them from, what is considered the best
society; when their admission to it depends mainly on what is thought of
them personally—and however unexceptionable their breeding and habits,
their being identified with opinions and public conduct unacceptable to
those who give the tone to society would operate as an effectual
exclusion. Many a woman flatters herself (nine times out of ten quite
erroneously) that nothing prevents her and her husband from moving in
the highest society of her neighbourhood—society in which others well
known to her, and in the same class of life, mix freely—except that her
husband is unfortunately a Dissenter, or has the reputation of mingling
in low radical politics. That it is, she thinks, which hinders George
from getting a commission or a place, Caroline from making an
advantageous match, and prevents her and her husband from obtaining
invitations, Edition: current; Page: [333] perhaps honours, which, for
aught she sees, they are as well entitled to as some folks. With such an
influence in every house, either exerted actively, or operating all the
more powerfully for not being asserted, is it any wonder that people in
general are kept down in that mediocrity of respectability which is
becoming a marked characteristic of modern times?

There is another very injurious aspect in which the effect, not of
women’s disabilities directly, but of the broad line of difference which
those disabilities create between the education and character of a woman
and that of a man, requires to be considered. Nothing can be more
unfavourable to that union of thoughts and inclinations which is the
ideal of married life. Intimate society between people radically
dissimilar to one another, is an idle dream. Unlikeness may attract, but
it is likeness which retains; and in proportion to the likeness is the
suitability of the individuals to give each other a happy life. While
women are so unlike men, it is not wonderful that selfish men should
feel the need of arbitrary power in their own hands, to arrest in limine
the life-long conflict of inclinations, by deciding every question on
the side of their own preference. When people are extremely unlike,
there can be no real identity of interest. Very often there is
conscientious difference of opinion between married people, on the
highest points of duty. Is there any reality in the marriage union where
this takes place? Yet it is not uncommon anywhere, when the woman has
any earnestness of character; and it is a very general case indeed in
Catholic countries, when she is supported in her dissent by the only
other authority to which she is taught to bow, the priest. With the
usual barefacedness of power not accustomed to find itself disputed, the
influence of priests over women is attacked by Protestant and Liberal
writers, less for being bad in itself, than because it is a rival
authority to the husband, and raises up a revolt against his
infallibility. In England, similar differences occasionally exist when
an Evangelical wife has allied herself with a husband of a different
quality, but in general this source at least of dissension is got rid
of, by reducing the minds of women to such a nullity, that they have no
opinions but those of Mrs. Grundy or those which the husband tells them
to have. When there is no difference of opinion, differences merely of
taste may be sufficient to detract greatly from the happiness of married
life. And though it may stimulate the amatory propensities of men, it
does not conduce to married happiness, to exaggerate by differences of
education whatever may be the native differences of the sexes. If the
married pair are well-bred and well-behaved people, they tolerate each
other’s tastes; but is mutual toleration what people look forward to,
when they enter into marriage? These differences of inclination will
naturally make their wishes different, if not restrained by affection or
duty, as to almost all domestic questions which arise. What a difference
there must be in the society which the two persons will wish to
frequent, or be frequented by! Each will desire associates who share
their own tastes: the persons agreeable to one, will be indifferent or
positively disagreeable to the other; yet there can be none who are not
common to both, for married people Edition: current; Page: [334] do not
now live in different parts of the house and have totally different
visiting lists, as in the reign of Louis XV. They cannot help having
different wishes as to the bringing up of the children: each will wish
to see reproduced in them their own tastes and sentiments: and there is
either a compromise, and only a half-satisfaction to either, or the wife
has to yield—often with bitter suffering; and, with or without
intention, her occult influence continues to counterwork the husband’s
purposes.

It would of course be extreme folly to suppose that these differences of
feeling and inclination only exist because women are brought up
differently from men, and that there would not be differences of taste
under any imaginable circumstances. But there is nothing beyond the mark
in saying that the distinction in bringing-up immensely aggravates those
differences, and renders them wholly inevitable. While women are brought
up as they are, a man and a woman will but rarely find in one another
real agreement of tastes and wishes as to daily life. They will
generally have to give it up as hopeless, and renounce the attempt to
have, in the intimate associate of their daily life, that idem velle,
idem nolle, which is the recognised bond of any society that is really
such: or if the man succeeds in obtaining it, he does so by choosing a
woman who is so complete a nullity that she has no velle or nolle at
all, and is as ready to comply with one thing as another if anybody
tells her to do so. Even this calculation is apt to fail; dulness and
want of spirit are not always a guarantee of the submission which is so
confidently expected from them. But if they were, is this the ideal of
marriage? What, in this case, does the man obtain by it, except an upper
servant, a nurse, or a mistress? On the contrary, when each of two
persons, instead of being a nothing, is a something; when they are
attached to one another, and are not too much unlike to begin with; the
constant partaking in the same things, assisted by their sympathy, draws
out the latent capacities of each for being interested in the things
which were at first interesting only to the other; and works a gradual
assimilation of the tastes and characters to one another, partly by the
insensible modification of each, but more by a real enriching of the two
natures, each acquiring the tastes and capacities of the other in
addition to its own. This often happens between two friends of the same
sex, who are much associated in their daily life: and it would be a
common, if not the commonest, case in marriage, did not the totally
different bringing-up of the two sexes make it next to an impossibility
to form a really well-assorted union. Were this remedied, whatever
differences there might still be in individual tastes, there would at
least be, as a general rule, complete unity and unanimity as to the
great objects of life. When the two persons both care for great objects,
and are a help and encouragement to each other in whatever regards
these, the minor matters on which their tastes may differ are not
all-important to them; and there is a foundation for solid friendship,
of an enduring character, more likely than anything else to make it,
through the whole of life, a greater pleasure to each to give pleasure
to the other, than to receive it.

Edition: current; Page: [335]
I have considered, thus far, the effects on the pleasures and benefits
of the marriage union which depend on the mere unlikeness between the
wife and the husband: but the evil tendency is prodigiously aggravated
when the unlikeness is inferiority. Mere unlikeness, when it only means
difference of good qualities, may be more a benefit in the way of mutual
improvement, than a drawback from comfort. When each emulates, and
desires and endeavours to acquire, the other’s peculiar qualities, the
difference does not produce diversity of interest, but increased
identity of it, and makes each still more valuable to the other. But
when one is much the inferior of the two in mental ability and
cultivation, and is not actively attempting by the other’s aid to rise
to the other’s level, the whole influence of the connexion upon the
development of the superior of the two is deteriorating: and still more
so in a tolerably happy marriage than in an unhappy one. It is not with
impunity that the superior in intellect shuts himself up with an
inferior, and elects that inferior for his chosen, and sole completely
intimate, associate. Any society which is not improving, is
deteriorating: and the more so, the closer and more familiar it is. Even
a really superior man almost always begins to deteriorate when he is
habitually (as the phrase is) king of his company, and in his most
habitual company the husband who has a wife inferior to him is always
so. While his self-satisfaction is incessantly ministered to on the one
hand, on the other he insensibly imbibes the modes of feeling, and of
looking at things, which belong to a more vulgar or a more limited mind
than his own. This evil differs from many of those which have hitherto
been dwelt on, by being an increasing one. The association of men with
women in daily life is much closer and more complete than it ever was
before. Men’s life is more domestic. Formerly, their pleasures and
chosen occupations were among men, and in men’s company: their wives had
but a fragment of their lives. At the present time, the progress of
civilization, and the turn of opinion against the rough amusements and
convivial excesses which formerly occupied most men in their hours of
relaxation—together with (it must be said) the improved tone of modern
feeling as to the reciprocity of duty which binds the husband towards
the wife—have thrown the man very much more upon home and its inmates,
for his personal and social pleasures: while the kind and degree of
improvement which has been made in women’s education, has made them in
some degree capable of being his companions in ideas and mental tastes,
while leaving them, in most cases, still hopelessly inferior to him. His
desire of mental communion is thus in general satisfied by a communion
from which he learns nothing. An unimproving and unstimulating
companionship is substituted for (what he might otherwise have been
obliged to seek) the society of his equals in powers and his fellow in
the higher pursuits. We see, accordingly, that young men of the greatest
promise generally cease to improve as soon as they marry, and, not
improving, inevitably degenerate. If the wife does not push the husband
forward, she always holds him back. He ceases to care for what she does
not care for; he no longer desires, and ends by disliking and shunning,
society congenial to Edition: current; Page: [336] his former
aspirations, and which would now shame his falling-off from them; his
higher faculties both of mind and heart cease to be called into
activity. And this change coinciding with the new and selfish interests
which are created by the family, after a few years he differs in no
material respect from those who have never had wishes for anything but
the common vanities and the common pecuniary objects.

What marriage may be in the case of two persons of cultivated faculties,
identical in opinions and purposes, between whom there exists that best
kind of equality, similarity of powers and capacities with reciprocal
superiority in them—so that each can enjoy the luxury of looking up to
the other, and can have alternately the pleasure of leading and of being
led in the path of development—I will not attempt to describe. To those
who can conceive it, there is no need; to those who cannot, it would
appear the dream of an enthusiast. But I maintain, with the profoundest
conviction, that this, and this only, is the ideal of marriage; and that
all opinions, customs, and institutions which favour any other notion of
it, or turn the conceptions and aspirations connected with it into any
other direction, by whatever pretences they may be coloured, are relics
of primitive barbarism. The moral regeneration of mankind will only
really commence, when the most fundamental of the social relations is
placed under the rule of equal justice, and when human beings learn to
cultivate their strongest sympathy with an equal in rights and in
cultivation.

Thus far, the benefits which it has appeared that the world would gain
by ceasing to make sex a disqualification for privileges and a badge of
subjection, are social rather than individual; consisting in an increase
of the general fund of thinking and acting power, and an improvement in
the general conditions of the association of men with women. But it
would be a grievous understatement of the case to omit the most direct
benefit of all, the unspeakable gain in private happiness to the
liberated half of the species; the difference to them between a life of
subjection to the will of others, and a life of rational freedom. After
the primary necessities of food and raiment, freedom is the first and
strongest want of human nature. While mankind are lawless, their desire
is for lawless freedom. When they have learnt to understand the meaning
of duty and the value of reason, they incline more and more to be guided
and restrained by these in the exercise of their freedom; but they do
not therefore desire freedom less; they do not become disposed to accept
the will of other people as the representative and interpreter of those
guiding principles. On the contrary, the communities in which the reason
has been most cultivated, and in which the idea of social duty has been
most powerful, are those which have most strongly asserted the freedom
of action of the individual—the liberty of each to govern his conduct by
his own feelings of duty, and by such laws and social restraints as his
own conscience can subscribe to.

He who would rightly appreciate the worth of personal independence as an
element of happiness, should consider the value he himself puts upon it
as an Edition: current; Page: [337] ingredient of his own. There is no
subject on which there is a greater habitual difference of judgment
between a man judging for himself, and the same man judging for other
people. When he hears others complaining that they are not allowed
freedom of action—that their own will has not sufficient influence in
the regulation of their affairs—his inclination is, to ask, what are
their grievances? what positive damage they sustain? and in what respect
they consider their affairs to be mismanaged? and if they fail to make
out, in answer to these questions, what appears to him a sufficient
case, he turns a deaf ear, and regards their complaint as the fanciful
querulousness of people whom nothing reasonable will satisfy. But he has
a quite different standard of judgment when he is deciding for himself.
Then, the most unexceptionable administration of his interests by a
tutor set over him, does not satisfy his feelings: his personal
exclusion from the deciding authority appears itself the greatest
grievance of all, rendering it superfluous even to enter into the
question of mismanagement. It is the same with nations. What citizen of
a free country would listen to any offers of good and skilful
administration, in return for the abdication of freedom? Even if he
could believe that good and skilful administration can exist among a
people ruled by a will not their own, would not the consciousness of
working out their own destiny under their own moral responsibility be a
compensation to his feelings for great rudeness and imperfection in the
details of public affairs? Let him rest assured that whatever he feels
on this point, women feel in a fully equal degree. Whatever has been
said or written, from the time of Herodotus to the present, of the
ennobling influence of free government[*]—the nerve and spring which it
gives to all the faculties, the larger and higher objects which it
presents to the intellect and feelings, the more unselfish public
spirit, and calmer and broader views of duty, that it engenders, and the
generally loftier platform on which it elevates the individual as a
moral, spiritual, and social being—is every particle as true of women as
of men. Are these things no important part of individual happiness? Let
any man call to mind what he himself felt on emerging from boyhood—from
the tutelage and control of even loved and affectionate elders—and
entering upon the responsibilities of manhood. Was it not like the
physical effect of taking off a heavy weight, or releasing him from
obstructive, even if not otherwise painful, bonds? Did he not feel twice
as much alive, twice as much a human being, as before? And does he
imagine that women have none of these feelings? But it is a striking
fact, that the satisfactions and mortifications of personal pride,
though all in all to most men when the case is their own, have less
allowance made for them in the case of other people, and are less
listened to as a ground or a justification of conduct, than any other
natural human feelings; perhaps because men compliment them in their own
case with the names of so many other qualities, that they are seldom
conscious how mighty an influence Edition: current; Page: [338] these
feelings exercise in their own lives. No less large and powerful is
their part, we may assure ourselves, in the lives and feelings of women.
Women are schooled into suppressing them in their most natural and most
healthy direction, but the internal principle remains, in a different
outward form. An active and energetic mind, if denied liberty, will seek
for power: refused the command of itself, it will assert its personality
by attempting to control others. To allow to any human beings no
existence of their own but what depends on others, is giving far too
high a premium on bending others to their purposes. Where liberty cannot
be hoped for, and power can, power becomes the grand object of human
desire; those to whom others will not leave the undisturbed management
of their own affairs, will compensate themselves, if they can, by
meddling for their own purposes with the affairs of others. Hence also
women’s passion for personal beauty, and dress and display; and all the
evils that flow from it, in the way of mischievous luxury and social
immorality. The love of power and the love of liberty are in eternal
antagonism. Where there is least liberty, the passion for power is the
most ardent and unscrupulous. The desire of power over others can only
cease to be a depraving agency among mankind, when each of them
individually is able to do without it: which can only be where respect
for liberty in the personal concerns of each is an established
principle.

But it is not only through the sentiment of personal dignity, that the
free direction and disposal of their own faculties is a source of
individual happiness, and to be fettered and restricted in it, a source
of unhappiness, to human beings, and not least to women. There is
nothing, after disease, indigence, and guilt, so fatal to the
pleasurable enjoyment of life as the want of a worthy outlet for the
active faculties. Women who have the cares of a family, and while they
have the cares of a family, have this outlet, and it generally suffices
for them: but what of the greatly increasing number of women, who have
had no opportunity of exercising the vocation which they are mocked by
telling them is their proper one? What of the women whose children have
been lost to them by death or distance, or have grown up, married, and
formed homes of their own? There are abundant examples of men who, after
a life engrossed by business, retire with a competency to the enjoyment,
as they hope, of rest, but to whom, as they are unable to acquire new
interests and excitements that can replace the old, the change to a life
of inactivity brings ennui, melancholy, and premature death. Yet no one
thinks of the parallel case of so many worthy and devoted women, who,
having paid what they are told is their debt to society—having brought
up a family blamelessly to manhood and womanhood—having kept a house as
long as they had a house needing to be kept—are deserted by the sole
occupation for which they have fitted themselves; and remain with
undiminished activity but with no employment for it, unless perhaps a
daughter or daughter-in-law is willing to abdicate in their favour the
discharge of the same functions in her younger household. Surely a hard
lot for the old age of those who have worthily discharged, as long as it
was given to them Edition: current; Page: [339] to discharge, what the
world accounts their only social duty. Of such women, and of those
others to whom this duty has not been committed at all—many of whom pine
through life with the consciousness of thwarted vocations, and
activities which are not suffered to expand—the only resources, speaking
generally, are religion and charity. But their religion, though it may
be one of feeling, and of ceremonial observance, cannot be a religion of
action, unless in the form of charity. For charity many of them are by
nature admirably fitted; but to practise it usefully, or even without
doing mischief, requires the education, the manifold preparation, the
knowledge and the thinking powers, of a skilful administrator. There are
few of the administrative functions of government for which a person
would not be fit, who is fit to bestow charity usefully. In this as in
other cases (pre-eminently in that of the education of children), the
duties permitted to women cannot be performed properly, without their
being trained for duties which, to the great loss of society, are not
permitted to them. And here let me notice the singular way in which the
question of women’s disabilities is frequently presented to view, by
those who find it easier to draw a ludicrous picture of what they do not
like, than to answer the arguments for it. When it is suggested that
women’s executive capacities and prudent counsels might sometimes be
found valuable in affairs of state, these lovers of fun hold up to the
ridicule of the world, as sitting in parliament or in the cabinet, girls
in their teens, or young wives of two or three and twenty, transported
bodily, exactly as they are, from the drawing-room to the House of
Commons. They forget that males are not usually selected at this early
age for a seat in Parliament, or for responsible political functions.
Common sense would tell them that if such trusts were confided to women,
it would be to such as having no special vocation for married life, or
preferring another employment of their faculties (as many women even now
prefer to marriage some of the few honourable occupations within their
reach), have spent the best years of their youth in attempting to
qualify themselves for the pursuits in which they desire to engage; or
still more frequently perhaps, widows or wives of forty or fifty, by
whom the knowledge of life and faculty of government which they have
acquired in their families, could by the aid of appropriate studies be
made available on a less contracted scale. There is no country of Europe
in which the ablest men have not frequently experienced, and keenly
appreciated, the value of the advice and help of clever and experienced
women of the world, in the attainment both of private and of public
objects; and there are important matters of public administration to
which few men are equally competent with such women, among others, the
detailed control of expenditure. But what we are now discussing is not
the need which society has of the services of women in public business,
but the dull and hopeless life to which it so often condemns them, by
forbidding them to exercise the practical abilities which many of them
are conscious of, in any wider field than one which to some of them
never was, and to others is no longer, open. If there is anything
vitally important to the happiness of human beings, it is that they
should Edition: current; Page: [340] relish their habitual pursuit. This
requisite of an enjoyable life is very imperfectly granted, or
altogether denied, to a large part of mankind; and by its absence many a
life is a failure, which is provided, in appearance, with every
requisite of success. But if circumstances which society is not yet
skilful enough to overcome, render such failures often for the present
inevitable, society need not itself inflict them. The injudiciousness of
parents, a youth’s own inexperience, or the absence of external
opportunities for the congenial vocation, and their presence for an
uncongenial, condemn numbers of men to pass their lives in doing one
thing reluctantly and ill, when there are other things which they could
have done well and happily. But on women this sentence is imposed by
actual law, and by customs equivalent to law. What, in unenlightened
societies, colour, race, religion, or in the case of a conquered
country, nationality, are to some men, sex is to all women; a peremptory
exclusion from almost all honourable occupations, but either such as
cannot be fulfilled by others, or such as those others do not think
worthy of their acceptance. Sufferings arising from causes of this
nature usually meet with so little sympathy, that few persons are aware
of the great amount of unhappiness even now produced by the feeling of a
wasted life. The case will be even more frequent, as increased
cultivation creates a greater and greater disproportion between the
ideas and faculties of women, and the scope which society allows to
their activity.

When we consider the positive evil caused to the disqualified half of
the human race by their disqualification—first in the loss of the most
inspiriting and elevating kind of personal enjoyment, and next in the
weariness, disappointment, and profound dissatisfaction with life, which
are so often the substitute for it; one feels that among all the lessons
which men require for carrying on the struggle against the inevitable
imperfections of their lot on earth, there is no lesson which they more
need, than not to add to the evils which nature inflicts, by their
jealous and prejudiced restrictions on one another. Their vain fears
only substitute other and worse evils for those which they are idly
apprehensive of: while every restraint on the freedom of conduct of any
of their human fellow creatures, (otherwise than by making them
responsible for any evil actually caused by it), dries up pro tanto the
principal fountain of human happiness, and leaves the species less rich,
to an inappreciable degree, in all that makes life valuable to the
individual human being.


Treaty Obligations

while it is undoubtedly true that, in the practical application even of
the best established and most universally received rules of morality, in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred an honest man seldom doubts by which
he is to guide his conduct, yet no one, I presume, will deny that there
will be found a hundredth case in which different moral obligations
conflict. But, though this is not likely to be denied, there exists very
generally a cowardly reluctance to look the fact in the face, and make
provision for it, as one of the unavoidable inconveniences of an
imperfect condition. People are afraid lest the force of recognised
duties should be weakened, by admitting the liability of one duty to be
overruled by another; and, though well knowing that this does happen,
and not prepared to deny that it sometimes ought to happen, they prefer
to be excused from giving their approbation beforehand to so
unpleasant-looking a fact. The consequence is, that those who, having
the responsibility of action, are forced to make for themselves some
path through these moral entanglements, finding no rules or principles
laid down for them but such as ignore instead of meeting the
difficulties of the case, decide according to the dictate either of
their selfish interests, or of some prevailing sentiment, which, if more
disinterested, is not necessarily a truer guide. And since national
concerns, by reason of their superior complication, afford by far the
greatest number of these disputable questions of obligation, this is one
(and not the smallest) among the causes of that laxity of principle
which has almost always prevailed in public matters, even when the
moralities of private life have met with a tolerable amount of
observance.

There is no case which more flagrantly exemplifies these general
observations than the case of international treaties. Through the
greater part of the present century, the conscience of Europe has been
habituated to the demoralising spectacle of treaties made only to be
broken. In 1814 and 1815, a set of treaties were made by a general
Congress of the States of Europe, which affected to regulate the
external, and some of the internal, concerns of the European nations,
for a time altogether unlimited. These treaties, having been concluded
at the termination of a long war, which had ended in the signal
discomfiture of one side, were imposed by some of the contracting
parties, and reluctantly submitted to by others. Their terms were
regulated by the interests, and relative strength at the time, of the
victors and vanquished; and were observed as long as those interests
Edition: current; Page: [344] and that relative strength remained the
same. But as fast as any alteration took place in these elements, the
powers, one after another, without asking leave, threw off, and were
allowed with impunity to throw off, such of the obligations of the
treaties as were distasteful to them, and not sufficiently important to
the others to be worth a fight. The general opinion sustained some of
those violations as being perfectly right; and even those which were
disapproved, were not regarded as justifying a resort to war. Europe did
not interpose when Russia annihilated Poland; when Prussia, Austria, and
Russia extinguished the Republic of Cracow; or when a second Bonaparte
mounted the throne of France. England alone, among the great contracting
powers, never actively violated this set of treaties; though England,
too, was a party after the fact to one of the most justifiable of the
violations—the separation of Belgium from Holland. Such is the spectacle
which Europe has had before her for half a century; and it is well
calculated, one would think, to moderate her surprise, when another
treaty, made forty years later, in the same wild hope of fixing a
certain condition of the affairs of Europe in perpetuity, has in a
similar manner broken down.[*] If we ask ourselves why this case has
aroused more anger in this country than any of the others had done, the
reply, if given with a full remembrance of the previous cases, can
scarcely be, that it is more shocking to the conscience than any of
them; for the annihilation of the Republic of Cracow was not merely the
infringement of a treaty, it was also, had there existed no treaty to
forbid it, in itself a gross violation of public rights and morality.
But it did not touch so nearly what we had been taught to fancy our own
interests, and was not so liable to be imagined a defiance to us in
particular. Not to a greater tenderness of the public conscience, but to
the different aspect affronts and injuries wear to the unreflecting when
addressed to ourselves and when addressed to others, must, I fear, be
attributed our special perception of the moral value of treaties on this
occasion. We may fairly be complimented with being so far in advance of
some of the other great States of Europe, that it is a disputable point
whether we have of late years infringed any of our treaty obligations,
although we must remember that the announcement, by one of our leading
statesmen, that almost the last treaty we entered into was only to be
considered binding by ourselves if adhered to by the others who entered
into the same obligation, met with very general approval.[†] Yet the
public, if actuated purely by moral feeling, ought to have been more
startled by the suggestion of a possible breach of morality Edition:
current; Page: [345] on our own part, than by the certainty of an actual
breach of it on the part of somebody else. The fact is, we have not yet
advanced so far as to regard these questions purely from the moral point
of view. Our indignation is hot or cold according to circumstances quite
foreign to the morality of the case; and is likely to continue so until
the morality of such cases has been placed on a firmer and more clearly
defined basis than it has yet received.

I am ready to join with any one in averring that this is an evil state
of things, most injurious to public morality. No honest man can see with
indifference a condition in which treaties do not bind, in which it
rests with the party who deems himself aggrieved by them, to say whether
they shall be observed or not; in which nations cannot trust each
other’s pledged word. It does not follow, however, that this evil is
likely to be remedied by ignoring the fact, that there are treaties
which never will, and even which never ought to be permanently observed
by those who have been obliged to submit to them; far less, therefore,
to be permanently enforced. It is not necessary to go far back for one
of the most signal examples which the entire history of mankind affords.
Did any impartial person blame Prussia or Austria, because, in 1813,
they violated the treaties which bound them to the first Napoleon, and
not only did not fight in his ranks, as their engagements required, but
brought their whole military force into the field against him, and
pursued him to his destruction? Ought they, instead of cancelling the
treaties, to have opened a negotiation with Napoleon, and entreated him
to grant them a voluntary release from their obligations; and if he did
not comply with their request to be allowed to desert him, ought they to
have faithfully fought in his defence? Yet it was as true of those
treaties, as it is of the treaty of 1856, that disadvantageous and
dishonourable as they might be, they had been submitted to as the
purchase-money of peace, when the prolongation of war would have been
most disastrous; for, had the terms been refused, Napoleon could with
ease have conquered the whole of Prussia, and at least the German
dominions of Austria, which is considerably more. I presume, than
England and France could have done to Russia, after the fall of
Sebastopol. I already seem to hear some uncandid reader crying out, “Do
you pretend that Russia has as complete a justification, and even
positive obligation, to break her treaties, as Prussia and Austria then
had?” Certainly not. The case of Austria and Prussia was about as
extreme a case as, in the nature of national affairs, could possibly
occur: Russia herself could not pretend that her own approaches within a
great distance of theirs. But the principle may be the same, and
principles are best tested by extreme cases. If a principle will not
stand good in every case which it covers, it is a proof that some other
principle requires to be considered along with it.

What means, then, are there of reconciling, in the greatest practicable
degree, the inviolability of treaties and the sanctity of national
faith, with the undoubted fact that treaties are not always fit to be
kept, while yet those who have imposed them upon others weaker than
themselves are not likely, if they retain confidence in their own
strength, to grant a release from them? To effect this reconcilement, so
Edition: current; Page: [346] far as it is capable of being effected,
nations should be willing to abide by two rules. They should abstain
from imposing conditions which, on any just and reasonable view of human
affairs, cannot be expected to be kept. And they should conclude their
treaties, as commercial treaties are usually concluded, only for terms
of years.

To the first of these rules it is essential that the obligations should
be defined, which nations are not warranted in imposing on one another.
I do not pretend to enter exhaustively into so large a subject. But one
great principle one can clearly see, and it is the only one which need
concern us at present. The community of nations is essentially a
republic of equals. Its purposes require that it should know no
distinction of grades, no rights or privileges enjoyed by some and
refused to others. The basis of international law—without which the
weak, for whose protection chiefly international law exists, would never
be secure—is, that the smallest and least powerful nation, in its
capacity of a nation, is the equal of the strongest. Whatever rights
belong to one belong to all, and can only be temporarily forfeited, even
by misconduct, unless the erring nation is to be treated as a savage,
and thrust out of the communion of civilised nations altogether. Now,
all treaties which bind a nation, within itself and in its own affairs,
by restrictions not common to all the rest, violate this principle. Of
this nature is a stipulation that a country shall maintain one form of
government, or abjure another; that she shall abstain from fortifying
places situated within her own territory; that she shall limit to a
prescribed amount her army or her fleet, or the portion of each
stationed in a particular part of her dominions, no equivalent
limitation of armaments being consented to by the other parties to the
treaty, or by nations in general. I do not say that some of these
restrictions cannot ever be admissible as a temporary penalty for crimes
committed against other states; though in general some penalty would be
preferable which could be completed by a single act. The period,
however, for which such exceptional disabilities can justly be imposed,
ought not, I conceive, to exceed the length of a generation; or, more
properly, the period at the end of which a majority of the adult
population will have grown up from childhood subsequently to the
offence, so that the people suffering the penalty are no longer, as a
body, the same with those who shared in the fault.

But the end in view would be in a still greater degree attained, were
nations to decline concluding any treaties except for limited periods.
Nations cannot rightfully bind themselves or others beyond the period to
which human foresight can be presumed to extend; thus aggravating the
danger which, to some extent, always exists, that the fulfilment of the
obligation may, by change of circumstances, become either wrong or
unwise. I am not aware of any good reason why engagements reciprocally
entered into by nations for their joint advantage, should not be subject
to periodical renewal. There are few, if any, contracts between nations,
the terms of which might not be so framed as to protect either party
from sustaining undue loss or injury in case of the non-renewal of the
contract. And with Edition: current; Page: [347] respect to the other
kind of treaties, those which nations inflict upon one another, there is
a very much greater chance of their being faithfully observed, if a
legitimate and peaceful emancipation from them is looked forward to at
the end of a moderate length of time. The treaty of 1856, vainly
affecting to be perpetual, has been repudiated in fourteen years. Had it
been concluded for twenty, or even for twenty-five years, it would
probably have lasted out the term. It is, perhaps, necessary to say,
that the expiration of a treaty does not imply that a money indemnity
exacted by it should be repaid, or a ceded territory restored.
Possession, once transferred, is an accomplished fact; and to disturb
it, after an interval of peace, would imply a fresh aggression, which
requires no stipulation of treaties to constitute it a casus belli. The
lapse of the treaty would merely reinstate the nation that had been
punished, in those common rights of all nations, the enjoyment of which
is the normal condition of an independent State; rights which no nation
ought to be, and no high-spirited nation will ever consent to be,
permanently dispossessed of.

If these principles are sound, it remains to be considered how they are
to be applied to past treaties, which, though containing stipulations
which, to be legitimate, must be temporary, have been concluded without
such limitation, and are afterwards violated, or, as by Russia at
present, repudiated, on the assumption of a right superior to the faith
of engagements.

It is the misfortune of such stipulations, even if as temporary
arrangements they might have been justifiable, that if concluded for
permanency, they are seldom to be got rid of without some lawless act on
the part of the nation bound by them. If a lawless act, then, has been
committed in the present instance, it does not entitle those who imposed
the conditions to consider the lawlessness only, and to dismiss the more
important consideration, whether, even if it was wrong to throw off the
obligation, it would not be still more wrong to persist in enforcing it.
If, though not fit to be perpetual, it has been imposed in perpetuity,
the question when it becomes right to throw it off is but a question of
time. No time having been fixed. Russia fixed her own time, and
naturally chose the most convenient. She had no reason to believe that
the release she sought would be voluntarily granted, on any conditions
which she would accept, and she chose an opportunity which, if not
seized, might have been long before it occurred again, when the other
contracting parties were in a more than usually disadvantageous position
for going to war.

Had this been all, there would have been little in the conduct of Russia
but what most other powers in her position would have done, and what
there are, at all events, but too many precedents for doing. Her special
offence is, that in asserting what she might, without being entirely
unreasonable or unscrupulous, believe to be her right, she showed no
desire whatever that the wound inflicted upon the confidence, so
necessary to mankind, in the faith of treaties, should be the smallest
possible. She showed herself perfectly indifferent to any such
consequence. She made her claim in the manner most calculated to startle
mankind, and to destroy Edition: current; Page: [348] their faith in the
observance of all treaties which any one of the contracting parties
thinks it has an interest in shaking off. Not but that it is in itself a
less immoral act, if a promise is to be broken, to give notice
beforehand of the intention, than to keep it hidden, and break the
engagement without notice, while the other party is relying on its being
kept. This is too obvious not to be seen in private life, and it is as
true of public treaties as of private promises. Had Russia, however,
thought the trust of nations in each other’s engagements a thing of the
highest importance, she would, even if determined to assert finally at
all costs what she claims as her right, have first exhausted all
endeavours, and consented to some sacrifices, to attain the freedom she
claimed by the general consent of Europe. If Russia had acted in this
honourable manner, she would have set, perhaps for the first time in
history, an example which neither we ourselves who blame her, nor any
other state, would find it easy to show in their own annals. She has
chosen a less honourable course. But this misconduct of Russia
(misconduct not so much before the bar of history and the past practice
of nations, as before that of true morality, and of what we may hope
will become the future customs) does not entitle us to bring upon
millions of innocent persons the unspeakable evils of war, in order to
enforce an obligation which it was wrong to impose, and which we ought
therefore plainly to declare that we do not desire to reimpose. The
notice which the high-handed proceeding of the Russian Government
demanded at our hands, was to protest (as Lord Granville immediately
did)[*] against the claim of a contracting party to set aside a treaty
by a mere announcement of its will; and, for the rest, to follow the
precedent set by the French Government, when three of the powers who
were parties to the treaties of Vienna, destroyed the Republic of Cracow
and confiscated its territory. M. Guizot, then Foreign Minister of
France, made a public declaration, that France took notice of this
violation of treaties; that she did not intend to oppose herself, by
arms or otherwise, to the proceeding, but that she reserved to herself
the full exercise of whatever rights the infringement of a treaty, to
which she was a contracting party, restored to her.[†] If we are unable
to arrange any joint peaceable action with the other powers concerned,
an intimation somewhat like this would be the only dignified notice we
could take of the mode of a demand, the substance of which the intrinsic
merits of the case forbid us to resent. We may, however, hope that if
our Government stands firm against the unreasonable clamour of the war
party, some arrangement may be come to by which the obnoxious
stipulations may be abrogated with the consent of all concerned.


The Contagious Diseases Acts

william nathaniel massey: Are you acquainted with the Acts of Parliament
which are the subject of inquiry by this Commission? I have a general
acquaintance with them.

Have you any practical knowledge of the working of them? No practical
knowledge.

Then any opinion you express with regard to these Acts, refers to the
principles on which they are founded? Yes; the general principles of
legislation. I have not studied the details.

The principal Act now in force is entitled “An Act for the better
prevention of contagious diseases at certain naval and military
stations.”[*] And are you aware that the policy which dictated this
legislation in the first instance, was a desire to maintain the health
of soldiers and sailors, whose physical efficiency was reported to be
very seriously affected by the disease which they contracted at garrison
and seaport towns, those towns and garrisons being the resort, in a
peculiar manner, of common prostitutes? Yes; I am aware of that.

Do you consider that such legislation as that is justifiable on
principle? I do not consider it justifiable on principle, because it
appears to me to be opposed to one of the greatest principles of
legislation, the security of personal liberty. It appears to me that
legislation of this sort takes away that security, almost entirely from
a particular class of women intentionally, but incidentally and
unintentionally, one may say, from all women whatever, inasmuch as it
enables a woman to be apprehended by the police on suspicion and taken
before a magistrate, and then by that magistrate she is liable to be
confined for a term of imprisonment which may amount, I believe, to six
months, for refusing to sign a declaration consenting to be examined.

The Act of Parliament in express terms applies only to common
prostitutes, plying their trade as prostitutes within the protected
districts. The police have express instructions to confine their action
to the women specified in the Act. We have it in evidence before us that
those orders have been most carefully obeyed by a select body of police
detached upon this particular duty.a In point of fact,a I do Edition:
current; Page: [352] not know whether that would make any difference in
your opinion. The Commission, I may say, are satisfied that no practical
abuse of the Act has taken place by the police; that in fact, women who
are not intended by the Legislature to be subjected to these provisions
have not been molested by it. We so far qualify that by saying it is
possible that in some particular instances the suspicion of the police
may have rested upon women who are not within the description of common
prostitutes, but practically the Act has been carried out with great
care. Is your objection confined to the possibility of a modest woman
being brought up under these Acts? That is a very great part of my
objection. Although I am quite aware that the Act only authorises the
apprehension of prostitutes, still a discretion must necessarily be left
in the police to prevent the entire evasion of the Act: and I have
understood that it is held by its supporters, medical men and others,
that the powers must be very considerable if the Acts are not to be very
seriously evaded. What number of cases there have been in which modest
women, or women at any rate not prostitutes, have been apprehended by
the police on suspicion, I do not know, but it appears to me that the
police have that power, and that they must have the power, it is
impossible to enforce the Acts unless they have the power, the Acts
cannot be made really effectual unless those powers are strengthened.
But in any case it seems to me that we ought not to assume, even
supposing bthatb no case of abuse has been found out as yet, that abuses
will not occur. When power is given which may be easily abused, we ought
always to presume that it will be abused, and although it is possible
that great precautions will be taken at first, those precautions are
likely to be relaxed in time. We ought not to give powers liable to very
great abuse, and easily abused, and then presume that those powers will
not be abused.

What power do you refer to? The power of apprehending women on
suspicion, and then requiring them to enter into engagements subjecting
themselves to examination.

Then setting aside the tendency to which these Acts are liable in their
execution of invading the liberty of modest women, do you consider it
objectionable in itself that the Legislature should make provision for
the periodical examination of common prostitutes who let out their
bodies for hire? I think that it is objectionable. If any penalty is to
be imposed, and this must be considered a penalty, for being a common
prostitute, she ought to have power to defend herself in the same manner
as before any ordinary tribunal, and of being heard by counsel, in order
to prove that she is not a prostitute if she can. There are great
numbers of prostitutes, I believe in this country, certainly in foreign
countries, who are not registered, and the effect of the examination
which the Act requires, and similar examinations which are required in
foreign countries, is said to be, and I believe with a great deal of
truth, to lead to a great amount of clandestine prostitution, and the
Acts therefore are not effectual unless clandestine prostitution is
touched also

Edition: current; Page: [353]
The provision of the Act is this, that a woman shall be permitted, if
she cthinksc fit, to acknowledge herself to be a common prostitute upon
paper, that is called in the Act a voluntary submission, and she may
deposit that in the hands of the police or the authorities of the
hospital, and in pursuance of that submission she is examined and
subjected to the same examination with regard to periodical attendance
as if ordered to attend before the magistrate; the alternative being
that if she declines to sign a voluntary submission, she may be taken
before a magistrate, and the question whether she is a common
prostitute, will be a question for the magistrate to try. She may be
heard by counsel, and the only difference between that mode of trial and
the ordinary mode of trial is the absence of a jury. She is tried, in
fact, by a tribunal analogous to that which has been created by recent
legislation in an Act called the “Criminal Justice Act,”[*] which in
fact merely extends summary jurisdiction which already obtained in this
country. Do I understand you to say that you think the protection of a
jury is necessary in such a case? I have not considered that subject,
but I think all the protection, which is necessary in other cases of
judicial investigation would be necessary in this. There can be hardly
any more serious case to the person concerned than that of being charged
with being a prostitute, if she is not really so. With regard to the
first part of your question, supposing that her declaration of her being
a prostitute is voluntary, and that her submission to examination is
strictly spontaneous on her part, I have nothing to say against it then,
but I do not think it is the business of Government to provide the means
of such examinations.

To follow up that, supposing a woman had voluntarily submitted her
person to examination, and her person was found to be diseased, would
you consider it an unjustifiable violation of her dlibertyd if she was
sent to hospital, and detained in the hospital against her will until
she was cured? I should think the objection less strong than in the
other case, but I still think it objectionable because I do not think it
is part of the business of the Government to provide securities
beforehand against the consequences of immoralities of any kind. That is
a totally different thing from remedying the consequences after they
occur. That I see no objection to at all. I see no objection to having
hospitals for the cure of patients, but I see considerable objection to
consigning them to hospitals against their will.

The condition which I took the liberty of putting to you was the
voluntary submission of the women? Yes.

Upon that voluntary submission the woman is found diseased. Now the
woman being found diseased and being a common prostitute, upon her
voluntary submission the law assumes the right of sending her to a
hospital, and detaining her in that hospital, until she is no longer in
a condition to communicate contagion Edition: current; Page: [354] Do
you think that a warrantable violation of the woman’s liberty, which is
the first question? Do you consider that a proper course for legislation
to take? I do not consider it a violation of the woman’s liberty in that
case, because she would know beforehand to what she would subject
herself. If she voluntarily underwent this examination, she might well
be made to undertake that if she was examined and found diseased, she
should consent beforehand to go to the hospital, and be there detained
until cured; therefore, on the score of personal liberty, I have no
objection to it. But I have a still remaining objection to the
Government undertaking, even on the solicitation of the parties
concerned, to provide beforehand the means of practising certain
indulgences with safety. Of course the objection on the ground of
personal liberty does not occur in that case, but the other objection
does. It applies to this case as much as the other, I think if a woman
comes and asks to be examined and asks it to be ascertained that she is
in a healthy condition, and to be submitted to treatment until she is
healthy in order that she may be fitter to follow a certain profession,
the State is in fact going out of its way to provide facilities for the
practice of that profession, which I do not think the State is called
upon, or can without considerable disadvantage undertake, to do.

Would your objection be modified by this consideration. It is in
evidence before this Commission, and we will assume for the purpose of
your answer that it is proved to your satisfaction that the contagious
disease extends far beyond the guilty persons, and may be communicated
to innocent wives, and be transmitted to innocent children? That opens
another point on which I should like to express an opinion. Of course I
understand it is not the object of the Act of Parliament to afford
facilities for indulgence. The object of the Act is not to protect those
who voluntarily seek indulgence, but to protect the innocent from having
these diseases communicated to them; that I understand to be the object.
Now a woman cannot communicate the disease but to a person who seeks it,
and who knowingly places himself in the way of it. A woman can only
communicate it through a man; it must be the man who communicates it to
innocent women and children afterwards. It seems to me, therefore, if
the object is to protect those who are not unchaste, the way to do that
is to bring motives to bear on the man and not on the woman, who cannot
have anything to do directly with the communication of it to persons
entirely innocent, whereas the man can and does. If you ask whether I
think it possible to bring motives to bear on the man, I think there are
various ways in which it may be done. In the first place, the same
degree of espionage which is necessary to detect women would detect also
the men who go with them, because very often they are detected only by
the circumstance of being seen to go into certain houses with men. In
that case, if the women can be laid hold of, the men can also, and be
obliged to give an account why they are there. But without the exercise
of espionage on either men or women, there are other means which can be
had recourse to; very severe damages in case a man is proved to have
communicated this disease to a modest woman, and in the case of his
wife, divorce as a matter of Edition: current; Page: [355] right; I
think that a stronger case in which to apply the remedy of divorce can
hardly be conceived.

Supposing for a moment that the enactment in law making it penal to
communicate the disease to another person was objectionable on the
ground that it would lead to extortion, and that a wife so affected
would not be able to overcome all those influences which her own
affections have over her to induce her not to take the extreme step of
seeking divorce, what remedy would you provide for the innocent
children? The evil could only reach the children through the wife. The
unborn children could only be infected by the mother being first
infected. If it was proved that a man had been the means of
communicating to his wife, she being a modest woman, or to his children,
any of these diseases, the law should grant the woman a divorce, and
compel the man in proportion to his means to pay very heavy damages to
them for their support apart from himself. That, in my opinion, is what
the law ought to do in the case. I quite see there would be often great
difficulty in enforcing it; probably it would only be enforced in a
certain proportion of cases, and very likely not in the majority of
cases, but still the knowledge that it could be enforced would operate
as a considerable check on the evil; and even the fact that the law
declared this a very great crime, not only rendering the person who
committed it subject to heavy penalties, but deemed so serious as to
warrant the dissolving of the marriage tie, the mere effect of placing
its mark on the conduct in this way would have very great influence, and
would make this crime be considered, as in truth it is, one of the
gravest a man could possibly commit.

rev. john hannah: Would you think it worth while to make an effort to
stop it, viewed simply as a plague? That is, of course, a question to be
considered, but I have heard and read that many medical men, and other
strong supporters of the Act, think it cannot be made effectual enough
to stamp out these diseases unless it is made much more strict than it
is, consequently much more oppressive to women, and still more liable to
abuse, besides which I have understood that several medical men who were
warm supporters of the Acts nevertheless think it impossible for the
Acts to be made to that degree effectual, or any degree approaching
that, unless men are subject to it as well as women, and the reason they
do not propose this is because they do not think that men would consent
to it.

Confining you to the one point of detention, I think I gather your
objections to it arise from collateral considerations which admit of
removal. I mean the consideration that the detention is simply to
facilitate an immoral purpose, an objection which you dwelt upon, did
you not? It seems to me always liable to that objection, even if it is
not liable to others.

Still, is not the policy of detention separable from what is clearly a
bad reason, viz., to make sin safe? I do not see how it can be
separated. I do not see how that which makes illicit indulgence of that
sort safe, or is supposed to do so, can be prevented from giving some
degree of encouragement to it, though far, I know, from the intention of
the Act.

Edition: current; Page: [356]
The point, I apprehend, is really this; in case it is really a plague,
differing only from other plagues by the intermixture of the moral
element, then is not the Legislature justified in the interests of the
innocent in endeavouring, so far as it can, to stamp it out, even if
there is no hope of complete success? I should say this question is very
much affected by the degree of hope there is of complete success. It
seems to me there ought to be a very good prospect of complete
extirpation to justify anything of that kind, and I do not understand
that such hope is entertained by those who are now most in favour of the
Acts.

sir walter james: You mentioned that personal examination of men and
women was a degrading thing, and in itself illegal? I did. I think it is
exceedingly degrading to the women subjected to it, not in the same
degree to men; therefore there is more reason that if it is applied at
all it should be applied to men as well ase women, or if not to both,
rather to men than to women. Men are not lowered in their own eyes as
much by exposure of their persons, besides which it is not a painful
operation in the case of a man, which I believe in the case of a woman
it often is, and they very much detest it.

With regard to the cost of these Acts, I understand on the continent
these Acts are self-supporting, are you aware of that? are you aware
that such is the case? I am not aware whether it is so.

Is it your opinion that it would be right and just that those persons
for whose safety these Acts were passed should pay for them? It depends
on who those are who are affected by the Acts.

Should you consider it more just that they should pay for it by licenses
as on the continent, or that the British taxpayer, the poor man should
pay for it? It seems to me that all the objections which exist against
the Acts, exist in an extreme degree against licenses, because they have
still more the character of toleration of that kind of vicious
indulgence, than exists under the Acts at present, or can exist in any
other way.

I think on this point you will agree with me that licenses should be
paid for byf prostitutes themselves, and the brothel-keepers, rather
than as in the present case by the English people? If the thing was
really justifiable on the ground on which it is defended, namely, as a
great sanitary measure for the protection of all classes, I think it
would be very fair that the English people should pay: but it is not
professed, and could not be with truth asserted to be the object of
these Acts, to protect persons in vicious indulgence or to protect the
class of prostitutes. The strongest argument for the Acts has been the
protection of those who are liable to take the disease without any
voluntary exposure to it on their own part.

But supposing the opposite to be the case, would not the hardship of the
case be greater, that is, that the innocent should pay the cost of these
Acts rather than the guilty? I should think such considerations of such
extremely small importance Edition: current; Page: [357] compared with
the general bearing of the Acts, that I should think them hardly worth
regarding. The very expense in any case would not be great.

But the expense would be very considerable if extended to other classes?
If applied to the whole population the expense no doubt would be very
much greater.

Would you consider, if applied to the whole population, it would be a
justifiable subject to tax the people for? I think it would; I do not
think it belongs to the class of measures which, if justifiable at all,
it would be unjust to make a charge on the whole community. The health
of the community is a subject now considered, I think with reason, to be
within the province of Government. But I do not think this consideration
material in comparison with the inconvenience that I see in the fact,
that the expense could not be charged on the prostitutes themselves
without in a manner licensing their profession. Moreover it is not the
prostitutes themselves mainly who are protected, but their customers,
and I do not see how you can get at them especially to make them pay.
You can make prostitutes pay, but you cannot make those who frequent
them pay.

Undoubtedly you can according to the principles of political economy, by
making a prostitute recoup by charging a larger sum to customers,
because we have heard in evidence that these registered women charge a
higher price than the others. A gentleman said the officers gave a
higher price to those licensed women than the others, so that you see in
that case the cost would not fall upon the woman but upon her customers?
In that case this particular objection fails, but the objection is still
unanswered that it involves special licensing of persons to practise
that profession.

Do you think that evil is at all avoided by the present Acts? By no
means. I think one of the objections to the present Acts is that they do
not avoid that evil, but still they are not attended with so much of it
as the licensing system would be.

You are aware that a woman has an order to attend the next examination?
I am.

And that it is their custom to show their tickets? Yes; that comes very
near to the licensing.

Can you draw a distinction between it and licensing? There is hardly any
distinction. It makes some difference that it is not called a license.
That makes a considerable difference in the feeling about it, not by the
public, but by the women themselves.

We have strong evidence that they are considered equivalent to it? That
may very possibly be the case.

Do you see a substantial difference between medical gexaminationsg under
these Acts, and the continental system? I do not see any substantial
difference. It seems to me that the same objections apply to both.

Except that it is applied to a smaller population here, and that on the
continent it is applied to all? More extensively.

Edition: current; Page: [358]
rev. frederick denison maurice: Supposing the whole of these Acts were
repealed so far as regards the military and naval population, so that
the whole purpose to supply prostitutes for them was taken away, would
you then think that there might be hospitals for this purpose
established by Government; would you see any objection to such hospitals
being under Government control? I do not see any reason. I by no means
wish that there should not be hospital accommodation for those cases to
the utmost extent for which it may be required. But I think the
objection that applies to the Acts would apply in some degree to having
hospitals for this express purpose. The great defect now is that these
patients are not admitted into most hospitals. It would be desirable
that the restrictive regulations which exclude them from all except a
few hospitals should be removed in some way or other, and hospital
accommodation provided for this disease in the same way as for others,
but not by Government taking that charge on itself, which would be
liable to the same objection as licensing prostitutes.

Do you not think the Government ought to exert itself for the purpose of
putting down this disease? I think the Government ought, so far as it
can, to exert itself in putting down all diseases—this among the rest,
but I certainly do see some degree of objection to anything special
being done by the Government distinguishing between this and other
diseases in that respect.

Then if the Act really fulfilled its purpose, and was for all contagious
diseases, by there being one department in each hospital, you would not
think that objectionable? No. Supposing the opinion of Parliament was
that contagious diseases generally, all sorts of infectious and
contagious diseases, were proper subjects for the Government to take in
hand administratively, and to provide proper means for curing, I should
say there was no objection in including this among the others.

You would not think it bad legislation? No, because it would not single
out diseases of this kind to meet with particular favour.

dr. john henry bridges: I understood one of your objections to the Act
was that the State thereby gave security for the consequences of
committing an immoral act? It facilitates the act beforehand; which is a
totally different thing and always recognized in legislation as a
different thing from correcting the evils which are the consequences of
vices and faults. If we were never to interfere with the evil
consequences which persons have brought upon themselves, or are likely
to have brought upon themselves, we should help one another very little.
Undoubtedly it is quite true that interfering to remedy evils which we
have brought on ourselves has in some degree the same bad consequences,
since it does in the same degree diminish the motive we have to guard
against bringing evils on ourselves. Still a line must be drawn
somewhere, and a marked line can be drawn there. You may draw a line
between attacking evils when they occur, in order to remedy them as far
as we are able, and making arrangements beforehand which will enable the
objectionable practices to be carried on without incurring the danger of
the evil. Edition: current; Page: [359] hTheseh two things I take to be
distinct, and capable of being kept distinct in practice. As long as
hospitals are not peculiarly for that class of diseases, and do not give
that class of disease any favour as compared with others, they are not
liable to objection, because their operation consists in remedying the
effects of past evils: they do not hold out a special facility
beforehand to practising illicit indulgence with a security which it
would not otherwise enjoy. The interference is not preventive but
remedial.

By attacking the evil after it has occurred, you would, I presume,
prefer dealing with a woman after she is diseased? Yes; I mean having
hospitals, and taking means of curing people of diseases either of this
kind or other kinds, which they have brought upon themselves by their
own fault.

You are probably aware speaking of the country generally that there are
not a very large number of hospitals, for the treatment of these
diseases? I believe there are not.

And that it is excluded to a very large extent from our provincial
hospitals? Yes.

Now would not the effect of having wards for the admission of venereal
disease in all our hospitals scattered about the country have the effect
which you deprecate, that is, of making fornication more secure from the
chance of disease than it is at present? No doubt it would. No doubt
everything you do to relieve people from what may be the iconsequencei
of their own fault, does in some degree diminish the motives to refrain
from that fault. Still if we are to help one another at all, we must not
stretch this argument to its full extent. Relieving people who are in
danger of starvation is liable to the same objection. All poor laws, all
relief whatever to the indigences or distresses of our fellow creatures
are liable to it, since the people themselves are often very much to
blame for bringing themselves into a position in which they require
relief, and no doubt the relief does in some not inconsiderable degree
diminish the prudential motives for abstaining. But still all our
experience, and the consideration given to the question by thinkers and
legislators, have ended in the recognition of this, that we ought not to
abstain from helping one another through the evils of life, provided we
do it in such a way as that it shall not provide facilities beforehand,
but only deal with the evil when it has been incurred.

Apart from the existence of venereal disease, will you be prepared to
lay down as a principle that the State should not take cognizance of the
existence of prostitution? Of course a good deal will depend on the sort
of cognizance, but I do not think that prostitution should be classed
and recognised as such by the State. It seems to me there are
inconveniences of many kinds in that.

You do not see your way to any improved legislation, for instance, with
reference to brothels? That is a different question and a very difficult
one. The Edition: current; Page: [360] question of the regulation of
brothels, whether they should be systematically put down, or let alone
to a certain degree, enters into very wide reaching considerations as to
the degree in which the law should interfere in questions of simple
morality, and also how far it should attack one portion of the persons
who conspire to do a particular act, while it tolerates the others. I
have always felt it very difficult to lay down a general rule on the
subject, and I am not prepared to do so now, but I do not think it
material to the consideration of these Acts.

sir john somerset pakington: Am I right in inferring from the evidence
you have been so good as to give us, that you would not consider the
fact of a very large proportion of the crews of our men-of-war and the
soldiers of our army, being incapacitated for rendering service to the
State by this terrible disease, an adequate reason for legislation of
this kind? Not for legislation of this kind; but it might be for
legislation of other kinds. I cannot say that I have considered the
subject much, but I do not see why the State should not subject its own
soldiers and sailors to medical examination, and impose penalties on
them in case they are found diseased. I would not undertake to say that
it might not, by measures directly acting on soldiers and sailors, in a
very considerable degree discourage that kind of indulgence. It is
certain, at least I have understood so, that the impression on the minds
of soldiers and sailors, is that it is not discouraged, that it is
considered by Parliament a necessity which may be regulated, but which
must be accepted, and that Parliament does not entertain any serious
disapprobation of immoral conduct of that kind. Now the State might
exercise an influence opposite to that, by making the being found
diseased a ground for military penalties in the case of soldiers and
sailors. I do not pretend to have made up my mind on the subject, or to
have anything definite to propose. I only throw that out as a
possibility.

Are you aware that in the case of soldiers, the very thing you recommend
has been now in practice for many years, and is still in practice? I
have understood that soldiers are examined.

Under those circumstances the remedy you suggest can hardly be regarded
as a fresh security? Not an entirely fresh security, certainly. I have
mentioned that I have not considered or studied that part of the
subject.

I infer from your answer that the fact to which I have adverted of the
known suffering in the way I have described must be regarded as a great
public evil? No doubt it is a great public evil.

Do you think it is an evil which the State would not be justified in
endeavouring to avert? If the State endeavours to avert it by any means
which are not objectionable in a greater degree than the evil itself.

Do you think that the State had better rather continue to suffer from
the evil than to pass such Acts as these for its prevention? I think the
State had better continue to suffer as much of that evil as it cannot
prevent in other ways, by the application of military discipline and the
correction of these practices among the soldiers.

Can you suggest any way other than that already adverted to, and which I
Edition: current; Page: [361] have told you is already in exercise? You
mentioned that the soldiers are liable to examination, but you have not
mentioned, and I am not aware, to what degree, if the result of that
examination proves them to be diseased, they are liable to penalties.

I cannot describe the exact penalty, but the principle has been in
action. I do not say with regard to the whole army, but can you suggest
any other description? I have not considered that part of the subject,
but certainly I am not prepared to suggest any other.

And I understand you to be of opinion that in no case should the State
resort to such a remedy as is found in these Acts? Exactly. I do not
think that the State should resort to any remedy which operates by
taking means beforehand to make the indulgence safe.

I think you told us that you have only a general knowledge of jthesej
Acts, and no practical experience of their working? That is so.

You spoke of the violation of personal liberty, and I think you also, if
I took down your words correctly, objected to the power of apprehending
women on suspicion.[*] Do you think, as far as you know the Act, that
the expression “apprehend the woman on suspicion” is an expression taken
in its ordinary sense, which is applicable to the powers which these
Acts give? It seems to me that it is applicable as far as I understand
the subject; inasmuch as when women have not voluntarily declared
themselves to be prostitutes, they may be, as I understand, watched by
policemen, and if the policeman thinks a woman is practising
prostitution, although not registered, he has it in his power, on any
grounds of suspicion which appear to him to be adequate, to require the
woman to enter into an undertaking to submit herself to examination, or
to take her before a magistrate, who will make her do so.

I am glad I asked you the question, because it is very clear you are
under a misapprehension. There is no such power calling on a woman to
make a declaration compelling her to be examined. The only power of the
police in this case is where they have good reason to suppose a woman to
be practising common prostitution, if she does not voluntarily sign a
paper stating she is willing to be examined, to lay an information
before a magistrate, and proceed in the ordinary course before that
magistrate. You would hardly call that apprehension on suspicion, would
you? Certainly, I should call that apprehending a woman on suspicion. It
is apprehending a woman on grounds which, in the opinion of the
policeman, place her under suspicion of practising prostitution without
acknowledgment. I am aware that policemen have no power of using any
compulsion for making a woman enter into an engagement subjecting
herself to examination. I am aware that that can only be done before a
magistrate, and after such inquiries as he Edition: current; Page: [362]
might hold; but the policeman has it in his power, whether he uses the
power or not, to use threats to induce the woman to enter into this
engagement.

I have no wish to raise any question on the narrow meaning of the word
“apprehend,” but as you have said it is a violation of personal liberty,
I will ask you whether you are aware that the liberty of such women, as
of all other persons, is protected by law, until interrupted under the
authority of law? Yes, I did not make that distinction as I ought to
have done. I admit its relevancy.

When you said that a prostitute ought to have the power of defending
herself before the ordinary tribunals, I think you would admit that she
has that power, because she is brought before the magistrate, and that
magistrate is not only free but bound in duty to hear everything that a
woman has got to say, and judge of the evidence before deciding her case
as he would in any other? That depends on whether it is explained to her
that she may be defended by counsel.

The attack on personal liberty is subject to those usual grounds of
protection which the law gives to all parties? It may be so.

In the case, which is not only a possible case but I fear from the
evidence we have had the not very uncommon one of disease being
communicated to innocent wives and innocent children, would you really
trust to the power of divorce as the only remedy in such a kcase?
shouldk you not endeavour at least to resort to prevention as being
better than trusting to so uncertain a cure? I think that if prevention
is to be applied at all, it should be applied to the man, who alone has
the power of committing this offence in a direct way. When a woman
infects anyone the man must always be a consenting party to running the
risk: it is only a man who having been infected himself can communicate
infection to an innocent person, and therefore if there is any argument
for prevention, it should be for preventive measures applied to men who
infect these women, and not to the women themselves.

Do you know or have you ever thought of any process by which prevention
could be applied to men? I think that it could. No doubt it would fail
very often; but inasmuch as it certainly does happen frequently that
women are brought under the operation of these Acts through being
watched by the police, and its being ascertained that they frequent
certain houses along with men, the police can equally ascertain who the
men are who go lwith them; and when they find that men have been seen to
frequent along with prostitutes houses of this description, those men
might be compelled to undergo examination for a certain period
afterwards.

Am I to understand you seriously to propose that in this country we
should adopt a system of espionage over every man seen going into a
brothel, and that men seen to go into a brothel should be subject all
alike to personal examination? I am not suggesting espionage; but if it
is already in practice on women who go to brothels, Edition: current;
Page: [363] with a view of ascertaining whether a woman is a prostitute
by her being seen there, I think the woman should not be singled out to
be subject to examination, but the men should be subjected to it also,
or even if the women were not subjected the men might be, but if the one
is, certainly I should say both.

Therefore you do, as I understand, recommend such a system of espionage
as I have described? I do not recommend it, because I do not recommend
the Acts at all; I do not recommend that there be any espionage
practised upon women, and therefore not on men either.

Do myou notm recommend it to this extent, if any remedy is attempted for
the evils complained of, it should be done in that shape? If any
preventive measures are to be taken I should say it should be in that
shape. But penal measures, or remedial measures by means of hospitals,
could be adopted independently of that, increasing the hospitals, and
increasing the facilities for admission of those who are diseased, and
laying severe penalties on the man who communicates this disease to an
innocent woman.

If the Legislature did enact with a view to preventing such cases as
this, that the woman affected should have the remedy of divorce, would
your knowledge of human nature lead you to the conclusion that that
remedy would be resorted to in one case in a hundred, or one case in a
thousand? A good many more than that, though probably not the majority.

william nathaniel massey: Are you aware that for a man to give his wife
a disease of that description would be adjudged cruelty by the Court of
Divorce, and would be a ground for a divorce, at all events a mensa?
Yes, but not complete dissolution of the matrimonial tie.

sir john pakington: Would you make it so? Yes.

william nathaniel massey: You would make it a vinculo? Yes, a vinculo,
accompanied with heavy pecuniary damages for the benefit of the
sufferers, the wife or children.

sir john pakington: We have received very strong evidence before this
Commission, that at one, at least, I think more, but at one of the most
populous places to which these Acts apply, one result has been that
whereas there were previously hundreds of children—when I say children,
girls under 13, 14, and 15 years of age—practising habitual
prostitution, that since these Acts have passed that class has almost,
if not quite, disappeared; now, assuming that evidence to be correct,
would it reconcile your mind to the operation of the Acts producing so
blessed an effect as that? It would not remove the objections by any
means. I have not examined into the statistics of the question, which I
have no doubt are very contradictory, because very opposite results are
stated at different places, with the effect of creating very great
distrust in statistics altogether on that subject. In the experience of
those countries where Acts similar to these have been very much Edition:
current; Page: [364] longer in operation, it is certainly found that a
vast quantity of prostitutes escape the operation of them altogether;
that the process to which women are subjected by it is so extremely
offensive and odious, that there is a great quantity of clandestine
prostitution; and therefore it may well happen—I do not pretend
knowledge on the subject—that the introduction of these Acts in places
where they have not prevailed before, may be attended with a
considerable diminution of avowed prostitution, without any diminution
of real prostitution. I may now say, as I did not say it before, that
another reason which appears to me very strong against the system of
these Acts is, that they have a decided tendency to increase the class
of prostitutes. Even if it is only by the fact that a considerable
number of them are withdrawn from their profession periodically, the
vacancy or gap that is thus made, as the demand calls forth a supply,
has a natural tendency to be filled up by additional prostitutes being
brought into the profession. That is independent of another argument,
which may also be urged, that in so far as the Acts are supposed to
afford increased security to the men who frequent these women, it is
liable to produce an increased demand for prostitutes, and therefore
bring forth in that way an increased supply. But independently of that,
which is an argument I have no doubt the Commission are perfectly
familiar with—the mere taking away forcibly from the competition of a
certain per-centage of the prostitutes for a certain time, naturally
tends to have that vacancy filled up by healthy persons from other
quarters.

I think I may ask you whether that is not rather a fear than any fact
established by proof? As I have already mentioned, I have not studied
the details, and cannot say that I know as a matter of fact that it is
so, though accounts I have read, and which appear to me reliable, as to
what takes place on the Continent, appear to me very strong evidence
that that is actually the case there. Whether it is the case here may be
matter of dispute. It may perhaps not be the case yet—it may be the case
hereafter, though not the case already, or it may be the case without
being detected. I know nothing practically about the matter, but it
appears to me that there is the tendency, and that the law which
produces it is as strong as any law in political economy.

Excuse me saying that I think your answer to my question about children
did not quite meet the question. I asked you whether, assuming such to
be the case, having first told you the strong evidence we had, whether
that fact would reconcile you in any degree to the operation of the
Acts, and your answer was that you distrusted such statistics. I did not
ask you that, but assuming those to be accurate, whether such an
important fact would reconcile you in any degree to the operation of the
Acts? If we are to enter into one part of the question only, the degree
of efficacy of the Acts for their professed purpose, of course any
increased efficacy furnishes an additional argument for the Acts. But no
argument that can be produced of that kind, or I believe ever has been
produced, would seem to me to overbear the very strong arguments of
other kinds against the operation of such Acts, therefore my Edition:
current; Page: [365] opinion would not be favourable to the Acts,
supposing the circumstances you mention to be finally confirmed.

If the existence of such a fact would not reconcile you to the
nprinciplesn of the Acts, would it not at least make you thankful that
such a result had ensued? Of course anybody must be thankful for such a
result, from whatever cause.

In following up the same part of the subject, may I ask you whether you
think it would be inconsistent with due regard to the liberty of the
subject, if such young creatures as I have referred to, and you must be
aware that such must be the case in all our crowded populations, if the
law authorised the detention of such young creatures as I have
described, when once convicted of prostitution, in homes or refuges for
their subsequent reclamation? I am not prepared to say that might not be
a good measure. I perhaps would go further for the protection of
extremely young persons than most people would. I should not be adverse
to strengthening and extending the laws which at present exist against
intercourse of any kind with girls below a certain age. I should not be
at all adverse to raising considerably the age below which it should be
prohibited.

We have had strong evidence with regard to the moral effects of these
Acts, and a number of cases in which through the agency of these Acts,
by first being taken into a hospital, where moral effects are produced
as well as physical, and then being sent to a refuge, numbers of young
women have been reclaimed from vice and restored to a virtuous life, and
in many instances married. Would such a fact as that reconcile you to
the operation of these Acts? I think otheseo effects might just as well
be produced by the mere existence of hospitals, by receiving them into
hospitals, having proper hospital accommodation for them, and when there
having them attended by those benevolent and excellent people who
undertake their reclamation.

Are you now contemplating voluntary hospitals or hospitals supported by
the State? Either. I have already stated I should object to hospitals
supported by the State for this particular disease exclusively, but if
contagious diseases generally were considered a proper subject for the
State to take under its charge, I should not object to those being
included.

Supposing these abandoned women did not go into them, what would you do
then? Suppose they did not go in, I do not see how anything could be
done.

Then your remedy would fail? Yes; but the women who would not go in
would be those on whom the remedy would be the least likely to be
effectual.

Supposing they did go in and would not stay when they were there, what
would you do? I should not be prepared to give any compulsory power to
detain them.

You would let them come out and spread disease right and left, rather
than do good? I do not think it is the business of legislation of this
kind to take special care Edition: current; Page: [366] either of the
women who practise this profession, or of the men who frequent them. I
apprehend that the real object for which these Acts are most defensible,
if defensible at all, is the protection of the innocent, and as long as
people are not liable to be infected without exposing themselves to it,
I should say you do enough for them if you offer them the means of cure
provided they accept it.

We have very strong evidence before us to this effect, that the Acts in
certain localities have greatly diminished the number of common
prostitutes, and have had the effect of raising the lowest and most
demoralised portion of that class to a comparatively more decent and
more respectable state of life—would not you acknowledge that to be a
good effect? Stated as you have stated it, any such effect, however
produced, is good pro tanto.

I am only putting to you that which we have before us in evidence.
Precisely so, but I should consider, if any effect of that sort is
produced, it is produced by a process, not applicable specially to
prostitution, but to the criminal and vicious classes, the dangerous
classes altogether, all of whom may have some amount of good done them
if attention is paid to them by benevolent persons, or, it may be by
persons employed by the Government. It would not be beyond the proper
function of the State to take means of making these persons understand
that they are not considered as totally unworthy of any kind of regard
or consideration by the rest of their fellow-creatures, but that it is
the object to reclaim them, and do them as much good as their condition
makes them susceptible of. Such measures, at all events, might be
applied to the dangerous classes generally, much more than ever has been
done yet. I should not see the least objection to applying such measures
to prostitutes also, but that would not require Acts of this
description.

We have before us evidence of such a nature as I think hardly you or
anybody else whose attention has not been called to it can imagine, with
regard to the state not only of degradation but of physical disease,
amounting to absolute rottenness, that the women have been found in in
the neighbourhood of our camps, I think if I remember right such a state
as almost to lead to the idea of falling to pieces; now looking at the
fact of a human being in such a horrible state as this, would you leave
those women to rot and die under the hedges, rather than pass such Acts
as these to save them? I do not think it is quite fair to put the
question exactly in that manner, because I am inclined to think that I
should approve very much more decided measures of that sort with regard
to the destitute classes generally than are now in practice. I should
say, if you found a person in this last stage of consumption, or any
other very wretched disease, it might be advisable and right to lay hold
of that person and give him or her relief or proper medical treatment,
and under proper medical regulation, and whatever relief of that sort I
gave to others I would give to these women. What I object to is having
special legislation for those women, which would have the effect of
singling them out for a special cure, to which persons with other
equally bad diseases are not subject.

I apprehend that I may take your answer as being in effect in the
affirmative. You Edition: current; Page: [367] would rather leave these
women to die and rot under hedges than pass these Acts and save them? I
do not think that a fair way of putting the question, because I think
they could be just as well saved without these Acts. I would do a great
deal for the purpose of affording relief to persons who were found in an
extremely bad state of disease, and in a state of destitution. I would
not do more for those than others; and certainly the fact that there are
such persons would not reconcile me to these Acts, because I think these
Acts do a great deal of mischief in other ways, which is not at all
necessary to be done for the sake of affording relief to those people,
without giving it in common to all others who have an equal claim to it.

I apprehend that I can take that as an affirmative answer. My inference
is that you would trust in such a case to the ordinary operation of the
poor law?[*] I have not such a very high opinion of the administration
of the poor laws as not to think it admits of great improvement in that
respect as in others, and such improvement I should be glad to see,
though I am not prepared to say exactly what it should be.

But the poor law has long been in operation and has not had the effect
of rescuing these poor creatures from suffering, therefore is it not a
fair inference that they are insufficient to meet that case? That is a
defect in the poor law, but some other means should be in practice for
the relief of disease Disease is a proper subject for a special branch
of administration.

You would suggest that some remedy should be afforded for so horrible an
evil, but you would rather it should not be the remedy we are now
trusting to? Precisely.

Though that remedy has been proved signally successful? Yes, but if it
has been signally successful, I think it has been by means and in a
manner which ought equally to be applied to other diseases, if applied
at all, and it would be equally effectual without the Acts.

We have before us evidence to the effect that from the fear of coming
under the cognizance of the police, these Acts have had the effect of
deterring young women from practising that clandestine prostitution
which they previously did. Now assuming this evidence to be consistent
with the facts. I would ask you whether you do not consider, that
whatever your objections to the pprinciplesp of these Acts are, they
have produced good results? Undoubtedly that result taken by itself,
must be considered a good result by every one. It is, however, to be
weighed against the probability that in other cases an opposite result
might be produced, for which also strong presumption can be shown.

You stated an opinion, and it is an opinion which other witnesses also
strongly stated, that the examination of the persons which is authorised
by the Acts is very degrading to those women, that is your opinion? I
dare say there are some of them to whom nothing is degrading, they are
so degraded already, but there is reason to Edition: current; Page:
[368] believe that there are many of them who have a considerable
quantity of modesty left, and to whom therefore it is degrading.

Your answer rather anticipates the next question I was going to put to
you, which is whether taking the case of a woman who submits herself
daily to prostitution in three or four instances, and lives that
miserable life, which do you think is the real degradation to that
woman; is it the life that she leads, or the fact that she subsequently
undergoes examination in order to cure the evils which have arisen from
that disgraceful life? I think both are degrading, but degradation for
degradation, that which is compulsory seems to me always more degrading
in its effects on the character than what is done voluntarily.

Am I to understand from that answer that you think the fact of such an
examination is more degrading to such a woman than the debauched life
she leads? I think it adds considerably to the degradation already
caused by the debauched life.

sir walter james: It is an additional degradation? An additional
degradation.

anthony john mundella: If we have evidence before us that many young
people have been removed from prostitution in the streets by the
operation of the Acts, are you not of opinion that we might also remove
those young persons from the streets without subjecting them to this
examination and making them healthy for prostitution? Certainly I think
so. I think that what removes them from the streets is the moral effect
which is produced in their minds, and the chance of producing this
effect is likely to be lessened by subjecting them to an offensive and
what must be considered a tyrannical operation by the force of law. I
should think that must tend in some degree to counteract the good effect
which no doubt was produced by the moral influences that were brought to
bear on them during their detention, which are no doubt the real cause
of reclaiming them so far as they are reclaimed, and therefore they
might be applied more effectually without the machinery of the Acts.

You are familiar with the compulsory education which exists on the
continent and elsewhere, and have written a good deal on the duties of
the State towards young children. Should you think it any interference
with personal liberty, if girls under a certain age found practising
prostitution were taken up and put into some industrial home? I
certainly do not think there would be any objection to that. I think the
objection to the interference with personal liberty begins when the age
of education, properly so called, ceases. Where a person is under age,
and in a position which must counteract very much all the good
influences of education, and substitute bad ones, it is always open to
the consideration of the State whether they cannot withdraw young
persons from those bad influences. I have already mentioned that I would
go still further, and be inclined to extend very much the operation of
the penal laws which now exist against intercourse with girls under age.
I would raise the age below which that is an offence by law, very
considerably, though I have not considered up to what point.

Edition: current; Page: [369]
I was going to ask you up to what age you would think the State would be
justified in interfering to prevent prostitution? I should think
certainly up to 17 or 18, up to the age when what is commonly called
education ordinarily finishes. Possibly it might be extended with
propriety until the girl was legally of age, but on that I would not
undertake to give an opinion.

Do you think it any interference with the liberty of the subject to
prevent solicitation in the streets? No; I think that is the duty of the
police, in order to preserve the order of the streets.

Sir John Pakington has referred to the wretched women who haunt the
camps.[*] Do you see any means of clearing the camps from those wretched
women, without subjecting them to these examinations and healing them
for the purpose of prostitution with soldiers? That is a matter of
police and the military discipline of camps, which I am not conversant
with. I should think much stronger things than that are justified by
military discipline.

As I have understood your evidence, from what I heard in
cross-examination, I gather that you would attack this evil of
prostitution rather in its cause than deal with its consequences? I
would deal with the consequences by means of hospitals, and combat the
disease after it has been contracted, only taking care not to do this in
such a way as would seem to take the persons who have that disease under
the special protection of the State in a degree in which others persons
equally diseased were not taken.

If we have evidence before us that brothel-keepers are constantly
communicated with by the police, and that beer-houses and public-houses
are used as brothels in large numbers, and are well known to the local
authorities, do not you think the State would be justified in
interfering with that class of persons? Clearly it ought to be a
forfeiture of the license of a public-house or beer-house to use it as a
brothel.

But suppose it is not a beer-house, would you prosecute brothel-keepers?
That is an extremely difficult question, and I would rather not give a
positive opinion about it, because so many pros and cons have occurred
to me when I have thought about it that I have found it very difficult
to make up my mind.

robert applegarth: You conceive it to be the duty of the State to deal
with girls and boys up to the age of 16; may I ask you whether you
consider it to be the duty of the State to insist that children should
be sent to school up to that age? I cannot pretend to say exactly up to
what age. I do think the State has a right, and is bound whenever
circumstances admit, to insist on all children who are born into the
community receiving education up to a certain point, and also to give
facilities for educating them still higher.

And I suppose you consider that if the State did its duty in that
respect, we should have in addition to better educated people, a higher
standard of morality amongst the people? That is one of the greatest
reasons for desiring it.

Edition: current; Page: [370]
And therefore we should probably have less prostitution? I should think
so.

Is it your opinion that sending children to work at a young age instead
of to school leads to immoral practices, and ultimately prostitution? I
should think it extremely probable from what I have heard and read. I
have no knowledge on the subject.

In your opinion, if the laws in existence against seduction and bastardy
and in other respects were strengthened and made of real practical use,
would it have a tendency to diminish prostitution? I do not know whether
it would have a tendency to reduce prostitution, but that is not the
only thing to be considered, because it might have a tendency to
increase other kinds of illicit intercourse. When the laws relating to
bastardy made a greater attempt to enforce the obligation upon the
seducer than is the case now, they did produce very demoralizing effects
upon many women.[*] I do not mean to give an express opinion as to how
far the law might properly go on that subject. At present my feeling is
against any attempt, however much it may be agreeable to one’s moral
feelings, to restrain illicit intercourse in that way.

Whilst you are opposed to the Acts, I understand you are not opposed to
an attempt being made by the State to diminish the amount of disease by
providing hospitals? Yes, providing always it is not done with special
favour to this class of diseases, but forms part of a general system,
such a system as it may be thought advisable by the State to adopt, with
a view of getting rid of serious and especially contagious diseases, as
far as possible, throughout the community.

And would you advise that there should be provided special Lock
Hospitals, or that people suffering from this disease should be treated
in lock wards in general hospitals? I should prefer lock wards; because
lock hospitals are a special provision for this particular class of
disease, and that appears to me to be undesirable.

Do you think providing Lock Hospitals for the treatment of this disease
would have a tendency to induce inquiries on the part of young children
which parents would be ashamed to answer, and thus produce a bad moral
effect? That might be one objection; but the grand objection I have to
it is to any measure taken specially with reference to this class of
disease. The general impression it would make, however contrary to the
intention of those who support it, would be that the State patronises
the class of practices by which these diseases are engendered, since it
considers those who contract qtheseq diseases as worthy of more
attention, and takes more pains to remedy the consequences, than those
who have other diseases equally serious.

Edition: current; Page: [371]
Is it your opinion that these Acts have done any physical good at all? I
have really no means of judging. I am not acquainted with the details.
No doubt the evidence taken before this Commission will be expected to
throw light on this subject.

Is it your opinion that morally they have done harm? I cannot tell
whether they have actually done harm, but it seems to me their natural
effect is to do harm.

You think that the tendency of them is to do moral injury? I do think
so, because I hardly think it possible for thoughtless people not to
infer, when special precautions are taken to make a course which is
generally considered worthy of disapprobation safer than it would
naturally be, that it cannot be considered very bad by the law, and
possibly may be considered as either not bad at all, or at any rate a
necessary evil.

Edition: current; Page: [372] Edition: current; Page: [373]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [374]
[lf0223-21_figure_003.jpg]
Folio 1r of “On Marriage” by Harriet Taylor.

Edition: current; Page: [375]


Appendix A


ON MARRIAGE (1832–33?)

by Harriet Taylor

Holograph MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, British Library of Political and
Economic Science, London School of Economics. Untitled and unsigned, but
in Taylor’s hand. Dated on physical evidence. Not published. For a
description of the MS, and comment on it, see xxx-xxxi and lviii-lix
above.

if i could be providence to the world for a time, for the express
purpose of raising the condition of women, I should come to you to know
the means—the purpose would be to remove all interference with
affection, or with any thing which is, or which even might be supposed
to be, demonstrative of affection—In the present state of womens minds,
perfectly uneducated, and with whatever of timidity and dependance is
natural to them increased a thousand fold by their habits of utter
dependance, it would probably be mischievous to remove at once all
restraints, they would buy themselves protectors at a dearer cost than
even at present—but without raising their natures at all, it seems to
me, that once give women the desire to raise their social condition, and
they have a power which in the present state of civilization and of mens
characters, might be made of tremendous effect. Whether nature made a
difference in the nature of men and women or not, it seems now that all
men, with the exception of a few lofty minded, are sensualists more or
less—Women on the contrary are quite exempt from this trait, however it
may appear otherwise in the cases of some—It seems strange that it
should be so, unless it was meant to be a source of power in
demi-civilized states such as the present—or it may not be so—it may be
only that the habits of freedom and low indulgence in which boys grow up
and the contrary notion of what is called purity in girls may have
produced the appearance of different natures in the two sexes—As certain
it is that there is equality in nothing, now—all the pleasures such as
there are being mens, and all the disagreables and pains being womens,
as that every pleasure would be infinitely heightened both in kind and
degree by the perfect equality of the sexes. Women are educated for one
single object, to gain their living by marrying—(some poor souls get it
without the churchgoing in the same way—they do not seem to me a bit
worse than their honoured sisters)—To Edition: current; Page: [376] be
married is the object of their existence and that object being gained
they do really cease to exist as to anything worth calling life or any
useful purpose. One observes very few marriages where there is any real
sympathy or enjoyment of companionship between the parties—The woman
knows what her power is, and gains by it what she has been taught to
consider “proper” to her state—The woman who would gain power by such
means is unfit for power, still they do use this power for paltry
advantages and I am astonished it has never occurred to them to gain
some large purpose: but their minds are degenerated by habits of
dependance—I should think that 500 years hence none of the follies of
their ancestors will so excite wonder and contempt as the fact of
legislative restraint as to matters of feeling—or rather in the
expressions of feeling. When once the law undertakes to say which
demonstration of feeling shall be given to which, it seems quite
inconsistent not to legislate for all, and say how many shall be seen,
how many heard, and what kind and degree of feeling allows of shaking
hands—The Turks is the only consistent mode—

I have no doubt that when the whole community is really educated, tho’
the present laws of marriage were to continue they would be perfectly
disregarded, because no one would marry—The widest and perhaps the
quickest means to do away with its evils is to be found in promoting
education—as it is the means of all good—but meanwhile it is hard that
those who suffer most from its evils and who are always the best people,
should be left without remedy. Would not the best plan be divorce which
could be attained by any, without any reason assigned, and at small
expence, but which could only be finally pronounced after a long period?
not less time than two years should elapse between suing for divorce and
permission to contract again—but what the decision will be must be
certain at the moment of asking for it—unless during that time the suit
should be withdrawn—

(I feel like a lawyer in talking of it only! O how absurd and little it
all is!)—In the present system of habits and opinions, girls enter into
what is called a contract perfectly ignorant of the conditions of it,
and that they should be so is considered absolutely essential to their
fitness for it!—But after all the one argument of the matter which I
think might be said so as to strike both high and low natures is—Who
would wish to have the person without the inclination? Whoever would
take the benefit of a law of divorce must be those whose inclination is
to separate and who on earth would wish another to remain with them
against their inclination? I should think no one—people sophisticate
about the matter now and will not believe that one “really would wish to
go.” Suppose instead of calling it a “law of divorce” it were to be
called “Proof of affection”—They would like it better then—

At this present time, in this state of civilization, what evil would be
caused by, first placing women on the most entire equality with men, as
to all rights and privileges, civil and political, and then doing away
with all laws whatever relating to marriage? Then if a woman had
children she must take the charge of them, Edition: current; Page: [377]
women would not then have children without considering how to maintain
them. Women would have no more reason to barter person for bread, or for
any thing else, than men have—public offices being open to them alike,
all occupations would be divided between the sexes in their natural
arrangement. Fathers would provide for their daughters in the same
manner as for their sons—

All the difficulties about divorce seem to be in the consideration for
the children—but on this plan it would be the women’s interest not to
have children—now it is thought to be the womans interest to have
children as so many ties to the man who feeds her.

Sex in its true and finest meaning, seems to be the way in which is
manifested all that is highest best and beautiful in the nature of human
beings—none but poets have approached to the perception of the beauty of
the material world—still less of the spiritual—and there never yet
existed a poet, except by the inspiration of that feeling which is the
perception of beauty in all forms and by all the means which are given
us, as well as by sight. Are we not born with the five senses, merely as
a foundation for others which we may make by them—and who extends and
refines those material senses to the highest—into infinity—best fulfils
the end of creation—That is only saying—Who enjoys most, is most
virtuous—It is for you—the most worthy to be the apostle of all loftiest
virtue—to teach, such as may be taught, that the higher the kind of
enjoyment, the greater the degree—perhaps there is but one class to whom
this can be taught—the poetic nature struggling with superstition: you
are fitted to be the saviour of such—

Edition: current; Page: [378]


Appendix B


PAPERS ON WOMEN’S RIGHTS (1847–50?)

by Harriet Taylor and J.S. Mill

Holograph MSS, Mill-Taylor Collection, British Library of Political and
Economic Science, London School of Economics. The title of the first
fragment is in Harriet Taylor’s hand at the end; those of the second,
third, and fourth fragments are in Mill’s hand, that of the fifth has
been supplied. The MSS are in Mill’s hand (except for a few corrections
in pencil by Taylor in the first and fourth, indicated in variant notes,
and in repeated parts of the second); however, her title for the first,
our knowledge of their working habits, and the apparent status of these
fragments as preparatory for her “Enfranchisement of Women” suggest that
they should be attributed jointly, if not solely to her. For
descriptions of the MSS, and comment on them, see lxxii-lxxiv above.


1.: Rights of Women—and Especially with Regard to the Elective Franchise—By a Woman—Dedicated to Queen Victoria

a great number of progressive changes are constantly going forward in
human affairs and ideas, which escape the notice of unreflecting people,
because of their slowness. As each successive, step requires a whole
generation or several generations to effect it, and is then only one
step, things in reality very changeable remain a sufficient length of
time without perceptible progress, to be, by the majority of
cotemporaries, mistaken for things permanent and immovable—and it is
only by looking at a long series of generations that they are seen to
be, in reality, always moving, and always in the same direction.

This is remarkably the case with respect to Privileges and Exclusions.
In every generation, the bulk of mankind imagine that all privileges and
all exclusions, then existing by law or usage, are natural, fit and
proper, even necessary: aexcepta such as happen to be, just at that
time, in the very crisis of the struggle which puts an end to them—which
rarely happens to more than one set or class of them at a time. But
Edition: current; Page: [379] when we take all history into view we find
that its whole course is a getting rid of privileges and exclusions.
Anciently all was privilege and exclusion. There was not a person or
class of persons who had not a line marked round them which they were in
no case permitted to overstep. There was not a function or operation in
society, sufficiently desirable to be thought worth guarding, which was
not rigidly confined to a circumscribed class or body of persons. Some
functions were confined to particular families—some to particular
guilds, corporations, or societies. Whoever has any knowledge of ancient
times knows that privilege and exclusion was not only the general rule
in point of fact, but bthat nothing else was inb accordance with the
ideas of mankind. Whenever any action or occupation, private or public,
was thought of, it seemed natural to everybody that there should be some
persons who were allowed to do the action or follow the occupation, and
others who were not. People never thought of inquiring why it should be
so, or what there was in the nature of the particular case to require
it. People seldom ask reasons for what is in accordance with the whole
spirit of what they see round them, but only for what jars with that
spirit. Even bodily freedom, the right to use one’s own labour for one’s
own benefit, was once a privilege, and the great majority of mankind
were excluded from it. This seems to the people of our day something
monstrously unnatural, to people of former days it seemed the most
natural of all things. It was very gradually that this was got rid of,
through many intermediate stages, of serfage, villenage &c. Where this
did not exist, the system of castes did: and that appears profoundly
unnatural to us, but so profoundly natural to Hindoos that they have not
yet given it up. Among the early Romans fathers had the power of putting
their sons to death, or selling them into slavery: this seemed perfectly
natural to them, most unnatural to us. To hold land, in property, was
throughout feudal Europe the privilege of a noble. This was only
gradually relaxed and in Germany there is still much land which can only
be so held. Up to the Reformation to teach religion was the exclusive
privilege of a male separate class, even to read the Bible was a
privilege: Those who lived at the time of the Reformation and who
adopted it, ceased to recognize this case of privilege and exclusion,
but did not therefore call in question any others. Throughout the
Continent political office and military rank were exclusive privileges
of a hereditary noblesse, till the French revolution destroyed these
privileges. Trades and occupations have almost everywhere ceased to be
privileges. Thus exclusion after exclusion has disappeared, until
privilege has ceased to be the general rule, and tends more and more to
become the exception: it now no longer seems a matter of course that
there should be an exclusion, but it is conceded that freedom and
admissibility ought to prevail, wherever there is not some special
reason for limiting them. Whoever considers how immense a change this is
from primitive Edition: current; Page: [380] opinions and feelings, will
think it nothing less than the very most important advance which has
hitherto been made in human society. It is nothing less than the
beginning of the reign of justice, or the first dawn of it at least. It
is the introduction of the principle that distinctions, and inequalities
of rights, are not good things in themselves, and that none ought to
exist for which there is not a special justification, grounded on the
greatest good of the whole community, privileged and excluded taken
together.

Considering how slowly this change has taken place and how very recent
is its date, it would be surprising if many exclusions did not still
exist, by no means fitted to stand the test which until lately no one
ever thought of applying to them. The fact that any particular exclusion
exists, and has existed hitherto, is in such a case no presumption
whatever that it ought to exist. We may rather surmise that it is
probably a remaining relic of that past state of things, in which
privilege and exclusion were the general rule. That the opinions of
mankind have not yet put an end to it is not even a presumption that
they ought not, or that they will not hereafter do so.

We propose to examine how far this may be the case with one of the
principal remaining cases of privilege, the privilege of sex: and to
consider whether the civil and political disabilities of women have any
better foundation in justice or the interest of society than any of the
other exclusions which have successively disappeared.[*]

In the first place it must be observed that the disabilities of women
are exactly of the class which modern times most pride themselves on
getting rid of—disabilities by birth. It is the boast of England that if
some persons are privileged by birth, at least none are disqualified by
it—that anybody may rise to be a peer, or a member of parliament, or a
minister—that the path to distinction is not closed to the humblest. But
it is closed irrevocably to women. A woman is born disqualified, and
cannot by any exertion get rid of her disabilities. This makes her case
an entirely peculiar one in modern Europe. It is like that of the negro
in America, and worse than that of the roturier formerly in Europe, for
he might receive or perhaps buy a patent of nobility. Women’s
disqualifications are the only indelible ones.

It is also a peculiarity in the case, that the persons disqualified are
of the same race, the same blood, the same parents, as the privileged,
and have even been brought up and educated along with them. There are
none of the excuses grounded on their belonging to a different class in
society. The excluded, have the same advantages of breeding and social
culture, as the admitted, and have or might have the same educational
advantages of all sorts.

Edition: current; Page: [381]
It is necessary to protest first of all against a mode of thought on the
subject of political exclusions which though less common than it once
was is still very common, viz. that a prohibition, an exclusion, a
disability, is not an evil or a grievance in itself. This is the opinion
of many grave, dignified people, who think that by uttering it they are
shewing themselves to be sound, sage, and rational, superior to nonsense
and sentimentality. Where is the grievance, they say, of not being
allowed to be an elector? What good would it do you to be an elector?
Why should you wish to be one? They always require you to point out some
distinct loss or suffering, some positive inconvenience which befals you
from anything you complain of. This class of persons are enemies of all
sorts of liberty. They say to those who complain. Have you not liberty
enough? What do you want to do more than you do at present? And what is
strange is, that they think this is shewing peculiar good sense and
sobriety. It is a doctrine however which they are not fond of applying
to their own liberties. Suppose that a law were made forbidding them
ever to go beyond the British isles, and that when they complained they
were answered thus: Is not Great Britain large enough for you? Are not
England, Scotland and Ireland fine countries? Is there not variety
enough in them for any reasonable taste? Why do you want to go to
foreign countries? Your proper place is at home. Your duties are there.
You have no duties to perform abroad, you are not a sailor, or a
merchant, or an ambassador. Stay at home.—Would they not say—“My good
friend, it is possible that I may never wish to go abroad at all; or
that if I do wish, it may not be convenient: but that does not give you
any right to say I shall not go abroad. It is an injustice and a
hardship to be told that even if I do wish to go I shall not be
permitted. I shall probably live all my life in this house, but that is
a very different thing from being imprisoned in it.”—What these people
(who deem their notions wise because they are limited) think there is no
harm in cutting off from the life of anybody, except themselves, is
precisely what makes the chief value of life. They think you lose
nothing as long as you are not prevented from having what you have and
doing what you do: now the value of life does not consist in what you
have or do, but in what you may have and may do. Freedom, power, and
hope, are the charms of existence. If you are outwardly comfortable they
think it nothing to cut off hope, to close the region of possibilities,
to say that you shall have no carrière, no excitement, that neither
chance nor your own exertions shall ever make you anything more or other
than you now are. This is essentially the doctrine of people legislating
for others. Nobody legislates in this way for himself. When it comes
home to them personally all feel that it is precisely the inconnu, the
indefinite, to be cut off from which would be unbearable. They know that
it is not the thing they please to do, but the power of doing as they
please, that makes to them the difference between contentment and
dissatisfaction. Everybody, for himself, values his position just in
proportion to the freedom of it: yet the same people think that freedom
is the very thing which you may subtract Edition: current; Page: [382]
from in the case of others, without doing them any wrong. The grievance
they think is merely ideal: but they find in their own case that these
ideal grievances are among the most real of any.[*]

“The proper sphere of women is domestic life.” Putting aside the word
“proper” which begs the question, what does this assertion mean? That no
woman is qualified for any other social functions than those of domestic
life? This will hardly be asserted, in opposition to the fact not only
of the numerous women who have distinguished themselves as writers, but
of the great number of eminent sovereigns who have been women—not only
in Europe but in the East where they are shut up in zenanas. The
assertion therefore can only be supposed to mean that a large proportion
of mankind must devote themselves mainly to domestic management, the
bringing up of children &c. and that this kind of employment is one
particularly suitable for women. Now, taking this for what it is worth,
is it in other cases thought necessary to dedicate a multitude of people
from their birth to one exclusive employment lest there should not be
people enough, or people qualified enough, to fill it? It is necessary
that there should be coalheavers, paviours, ploughmen, sailors,
shoemakers, clerks and so forth, but is it therefore necessary that
people should be born all these things, and not permitted to quit those
particular occupations? Still more, is it necessary that because people
are clerks or shoemakers they should have no thoughts or opinions beyond
clerking or shoemaking? for that is the implication involved in denying
them votes.

The occupations of men, however engrossing they may be considered, are
not supposed to make them either less interested in the good management
of public affairs, or less entitled to exercise their share of influence
in those affairs by their votes. It is not supposed that nobody ought to
have a vote except idle people. A shoemaker, a carpenter, a farmer have
votes. Those who say that a scavenger or a coalheaver should not have a
vote, do not say so on account of his occupation but on account of his
poverty or want of education. Let this ground of exclusion be admitted
for one sex just as far as for the other. Whatever class of men are
allowed the franchise, let the same class of women have it.

If a woman’s habitual employment, whether chosen for or by her, is the
management of a family, she will be no more withdrawn from that
occupation by voting in an election than her neighbour will be withdrawn
by it from his shop or his office.[†]

The feeling, however, which expresses itself in such phrases as “The
proper sphere of women is private life,” “Women have nothing to do with
politics” and the like, is, I believe, not so much any feeling regarding
women as women, as a feeling against any new and unexpected claimants of
political rights. In England especially there is always a grudging
feeling towards all persons who unexpectedly Edition: current; Page:
[383] profess an opinion in politics, or indeed in any matter not
concerning their own speciality. There is always a disposition to say,
What business is that of yours? When people hear that their
tradespeople, or their workpeople, concern themselves about politics,
there is almost always a feeling of dislike accompanying the remark. It
seems as if people were vexed at finding more persons than they expected
in a condition to give them trouble on that subject. Men have the same
feeling about their sons unless the sons are mere echoes of their own
opinions: and if their wives and daughters claimed the same privilege,
their feeling would be that of having an additional disagreeable from a
quarter they did not expect.

The truth is, everybody feels that whether in classes or individuals,
having an opinion of their own makes them more troublesome and difficult
to manage: and everybody is aware, in all cases but his own, that the
intrinsic value of the opinion is very seldom much of an equivalent. But
this is no more than the ministers of despotic monarchs feel with regard
to popular opinion altogether. It is an exact picture of the state of
mind of Metternich. It is much more consistent in him. He says, or would
say, Leave politics to those whose business it is. But these other
people say, No; some whose business it is not peculiarly may and ought
to have opinions on it, but others, workpeople for instance, and women,
ought not. Constitutionalists and Liberals are right against Metternich
only on grounds which prove them to be wrong against those whom they
would exclude. Metternich is wrong because if none but those who make
politics their business, had opinions and could give votes, all the rest
would be delivered blindfold into the hands of those professional
politicians. This argument is good against excluding anybody, especially
any class or kind of persons. It is a very great evil that any portion
of the community should be left politically defenceless. To justify it
in any case it must be shewn that still greater evils would arise from
arming the class with opinions and votes. It may possibly admit of being
maintained that this would be the result of giving votes to very
ignorant or even in some cases to very poor people. But it is impossible
to shew that any evils would arise from admitting women of the same
social rank as the men who have votes.

Objection, “You would have perpetual domestic discussion.” If people
cannot differ in opinion on any important matter and remain capable of
living together without quarrelling, there cannot be a more complete
condemnation of marriage: for if so, two people cannot live together at
all unless one of them is a mere cipher, abdicating all will and opinion
into the hands of the other, and marriage can only be fit for tyrants
and nobodies.

But the proposition is false. Do not married people live together in
perfect harmony although they differ in opinions and even feelings on
things which come much nearer home than politics do to most people? Does
it not often happen for instance that they hold different opinions in
religion? And have they not continually different opinions or wishes on
innumerable private matters without quarrelling? People with whose
comfort it is incompatible that the person they live Edition: current;
Page: [384] with should think differently from them in politics or
religion will if they marry at all generally marry a person who has
either no opinions or the same sort of opinions with themselves.
Besides, by discouraging political opinions in women, you only prevent
independent disinterested opinions. In a woman, to have no political
opinions, practically means to have the political opinions which conduce
to the pecuniary interest or social vanity of the family. If honest
opinions on both sides would make dissension between married people,
will there not be dissension between a man who has an opinion and a
conscience in politics and a woman who sees what she thinks the
interests of the family sacrificed to what seems to her a matter of
indifference? except indeed that the man’s public spirit is seldom
strong enough to hold out long against the woman’s opposition,
especially if he really cares for her. Now when women and men really
live together, and are each other’s most intimate associates, (which in
the ancient republics they were not) men never can or will be patriotic
or public spirited unless women are so too. People cannot long maintain
a higher tone of feeling than that of their favourite society. The wife
is the incarnate spirit of family selfishness unless she has accustomed
herself to cultivate feelings of a larger and more generous kind: while,
when she has, her (in general) greater susceptibility of emotion and
more delicate conscience makes her the great inspirer of those nobler
feelings in the men with whom she habitually associates.

A part of the feeling which makes many men dislike the idea of political
women, is, I think, the idea that politics altogether are a necessary
evil, a source of quarrelsome and unamiable feelings, and that their
sphere of action should be restricted as much as possible, and
especially that home, and social intercourse, should be kept free from
them, and be retained as much as possible under influences counteractive
of those of politics. One would imagine from this manner of looking at
the subject, that the danger in modern times was that of too much
political earnestness: that people generally felt so strongly about
politics as to require a strong curb to prevent them from quarrelling
about it when they meet. The fact however we know to be that people in
general are quite lukewarm about politics, except where their personal
interests or the social position of their class are at stake, and when
that is the case women have already as strong political feelings as men
have. And this wish to keep the greater interests of mankind from being
thought of and dwelt on when people are brought together in private,
does not really prevent ill feeling and ill blood in society, but only
causes it to exist about things not worth it. Where is the benefit of
hindering people from disliking each other on matters involving the
liberty or the progress of mankind, only to make them hate each other
from petty personal jealousies and piques? Active minds and susceptible
feelings will and must interest themselves about something, and if you
deny them all subjects of interest except personal ones, you reduce the
personal interests to a petty scale, and make personal or social
vanities the primum Edition: current; Page: [385] mobile of life: now
personal rivalities are a much more fruitful source of hatred and malice
than differences of political opinion.

How vain the idea that the way to make mankind amiable is to make them
care for nothing except themselves and the individuals immediately
surrounding them. Does not all experience shew that when people care
only for themselves and their families, then unless they are held down
by despotism, every one’s hand is against every one, and that only so
far as they care about the public or about some abstract principle is
there a basis for real social feeling of any sort? One reason why there
is scarcely any social feeling in England, but every man, entrenched
within his family, feels a kind of dislike and repugnance to every
other, is because there is hardly any concern in England for great ideas
and the larger interests of humanity. The moment you kindle any such
concern, if it be only about negroes or prisoners in gaols, you not only
elevate but soften individual character; because each begins to move in
an element of sympathy, having a common ground, even if a narrow one, to
sympathize on. And yet you would prevent the sympathetic influence of
women from exercising itself on the great interests. Observe, by the
way, that almost all the popular movements towards any object of social
improvement which have been successful in this country, have been those
in which women have taken an active part, and have fraternized
thoroughly with the men who were engaged about them: Slavery abolition,
establishment of schools, improvement of prisons. In the last we know
that a woman[*] was one of the principal leaders, and in all three the
victory was chiefly due to the Quakers among whom women are in all
points of public exertion as active as men. Probably none of these
things would have been effected if women had not taken so strong an
interest in them—if the men engaged had not found a constant stimulus in
the feelings of the women connected with them, and a necessity for
excusing themselves in the eyes of the women in every case of failure or
shortcoming. And will any one say that the harmony of domestic life or
of social intercourse was rendered less because women took interest in
these subjects? It will be said, they were questions peculiarly
concerning the sympathies and therefore suitable to women. But they were
also subjects which concerned people’s self interest and were therefore
sources of antipathy as well as sympathy: and there have been few
subjects on which there has been more party spirit and more vehement
opposition of political feeling, than on West India slavery and on the
Bell and Lancaster schools.[†]

“What is the use of giving women votes?” Before answering this question
it may be well to put another: What is the use of votes at all? Whatever
use there is in any case, there is in the case of women. Are votes given
to protect the particular interests of the voters? Then women need
votes, for the state of the law as to their Edition: current; Page:
[386] property, their rights with regard to children, their right to
their own person, together with the extreme maladministration of the
courts of justice in cases of even the most atrocious violence when
practised by men to their wives, contributes a mass of grievances
greater than exists in the case of any other class or body of persons.
Are votes given as a means of fostering the intelligence of the voters,
and enlarging their feelings by directing them to a wider class of
interests? This would be as beneficial to women as to men. Are votes
given as a means of exalting the voters in social position and
estimation? and to avoid making an offensive distinction to their
disadvantage? This reason is strong in the case of women. And this
reason would suffice in the absence of any other. Women should have
votes because otherwise they are not the equals but the inferiors of
men.

So clear is this, that any one who maintains that it is right in itself
to exclude women from votes, can only do it for the express purpose of
stamping on them the character of inferiors.

* * * * *


2.: Women—(Rights of)

the rights of women are no other than the rights of human beings. The
phrase has come into use, and become necessary, only because law and
opinion, having been made chiefly by men, have refused to recognize in
women the universal claims of humanity. When opinion on this subject
shall be further advanced towards rectification, neither “rights of
women” nor even “equality of women” will be terms in use, because
neither of them fully expresses the real object to be aimed at, viz. the
negation of all distinctions among persons, grounded on the accidental
circumstance of sex.

The present legal and moral subjection of women is the principal, and
likely to be the latest remaining relic of the primitive condition of
society, the tyranny of physical force. Society sets out from the state
of lawlessness in which every one’s hand is against every one, and each
robs and slays a weaker than himself when he has any object to gain by
it: the next stage is that in which the races and tribes which are
vanquished in war are made slaves, the absolute property of their
conquerors, this by degrees changes into serfdom, or some other limited
form of dependence, and in the course of ages mankind pass through
various decreasing stages of subjection on one side and privilege on the
other, up to complete democracy which the advanced guard of the human
species are now just reaching: so that the only arbitrary distinction
among human beings, which the one or two most advanced nations do not
now, at least in principle, repudiate, is that between women and men.
And even this distinction, although still essentially founded on
despotism, Edition: current; Page: [387] has assumed a more mitigated
form with each step in the general improvement of mankind, whether we
compare age with age, people with people or class with class: which was
also the case with all the other social tyrannies, in their progress
towards extinction.

It deserves particular remark, that at every period in this gradual
progress, the prevailing morality of the time (with or without the
exception of a few individuals superior to their age) invariably
consecrated all existing facts. It assumed every existing unjust power
or privilege as right and proper, contenting itself with inculcating a
mild and forbearing exercise of them: by which inculcation no doubt it
did considerable good, but which it never failed to balance by enjoining
on the sufferers an unresisting and uncomplaining submission to the
power itself. Morality recommended kind treatment of slaves by their
masters, and just rule by despots over their subjects, but it never
justified or tolerated either slaves or subjects in throwing off the
yoke, and wherever they have done so it has been by a plain violation of
the then established morality. It is needless to point out how exactly
the parallel holds in the case of women and men.

In the position of women as society has now made it, there are two
distinct peculiarities. The first is, the domestic subjection of the
larger portion of them. From this, unmarried women who are either in
independent or in self-dependent pecuniary circumstances are exempt; so
that by the admission of society itself, there is no inherent necessity
for it, and the time cannot be far off when to hold any human being, who
has past the age which requires to be taken care of and educated by
others, in a state of compulsory obedience to any other human being
(except as the mere organ and minister of the law) will be acknowledged
to be as monstrous an infraction of the rights and dignity of humanity,
as slavery is at last, though tardily, among a small, comparatively
advanced part of the human race, felt to be. Practically the evil
varies, in the case of women, (as it did in the case of slaves) from
being slowly murdered by continued bodily torture, to being only subdued
in spirit and thwarted of all those higher and finer developements of
individual character of which personal liberty has in all ages been felt
to be the indispensable condition.

The other point of the question relates to the numberless disabilities
imposed on women by law or by custom equivalent to law; their exclusion
from most public and from a great number of private occupations, and the
direction of all the forces of society towards educating them for, and
confining them to, a small number of functions, on the plea that these
are the most conformable to their nature and powers. It is impossible
here to enter, with any detail, into this part of the subject. Three
propositions however may be laid down as certain. First; that the
alleged superior adaptation of women to certain occupations, and of men
to certain others, does not, even now, exist, to anything like the
extent that is pretended. Secondly, that so far as it does exist, a
rational analysis of human character and circumstances tends more and
more to shew, that the difference is principally if not wholly the
Edition: current; Page: [388] effect of differences in education and in
social circumstances, or of physical characteristics by no means
peculiar to one or the other sex. Lastly; even if the alleged
differences of aptitude did exist, it would be a reason why women and
men would generally occupy themselves differently but no reason why they
should be forced to do so. It is one of the aberrations of early and
rude legislation to attempt to convert every supposed natural fitness
into an imperative obligation. There was an apparent natural reason why
the children should follow the occupation of their parents; they were
often familiar with it from childhood, and had always peculiar
facilities for being instructed in it: but this natural fitness,
converted into a law, became the oppressive and enslaving system of
Castes. Good laws, laws which pay any due regard to human liberty, will
not class human beings according to mere general presumptions, nor
require them to do one thing and to abstain from another on account of
any supposed suitableness to their natural or acquired gifts, but will
leave them to class themselves under the natural influence of those and
of all the other peculiarities of their situation, which if left free
they will not fail to do quite as well, not to say much better, than any
inflexible laws made for them by pedantic legislators or conceited
soi-disant philosophers are ever likely to do.

* * * * *


3.: The Rights of Women to the Elective Franchise and Its Advantages

statement of the principle—perfect equality.

Although this requires no proof, necessary to consider the subject as
usually treated and reply categorically to objections either to it as a
principle or as a matter of practice.

Prevailing opinion is that some change is needed but not fundamental,
only of degree—above all that the change shall not alter the principle
of inequality, foundation of present condition.

Present state of opinion divided into the following:

Largest class, both men and women, composed of those who take things for
granted because they are so and have always been so—have a natural fear
of making any alteration in the relations on which they are accustomed
to think the best things in life depend. We would prove to them that
tho’ the best things in life did depend on those relations as they are,
the relation under its present conditions is worn out and no longer
affords to either party a life either well or sufficiently filled for
the spirit of the present time which requires more developement of the
spiritual and less of the physical instead of the contrary. True,
education is the great want of the time, but people have scarce begun to
perceive in what sense of education—that Edition: current; Page: [389]
which modern developement requires should be the desire, power and habit
of using the person’s own mind, instead of (as almost all educationists
seem to think) filling the mind with an undigested mass from the minds
of others, in consequence of which process the most educated people now
are among the most ignorant—witness not only the (absurdly) called
educated classes but preeminently the collegiate, legal, clerical,
professional men. Placeman, clergyman, barrister, doctor, has each
something to say on one subject—in the majority of cases this something
is what he has heard from others and therefore comes from him
deadborn—if an active minded person, he is found to talk interestingly
on his one subject, but let conversation be anything worthy the name of
general, and the profound ignorance and inactivity of intellect
presented by the educated classes in England is the only thing capable
of exciting the mind in intercourse with them.

After all the objections that are made both by men and women have been
considered, one may perhaps put it down as a fact that they are all
based on the supposition that conceding equal political rights to women
would be contrary to the interests of men. Some think it would be
contrary to their real interests, some to their selfish interests. We
think they would be not only in accordance with, but greatly
advantageous to, the interests of men with perhaps the exception of
interests if such they can be called, as no man in the present day would
venture to &c. It would probably put a stop to the sort of license of
indulgence which everybody is now agreed in discountenancing:—

A great part of the feeling which resists the political equality of
women is a feeling of the contrast it would make with their domestic
servitude.

The evils of women’s present condition all lie in the necessity of
dependence, the just cause of complaint lies here and not elsewhere.

Objections made by common place women }
to freedom for women
— by common place men }

Historical parallel between men and women sovereigns.

The expression “Rights of Women,” it is the fashion among women and
among a certain vulgar class of men to affect to receive with a sneer
and to endeavour to drown with ridicule. In neither case does this
appear to be because they really regard it as meaningless, for if the
same people are asked why they receive it so, they invariably grow angry
and this mode of reception perpetuates itself because the intense
constitutional shyness of Englishmen makes them of all things fear
ridicule and this phrase as well as the idea it includes has always
hitherto been put down by ridicule. Commonplace women’s aversion to it
has more meaning—it contains the everlasting dread of the givers of the
loaves and fishes[*]—their lively Edition: current; Page: [390]
imagination exaggerates the disagreeables of having to work instead of
being worked for, which their education having precluded all notions of
public spirit or personal dignity, far from being revolted at the idea
of dependence, elevates submission into a virtue per se. They enormously
exaggerate both the talent and the labour required for the external
details of life, unaware that they give as much labour and fritter away
as much talent in executing badly those domestic details which they
enlarge upon as arguments against women’s emancipation, as would be
sufficient to conduct both the public and private affairs of either an
individual or a family. Is it not true that half the time of half the
women in existence is passed in worthless and trashy work, of no benefit
to any human being?

Objection. Well bred people never exercise the power which the law gives
them. But all their conduct takes the bent which has been given to the
two characters by the relation which the law establishes. The woman’s
whole talent goes into the inducing, persuading, coaxing, caressing, in
reality the seducing, capacity. In whatever class in life, the woman
gains her object by seducing the man. This makes her character quite
unconsciously to herself, petty and paltry.

* * * * *


4.: Why Women Are Entitled to the Suffrage

1st. Because it is just.

2nd. Because women have many serious practical grievances from the state
of the law as it regards them.

3rd. Because the general condition of women, being one of dependence, is
in itself a grievance, which their exclusion from the suffrage stamps
and perpetuates.

4th. Reply to objections.

The exclusion of women from the suffrage becomes a greater offence and
degradation in proportion as the suffrage is opened widely to all men.
When the only privileged class is the aristocracy of sex the slavery of
the excluded sex is more marked and complete.

Notion that giving the suffrage does no good; a shallow fallacy. The
greatest good that can be done for women and the preparation of all
others is to recognize them as citizens—as substantive members of the
community instead of mere things belonging to members of the community.
One of the narrownesses of modern times, in England, is that the
indirect effects produced by the spirit of institutions are not
recognized and therefore the immense influence on the whole life of a
person produced by the fact of citizenship is not at all felt.

Edition: current; Page: [391]
Even according to the most moderate reformers the suffrage should
include clerks and other educated persons who are dependent on
employers. These are not turned out of their employments for voting
against their employers, only because there is a point of honour on the
subject. There ought to be the same between married people.—

To suppose that one person’s freedom of opinion must merge in that of
the other and that they could not vote differently at an election
without quarrelling is a satire on marriage and a reductio ad absurdum
of it. All persons, men and women, in the present age, are entitled to
mental independence and marriage like other institutions must reconcile
itself to this necessity.

The queen professes to live and act perfectly conscientiously, does she
ask her husband’s opinion and submit to it in all her acts as queen? is
not this a case of married persons exercising their separate freedom of
opinion and conduct?

The principle that all who are taxed should be represented, would give
votes not only to single women but to married women whose property is
settled.

Women should either not be allowed to have property or should have all
which follows from the possession of property.

The man acquires the points of character that belong to one who is
always having homage paid to the power vested in him, self-important,
domineering, with more or less politeness of form according to his
breeding, and more or less suavity according to his temper—the
difference in the case of a well bred man being mainly this, that as he
does not need to assert what never is disputed, so he does not do so,
but contents himself with accepting the position which the law assigns
and which the woman yields to him, it being a main point in the ways of
well bred people that all occasions of bringing wills into active
collision, are avoided, sometimes by a tacit compromise in which however
the chief part always remains with the strongest, sometimes because that
which knows itself to be the weakest makes a graceful retreat in time.
In this as in other relations, good breeding does not so much affect the
substance of conduct as the manner aof ita. When the man is ill bred the
manner is coarse, tyrannical, brutal, either in a greater or in a less
degree; there is superfluous self assertion, and of an offensive kind,
well bred people’s self assertion is only tacit, until their claims are
in some way resisted, but they are not therefore less tenacious of all
that bthe lawb gives them, and are often not less really inflated by
self-worship caused by the cworshipc they receive from dependents of
every description.

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [392]


5.: [Reform: Ends and Means]


Political

No hereditary privileges whatever.

No exclusion from the suffrage, but an educational qualification (qu.
what?)

Complete freedom of speech, printing, public meetings and associations,
locomotion, and industry in all its branches.

No church establishment or paid clergy; but national schools and
colleges without religion.


Social

All occupations to be alike open to men and women; and all kinds and
departments of instruction.

Marriage to be like any other partnership, dissoluble at pleasure, and
not merging any of the individual rights of either of the parties to the
contract. All the interests arising out of marriage to be provided for
by special agreement.

The property of intestates to belong to the state, which then undertakes
the education, and setting out in life, of all descendants not otherwise
provided for.

No one to acquire by gift or bequest more than a limited amount.

Edition: current; Page: [393]


Appendix C


ENFRANCHISEMENT OF WOMEN (1851)

by Harriet Taylor Mill

Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review, LV (July, 1851), 289-311.
Headed, “Art I.—The New York Tribune for Europe. October 29th, 1850”,
running titles, “Enfranchisement of Women”; unsigned. Offprinted with
title, repaged 1-23, and identified as “Reprinted from the ‘Westminster
and Foreign Quarterly Review,’ for July, 1851,” with the printer’s
identification (“London: Waterlow and Sons, Printers, 65 to 66, London
Wall, London”) added at the end, but otherwise identical. Reprinted in
Dissertations and Discussions, II, 411-49, where the title is footnoted,
“Westminster Review, July 1851.” Issued as a pamphlet, London: Trubner,
1868, where the title page reads, “Enfranchisement of Women by Mrs.
Stuart Mill. Reprinted from the ‘Westminster Review’ for July, 1851.”
London: Trubner and Co., 60, Paternoster Row, 1868. Price One Penny”,
paged 1-22, title repeated on 1; no running heads. Not listed in Mill’s
bibliography of his writings, where various items are identified as
“joint productions” with Harriet Taylor Mill. There are no corrections
or emendations in the copies of the offprint and pamphlet in the
Somerville College Library. For comment on the essay, see xxxi-xxxii and
lxxiv-lxxvii above.

The text below is that of the Westminster, the last in Harriet Taylor
Mill’s lifetime (she died in 1858, before the 1st ed. of D&D), which has
been collated with the offprint, the 1st and 2nd eds. of D&D, and the
pamphlet. In the footnoted variants, “59” indicates D&D, 1st ed., “67”,
D&D, 2nd ed., and “68”, the pamphlet.

Though the copy-text is that of 1851, the text below is headed by the
introductory note written by Mill for the version in D&D, it is
separated from the main text by a row of asterisks.

all the more recent of these papers[*] were joint productions of myself
and of one[†] whose loss, even in a merely intellectual point of view,
can never be repaired or alleviated. But the following Essay is hers in
a peculiar sense, my share in it being little more than that of an
editor and amanuensis. Its authorship having been known at the time, and
publicly attributed to her, it is proper to state, that she never
regarded it as a complete discussion of the subject which it treats of,
and, highly as Edition: current; Page: [394] I estimate it, I would
rather it remained unacknowledged, than that it should be read with the
idea that even the faintest image can be found in it of a mind and heart
which in their union of the rarest, and what are deemed the most
conflicting aexcellencesa, were unparalleled in any human being that I
have known or read of. While she was the light, life, and grace of every
society in which she took part, the foundation of her character was a
deep seriousness, resulting from the combination of the strongest and
most sensitive feelings with the highest principles. All that excites
admiration when found separately in others, seemed brought together in
her: a conscience at once healthy and tender; a generosity, bounded only
by a sense of justice which often forgot its own claims, but never those
of others; a heart so large and loving, that whoever was capable of
making the smallest return of sympathy, always received tenfold; and in
the intellectual department, a vigour and truth of imagination, a
delicacy of perception, an accuracy and nicety of observation, only
equalled by her profundity of speculative thought, and by a practical
judgment and discernment next to infallible. So elevated was the general
level of her faculties, that the highest poetry, philosophy, oratory, or
art, seemed trivial by the side of her, and equal only to expressing
some small part of her mind. And there is no one of those modes of
manifestation in which she could not easily have taken the highest rank,
had not her inclination led her for the most part to content herself
with being the inspirer, prompter, and unavowed coadjutor of others.

The present paper was written to promote a cause which she had deeply at
heart, and though appealing only to the severest reason, was meant for
the general reader. The question, in her opinion, was in a stage in
which no treatment but the most calmly argumentative could be useful,
while many of the strongest arguments were necessarily omitted, as being
unsuited for popular effect. Had she lived to write out all her thoughts
on this great question, she would have produced something as far
transcending in profundity the present Essay, as, had she not placed a
rigid restraint on her feelings, she would have excelled it in fervid
eloquence. Yet nothing which even she could have written on any single
subject, would have given an adequate idea of the depth and compass of
her mind. As during life she continually detected, before any one else
had seemed to perceive them, those changes of times and circumstances
which ten or twelve years later became subjects of general remark, so I
venture to prophecy that if mankind continue to improve, their spiritual
history for ages to come will be the progressive working out of her
thoughts, and realization of her conceptions.

* * * * *

most of our readers will probably learn from these pages for the first
time, that there has arisen in the United States, and in the most
civilized and enlightened Edition: current; Page: [395] portion of them,
an organised agitation on a new question—new, not to thinkers, nor to
any one by whom the principles of free and popular government are felt
as well as acknowledged, but new, and even unheard of, as a subject for
public meetings and practical political action. This question is, the
enfranchisement of women; their admission, in law and in fact, to
equality in all rights, political, civil, and social, with the male
citizens of the community.

It will add to the surprise with which many will receive this
intelligence, that the agitation which has commenced is not a pleading
by male writers and orators for women, those who are professedly to be
benefitted remaining either indifferent or ostensibly bhostile: itb is a
political movement, practical in its objects, carried on in a form which
denotes an intention to persevere. And it is a movement not merely for
women, but by them. Its first public manifestation appears to have been
a Convention of Women, held in the State of Ohio, in the spring of 1850.
Of this meeting we have seen no report. On the 23rd and 24th of October
last, a succession of public meetings was held at Worcester, in
Massachusetts, under the name of a “Women’s Rights Convention,” of which
the president was a woman,[*] and nearly all the chief speakers women;
numerously reinforced, however, by men, among whom were some of the most
distinguished leaders in the kindred cause of negro emancipation. A
general and four special committees were nominated, for the purpose of
carrying on the undertaking until the next annual meeting.

According to the report in the New York Tribune, above a thousand
persons were present throughout, and “if a larger place could have been
had, many thousands more would have attended.” The place was described
as “crowded from the beginning with attentive and interested
listeners.”[†] In regard to the quality of the speaking, the proceedings
bear an advantageous comparison with those of any popular movement with
which we are acquainted, either in this country or in America. Very
rarely in the oratory of public meetings is the part of verbiage and
declamation so small, that of calm good sense and reason so
considerable. The result of the Convention was in every respect
encouraging to those by whom it was summoned: and it is probably
destined to inaugurate one of the most important of the movements
towards political and social reform, which are the best characteristic
of the present age.

That the promoters of this new agitation take their stand on principles,
and do not fear to declare these in their widest extent, without
time-serving or compromise, will be seen from the resolutions adopted by
the Convention, part of which we transcribe:

Resolved—That every human being, of full age, and resident for a proper
length of time on the soil of the nation, who is required to obey the
law, is entitled to a voice in its Edition: current; Page: [396]
enactment; that every such person, whose property or labour is taxed for
the support of the government, is entitled to a direct share in such
government, therefore,

Resolved—That women are entitled to the right of suffrage, and to be
considered eligible to office, . . . and that every party which claims
to represent the humanity, the civilization, and the progress of the
age, is bound to inscribe on its banners, equality before the law,
without distinction of sex or colour.

Resolved—That civil and political rights acknowledge no sex, and
therefore the word “male” should be struck from every State
Constitution.[*]

Resolved—That, since the prospect of honourable and useful employment in
after life is the best stimulus to the use of educational advantages,
and since the best education is that we give ourselves, in the
struggles, employments, and discipline of life; therefore it is
impossible that women should make full use of the instruction already
accorded to them, or that their career should do justice to their
faculties, until the avenues to the various civil and professional
employments are thrown open to them.

Resolved—That every effort to educate women, without according to them
their rights, and arousing their conscience by the weight of their
responsibilities, is futile, and a waste of labour.

Resolved—That the laws of property, as affecting married persons, demand
a thorough revisal, so that all rights be equal between them, that the
wife have, during life, an equal control over the property gained by
their mutual toil and sacrifices, and be heir to her husband precisely
to that extent that he is heir to her, and entitled at her death to
dispose by will of the same share of the joint property as he is.[†]

The following is a brief summary of the principal demands:

1. Education in primary and high schools, universities, medical, legal,
and theological institutions.

2. Partnership in the labours and gains, risks and remunerations, of
productive industry.

3. A coequal share in the formation and administration of
laws—municipal, state, and national—through legislative assemblies,
courts, and executive offices.[‡]

It would be difficult to put so much true, just, and reasonable meaning
into a style so little calculated to recommend it as cthatc of some of
the resolutions. But whatever objection may be made to some of the
expressions, none, in our opinion, can be made to the demands
themselves. As a question of justice, the case seems to us too clear for
dispute. As one of expediency, the more thoroughly it is examined the
stronger it will appear.

That women have as good a claim as men have, in point of personal right,
to the suffrage, or to a place in the jury-box, it would be difficult
for anyone to deny. It cannot certainly be denied by the United States
of America, as a people or as a community. Their democratic institutions
rest avowedly on the inherent right of everyone to a voice in the
government. Their Declaration of Independence, framed by the men who are
still their great constitutional authorities—that document Edition:
current; Page: [397] which has been from the first, and is now, the
acknowledged basis of their polity, commences with this express
statement:

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal,
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights,
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that
to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving
their just powers from the consent of the governed.[*]

We do not imagine that any American democrat will evade the force of
these expressions by the dishonest or ignorant subterfuge, that “men,”
in this memorable document, does not stand for human beings, but for one
sex only, that “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” are
“inalienable rights” of only one moiety of the human species, and that
“the governed,” whose consent is affirmed to be the only source of just
power, are meant for that half of mankind only, who, in relation to the
other, have hitherto assumed the character of dgovernorsd. The
contradiction between principle and practice cannot be explained away. A
like dereliction of the fundamental maxims of their political creed has
been committed by the Americans in the flagrant instance of the negroes;
of this they are learning to recognise the turpitude. After a struggle
which, by many of its incidents, deserves the name of heroic, the
abolitionists are now so strong in numbers and in influence that they
hold the balance of parties in the United States. It was fitting that
the men whose names will remain associated with the extirpation, from
the democratic soil of America, of the aristocracy of colour, should be
among the originators, for America and for the rest of the world, of the
first collective protest against the aristocracy of sex, a distinction
as accidental as that of colour, and fully as irrelevant to all
questions of government.

Not only to the democracy of America, the claim of women to civil and
political equality makes an irresistible appeal, but also to those
radicals and chartists in the British islands, and democrats on the
Continent, who claim what is called universal suffrage as an inherent
right, unjustly and oppressively withheld from them. For with what truth
or rationality could the suffrage be termed universal, while half the
human species eremaine excluded from it? To declare that a voice in the
government is the right of all, and demand it only for a part—the part,
namely, to which the claimant himself belongs—is to renounce even the
appearance of principle. The chartist who denies the suffrage to women,
is a chartist only because he is not a lord;[†] he is one of those
levellers who would level only down to themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [398]
Even those who do not look upon a voice in the government as a matter of
personal right, nor profess principles which require that it should be
extended to all, have usually traditional maxims of political justice
with which it is impossible to reconcile the exclusion of all women from
the common rights of citizenship. It is an axiom of English freedom that
taxation and representation should be co-extensive. Even under the laws
which give the wife’s property to the husband, there are many unmarried
women who pay taxes. It is one of the fundamental doctrines of the
British constitution, that all persons should be tried by their peers,
yet women, whenever tried, are tried by male judges and a male jury. To
foreigners the law accords the privilege of claiming that half the jury
should be composed of themselves; not so to women. Apart from maxims of
detail, which represent local and national rather than universal ideas,
it is an acknowledged dictate of justice to make no degrading
distinctions without necessity. In all things the presumption ought to
be on the side of equality. A reason must be given why anything should
be permitted to one person and interdicted to another. But when that
which is interdicted includes nearly everything which those to whom it
is permitted most prize, and to be deprived of which they feel to be
most insulting, when not only political liberty but personal freedom of
action is the prerogative of a caste; when even in the exercise of
industry, almost all employments which task the higher faculties in an
important field, which lead to distinction, riches, or even pecuniary
independence, are fenced round as the exclusive domain of the
predominant section, scarcely any doors being left open to the dependent
class, except such as all who can enter elsewhere disdainfully pass by;
the miserable expediencies which are advanced as excuses for so grossly
partial a dispensation, would not be sufficient, even if they were real,
to render it other than a flagrant injustice. While, far from being
expedient, we are firmly convinced that the division of mankind into two
castes, one born to rule over the other, is in this case, as in all
cases, an unqualified mischief; a source of perversion and
demoralization, both to the favoured class and to those at whose expense
they are favoured, producing none of the good which it is the custom to
ascribe to it, and forming a bar, almost insuperable while it lasts, to
any really vital improvement, either in the character or in the social
condition of the human race.

These propositions it is now our purpose to maintain. But before
entering on them, we would endeavour to dispel the preliminary
objections which, in the minds of persons to whom the subject is new,
are apt to prevent a real and conscientious examination of it. The chief
of these obstacles is that most formidable one, custom. Women never have
had equal rights with men. The claim in their behalf, of the common
rights of mankind, is looked upon as barred by universal practice. This
strongest of prejudices, the prejudice against what is new and unknown,
has, indeed, in an age of changes like the present, lost much of its
force; if it had not, there would be little hope of prevailing against
it. Over three-fourths of the habitable world, even at this day, the
answer, “it has always Edition: current; Page: [399] been so,” closes
all discussion. But it is the boast of modern Europeans, and of their
American kindred, that they know and do many things which their
forefathers neither knew nor did; and it is perhaps the most
unquestionable point of superiority in the present above former ages,
that habit is not now the tyrant it formerly was over opinions and modes
of action, and that the worship of custom is a declining idolatry. An
uncustomary thought, on a subject which touches the greater interests of
life, still startles when first presented; but if it can be kept before
the mind until the impression of strangeness wears off, it obtains a
hearing, and as rational a consideration as the intellect of the hearer
is accustomed to bestow on any other subject.

In the present case, the prejudice of custom is doubtless on the unjust
side. Great thinkers, indeed, at different times, from Plato to
Condorcet,[*] besides some of the most eminent names of the present age,
have made emphatic protests in favour of the equality of women. And
there have been voluntary societies, religious or secular, of which the
Society of Friends is the most known, by whom that principle was
recognised. But there has been no political community or nation in
which, by law, and usage, women have not been in a state of political
and civil inferiority. In the ancient world the same fact was alleged,
with equal truth, in behalf of slavery. It might have been alleged in
favour of the mitigated form of slavery, serfdom, all through the middle
ages. It was urged against freedom of industry, freedom of conscience,
freedom of the press; none of these liberties were thought compatible
with a well-ordered state, until they had proved their possibility by
actually existing as facts. That an institution or a practice is
customary is no presumption of its goodness, when any other sufficient
cause can be assigned for its existence. There is no difficulty in
understanding why the subjection of women has been a custom. No other
explanation is needed than physical force.

That those who were physically weaker should have been made legally
inferior, is quite conformable to the mode in which the world has been
governed. Until very lately, the rule of physical strength was the
general law of human affairs. Throughout history, the nations, races,
classes, which found themselves the strongest, either in muscles, in
riches, or in military discipline, have conquered and held in subjection
the rest. If, even in the most improved nations, the law of the sword is
at last discountenanced as unworthy, it is only since the calumniated
eighteenth century. Wars of conquest have only ceased since democratic
revolutions began. The world is very young, and has but just begun to
cast off injustice. It is only now getting rid of negro slavery. It is
only now getting rid of monarchical despotism. It is only now getting
rid of hereditary feudal nobility. It is Edition: current; Page: [400]
only now getting rid of disabilities on the ground of religion. It is
only beginning to treat fany menf as citizens, except the rich and a
favoured portion of the middle class. Can we wonder that it has not yet
done as much for women? As society was constituted until the last few
generations, inequality was its very basis; association grounded on
equal rights scarcely existed; to be equals was to be enemies; two
persons could hardly co-operate in anything, or meet in any amicable
relation, without the law’s appointing that one of them should be the
superior of the other. Mankind have outgrown this state, and all things
now tend to substitute, as the general principle of human relations, a
just equality, instead of the dominion of the strongest. But of all
relations, that between men and women being the nearest and most
intimate, and connected with the greatest number of strong emotions, was
sure to be the last to throw off the old rule and receive the new: for
in proportion to the strength of a feeling, is the tenacity with which
it clings to the forms and circumstances with which it has even
accidentally become associated.

When a prejudice, which has any hold on the feelings, finds itself
reduced to the unpleasant necessity of assigning reasons, it thinks it
has done enough when it has re-asserted the very point in dispute, in
phrases which appeal to the pre-existing feeling. Thus, many persons
think they have sufficiently justified the restrictions on women’s field
of action, when they have said that the pursuits from which women are
excluded are unfeminine, and that the proper sphere of women is not
politics or publicity, but private and domestic life.

We deny the right of any portion of the species to decide for another
portion, or any individual for another individual, what is and what is
not their “proper sphere.” The proper sphere for all human beings is the
largest and highest which they are able to attain to. What this is,
cannot be ascertained, without complete liberty of choice. The speakers
at the Convention in America have therefore done wisely and right, in
refusing to entertain the question of the peculiar aptitudes either of
women or of men, or the limits within which this or that occupation may
be supposed to be more adapted to the one or to the other.[*] They
justly maintain, that these questions can only be satisfactorily
answered by perfect freedom. Let every occupation be open to all,
without favour or discouragement to any, and employments will fall into
the hands of those men or women who are found by experience to be most
capable of worthily exercising them. There need be no fear that women
will take out of the hands of men any occupation which men perform
better than they. Each individual will prove his or her capacities, in
the only way in which capacities can be proved—by trial; and the world
will have the benefit of the best faculties of all its inhabitants. But
to interfere beforehand by an arbitrary limit, and declare that whatever
be the genius, talent, energy, or force of mind of an individual of a
certain sex or class, those faculties shall not be exerted, or shall be
Edition: current; Page: [401] exerted only in some few of the many modes
in which others are permitted to use theirs, is not only an injustice to
the individual, and a detriment to society, which loses what it can ill
spare, but is also the most effectual mode of providing that, in the sex
or class so fettered, the qualities which are not permitted to be
exercised shall not exist.

We shall follow the very proper example of the Convention, in not
entering into the question of the alleged differences in physical or
mental qualities between the sexes; not because we have nothing to say,
but because we have too much; to discuss this one point tolerably would
need all the space we have to bestow on the entire subject.* But if
those who assert that the “proper sphere” for women is the domestic,
mean by this that they have not shown themselves qualified for any
other, the assertion evinces great ignorance of life and of history.
Women have shown fitness for the highest social functions, exactly in
proportion as they have been admitted to them. By a curious anomaly,
though ineligible to even the lowest offices of state, they are in some
countries admitted to the highest of all, the regal, and if there is any
one function for which they have shown a decided vocation, it is that of
reigning. Not to go back to ancient history, we look in vain for abler
or firmer rulers than Elizabeth; than Isabella of Castile, than Maria
Teresa; than Catherine of Russia; than Blanche, mother of Louis IX of
France; than Jeanne d’Albret, mother of Henri Quatre. There are few
kings on record who contended with more difficult circumstances, or
overcame them more triumphantly, thanh these. Even in semi-barbarous
Asia, princesses who have never been seen by men, other than those of
their own family, or ever spoken with them unless from behind a curtain,
have as regents, during the minority of their sons, exhibited many of
the most brilliant examples of just and vigorous administration. In the
middle ages, Edition: current; Page: [402] when the distance between the
upper and lower ranks was greater than even between women and men, and
the women of the privileged class, however subject to tyranny from the
men of the same class, were at a less distance below them than any one
else iwasi, and often in their absence represented them in their
functions and authority—numbers of heroic chatelaines, like Jeanne de
Montfort, or the great Countess of Derby[*] as late even as the time of
Charles I, distinguished themselves not only by their political but
their military capacity. In the centuries immediately before and after
the Reformation, ladies of royal houses, as diplomatists, as governors
of provinces, or as the confidential advisers of kings, equalled the
first statesmen of their time: and the treaty of Cambray, which gave
peace to Europe, was negociated in conferences where no other person was
present, by the aunt of the Emperor Charles V, and the mother of Francis
I.[†]

Concerning the fitness, then, of women for politics, there can be no
question, but the dispute is more likely to turn upon the fitness of
politics for women. When the reasons alleged for excluding women from
active life in all its higher departments, are stripped of their garb of
declamatory phrases, and reduced to the simple expression of a meaning,
they seem to be mainly three: jthe incompatibility of active life with
maternity, and with the cares of a household; secondly, its alleged
hardening effect on the character; and thirdly, the inexpediency of
making an addition to the already excessive pressure of competition in
every kind of professional or lucrative employment.

The first, the maternity argument, is usually laid most stress upon,
although (it needs hardly be said) this reason, if it be one, can apply
only to mothers. It is neither necessary nor just to make imperative on
women that they kshallk be either mothers or nothing; or that if they
lhavel been mothers once, they shall be nothing else during the whole
remainder of their lives. Neither women nor men need any law to exclude
them from an occupation, if they have undertaken another which is
incompatible with it. No one proposes to exclude the male sex from
Parliament because a man may be a soldier or sailor in active service,
or a merchant whose business requires all his time and energies.
Nine-tenths of the occupations of men exclude them de facto from public
life, as effectually as if they were excluded by law; but that is no
reason for making laws to exclude even the nine-tenths, much less the
remaining tenth. The reason of the case is the same for women as for
men. There is no need to make provision by law that a woman shall not
carry on the Edition: current; Page: [403] active details of a
household, or of the education of children, and at the same time
practise a profession or be elected to Parliament. Where incompatibility
is real, it will take care of itself: but there is gross injustice in
making the incompatibility a pretence for the exclusion of those in
whose case it does not exist. And these, if they were free to choose,
would be a very large proportion. The maternity argument deserts its
supporters in the case of single women, a large and increasing class of
the population, a fact which, it is not irrelevant to remark, by tending
to diminish the excessive competition of numbers, is calculated to
assist greatly the prosperity of all. There is no inherent reason or
necessity that all women should voluntarily choose to devote their lives
to one animal function and its consequences. Numbers of women are wives
and mothers only because there is no other career open to them, no other
occupation for their feelings or their activities. Every improvement in
their education, and enlargement of their faculties—everything which
renders them more qualified for any other mode of life, increases the
number of those to whom it is an injury and an oppression to be denied
the choice. To say that women must be excluded from active life because
maternity disqualifies them for it, is in fact to say, that every other
career should be forbidden them in order that maternity may be their
only resource.

But secondly, it is urged, that to give the same freedom of occupation
to women as to men, would be an injurious addition to the crowd of
competitors, by whom the avenues to almost all kinds of employment are
choked up, and its remuneration depressed. This argument, it is to be
observed, does not reach the political question. It gives no excuse for
withholding from women the rights of citizenship. The suffrage, the
jury-box, admission to the legislature and to office, it does not touch.
It bears only on the industrial branch of the subject. Allowing it,
then, in an economical point of view, its full force; assuming that to
lay open to women the employments now monopolized by men, would tend,
like the breaking down of other monopolies, to lower the rate of
remuneration in those employments, let us consider what is the amount of
this evil consequence, and what the compensation for it. The worst ever
asserted, much worse than is at all likely to be realized, is that if
women competed with men, a man and a woman could not together earn more
than is now earned by the man alone. Let us make this supposition, the
most unfavourable supposition possible, the joint income of the two
would be the same as before, while the woman would be raised from the
position of a servant to that of a partner. Even if every woman, as
matters now stand, had a claim on some man for support, how infinitely
preferable is it that part of the income should be of the woman’s
earning, even if the aggregate sum were but little increased by it,
rather than that she should be compelled to stand aside in order that
men may be the sole earners, and the sole dispensers of what is
mearned.m Even under the present laws Edition: current; Page: [404]
respecting the property of women,* a woman who contributes materially to
the support of the family, cannot be treated in the same contemptuously
tyrannical manner as one who, however she may toil as a domestic drudge,
is a dependent on the man for subsistence. As for the depression of
wages by increase of competition, remedies will be found for it in time.
Palliatives might be applied immediately; for instance, a more rigid
exclusion of children from industrial employment, during the years in
which they ought to be working only to strengthen their bodies and minds
for after life. Children are nnecessarilyn dependent, and under the
power of others; and their labour, being not for themselves but for the
gain of their parents, is a proper subject for legislative regulation.
With respect to the future, we neither believe that improvident
multiplication, and the consequent excessive difficulty of gaining a
subsistence, will oalwayso continue, nor that the division of mankind
into capitalists and hired labourers, and the regulation of the reward
of labourers mainly by demand and supply, will be for ever, or even much
longer, the rule of the world. But so long as competition is the general
law of human life, it is tyranny to shut out one half of the
competitors. All who have attained the age of self-government, have an
equal claim to be permitted to sell whatever kind of useful labour they
are capable of, for the price which it will bring.

The third objection to the admission of women to political or
professional life, its alleged hardening tendency, belongs to an age now
past, and is scarcely to be comprehended by people of the present time.
There are still, however, persons who say that the world and its
avocations render men selfish and unfeeling; that the struggles,
rivalries and collisions of business and of politics make them harsh and
unamiable; that if half the species must unavoidably be given up to
these things, it is the more necessary that the other half should be
kept free from them; that to preserve women from the bad influences of
the world, is the only chance of preventing men from being wholly given
up to them.

There would have been plausibility in this argument when the world was
still in the age of violence, when life was full of physical conflict,
and every man had to redress his injuries or those of others, by the
sword or by the strength of his arm. Women, like priests, by being
exempted from such responsibilities, and from some part of the
accompanying dangers, may have been enabled to exercise a Edition:
current; Page: [405] beneficial influence. But in the present condition
of human life, we do not know where those hardening influences are to be
found, to which men are subject and from which women are at present
exempt. Individuals now-a-days are seldom called upon to fight hand to
hand, even with peaceful weapons; personal enmities and rivalities count
for little in worldly transactions, the general pressure of
circumstances, not the adverse will of individuals, is the obstacle men
now have to make head against. That pressure, when excessive, breaks the
spirit, and cramps and sours the feelings, but not less of women than of
men, since they suffer certainly not less from its evils. There are
still quarrels and dislikes, but the sources of them are changed. The
feudal chief once found his bitterest enemy in his powerful neighbour,
the minister or courtier in his rival for place: but opposition of
interest in active life, as a cause of personal animosity, is out of
date, the enmities of the present day arise not from great things but
small, from what people say of one another, more than from what they do;
and if there are hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness, they are to
be found among women fully as much as among men. In the present state of
civilization, the notion of guarding women from the hardening influences
of the world, could only be realized by secluding them from society
altogether. The common duties of common life, as at present constituted,
are incompatible with any other softness in women than weakness. Surely
weak minds in weak bodies must ere long cease to be even supposed to be
either attractive or amiable.

But, in truth, none of these arguments and considerations touch the
foundations of the subject. The real question is, whether it is right
and expedient that one-half of the human race should pass through life
in a state of forced subordination to the other half. If the best state
of human society is that of being divided into two parts, one consisting
of persons with a will and a substantive existence, the other of humble
companions to these persons, attached, each of them to one, for the
purpose of bringing up his children, and making his home pleasant to
him; if this is the place assigned to women, it is but kindness to
educate them for this, to make them believe that the greatest good
fortune which can befal them, is to be chosen by some man for this
purpose, and that every other career which the world deems happy or
honourable, is closed to them by the law, not of social institutions,
but of nature and destiny.

When, however, we ask why the existence of one-half the species should
be merely ancillary to that of the other—why each woman should be a mere
appendage to a man, allowed to have no interests of her own, that there
may be nothing to compete in her mind with his interests and his
pleasure, the only reason which can be given is, that men like it. It is
agreeable to them that men should live for their own sake, women for the
sake of men: and the qualities and conduct in subjects which are
agreeable to rulers, they succeed for a long time in making the subjects
themselves consider as their appropriate virtues. Helvetius has met with
Edition: current; Page: [406] much obloquy for asserting, that persons
usually mean by virtues the qualities which are useful or convenient to
themselves.[*] How truly this is said of mankind in general, and how
wonderfully the ideas of virtue set afloat by the powerful, are caught
and imbibed by those under their dominion, is exemplified by the manner
in which the world were once persuaded that the supreme virtue of
subjects was loyalty to kings, and are still persuaded that the
paramount virtue of womanhood is loyalty to pmenp. Under a nominal
recognition of a moral code common to both, in practice self-will, and
self-assertion form the type of what are designated as manly virtues,
while abnegation of self, patience, resignation, and submission to
power, unless when resistance is commanded by other interests than their
own, have been stamped by general consent as pre-eminently the duties
and graces required of qwomen. Theq meaning being merely, that power
makes itself the centre of moral obligation, and that a man likes to
have his own will, but does not like that his domestic companion should
have a will different from his.

We are far from pretending that in modern and civilized times, no
reciprocity of obligation is acknowleged on the part of the stronger.
Such an assertion would be very wide of the truth. But even rthisr
reciprocity, which has disarmed tyranny, at least in the higher and
middle classes, of its most revolting features, yet when combined with
the original evil of the dependent condition of women, has introduced in
its turn serious evils.

In the beginning, and samongs tribes which are still in a primitive
condition, women were and are the slaves of men for tthet purposes of
toil. All the hard bodily labour devolves on them. The Australian savage
is idle, while women painfully dig up the roots on which he lives. An
American Indian, when he has killed a deer, leaves it, and sends a woman
to carry it home. In a state somewhat more advanced, as in Asia, women
were and are the slaves of men for utheu purposes of sensuality. In
Europe there early succeeded a third and milder dominion, secured not by
blows, nor by locks and bars, but by sedulous inculcation on the mind;
feelings also of kindness, and ideas of duty, such as a superior owes to
inferiors under his protection, became more and more involved in the
relation. But it did not for many ages become a relation of
companionship, even between vunequals; thev lives of the two persons
were apart. The wife was part of the furniture of home, of the
resting-place to which the man returned from business or pleasure. His
occupations were, as they still are, among men, his pleasures and
excitements also Edition: current; Page: [407] were, for the most part,
among men—among his equals. He was a patriarch and a despot within four
walls, and irresponsible power had its effect, greater or less according
to his disposition, in rendering him domineering, exacting,
self-worshipping, when not capriciously or brutally tyrannical. But if
the moral part of his nature suffered, it was not necessarily so, in the
same degree, with the intellectual or the active portion. He might have
as much vigour of mind and energy of character as his nature enabled
him, and as the circumstances of his times allowed. He might write the
Paradise Lost,[*] or win the battle of Marengo.[†] This was the
condition of the Greeks and Romans, and of the moderns until a recent
date. Their relations with their domestic subordinates occupied a mere
corner, though a cherished one, of their lives. Their education as men,
the formation of their character and faculties, depended mainly on a
different class of influences.

It is otherwise now. The progress of improvement has imposed on all
possessors of power, and of domestic power among the rest, an increased
and increasing sense of correlative obligation. No man now thinks that
his wife has no claim upon his actions but such as he may accord to her.
All men of any conscience believe that their duty to their wives is one
of the most binding of their obligations. Nor is it supposed to consist
solely in protection, which, in the present state of civilization, women
have almost ceased to need: it involves care for their happiness and
consideration of their wishes, with a not unfrequent sacrifice of their
own to them. The power of husbands has reached the stage which the power
of kings had arrived at, when opinion did not yet question the
rightfulness of arbitrary power, but in theory, and to a certain extent
in practice, condemned the selfish use of it. This improvement in the
moral sentiments of mankind, and increased sense of the consideration
due by every man to those who whavew no one but himself to look to, has
tended to make home more and more the centre of interest, and domestic
circumstances and society a larger and larger part of life, and of its
pursuits and pleasures. The tendency has been strengthened by the
changes of tastes and manners which have so remarkably distinguished the
last two or three generations. In days not far distant, men found their
excitement and filled up their time in violent bodily exercises, noisy
merriment, and intemperance. They have now, in all but the very poorest
classes, lost their inclination for these things, and for the coarser
pleasures generally; they have now scarcely any tastes but those which
they have in common with women, and, for the first time in the world,
men and women are really companions. A most beneficial change, if the
companionship were between equals; but being between unequals, it
produces, what good Edition: current; Page: [408] observers have
noticed, though without perceiving its cause, a progressive
deterioration among men in what had hitherto been considered the
masculine excellences. Those who are so careful that women should not
become men, do not see that men are becoming, what they have decided
that women should be—are falling into the feebleness which they have so
long cultivated in their companions. Those who are associated in their
lives, tend to become assimilated in character. In the present closeness
of association between the sexes, men cannot retain manliness unless
women acquire it.

There is hardly any situation more unfavourable to the maintenance of
elevation of character or force of intellect, than to live in the
society, and seek by preference the sympathy, of inferiors in mental
endowments. Why is it that we constantly see in life so much of
intellectual and moral promise followed by such inadequate performance,
but because the aspirant has compared himself only with those below
himself, and has not sought improvement or stimulus from measuring
himself with his equals or xsuperiors.x In the present state of social
life, this is becoming the general condition of men. They care less and
less for any sympathies, and are less and less under any personal
influences, but those of the domestic roof. Not to be misunderstood, it
is necessary that we should distinctly disclaim the belief, that women
are even now inferior in intellect to men. There are women who are the
equals in intellect of any men who ever lived: and comparing ordinary
women with ordinary men, the varied though petty details which compose
the occupation of most women, call forth probably as much of mental
ability, as the uniform routine of the pursuits which are the habitual
occupation of a large majority of men. It is from nothing in the
faculties themselves, but from the petty subjects and interests on which
alone they are exercised, that the companionship of women, such as their
present circumstances make them, so often exercises a dissolvent
influence on high faculties and aspirations in men. If one of the two
has no knowledge and no care about the great ideas and purposes which
dignify life, or about any of its practical concerns save personal
interests and personal vanities, her conscious, and still more her
unconscious influence, will, except in rare cases, reduce to a secondary
place in his mind, if not entirely extinguish, those interests which she
cannot or does not share.

Our argument here brings us into collision with what may be termed the
moderate reformers of the education of women; a sort of persons who
cross the path of improvement on all great questions; those who would
maintain the old bad principles, mitigating their consequences. These
say, that women should be, not slaves, nor servants, but companions; and
educated for that office, (they do not say that men should be educated
to be the companions of women). But since uncultivated women are not
suitable companions for cultivated men, and a man who feels interest in
things above and beyond the family circle wishes that his Edition:
current; Page: [409] companion should sympathize with him in that
interest; they therefore say, let women improve their understanding and
taste, acquire general knowledge, cultivate poetry, art, even coquet
with science, and some stretch their liberality so far as to say, inform
themselves on politics; not as pursuits, but sufficiently to feel an
interest in the subjects, and to be capable of holding a conversation on
them with the husband, or at least of understanding and imbibing his
wisdom. Very agreeable to him, no doubt, but unfortunately the reverse
of improving. It is from having intellectual communion only with those
to whom they can lay down the law, that so few men continue to advance
in wisdom beyond the first stages. The most eminent men cease to
improve, if they associate only with disciples. When they have
overtopped those who immediately surround them, if they wish for further
growth, they must seek for others of their own stature to consort with.
The mental companionship which is improving, is communion between active
minds, not mere contact between an active mind and a passive. This
inestimable advantage is even now enjoyed, when a strong-minded man and
a strong-minded woman are, by a rare chance, united: and would be had
far oftener, if education took the same pains to form strong-minded
women which it takes to prevent them from being formed. yThe modern, and
what are regarded as the improved and enlightened modes of education of
women, abjure, as far as words go, an education of mere show, and
profess to aim at solid instruction, but mean by that expression,
superficial information on solid subjects. Except accomplishments, which
are now generally regarded as to be taught well if taught at all,
nothing is taught to women thoroughly. Small portions only of what it is
attempted to teach thoroughly to boys, are the whole of what it is
intended or desired to teach to women.y What makes intelligent beings is
the power of thought: the stimuli which call forth that power are the
interest and dignity of thought itself, and a field for its practical
application. Both motives are cut off from those who are told from
infancy that thought, and all its greater applications, are other
people’s business, while theirs is to make themselves agreeable to other
people. High mental powers in women will be but an exceptional accident,
until every career is open to them, and until they, as well as men, are
educated for themselves and for the world—not one sex for the other.

In what we have said on the effect of the inferior position of women,
combined with the present constitution of married life, we have thus far
had in view only the most favourable cases, those in which there is some
real approach to that union and blending of characters and of lives,
which the theory of the relation contemplates as its ideal standard. But
if we look to the great majority of cases, the effect of women’s legal
inferiority on the character both of women and of men must be Edition:
current; Page: [410] painted in far darker colours. We do not speak here
of the grosser brutalities, nor of the man’s power to seize on the
woman’s earnings, or compel her to live with him against her will. We do
not address ourselves to any one who requires to have it proved that
these things should be remedied. We suppose average cases, in which
there is neither complete union nor complete disunion of feelings and
zofz character; and we affirm that in such cases the influence of the
dependence on the woman’s side, is demoralizing to the character of
both.

The common opinion is, that whatever may be the case with the
intellectual, the moral influence of women over men is almost always
salutary. It is, we are often told, the great counteractive of
selfishness. However the case may be as to personal influence, the
influence of the position tends eminently to promote selfishness. The
most insignificant of men, the man who can obtain influence or
consideration nowhere else, finds one place where he is chief and head.
There is one person, often greatly his superior in understanding, who is
obliged to consult him, and whom he is not obliged to consult. He is
judge, magistrate, ruler, over their joint concerns; arbiter of all
differences between them. The justice or conscience to which her appeal
must be made, is his justice and conscience: it is his to hold the
balance and adjust the scales between his own claims or wishes and those
of another. His is now the only tribunal, in civilized life, in which
the same person is judge and party. A generous mind, in such a
situation, makes the balance incline against its own side, and gives the
other not less, but more, than a fair equality; and thus the weaker side
may be enabled to turn the very fact of dependence into an instrument of
power, and in default of justice, take an ungenerous advantage of
generosity; rendering the unjust power, to those who make an unselfish
use of it, a torment and a burthen. But how is it when average men are
invested with this power, without reciprocity and without
responsibility? Give such a man the idea that he is first in law and in
opinion—that to will is his part, and hers to submit; it is absurd to
suppose that this idea merely glides over his mind, without sinking into
it, or having any effect on his feelings and practice. The propensity to
make himself the first object of consideration, and others at most the
second, is not so rare as to be wanting where everything seems purposely
arranged for apermittinga its indulgence. If there is any self-will in
the man, he becomes either the conscious or unconscious despot of his
household. The wife, indeed, often succeeds in gaining her objects, but
it is by some of the many various forms of indirectness and management.

Thus the position is corrupting equally to both; in the one it produces
the vices of power, in the other those of artifice. Women, in their
present physical and moral state, having stronger impulses, would
naturally be franker and more direct than men; yet all the old saws and
traditions represent them as artful and dissembling. Why? Because their
only way to their objects is by indirect paths. In all countries
Edition: current; Page: [411] where women have strong wishes and active
minds, this consequence is inevitable: and if it is less conspicuous in
England than in some other places, it is because Englishwomen, saving
occasional exceptions, have ceased to have either strong wishes or
active minds.

We are not now speaking of cases in which there is anything deserving
the name of strong affection on both sides. That, where it exists, is
too powerful a principle not to modify greatly the bad influences of the
situation, it seldom, however, destroys them entirely. Much oftener the
bad influences are too strong for the affection, and destroy it. The
highest order of durable and happy attachments would be a hundred times
more frequent than they are, if the affection which the two sexes sought
from one another were that genuine friendship, which only exists between
equals in privileges as in faculties. But with regard to what is
commonly called affection in married life—the habitual and almost
mechanical feeling of kindliness, and pleasure in each other’s society,
which generally grows up between persons who constantly live together,
unless there is actual dislike—there is nothing in this to contradict or
qualify the mischievous influence of the unequal relation. Such feelings
often exist between a sultan and his favourites, between a master and
his servants; they are merely examples of the pliability of human
nature, which accommodates itself in some degree even to the worst
circumstances, and the commonest natures always the most easily.

With respect to the influence personally exercised by women over men,
it, no doubt, renders them less harsh and brutal; in ruder times, it was
often the only softening influence to which they were accessible. But
the assertion, that the wife’s influence renders the man less selfish,
contains, as things now are, fully as much error as truth. Selfishness
towards the wife herself, and towards those in whom she is interested,
the children, though favoured by btheirb dependence, the wife’s
influence, no doubt, tends to counteract. But the general effect on him
of her character, so long as her interests are concentrated in the
family, tends but to substitute for individual selfishness a family
selfishness, wearing an amiable guise, and putting on the mask of duty.
How rarely is the wife’s influence on the side of public virtue: how
rarely does it do otherwise than discourage any effort of principle by
which the private interests or worldly vanities of the family can be
expected to csuffer.c Public spirit, sense of duty towards the public
good, is of all virtues, as women are now educated and situated, the
most rarely to be found among them; they have seldom even, what in men
is often a partial substitute for public spirit, a sense of personal
honour connected with any public duty. Many a man, whom no money or
personal flattery would have bought, has bartered his political opinions
against da titled or invitations efore his wife; and a still greater
number are made mere hunters after the puerile vanities of society,
because their Edition: current; Page: [412] wives value them. As for
opinions; in Catholic countries, the wife’s influence is another name
for that of the priest: he gives her, in the hopes and emotions
connected with a future life, a consolation for the sufferings and
disappointments which are her ordinary lot in this. Elsewhere, her
weight is thrown into the scale either of the most common-place, or of
the most outwardly prosperous opinions: either those by which censure
will be escaped, or by which worldly advancement is likeliest to be
procured. In England, the wife’s influence is usually on the illiberal
and anti-popular side: this is generally the gaining side for personal
interest and vanity; and what to her is the democracy or liberalism in
which she has no part—which leaves her the Pariah it found her? The man
himself, when he marries, usually declines into Conservatism; begins to
sympathize with the holders of power, more than with its victims, and
thinks it his part to be on the side of authority. As to mental
progress, except those fvulgarerf attainments by which vanity or
ambition are promoted, there is generally an end to it in a man who
marries a woman mentally his inferior; unless, indeed, he is unhappy in
marriage, or becomes indifferent. From a man of twenty-five or thirty,
after he is married, an experienced observer seldom expects any further
progress in mind or feelings. It is rare that the progress already made
is maintained. Any spark of the mens divinior[*] which might otherwise
have spread and become a flame, seldom survives for any length of time
unextinguished. For a mind which learns to be satisfied with what it
already is—which does not incessantly look forward to a degree of
improvement not yet reached—becomes relaxed, self-indulgent, and loses
the spring and the tension which maintain it even at the point already
attained. And there is no fact in human nature to which experience bears
more invariable testimony than to this—that all social or sympathetic
influences which do not raise up, pull down; if they do not tend to
stimulate and exalt the mind, they tend to vulgarize it.

For the interest, therefore, not only of women but of men, and of human
improvement in the widest sense, the emancipation of women, which the
modern world often boasts of having effected, and for which credit is
sometimes given to civilization, and sometimes to Christianity, cannot
stop where it is. If it were either necessary or just that one portion
of mankind should remain mentally and spiritually only half developed,
the development of the other portion ought to have been made, as far as
possible, independent of their influence. Instead of this, they have
become the most intimate, and it may now be said, the only intimate
associates of those to whom yet they are sedulously kept inferior; and
have been raised just high enough to drag the others down to themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [413]
We have left behind a host of vulgar objections, either as not worthy of
an answer, or as answered by the general course of our remarks. A few
words, however, must be said on one plea, which in England is made much
use of for giving an unselfish air to the upholding of selfish
privileges, and which, with unobserving, unreflecting people, passes for
much more than it is worth. Women, it is said, do not desire—do not
seek, what is called their emancipation. On the contrary, they generally
disown such claims when made in their behalf, and fall with acharnement
upon any one of themselves who identifies herself with their common
cause.

Supposing the fact to be true in the fullest extent ever asserted, if it
proves that European women ought to remain as they are, it proves
exactly the same with respect to Asiatic women; for they too, instead of
murmuring at their seclusion, and at the restraint imposed upon them,
pride themselves on it, and are astonished at the effrontery of women
who receive visits from male acquaintances, and are seen in the streets
unveiled. Habits of submission make men as well as women servile-minded.
The vast population of Asia do not desire or value, probably would not
accept, political liberty, nor the savages of the forest, civilization;
which does not prove that either of those things is undesirable for
them, or that they will not, at some future time, enjoy it. Custom
hardens human beings to any kind of degradation, by deadening the part
of their nature which would resist it. And the case of women is, in this
respect, even a peculiar one, for no other inferior caste that we have
heard of, have been taught to regard their degradation as their honour.
The argument, however, implies a secret consciousness that the alleged
preference of women for their dependent state is merely apparent, and
arises from their being allowed no choice; for if the preference be
natural, there can be no necessity for enforcing it by law. To make laws
compelling people to follow their inclination, has not hitherto been
thought necessary by any legislator. The plea that women do not desire
any change, is the same that has been urged, times out of mind, against
the proposal of abolishing any social evil—“there is no complaint;”
which is generally not true, and when true, only so because there is not
that hope of success, without which complaint seldom makes itself
audible to unwilling ears. How does the objector know that women do not
desire equality and freedom? He never knew a woman who did not, or would
not, desire it for herself individually. It would be very simple to
suppose, that if they do desire it they will say so. Their position is
like that of the tenants or labourers who vote against their own
political interests to please their landlords or employers; with the
unique addition, that submission is inculcated on them from childhood,
as the peculiar attraction and grace of their character. They are taught
to think, that to repel actively even an admitted injustice done to
themselves, is somewhat unfeminine, and had better be left to some male
friend or protector. To be accused of rebelling against anything which
admits of being called an ordinance of society, they are taught to
regard as an imputation of a serious offence, to say the least, against
the proprieties of their sex. It requires Edition: current; Page: [414]
unusual moral courage as well as disinterestedness in a woman, to
express opinions favourable to women’s enfranchisement, until, at least,
there is some prospect of obtaining it. The comfort of her individual
life, and her social consideration, usually depend on the goodwill of
those who hold the undue power; and to possessors of power any
complaint, however bitter, of the misuse of it, is a less flagrant act
of insubordination than to protest against the power itself. The
professions of women in this matter remind us of the state offenders of
old, who, on the point of execution, used to protest their love and
devotion to the sovereign by whose unjust mandate they suffered.
Griselda herself might be matched from the speeches put by Shakespeare
into the mouths of male victims of kingly caprice and tryanny: the Duke
of Buckingham, for example, in Henry the Eighth, and even Wolsey.[*] The
literary class of women, especially in England, are ostentatious in
disclaiming the desire for equality or citizenship, and proclaiming
their complete satisfaction with the place which society assigns to
them; exercising in this, as in many other respects, a most noxious
influence over the feelings and opinions of men, who unsuspectingly
accept the servilities of toadyism as concessions to the force of truth,
not considering that it is the personal interest of these women to
profess whatever opinions they expect will be agreeable to men. It is
not among men of talent, sprung from the people, and patronized and
flattered by the aristocracy, that we look for the leaders of a
democratic movement. Successful literary women are just as unlikely to
prefer the cause of women to their own social consideration. They depend
on men’s opinion for their literary as well as for their feminine
successes; and such is their bad opinion of men, that they believe there
is not more than one in ten thousand who does not dislike and fear
strength, sincerity, or high spirit in a woman. They are therefore
anxious to earn pardon and toleration for whatever of these qualities
their writings may exhibit on other subjects, by a studied display of
submission on this: that they may give no occasion for vulgar men to say
(what nothing will prevent vulgar men from saying), that learning makes
women unfeminine, and that literary ladies are likely to be bad wives.

But enough of this; especially as the fact which affords the occasion
for this gnoticeg, makes it impossible any longer to assert the
universal acquiescence of women (saving individual exceptions) in their
dependent condition. In the United States at least, there are women,
seemingly numerous, and now organised for action on the public mind, who
demand equality in the fullest acceptation of the Edition: current;
Page: [415] word, and demand it by a straightforward appeal to men’s
sense of justice, not plead for it with a timid deprecation of their
displeasure.

Like other popular movements, however, this may be seriously retarded by
the blunders of its adherents. Tried by the ordinary standard of public
meetings, the speeches at the Convention are remarkable for the
preponderance of the rational over the declamatory element; but there
are some exceptions; and things to which it is impossible to attach any
rational meaning, have found their way into the resolutions. Thus, the
resolution which sets forth the claims made in behalf of women, after
claiming equality in education, in industrial pursuits, and in political
rights, enumerates as a fourth head of demand something under the name
of “social and spiritual union,” and “a medium of expressing the highest
moral and spiritual views of justice,”[*] with other similar verbiage,
serving only to mar the simplicity and rationality of the other
demandsh: resembling those who would weakly attempt to combine nominal
equality between men and women, with enforced distinctions in their
privileges and functionsh. What is wanted for women is equal rights,
equal admission to all social privileges; not a position apart, a sort
of sentimental priesthood. To this, the only just and rational
principle, both the resolutions and the speeches, for the most part,
adhere. They contain so little which is akin to the nonsensical
paragraph in question, that we suspect it not to be the work of the same
hands as most of the other resolutions. The strength of the cause lies
in the support of those who are influenced by reason and principle; and
to attempt to recommend it by sentimentalities, absurd in reason, and
inconsistent with the principle on which the movement is founded, is to
place a good cause on a level with a bad one.

There are indications that the example of America will be followed on
this side of the Atlantic; and the first step has been taken in that
part of England where every serious movement in the direction of
political progress has its commencement—the manufacturing districts of
the North. On the 13th of February 1851, a petition of women, agreed to
by a public meeting at Sheffield, and claiming the elective franchise,
was presented to the House of Lords by the Earl of Carlisle.[†]

Edition: current; Page: [416]


Appendix D


DRAFT OF A PORTION OF THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS (1866)

MS (evidently first draft), Houghton Library, Harvard University, part
of the miscellaneous papers bought by George Herbert Palmer from the
Avignon bookseller, J. Roumanille.

The variant notes to the text below give the differences between the
draft and the printed versions, the latter indicated by “67”. The
comparable passage in the printed versions appears at 222-5 above.

acquired with tenfold greater facility when the aexamples of their
applicationa are already bpresent inb the cmind—if this were but done,c
an average schoolboy long before the age at which schooling dgenerallyd
terminates, emight easilye be able to read fwith ease, fluency, andf
intelligent interest any ordinary Latin or Greek author, in prose or
verse, gmightg have a competent knowledge of the grammatical structure
of both languages, and have had time besides for an ample amount of
scientific instruction.h I am as unwilling to imentioni all that I think
practicable in this matter, as George Stephenson was jin the matter of
locomotionj, when he calculated the average speed of a krailwayk train
at ten miles an hour because if he had estimated it lat morel the
practical men mwhose cooperation he neededm would have ndistrustedn him
as that most unsafe character in their estimation an Edition: current;
Page: [417] enthusiast and a visionary. The results have shewn, in
othiso case, who was the real practical man. What the results would shew
in the other case I will notp anticipate. qIt is enough to be able to
say with confidenceq, that if the two classical languages were properly
taught, there would be no need whatever for rturning them out ofr the
school course in order to have sufficient srooms for everything else
that tneedst be included therein.

uThis wonderfullyu limited estimate of what it is possible for human
beings to learn, resting upon a tacit assumption that they are already
as efficiently taught as they ever can vbe,v not only vitiates wthe
general conceptionw of education, but actually, if we receive it,
darkens our anticipations as to the future progress of mankind. For if
the inexorable conditions of human life make it useless for one man to
attempt to know more than one thing, what is to become of the human
intellect as facts accumulate? In every generation, and xmore rapidly
nowx than ever ybefore, the number of things increases,y which it is
necessary that somebody should zlearnz. Every department of aour
knowledge of the universea becomes so loaded with details that bif a
personb endeavours to know call that is known of it, hec must confine
himself to a smaller and smaller portion of the whole dfield,d every
science and art must be edivided and subdividede, until each man’s
fspeciality, the regionf which he thoroughly knows, bears about the same
gproportiong to the whole hfieldh of useful knowledge that the art of
putting on a pin’s head does to the field of human industry. Now, iwhen
we take this along with the fact certified by experience,i that there is
no one study or pursuit which, Edition: current; Page: [418] practised
to the exclusion of all others, does not narrow and pervert the mindj,
breedj in it a class of prejudices special to that kparticular pursuit,
andk a general prejudice common to all narrow specialities against
lgeneral ideas of all sorts, grounded onl an incapacity to take mthem in
or to judgem of them. nWhat prospect have we before us but that of a
human intellectn more and more dwarfed and unfitted for oallo great
things, pactually by its progressp in small onesq? But thingsq are not
so bad with us: rthis is not the fate we need look forward tor. It is
not the utmost limit of human acquirement to know only one thing, but to
combine a minute knowledge of one or a few things with a general
knowledge of many things. By a general knowledge I do not mean a smere
vague impressions. An eminent man one of whose writings is part of the
course of this University, Abp. Whately, has well tpointed out, thatt a
general knowledge uis a totally different thing fromu a superficial
knowledge. To have a general knowledge of a subject is to know vits
leading truths, but to wlearn them with understanding,w not
superficially but thoroughly, so as to have a true conception of the
subject xas a whole,x leaving the minor details to those who require
ythe knowledge ofy them zbecause it is their business to follow them out
and to apply them. This kind of knowledge does not tend to narrow but to
enlarge the mind; it formsz a body of cultivated intellects, acapable of
illuminating each his own special studies by the lights derived from the
other branches of human knowledge, and constituting a public able to
understand and appreciate the processes of thought in other people’s
special departments and intelligently follow the lead of those
specialists who by their general powers and Edition: current; Page:
[419] cultivation of their minds are most capable of leading rightly.
Above all, it is this alone which can form mindsa capable of bdirectingb
and improving public opinion in the greater concerns of chumanc life.
Government and civil society are the most complicated of all subjects
accessible to the human mind, and dto be competent to deal with them
there is great need not only ofd a general knowledge of the leading
facts of ethe universe in almost all its departments, but ofe an
understanding exercised and disciplined in the principles and rules of
sound thinking up to a point which fnof one science or branch of
knowledge affordsg, and to obtain which it is necessary to be more or
less conversant with manyg. Let us understand then, that it hought to be
our objecth in learning, not merely to know isome one thing, the thingi
which is to be our principal occupation, as well as it can be known but
to do this and also to know something of all the great jdepartmentsj of
human kknowledge;k taking care to know that something laccurately, or at
all eventsl marking well the dividing line between what we know
accurately and what we do not; and remembering that our object should be
to obtain a true view of nature and mthe world in itsm broad outline,
nbutn that it is ouselesso to throw away time upon the pminutep details
of anything which is qnot to beq part of the occupation of our practical
energies.

It by no means follows, however, that reverything which deserves to be
known, and which is capable of being known by everybody who has received
a liberal educationr, should be included in the scourses of school or
university studies. tSome things, very desirable to be learnt, are
learnt bettert out of school or uafteru school yearsv are over wFor this
reasonw I do not agree with those reformers who Edition: current; Page:
[420] would xassign a place, and an important place,x in the schooly
course, to modern languages. This is not because I attach small
importance to zthem*; noz one cana be bconsidered well-instructed or
cultivatedb who is not familiar with at least the French language cand
ablec to read French books with ease; and there is great dadvantaged in
cultivating a familiarity with German. But living languages are so much
more easily acquired elater in life,e by intercourse with those who use
them in daily flife,f that it is really waste of timeg to labour at
htheir acquisition without anyh help but that of books and mastersi.
Again, it has always seemed to me a great absurdity that jsuch things
asj history and geography should be taught in schools, except ka few of
the leading facts of bothk in elementary schools for the lmass of the
peoplel. Who ever really learnt history and geography except by private
reading? and what an utter failure myourm education must be if it has
not given nyourn pupil a sufficient taste for reading to omake him seek
by that easy process the most interestingo of all kinds of knowledge?
Besides such history and geography as can be taught in schools exercise
none of the faculties of the pintellect except that of merep memory. qAt
an University indeed it is very important that the pupilq should be
introduced to the Philosophy of Historyr—that a Professorr who Edition:
current; Page: [421] not merely sknowss the facts but thast exercised
uhis mindu on them, should initiate vthe pupilsv into the causes and
explanation, wasw far as xan explanation is possiblex of the past life
of mankind in its ymore important features and vicissitudesy. But of the
mere facts of history as commonly zbelieved and understoodz, what
educated apersona of any mental activity does not learn ball that is of
primary importanceb if he is conlyc turned loose in an historical
library? What dis wanted on this subjectd is not that he should be
taught it in boyhood, but thate books should be accessible to him.

The only languages fthereforef and the only gliteraturesg to which I
would allow a place in the ordinary hcourse of a liberal educationh are
those of the Greeks and Romans; to these I would preserve the position
ithey at present occupy jin it. The importance of these languages in
education is twofold: first, the value of languages in general, of
studying and knowingj some other cultivated language and ksome otherk
literature than one’s ownl: secondly,l the peculiar value of those
particular languagesm.

nThe value, to the human mind, of knowing, and knowing well, more than
one language; or I should rather say, the extreme disadvantage of
knowing no language but one’s own, is scarcely, I think, generally felt
and recognized in all its force. Every thinker or writer who hasn
reflected on the causes of human error ohaso been deeply impressed with
the pnaturalp tendency of mankind to mistake.

Edition: current; Page: [422]


Appendix E


JAMAICA COMMITTEE: PUBLIC DOCUMENTS (1866, 1868)


1.: Statement of the Jamaica Committee (1866)

Jamaica Papers, No. III, Statement of the Committee and Other Documents
(London: Jamaica Committee, [1866]), 3-7. Concludes: “Signed, on behalf
of the Committee, J.S. Mill, Chairman. P.A. Taylor, Treasurer, / F.W.
Chesson, Hon. Sec. / 65, Fleet Street, / 27th July, 1866.” Not listed in
Mill’s bibliography. Printed, with a few substantive differences, in the
Daily News, 30 July, 1866, 3, and, without substantive differences, in
the Diplomatic Review, 5 Sept., 1866, 118-19; the variants between the
version in the Daily News and the copy-text are given in notes, in which
“DN” indicates Daily News.

For comment on this and the other Jamaica documents, see xxvi-xxviii and
lxxviii above.

the jamaica committee[*] wish to explain to the public the motives by
which they are actuated, and the objects which they have in view.

When there is reason to believe that a British subject has been
illegally put to death, or otherwise illegally punished by a person in
authority, it is the duty of the Government to inquire into the case;
and if it appears that the offence has been committed, to vindicate the
law by bringing the offender to public justice.

From the facts recorded in the Report of the Royal Commissioners of
Inquiry,[†] and in other documents relating to the late disturbances in
Jamaica, coupled with the legal opinion of Mr. Edward James and Mr.
Fitzjames Stephen, published by Edition: current; Page: [423] the
Committee,[*] there appeared strong reason to believe that George
William Gordon, Samuel Clarke, Edward Fleming, Charles Mitchell, William
Grant, Henry Lawrence, and many other subjects of Her Majesty, both male
and female, had been illegally put to death, or flogged, and in some
cases flogged and afterwards put to death, anda the houses of many
othersb illegally burnt, by Ex-Governor Eyre, Brigadier Nelson,[†] and
their subordinates and coadjutors. The attention of the Government was
therefore called to these cases in Parliament by Mr. Mill, the Chairman
of the Committee.[‡]

The Government not only declined to take any steps for the vindication
of the law, but declined on grounds and in a tone which appear to the
Committee to aggravate the dangerous aspect of the proceedings in
question as infractions of the constitutional liberty of the subject.[§]

The duty now devolves upon private citizens of taking such measures as
the constitution may point out for the defence of those legal and
chartered rights which protect the lives and liberties of all.

In undertaking to discharge this duty, so far as circumstances and the
means placed at their disposal may permit, the Committee are not, any
more than the ordinary ministers of public justice, actuated by
vindictive feelings towards those whom they believe to have violated the
law. Their aim, besides upholding the obligation of justice and humanity
towards all races beneath the Queen’s sway, is to vindicate, by an
appeal to judicial authority, the great legal and constitutional
principles which have been violated in the late proceedings, and
deserted by the Government.

They desire in the first instance to establish, by a judicial sentence,
the principle that the illegal execution of a British subject by a
person in authority is not merely an error which superiors in office may
at their discretion visit with displeasure or condone, but a crime which
will certainly be punished by the law. The condition of a British
subject will be altered if, for the offence of taking his life without
law, a public functionary is to be responsible only to a Minister of the
Crown who, in the case most dangerous to public liberty, would obviously
be not the censor of his subordinate but his abettor. Our lives and
liberties have not been, nor can they be safely allowed to be, under the
guardianship of the Executive Government alone; they have been, and it
is essential that they should remain, under the guardianship Edition:
current; Page: [424] of the law. cA Royal Commission of Inquiry, the
report of which it is proposed to substitute for the regular inquest of
a court of justice in a case affecting the life of the subject, is a
tribunal unknown to the constitution, not independent of the Executive,
incapable even of entertaining a criminal charge, much more of passing
any sentence upon the guilty, and therefore, though useful in
instructing the Government, not competent to protect the lives of
British citizens, or to fulfil the ends of public justice.c

In the second place, the Committee desire to challenge in a Court of
Justice the jurisdiction of courts of martial law, which, as the late
events show, may be made engines of indiscriminate butchery and torture;
to obtain a judicial answer to the question whether military and naval
officers, untrained to judicial investigation, and inflamed, probably,
by the passions of the crisis, can legally try and torture or put to
death the subjects of Her Majesty for high treason and other civil
offences without a jury or any adequate security for justice, and
without necessarily keeping even a record of the proceedings; and to
have it determined by authority whether the law which these courts
assume to administer is really law at all, or sanguinary licence which
the law will repress and punish.

The mere refusal of Mr. Eyre’s superiors in office to reinstate him in
his government affords little satisfaction to the community as regards
the first of these objects, and none at all as regards the second. In
the Dispatch conveying that decision some parts of his conduct are
disapproved; but he is not pronounced to have violated the law; and the
resolution not to retain him in office is put at last mainly on the
ground that a new form of government is about to be inaugurated in the
Island, and that it is better to intrust this “arduous task” to some
person “who may approach it free from all the difficulties inseparable
from a participation in the questions raised by the recent troubles.”[*]
The execution of Mr. Gordon is condemned in more positive terms; but it
is condemned as a stretch of severity uncalled for in the particular
case, not as an infraction of public rights and principles of justice
sacred in all cases alike. The practice of trying British subjects for
high treason and other civil offences by court-martial is not repudiated
in this Dispatch; while the language of Mr. Disraeli, in his reply to
Mr. Mill’s questions, admits that the proclamation of martial law is the
suspension of all law,[†] and exposes the lives of British subjects to
irresponsible butchery.

The form of the legal proceedings prescribed by the law in such a case,
and the issue in the event of those proceedings proving successful, the
Committee must leave to be determined by the law itself, of which they
take dthe regulation of the penalty by the exercise ofd the prerogative
of mercy to be a part. It is not their fault Edition: current; Page:
[425] if the law of England, instead of assigning a specific remedy
against a public functionary guilty of contriving the death of an
English citizen, includes the offence among those the common remedy for
which is an indictment for murder;[*] nor can the Committee admit that
public justice ought on that account to be allowed to fail.

In deciding on their legal course, however, the Committee have hitherto
consulted,[†] and will continue to consult, professional advisers of the
highest eminence and the most unbiassed judgment.

When indeed the Committee consider the circumstances of such a case as
that of Mr. Gordon—the political antagonism which previously subsisted
between him and Governor Eyre—the apparent absence of any ground of
military necessity for taking the life of a man who was a helpless
captive in the hands of the authorities—the eagerness with which the
Governor personally interposed to arrest him and carry hime from the
place where he was living under the protection of the common law to one
where it was supposed that his life might with impunity be taken without
a regular trial—fthe voice of warning raised in vain by a member of the
Council,[‡] who, seeing the Governor’s intention, suggested that Mr.
Gordon should be tried before a civil court—fthe composition of the
court, which, by its combined incompetence and ruthlessness, cut off all
hope alike of justice and of mercy—the pitiless manner in which the
accused was deprived of all legal advice and assistance, and of the
benefit of evidence which might have been given in his favour—the
interception and destruction of the letter of advice sent open to the
Brigadier-General for the guidance of the prisoner in pleading,[§] and
the refusal of the brief delay necessary to call a most important
witness[¶] who resided almost on the spot—the evidence on which the
conviction was founded, and the total insufficiency of which to support
the charge must have been palpable to any man of common
understanding—the warm approval of the sentence upon that evidence by
the Governor[∥] after the date at which, by his own account, the
insurrection had been got under,[**] and when, consequently, the plea of
military necessity could no longer have any force—they must confess that
this is not a case Edition: current; Page: [426] which they would
particularly shrink from submitting to the investigation of a court of
justice.

If the execution of Mr. Gordon was illegal, and, in the eye of the law,
a murder, it was a murder of which Mr. Eyre was not only constructively
but personally guilty; which was committed not only under his authority,
but, to all intents and purposes, with his own hand.

To lay it down that proof of private malice is indispensable in order to
make an illegal execution a murder, would be to hold out impunity to the
crime which is the most dangerous of all to the community—the crime of a
public functionary who abuses the power entrusted to him to compass,
under the forms of justice, the death of a citizen obnoxious to the
Government. gTo lay it down that the plea of good intentions is
sufficient to divest an act of criminality would be, in like manner, to
hold out impunity to all political homicide: since all who commit
political homicide, whether the agents of a Government or its opponents,
believe that the political object which they have in view is good.g

The Government of Jamaica institutes a prosecution for murder against
Mr. Ramsay,[*] the Provost-Marshal, though it is not suggested that his
cruelties were committed from any feelings of private malice against the
victims. Mr. Cardwell advises Sir Henry Storks, as Governor of Jamaica,
to cause careful investigation to be made in those cases which appear to
require it, with a view to such further proceedings as may be requisite
and just. “Great offences,” he says, “must be punished.”[†] It is to be
presumed that he would not except the great offences of great offenders.

In attempting to vindicate the law against the violence of persons in
authority, the Committee will take care to give no pretence for the
charge that they are showing sympathy with disorder. The gentlemen who
represented them in Jamaica[‡] went out with strict instructions to lend
no assistance or countenance to any persons who had suffered for real
complicity in the late disturbances. The Committee will themselves act
in the spirit of these instructions; and they will further abstain from
founding proceedings on any case which appears to be fairly covered by
the plea ofh necessity. They have no desire to abet resistance to lawful
authority or to weaken the arm of the magistrate in preserving public
order. But, on the other hand, they would remind their fellow-citizens
that hopeless wrong is the sure parent of rebellion, and that its best
antidote is the hope of constitutional redress.

The Committee, then, submit that they are endeavouring to defend public
Edition: current; Page: [427] liberty against aggression from public
motives, and by the means pointed out by law; and that they may justly
claim the sympathy and support of all to whom public liberty is dear.

* * * * *


2.: Address to Friends of the Jamaica Committee (1866)

Examiner, 13 Oct., 1866 (2nd ed.), 647. Headed: “The Jamaica Committee /
The Jamaica Committee have issued the following address to their friends
throughout the country: 65. Fleet-street, London, October, 1866.” Not
listed in Mill’s bibliography. Printed also, without substantive
variants, and with the same heading, in the Daily News, 12 Oct., 1866,
3. Signed: John Stuart Mill, M.P., Chairman: P.A. Taylor, M.P.,
Treasurer: F.W. Chesson, Hon. Secretary: / Thomas Barnes, M.P., John
Bright, M.P., Joseph Cowen, M.P., J.E. Cairnes, Henry Fawcett, M.P.,
Thomas Hughes, M.P., Wilfrid Lawson, Bart., J.M. Ludlow, Duncan M’Laren,
M.P., S. Morley, F.W. Newman, R.N. Philips, M.P., T.B. Potter, M.P.,
Humphrey Sandwith, C.B., Goldwin Smith, Herbert Spencer, James White,
M.P.

sir,—For the reasons set forth in the accompanying “Statement”[*]—to
which particular attention is requested—the Jamaica Committee resolved
to undertake the duty which the Government had declined, of submitting
to judicial investigation the conduct of Governor Eyre and his
subordinates in putting to death Mr. Gordon and other British subjects
for treason, sedition, and other alleged offences without a lawful
trial.

The subscriptions and guarantees already received have justified the
committee in taking the first steps; and they hope, by the time the
courts resume their sittings, to be in possession of the opinion of
eminent counsel as to the form of indictment and method of procedure.

The process, owing to the distance of Jamaica and other circumstances,
will be very expensive; and it is evident that the committee will have
to encounter a powerful resistance backed by all the resources of
wealth. They deem it necessary, therefore, to appeal to the public to
raise the fund to 10,000l. Your personal aid is earnestly requested,
both in the form of subscription or guarantee, and in that of
endeavouring to secure the co-operation of your friends.

In making this appeal, the committee desire once more to state that
their sole object is to vindicate the law.

That the law has not yet been vindicated, that the principles of public
liberty and justice impugned by the acts of Governor Eyre and his
subordinates have not yet been effectively asserted, that no adequate
security has been obtained against a Edition: current; Page: [428]
repetition of such acts by men in power for the future, the Southampton
banquet, the sentiments expressed at that banquet,[*] the doctrines
propounded by the chairman and other members of the Eyre Defence and Aid
Committee,[†] and the bearing of Mr. Eyre himself, are sufficient
proofs. The conduct of the ex-governor, so far from being repented of or
repudiated, is held up as a model for imitation; and the committee
submit that, as the matter at present stands, the public cannot feel
assured that British subjects, who may have given offence to a party in
power, will not again be put to death without lawful trial, or that
those who have been concerned in such proceedings will not again be
applauded, caressed, and marked out for future reward and honour by
peers, members of parliament, chaplains of her Majesty, magistrates, and
other persons in high station.

The only adequate, as well as the only constitutional safeguard, is the
decision of a court of justice, which, as the committee submit, those
supporters of the ex-governor who believe that Mr. Gordon, Mr. Clarke,
and Mr. Lawrence came lawfully and fairly to their ends ought to be the
last to decline.

The committee also desire once more, in reply to persistent
misrepresentation, to repeat that the acts for which they are about to
prosecute were not done in the suppression of the so-called rebellion.
Mr. Gordon, Mr. Clarke, and Mr. Lawrence all suffered after the period
at which, as Mr. Eyre himself expressly stated, the insurrection had
been completely crushed.[‡] They suffered, there is reason to suspect,
for offence given to the party in power, quite independently of the
disturbances, with which no one of the three was proved to have been
connected in any way whatever.

While the interests of public liberty form the most obvious ground for
an effectual protest against the lawless violence of persons in
authority, it must not be forgotten that justice is also due to the
memory, and to the families of those who have been put to a felon’s
death, and buried as felons beneath the gallows, for crimes of which
there is reason to believe they were not lawfully or justly convicted.

The committee commend to your support an undertaking which they believe
to be essential to the interests of public liberty and justice. They
have come forward as private individuals to put the law in motion only
on the positive and almost contumacious refusal of the Government to do
its duty, by inquiring into the cases in which there was reason to
believe the lives of subjects of her Majesty had been Edition: current;
Page: [429] illegally taken. But having come forward, they will not fail
the public, if the public will not fail them.

P.S.—Subscriptions should be forwarded to the treasurer, Mr. P.A.
Taylor, M.P., Aubrey-house, Notting-hill; or to Mr. F. W. Chesson, the
hon. secretary, 65 Fleet-street, London.

* * * * *


3: Statement of the Jamaica Committee (1868)

London: The Jamaica Committee, 1868, Headed: “To the Members of the
Jamaica Committee”; signed: “John Stuart Mill, Chairman: P.A. Taylor,
Treasurer: F.W. Chesson, Hon. Sec.”, and dated London, 15 July, 1868.
Not listed in Mill’s bibliography. Accompanied by the following letter
from Chesson, dated as the statement, from 65 Fleet St.: “Dear Sir, I
beg to send you, as a Member of the (General) Jamaica Committee, the
enclosed statement, explanatory of the course which your Executive
Committee has followed, and of the conclusion at which they have
arrived. The Executive Committee propose to call together the whole body
of Subscribers in the course of the Autumn, of which you will of course
receive due notice. In the meantime I need hardly say we shall be happy
to receive any suggestions or opinions with which you may please to
favour us.” The only copies of the statement located are in the
Mill-Taylor Collection, British Library of Political and Economic
Science.

the attempt to call Mr. Eyre to account for his conduct as Governor of
Jamaica, under the Colonial Governors’ Act,[*] being at an end, the
Grand Jury of Middlesex having thrown out the Bill,[†] the Executive
Committee are of opinion that the duty which they undertook of
exhausting all the methods afforded by the criminal law of bringing the
case under the cognizance of justice has now been performed.

So much misconception has prevailed, and has been fostered by the
language of those who were opposed to an inquiry, that it may be
desirable to recall to mind the leading facts.

A district in the Island of Jamaica had been the scene of a disturbance,
caused as it appears, in part at least, by a system of misrule under
which (according to the testimony of the present Governor, Sir J.P.
Grant) in minor criminal cases, those mainly affecting the people, the
system of legal procedure was extremely bad, and in civil matters for
the poorer classes there was no justice at all, while there was Edition:
current; Page: [430] nothing worthy to be called a police.* The
disturbance, though sanguinary in its first outbreak, was suppressed
without difficulty, no stand being ever made by the peasantry against
the troops engaged in its suppression. The outbreak having occurred on
October 11th, on the 20th the Governor reported, in a letter to the
Colonial Secretary, that “the rebellion had been crushed.”[*]
Nevertheless, for more than three weeks after this date, and even for
many days after he had, on the 30th October, issued a proclamation of
amnesty, declaring that the rebellion had been subdued—when all excuse
of military necessity for summary proceedings was at end, and every
person suspected of complicity in the disturbance might have been
brought before the regular courts of justice—he continued to license the
shooting, hanging and flogging of the peasantry, without distinction of
sex, and the destruction of their houses and property, under the name
and colour of martial law. According to the Report of the Royal
Commissioners of Inquiry, 439 persons in all were put to death, not less
than 600 were flogged, and 1000 houses were burned.[†] For a whole month
there was a reign of terror. At one place, on a single day, 30 men and
20 women were flogged; the men with cats twisted with piano-wire, of
which the Royal Commissioners of Inquiry, before whom portions of some
of the cats were produced, say that it is painful to think that any man
should have used such an instrument for the torturing of his
fellow-creatures.[‡] Persons were tried and put to death under martial
law for acts done, and even for words spoken, before the proclamation of
martial law. A peasant, named Samuel Clarke, was hanged some days after
the proclamation of amnesty, for words spoken two months before the
proclamation of martial law, his only specified offence being that he
had, at that time, declared with an oath that a letter signed by the
Secretary of State for the Colonies was a lie.[§] The case of the Hon.
G.W. Gordon was in its constitutional aspect still more grave.[¶] A
member of the Legislature of Jamaica, and a leading opponent of the
government of Mr. Eyre, he was taken by the Governor himself out of the
protection of the common law, carried into the proclaimed district,
handed over to a so-called court-martial presided over by Lieutenant
Brand, of whose fitness to sit as judge in a case of life or death the
public has since had sufficient means of forming an opinion, and put to
death, with the express sanction of Mr. Eyre;[∥] to whom the sentence
had been specially submitted, with an intimation from the commanding
officer, General Edition: current; Page: [431] Nelson, that there was no
military necessity for a summary execution: and this on evidence which
the Royal Commissioners pronounce to have been wholly insufficient to
support the charge,[*] and which is characterized by the Lord Chief
Justice of the Queen’s Bench, not only as legally “inadmissible before
any properly-constituted tribunal,” but as “morally worthless.”[†] “No
one, I think,” says the same authority, “who has the faintest idea of
what the administration of justice involves, could deem the proceedings
on this trial consistent with justice, or, to use a homely phrase, with
that fair play which is the right of the commonest criminal.” “All I can
say,” proceeds the Lord Chief Justice, “is that if, on martial law being
proclaimed, a man can lawfully be thus tried, condemned and sacrificed,
such a state of things is a scandal and a reproach to the institutions
of this great and free country; and, as a minister of justice,
profoundly imbued with a sense of what is due to the first and greatest
of earthly obligations, I enter my solemn and emphatic protest against
the lives of men being thus dealt with in the time to come.”[‡]

The gravity of these events, in a constitutional point of view, and the
necessity of bringing the case before a legal tribunal in the interest
of public liberty and justice, were enhanced by the language of certain
classes and of certain journalists in this country, who applauded the
arbitrary violence of Mr. Eyre; by the publications of legal writers,
the advocates of prerogative, who took occasion to uphold martial law as
exemplified in the acts of the Governor and his subordinates in Jamaica
(and notably in the trial and execution of Mr. Gordon) putting forth
doctrines which the Lord Chief Justice denounces as “dangerous and
pernicious,” and of which he says that he “almost shuddered when he read
them,”[§] and, above all, by the attitude of the ministers of the Crown,
one of whom, when questioned on the subject in Parliament, maintained,
in effect, that martial law, when proclaimed, exempted those assuming to
act under it from responsibility for their actions, however criminal and
oppressive, to the laws and legal tribunals of the land,* while his
colleague defended the execution of Mr. Gordon, without reference to
legality, as “practically just.”†

Acting, as they have acted throughout, under the legal guidance of
counsel at once eminent and dispassionate,[¶] the Executive Committee
proceeded to try the question whether an officer of the Crown, who had
illegally taken the life of a Edition: current; Page: [432] British
subject, was or was not responsible to the law. This was done by
proceeding at common law against Mr. Eyre and his subordinates, General
Nelson and Lieut. Brand, for the illegal execution of Mr. Gordon. The
subordinates were committed for trial by Sir Thomas Henry, the chief
magistrate of the metropolitan district, but the Grand Jury of London
threw out the Bill.[*] Mr. Eyre himself, acting, as was stated, under
the advice of his Committee, had retired into Shropshire, where he was
under the jurisdiction of the county magistrates, who, upon application
being made to them, refused to commit him for trial.[†] The case against
Mr. Eyre was now laid in its completeness before the Attorney-General,
that the investigation, which the Shropshire Justices of the Peace
refused, might, under his authority and on his motion, be obtained; but
the Attorney-General declined to act.[‡] Much time was next spent in
endeavouring to bring Mr. Eyre, who had left Shropshire, but whose
movements the Solicitor of the Committee found great difficulty in
tracing, before a magistrate legally educated, and upon whose
impartiality reliance could be placed. When, at length, this was
effected, the magistrate[§] refused to commit, on the technical ground
that General Nelson and Lieutenant Brand were the principals in the
execution of Mr. Gordon, while Mr. Eyre was only an accessory, and that
the Bill against the principals having been thrown out by the Grand
Jury, the accessory ought not to be committed on that charge. Thus
baffled by the forms of law, the Executive Committee made a final
attempt, under the advice of their counsel, to bring the case before a
jury under the Colonial Governors’ Act. Under that Act the
magistrate,[¶] after first seeking the direction of the Court of Queen’s
Bench as to his jurisdiction in the matter, committed Mr. Eyre for
trial; but the Grand Jury of Middlesex threw out the Bill.

In accordance with their pledge, and in consistency with the
instructions given by them to their legal representatives in Jamaica,
the Executive Committee have abstained from calling in question any act
done by an officer of the Crown in the suppression of insurrection. They
have confined the proceedings to acts done after the insurrection had,
in the recorded opinion of the Governor himself, been put down, and
when, in the judgment of his chief military subordinate, the military
necessity was at an end.

Nor would the Executive Committee have assumed to themselves and their
constituents in any case the invidious function of setting the law in
motion, if the Edition: current; Page: [433] Government had shewn any
disposition to perform that duty. Once, as has already been stated, they
attempted, and they would at any time have been ready, to transfer the
matter to the hands of the Law Officers of the Crown. But the
Government, though it instituted proceedings against some of the
subordinate agents in Jamaica, wholly refused to take any steps for
submitting the conduct of the principal agents to a judicial
investigation here.[*] The duty of vindicating the law, when thus
abandoned by the Government, is cast, by the principles of the English
constitution, on private citizens; if private citizens declined it,
there would be no check on the illegal conduct of officers of the Crown.

For the inappropriateness, uncertainty and awkwardness of the remedies
provided by the law against a Colonial Governor guilty of oppression,
and the protraction of the legal proceedings thereby occasioned, the
Executive Committee are not responsible. Nor are they responsible for
the unavoidable delay incurred in bringing witnesses from Jamaica, or
for that caused by the difficulty of finding Mr. Eyre within the
jurisdiction of a professional minister of the law. Due allowance being
made for these impediments, the proceedings have been carried on with
all possible despatch.

The difficulty of bringing evidence from Jamaica not only occasioned
loss of time and expenditure of money, but prevented the case from being
presented before the public in the Courts of Law, with its full moral
force, the Executive Committee being compelled to content themselves
with no more testimony than what was technically sufficient to support
the charge.

The proceedings of the Committee may be said to have had three
objects—to obtain a judicial inquiry into the conduct of Mr. Eyre and
his subordinates; to settle the law in the interest of justice, liberty
and humanity, and to arouse public morality against oppression
generally, and particularly against the oppression of subject and
dependent races.

The first object has not been attained. The Grand Jury in Jamaica threw
out the Bill in the case of Provost-Marshal Ramsay (who had hanged a man
for a gesture made, or an exclamation uttered under the torture of the
lash) notwithstanding the declaration of the presiding judge that a
trial was essential to the interests of public justice.[†] The county
Magistrates of Shropshire, and the Grand Juries of London and Middlesex,
have interposed their authority to prevent a judicial inquiry into the
case of a British citizen put to death “unlawfully and unjustifiably,”
in the words of the Lord Chief Justice,[‡] by an officer of the Crown.
In each case the public must be left to judge whether the result was due
to the want of ground for an inquiry, or to the determination of those
who interposed that no inquiry should take place. On Edition: current;
Page: [434] the other hand, it is needless to say that Mr. Eyre is in
error when he speaks of himself as having been twice acquitted.[*] As
there has been no trial, there can have been no acquittal; and in that
respect the question remains exactly where it was before these
proceedings were commenced.

The second object has been attained. The memorable charge of the Lord
Chief Justice in the case of Nelson and Brand will remain, as the
Executive Committee believe, a lasting barrier against the encroachment
of martial law and its upholders on the rights and liberties of British
subjects. If the subsequent charge of Mr. Justice Blackburn[†] in some
respects differed from that of the Lord Chief Justice, the opinion of
the Lord Chief Justice is known to be shared by every other member of
the Court. But even Mr. Justice Blackburn did not maintain, as some
lawyers had maintained, that the power of proclaiming martial law formed
a part of the prerogative of the Crown in England. His doctrine was
limited to Jamaica, and was founded on Acts of the Colonial Legislature,
which, with all Colonial Acts of a similar character, have now, and in
consequence of the manifestation of public opinion respecting the events
in Jamaica, been repealed.[‡] British jurisprudence, therefore, has been
finally purged of martial law. The committal of Mr. Eyre, General Nelson
and Lieutenant Brand, for trial, by London Magistrates, has moreover
confirmed the principle that the officers of the Crown are responsible
in the ordinary course of justice to the Courts of Law for acts done by
them in the suppression, or alleged suppression, of insurrection.

With regard to the third object, also, the Executive Committee feel that
the efforts of the Jamaica Committee have been well repaid. A great
amount of sound public opinion has been called forth; and it is not
unreasonable to think that this has contributed to the escape of the
nation from any thing which could leave a stain on its humanity or
honour in the suppression of the recent disturbances in Ireland, where
there were not wanting cruel and panic-stricken advocates of a
proclamation of martial law. That sympathy with Mr. Eyre and with his
policy should at the same time be exhibited in the quarters where it
prevailed, was inevitable. It was inevitable also, that this sympathy
should take the form of charges of vindictiveness, malignity and
persecution against those who, without the slightest personal feeling,
were endeavouring to discharge the unwelcome but indispensable duty of
guarding public liberty and vindicating the law; nor was it unnatural
that such charges should find acceptance among the unthinking, when,
from the lapse of time, the agony of so many hundreds of sufferers had
been forgotten, and the annoyance inflicted by legal proceedings on the
author of the suffering alone remained present to the mind. In answer to
the charge of persecution, so far as it is Edition: current; Page: [435]
founded on the protraction of the proceedings, the Executive Committee
repeat, that for this protraction they are not responsible. Had Mr. Eyre
been advised to meet justice like his subordinates, his case would have
been brought to as prompt a hearing as those of General Nelson and
Lieutenant Brand.