<span id="chapter-1.xhtml"></span>

<div class="body" style="white-space:pre-wrap">

### <span class="c1">Editor’s</span> Introduction

 

John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) was the precocious child of the
Philosophical Radical and Benthamite James Mill. He was taught Greek,
Latin, and political economy at an early age and spent his youth in the
company of the Philosophic Radicals, Benthamites and utilitarians who
gathered around his father James. J.S. Mill went on to become a
journalist, Member of Parliament, political economist, and philosopher
and is regarded as one of the most significant English classical
liberals of the 19th century. His important books include <span
class="c2">A System of Logic</span> (1843), <span class="c2">The
Principles of Political Economy: with some of their applications to
social philosophy</span> (1848), <span class="c2">On Liberty</span>
(1859), <span class="c2">Considerations on Representative
Government</span> (1861), <span class="c2">Utilitarianism</span> (1863),
and <span class="c2">The Subjection of Women</span> (1869).

Mill was only 25 when he wrote this essay (he refers to himself in
passing in the essay as “a man of six and twenty years”) and he was
still very much under the influence of the Benthamites led by his father
James Mill. The latter had led the push for the democratic reform of the
British political system and they were on the verge of achieving the
first major step towards that goal with the passage of the First Reform
Act of June 1832 which expanded the English electorate to include middle
class voters. This ushered in a period of liberal reform which was
crowned by the repeal of the protectionist Corn Laws in 1846. When Mill
wrote “The Spirit of the Age” he could sense that British society was
about to enter a period of reform which would be dominated by the
politically active middle class guided by classical liberal ideas.

This extract includes the first and fifth parts of a long essay which
appeared in <span class="c2">The Examiner</span> between January and May
1831. Mill believed that English society had entered an “age of
transition” in which the ideas and the ruling elites of the old society
were no longer able to provide the direction the country needed. New
ideas and new men were about to step forward and introduce “one of the
greatest revolutions of which history has preserved remembrance, in the
human mind, and the whole constitution of human society.” Of course,
Mill thought that he would be one of those who would assist in the
creation of that new society with his writings and his political
activity in the British parliament.

 

 

“A change has taken place in the human mind; a change which, being
effected by insensible gradations, and without noise, had already
proceeded far before it was generally perceived. When the fact disclosed
itself, thousands awoke as from a dream. They knew not what processes
had been going on in the minds of others, or even in their own, until
the change began to invade outward objects; and it became clear that
those were indeed new men, who insisted upon being governed in a new
way.

But mankind are now conscious of their new position. The conviction is
already not far from being universal, that the times are pregnant with
change; and that the nineteenth century will be known to posterity as
the era of one of the greatest revolutions of which history has
preserved the remembrance, in the human mind, and in the whole
constitution of human society.”

 

 

\

</div>

<span id="chapter-2.xhtml"></span>

<div class="body" style="white-space:pre-wrap">

### <span class="c2">The Spirit of the Age</span> (1831)<span id="chapter-2.xhtml#footnote-ref1">[<span class="c3">^1^</span>](#footnotes.xhtml#footnote1)</span>

 

##### <span id="chapter-2.xhtml#chapter-2-sh1"></span>PART I [EXAMINER, 9 JAN., 1831]

 

The “spirit of the age” is in some measure a novel expression. I do not
believe that it is to be met with in any work exceeding fifty years in
antiquity. The idea of comparing one’s own age with former ages, or with
our notion of those which are yet to come, had occurred to philosophers;
but it never before was itself the dominant idea of any age.

 

“Mankind are then divided, into those who are still what they were, and
those who have changed: into the men of the present age, and the men of
the past. To the former, the spirit of the age is a subject of
exultation; to the latter, of terror; to both, of eager and anxious
interest.”

 

It is an idea essentially belonging to an age of change. Before men
begin to think much and long on the peculiarities of their own times,
they must have begun to think that those times are, or are destined to
be, distinguished in a very remarkable manner from the times which
preceded them. Mankind are then divided, into those who are still what
they were, and those who have changed: into the men of the present age,
and the men of the past. To the former, the spirit of the age is a
subject of exultation; to the latter, of terror; to both, of eager and
anxious interest. The wisdom of ancestors, and the march of intellect,
are bandied from mouth to mouth; each phrase originally an expression of
respect and homage, each ultimately usurped by the partisans of the
opposite catch-word, and in the bitterness of their spirit, turned into
the sarcastic jibe of hatred and insult.

The present times possess this character. A change has taken place in
the human mind; a change which, being effected by insensible gradations,
and without noise, had already proceeded far before it was generally
perceived. When the fact disclosed itself, thousands awoke as from a
dream. They knew not what processes had been going on in the minds of
others, or even in their own, until the change began to invade outward
objects; and it became clear that those were indeed new men, who
insisted upon being governed in a new way.

 

“A change has taken place in the human mind; a change which, being
effected by insensible gradations, and without noise, had already
proceeded far before it was generally perceived. When the fact disclosed
itself, thousands awoke as from a dream. They knew not what processes
had been going on in the minds of others, or even in their own, until
the change began to invade outward objects; and it became clear that
those were indeed new men, who insisted upon being governed in a new
way.”

 

But mankind are now conscious of their new position. The conviction is
already not far from being universal, that the times are pregnant with
change; and that the nineteenth century will be known to posterity as
the era of one of the greatest revolutions of which history has
preserved the remembrance, in the human mind, and in the whole
constitution of human society. Even the religious world teems with new
interpretations of the Prophecies, foreboding mighty changes near at
hand.[1] It is felt that men are henceforth to be held together by new
ties, and separated by new barriers; for the ancient bonds will now no
longer unite, nor the ancient boundaries confine. Those men who carry
their eyes in the back of their heads and can see no other portion of
the destined track of humanity than that which it has already travelled,
imagine that because the old ties are severed mankind henceforth are not
to be connected by any ties at all; and hence their affliction, and
their awful warnings. For proof of this assertion, I may refer to the
gloomiest book ever written by a cheerful man—Southey’s <span
class="c2">Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects of Society</span>; a
very curious and not uninstructive exhibition of one of the points of
view from which the spirit of the age may be contemplated.[2] They who
prefer the ravings of a party politician to the musings of a recluse,
may consult a late article in <span class="c2">Blackwood’s
Magazine</span>, under the same title which I have prefixed to this
paper.[3] For the reverse of the picture, we have only to look into any
popular newspaper or review.

 

“The nineteenth century will be known to posterity as the era of one of
the greatest revolutions of which history has preserved the remembrance,
in the human mind, and in the whole constitution of human society.”

 

Amidst all this indiscriminate eulogy and abuse, these undistinguishing
hopes and fears, it seems to be a very fit subject for philosophical
inquiry, what the spirit of the age really is; and how or wherein it
differs from the spirit of any other age. The subject is deeply
important: for, whatever we may think or affect to think of the present
age, we cannot get out of it; we must suffer with its sufferings, and
enjoy with its enjoyments; we must share in its lot, and, to be either
useful or at ease, we must even partake its character. No man whose good
qualities were mainly those of another age, ever had much influence on
his own. And since every age contains in itself the germ of all future
ages as surely as the acorn contains the future forest, a knowledge of
our own age is the fountain of prophecy—the only key to the history of
posterity. It is only in the present that we can know the future; it is
only through the present that it is in our power to influence that which
is to come.

 

“And since every age contains in itself the germ of all future ages as
surely as the acorn contains the future forest, a knowledge of our own
age is the fountain of prophecy—the only key to the history of
posterity. It is only in the present that we can know the future; it is
only through the present that it is in our power to influence that which
is to come.”

 

Yet, because our own age is <span class="c2">familiar</span> to us, we
are presumed, if I may judge from appearances, to know it by nature. A
statesman, for example, if it be required of him to have studied any
thing at all (which, however, is more than I would venture to affirm) is
supposed to have studied history—which is at best the spirit of ages
long past, and more often the mere inanimate carcass without the spirit:
but is it ever asked (or to whom does the question ever occur?) whether
he understands his own age? Yet that also is history, and the most
important part of history, and the only part which a man may know and
understand, with absolute certainty, by using the proper means. He may
learn in a morning’s walk through London more of the history of England
during the nineteenth century, than all the professed English histories
in existence will tell him concerning the other eighteen: for, the
obvious and universal facts, which every one sees and no one is
astonished at, it seldom occurs to any one to place upon record; and
posterity, if it learn the rule, learns it, generally, from the notice
bestowed by contemporaries on some accidental exception. Yet are
politicians and philosophers perpetually exhorted to judge of the
present by the past, when the present alone affords a fund of materials
for judging, richer than the whole stores of the past, and far more
accessible.

But it is unadvisable to dwell longer on this topic, lest we should be
deemed studiously to exaggerate that want, which we desire that the
reader should think ourselves qualified to supply. It were better,
without further preamble, to enter upon the subject, and be tried by our
ideas themselves, rather than by the need of them.

The first of the leading peculiarities of the present age is, that it is
an age of transition. Mankind have outgrown old institutions and old
doctrines, and have not yet acquired new ones. When we say outgrown, we
intend to prejudge nothing. A man may not be either better or happier at
six-and-twenty, than he was at six years of age: but the same jacket
which fitted him then, will not fit him now.

 

“The first of the leading peculiarities of the present age is, that it
is an age of transition. Mankind have outgrown old institutions and old
doctrines, and have not yet acquired new ones... (These old
institutions) are vicious both in the outline and in the details, and
that they shall be renovated, and purified, and made fit for civilized
man,”

 

The prominent trait just indicated in the character of the present age,
was obvious a few years ago only to the more discerning: at present it
forces itself upon the most inobservant. Much might be said, and shall
be said on a fitting occasion, of the mode in which the old order of
things has become unsuited to the state of society and of the human
mind. But when almost every nation on the continent of Europe has
achieved, or is in the course of rapidly achieving, a change in its form
of government; when our own country, at all former times the most
attached in Europe to its old institutions, proclaims almost with one
voice that they are vicious both in the outline and in the details, and
that they <span class="c2">shall</span> be renovated, and purified, and
made fit for civilized man, we may assume that a part of the effects of
the cause just now pointed out, speak sufficiently loudly for
themselves. To him who can reflect, even these are but indications which
tell of a more vital and radical change. Not only, in the conviction of
almost all men, things as they are, are wrong [4] —but, according to
that same conviction, it is not by remaining in the old ways that they
can be set right. Society demands, and anticipates, not merely a new
machine, but a machine constructed in another manner. Mankind will not
be led by their old maxims, nor by their old guides; and they will not
choose either their opinions or their guides as they have done
heretofore. The ancient constitutional texts were formerly spells which
would call forth or allay the spirit of the English people at pleasure:
what has become of the charm? Who can hope to sway the minds of the
public by the old maxims of law, or commerce, or foreign policy, or
ecclesiastical policy? Whose feelings are now roused by the mottoes and
watch-words of Whig and Tory? And what Whig or Tory could command ten
followers in the warfare of politics by the weight of his own personal
authority? Nay, what landlord could call forth his tenants, or what
manufacturer his men? Do the poor respect the rich, or adopt their
sentiments? Do the young respect the old, or adopt their sentiments? Of
the feelings of our ancestors it may almost be said that we retain only
such as are the natural and necessary growth of a state of human
society, however constituted; and I only adopt the energetic expression
of a member of the House of Commons, less than two years ago, in saying
of the young men, even of that rank in society, that they are ready to
advertise for opinions.

Since the facts are so manifest, there is the more chance that a few
reflections on their causes, and on their probable consequences, will
receive whatever portion of the reader’s attention they may happen to
deserve.

With respect, then, to the discredit into which old institutions and old
doctrines have fallen, I may premise, that this discredit is, in my
opinion, perfectly deserved.<span class="c4"> </span>Having said this, I
may perhaps hope, that no perverse interpretation will be put upon the
remainder of my observations, in case some of them should not be quite
so conformable to the sentiments of the day as my commencement might
give reason to expect. The best guide is not he who, when people are in
the right path, merely praises it, but he who shows them the pitfalls
and the precipices by which it is endangered; and of which, as long as
they were in the wrong road, it was not so necessary that they should be
warned.

There is one very easy, and very pleasant way of accounting for this
general departure from the modes of thinking of our ancestors: so easy,
indeed, and so pleasant, especially to the hearer, as to be very
convenient to such writers for hire or for applause, as address
themselves not to the men of the age that is gone by, but to the men of
the age which has commenced. This explanation is that which ascribes the
altered state of opinion and feeling to the growth of the human
understanding. According to this doctrine, we reject the sophisms and
prejudices which misled the uncultivated minds of our ancestors, because
we have learnt too much, and have become too wise, to be imposed upon by
such sophisms and such prejudices. It is our knowledge and our sagacity
which keep us free from these gross errors. We have now risen to the
capacity of perceiving our true interests; and it is no longer in the
power of impostors and charlatans to deceive us.

I am unable to adopt this theory. Though a firm believer in the
improvement of the age, I do not believe that its improvement has been
of this kind. The grand achievement of the present age is the <span
class="c2">diffusion</span> of <span class="c2">superficial</span>
knowledge; and that surely is no trifle, to have been accomplished by a
single generation. The persons who are in possession of knowledge
adequate to the formation of sound opinions by their own lights, form
also a constantly increasing number, but hitherto at all times a small
one. It would be carrying the notion of the march of intellect too far,
to suppose that an average man of the present day is superior to the
greatest men of the beginning of the eighteenth century; yet they <span
class="c2">held</span> many opinions which we are fast renouncing. The
intellect of the age, therefore, is not the cause which we are in search
of. I do not perceive that, in the mental training which has been
received by the immense majority of the reading and thinking part of my
countrymen, or in the kind of knowledge and other intellectual aliment
which has been supplied to them, there is any thing likely to render
them much less accessible to the influence of imposture and
charlatanerie than there ever was. The Dr. Eadys still dupe the lower
classes, the St. John Longs the higher. [5] and it would not be
difficult to produce the political and literary antitypes of both.
Neither do I see, in such observations as I am able to make upon my
contemporaries, evidence that they have any principle within them which
renders them much less liable now than at any former period to be misled
by sophisms and prejudices. All I see is, that the opinions which have
been transmitted to them from their ancestors, are not the kind of
sophisms and prejudices which are fitted to possess any considerable
ascendancy in their altered frame of mind. And I am rather inclined to
account for this fact in a manner not reflecting such extraordinarily
great honour upon the times we live in, as would result from the theory
by which all is ascribed to the superior expansion of our
understandings.

The intellectual tendencies of the age, considered both on the
favourable and on the unfavourable side, it will be necessary, in the
prosecution of the present design, to review and analyse in some detail.
For the present it may be enough to remark, that it is seldom safe to
ground a positive estimate of a character upon mere negatives: and that
the faults or the prejudices, which a person, or an age, or a nation
<span class="c2">has not,</span> go but a very little way with a wise
man towards forming a high opinion of them. A person may be without a
single prejudice, and yet utterly unfit for every purpose in nature. To
have erroneous convictions is one evil; but to have no strong or
deep-rooted convictions at all, is an enormous one. Before I compliment
either a man or a generation upon having got rid of their prejudices, I
require to know what they have substituted in lieu of them.

 

“Now, it is self-evident that no fixed opinions have yet generally
established themselves in the place of those which we have abandoned;
that no new doctrines, philosophical or social, as yet command, or
appear likely soon to command, an assent at all comparable in unanimity
to that which the ancient doctrines could boast of while they continued
in vogue.”

 

Now, it is self-evident that no fixed opinions have yet generally
established themselves in the place of those which we have abandoned;
that no new doctrines, philosophical or social, as yet command, or
appear likely soon to command, an assent at all comparable in unanimity
to that which the ancient doctrines could boast of while they continued
in vogue. So long as this intellectual anarchy shall endure, we may be
warranted in believing that we are in a fair way to become wiser than
our forefathers; but it would be premature to affirm that we are already
wiser. We have not yet advanced beyond the unsettled state, in which the
mind is, when it has recently found itself out in a grievous error, and
has not yet satisfied itself of the truth. The men of the present day
rather incline to an opinion than embrace it; few, except the very
penetrating, or the very presumptuous, have full confidence in their own
convictions. This is not a state of health, but, at the best, of
convalescence. It is a necessary stage in the progress of civilization,
but it is attended with numerous evils; as one part of a road may be
rougher or more dangerous than another, although every step brings the
traveller nearer to his desired end.

Not increase of wisdom, but a cause of the reality of which we are
better assured, may serve to account for the decay of prejudices; and
this is, increase of discussion. Men may not reason, better, concerning
the great questions in which human nature is interested, but they reason
more. Large subjects are discussed more, and longer, and by more minds.
Discussion has penetrated deeper into society; and if no greater numbers
than before have attained the higher degrees of intelligence, fewer
grovel in that state of abject stupidity, which can only co-exist with
utter apathy and sluggishness.

 

“Not increase of wisdom, but a cause of the reality of which we are
better assured, may serve to account for the decay of prejudices; and
this is, increase of discussion. Men may not reason, better, concerning
the great questions in which human nature is interested, but they reason
more.”

 

The progress which we have made, is precisely that sort of progress
which increase of discussion suffices to produce, whether it be attended
with increase of wisdom or no. To discuss, and to question established
opinions, are merely two phrases for the same thing. When all opinions
are questioned, it is in time found out what are those which will not
bear a close examination. Ancient doctrines are then put upon their
proofs; and those which were originally errors, or have become so by
change of circumstances, are thrown aside. Discussion does this. It is
by discussion, also, that true opinions are discovered and diffused. But
this is not so certain a consequence of it as the weakening of error. To
be rationally assured that a given doctrine is <span
class="c2">true,</span> it is often necessary to examine and weigh an
immense variety of facts. One single well-established fact, clearly
irreconcilable with a doctrine, is sufficient to prove that it is <span
class="c2">false.</span> Nay, opinions often upset themselves by their
own incoherence; and the impossibility of their being well-founded may
admit of being brought home to a mind not possessed of so much as one
positive truth. All the inconsistencies of an opinion with itself, with
obvious facts, or even with other prejudices, discussion evolves and
makes manifest: and indeed this mode of refutation, requiring less study
and less real knowledge than any other, is better suited to the
inclination of most disputants. But the moment, and the mood of mind, in
which men break loose from an error, is not, except in natures very
happily constituted, the most favourable to those mental processes which
are necessary to the investigation of truth. What led them wrong at
first, was generally nothing else but the incapacity of seeing more than
one thing at a time; and that incapacity is apt to stick to them when
they have turned their eyes in an altered direction. They usually
resolve that the new light which has broken in upon them shall be the
sole light; and they wilfully and passionately blow out the ancient
lamp, which, though it did not show them what they now see, served very
well to enlighten the objects in its immediate neighbourhood. Whether
men adhere to old opinions or adopt new ones, they have in general an
invincible propensity to split the truth, and take half, or less than
half of it; and a habit of erecting their quills and bristling up like a
porcupine against any one who brings them the other half, as if he were
attempting to deprive them of the portion which they have.

I am far from denying, that, besides getting rid of error, we are also
continually enlarging the stock of positive truth. In physical science
and art, this is too manifest to be called in question; and in the moral
and social sciences, I believe it to be as undeniably true. The wisest
men in every age generally surpass in wisdom the wisest of any preceding
age, because the wisest men possess and profit by the constantly
increasing accumulation of the ideas of all ages: but the multitude (by
which I mean the majority of all ranks) have the ideas of their own age,
and no others: and if the multitude of one age are nearer to the truth
than the multitude of another, it is only in so far as they are guided
and influenced by the authority of the wisest among them.

This is connected with certain points which, as it appears to me, have
not been sufficiently adverted to by many of those who hold, in common
with me, the doctrine of the indefinite progressiveness of the human
mind; but which must be understood, in order correctly to appreciate the
character of the present age, as an age of moral and political
transition. These, therefore, I shall attempt to enforce and illustrate
in the next paper. [6]

A.B.

 

### Notes

 

[1] For example, <span class="c2">Babylon and Infidelity Foredoomed of
God: A Discourse on the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse, Which
Relate to These Latter Times, and Until the Second Advent</span>
(Glasgow: Collins, 1828), by Edward Irving (1792-1834), the popular
preacher, early friend of Thomas Carlyle; <span class="c2">Dialogues on
Prophecy,</span> 3 vols. (London: Nisbet, 1827-29), comp. Henry Drummond
(1786-1860), banker and M.P. (1810-13, 1847-60), who endowed the chair
of Political Economy at Oxford (see Nos. 69 and 110), and was a founder
of the Irvingite church; and <span class="c2">The Abominations of
Babylon</span> (London: Hatchard, 1826), and <span class="c2">Popular
Lectures on the Prophecies Relative to the Jewish Nation</span> (London:
Hatchard, 1830), both by Hugh MacNeile (1795-1879), Rector of Albury, at
this time an Irvingite.

[2] <span class="c2">Sir Thomas More; or, Colloquies on the Progress and
Prospects of Society,</span> 2 vols. (London: Murray, 1829), by Robert
Southey (1774-1843), prolific poet and author, whom Mill met during this
period at breakfast parties.

[3] David Robinson (d. 1849), “Letter to Christopher North, Esquire, on
the Spirit of the Age,” <span class="c2">Blackwood’s Edinburgh
Magazine,</span> XXVIII (Dec. 1830), 900-20.

[4] “Things as they are” became a catch-phrase for the Radicals, who
probably took it from <span class="c2">Things As They Are; or, The
Adventures of Caleb Williams,</span> 3 vols. (London: Crosby, 1794), by
William Godwin (1756-1836), philosopher and political writer.

[5] Eady, a notorious quack doctor and “wall-chalker,” formerly
bankrupted when a linen-draper at St. Ives, had been subject to a
successful action for recovery of £115/11/6 in 1824 (<span
class="c2">Examiner,</span> 29 Feb., 1824, p. 142). John St. John Long
(1798-1834) was a popular but untrained medical practitioner, with an
office in Harley Street, whose treatments by “friction and corrosion”
sometimes had unfortunate effects, leading to trials after the deaths of
patients.

[6] No. 77.

 

 

##### <span id="chapter-2.xhtml#chapter-2-sh2"></span>PART V [Part 1] [EXAMINER, 15 MAY, 1831]

 

In commencing this series of papers, I intended, and attempted, that the
divisions of my discourse should correspond with those of my subject,
and that each number should comprehend within its own limits all which
was necessary to the expansion and illustration of one single idea. The
nature of the publication, which, as being read by more persons capable
of understanding the drift of such speculations (and by fewer, in
proportion, who are unfit for them) than any other single work, I
considered myself fortunate in being enabled to adopt as a vehicle for
my ideas, compels me to limit the length of each article more than is
compatible with my original plan. I can no longer always hope that every
paper should be complete within itself; and the present number, had it
appeared in its proper place, would have formed the continuation of the
last.

In endeavouring to give an intelligible notion of what I have termed the
<span class="c2">natural</span> state of society, in respect of moral
influence—namely, that state in which the opinions and feelings of the
people are, with their voluntary acquiescence, formed <span
class="c2">for</span> them, by the most cultivated minds which the
intelligence and morality of the times call into existence; and in
drawing attention to the striking differences between this <span
class="c2">natural</span> state and our present <span
class="c2">transitional</span> condition, in which there are no persons
to whom the mass of the uninstructed habitually defer, and in whom they
trust for finding the right, and for pointing it out; I have hitherto
illustrated the former state only by the example of those commonwealths,
in which the most qualified men are studiously picked out because of
their qualifications, and invested with that worldly power, which, if it
were in any other hands, would divide or eclipse their moral influence:
but which, placed in theirs, and acting partly as a <span
class="c2">certificate</span> of authority, and partly as a <span
class="c2">cause,</span> tends naturally to render their power over the
minds of their fellow-citizens paramount and irresistible.

 

“... our present <span class="c2">transitional</span> condition, in
which there are no persons to whom the mass of the uninstructed
habitually defer, and in whom they trust for finding the right, and for
pointing it out;”

 

But it is not solely in such societies that there is found a united body
of moral authority, sufficient to extort acquiescence from the
uninquiring, or uninformed majority. It is found, likewise, in all
societies where religion possesses a sufficient ascendancy, to subdue
the minds of the possessors of worldly power, and where the spirit of
the prevailing religion is such as excludes the possibility of material
conflict of opinion among its teachers.

These conditions exist among two great stationary communities—the
Hindoos and the Turks; and are doubtless the chief cause which keeps
those communities stationary. The same union of circumstances has been
hitherto found only in one <span class="c2">progressive</span>
society—but that, the greatest which had ever existed: Christendom in
the middle ages.

For many centuries, undivided moral influence over the nations of
Europe, the unquestioned privilege of forming the opinions and feelings
of the Christian world, was enjoyed, and most efficiently exercised by
the Catholic clergy. Their word inspired in the rest of mankind the most
fervent faith. It not only absolutely excluded doubt, but caused the
doubter to be regarded with sentiments of profound abhorrence, which
moralists had never succeeded in inspiring for the most revolting of
crimes. It is certainly possible to feel perfectly sure of an opinion,
without believing that whosoever doubts it will be damned, and should be
burnt: and this last is by no means one of those peculiarities of a
natural state of society which I am at all anxious to see restored. But
the deep earnest feeling of firm and unwavering conviction, which it
pre-supposes, we may, without being unreasonable, lament that it was
impossible, and could not <span class="c2">but</span> be impossible, in
the intellectual anarchy of a general revolution in opinion, to transfer
unimpaired to the truth.

The priesthood did not claim a right to dictate to mankind, either in
belief or practice, beyond the province of religion and morals, but the
political interests of mankind came not the less within their pale
because they seldom assumed the authority to regulate those concerns by
specific precepts. They gave the sanction of their irresistible
authority to one comprehensive rule, that which enjoined unlimited
obedience to the temporal sovereign: an obligation from which they
absolved the conscience of the believer, only when the sovereign
disputed their authority within their peculiar province: and in that
case they were invariably triumphant, like all those to whom it is given
to call forth the moral sentiments of mankind in all their energy,
against the inducements of mere physical hopes and fears.

The Catholic clergy, at the time when they possessed this undisputed
authority in matters of conscience and belief, were, in point of fact,
the fittest persons who <span class="c2">could</span> have possessed
it—the then state of society, in respect of moral influence, answers to
the description of a <span class="c2">natural</span> state.

When we consider for how long a period the Catholic clergy were the only
members of the European community who could even read; that they were
the sole depositaries of all the treasures of thought, and reservoirs of
intellectual delight, handed down to us from the ancients; that the
sanctity of their persons permitted to them alone, among nations of
semi-barbarians, the tranquil pursuit of peaceful occupations and
studies; that, howsoever defective the morality which they taught, they
had at least a mission for curbing the unruly passions of mankind, and
teaching them to set a value upon a distant end, paramount to immediate
temptations, and to prize gratifications consisting of mental feelings
above bodily sensation; that (situate in the position of rivals to the
temporal sovereign, drafted chiefly from the inferior classes of
society, from men who otherwise would have been serfs, and the most
lowly among them all having the road open before him even to the papal
chair,) they had the strongest motives to avail themselves of the means
afforded by Christianity, for inculcating the natural equality of
mankind, and the superiority of love and sacrifice above mere courage
and bodily prowess, for menacing the great with the only terrors to
which they were accessible, and speaking to their consciences in the
name of the only superior whom they acknowledged, in behalf of the
low;—Reflecting on these things, I cannot persuade myself to doubt that
the ascendancy of the Catholic clergy was to be desired, for that day,
even by the philosopher; and that it has been a potent cause, if even it
was not an indispensable condition, of the present civilization of
Europe. Nor is this an apology for the vices of the Catholic religion:
those vices were great and flagrant, and there was no natural connection
between them and the more civilizing and humanizing features in which
all that there was of good in it resided. We may regret that the
influence of the priesthood was not superseded by a better influence:
but where in those days did any such influence exist?

 

“But the age of transition arrived. A time came when that which had
overmatched and borne down the strongest obstacles to improvement,
became itself incompatible with improvement. Mankind outgrew their
religion, and that, too, at a period when they had not yet outgrown
their government, because the texture of the latter was more yielding,
and could be stretched.”

 

I conclude, therefore, that, during a part of the middle ages, not only
worldly power, as already shown, but moral influence also, was
undisputedly exercised by the most competent persons; and that the
conditions of a natural state of society were then fully realized.

But the age of transition arrived. A time came when that which had
overmatched and borne down the strongest obstacles to improvement,
became itself incompatible with improvement. Mankind outgrew their
religion, and that, too, at a period when they had not yet outgrown
their government, because the texture of the latter was more yielding,
and could be stretched. We all know how lamentably effectual an
instrument the influence of the Catholic priesthood then became, for
restraining that expansion of the human intellect, which could not any
longer consist with their ascendancy, or with the belief of the
doctrines which they taught.

The more advanced communities of Europe succeeded, after a terrific
struggle, in effecting their total or partial emancipation: in some, the
Reformation achieved a victory—in others, a toleration; while, by a fate
unhappily too common, the flame which had been kindled where the pile
awaited the spark, spread into countries where the materials were not
yet sufficiently prepared; and instead of burning down the hateful
edifice, it consumed all that existed capable of nourishing itself, and
was extinguished. The germs of civilization to come were scorched up and
destroyed; the hierarchy reigned stronger than ever, amidst the
intellectual solitude which it had made: and the countries which were
thus denuded of the means of further advancement, fell back into
barbarism irretrievable except by foreign conquest. Such is the
inevitable end, when, unhappily, changes to which the spirit of the age
is favourable, can be successfully resisted. Civilization becomes the
terror of the ruling powers, and that they may retain their seat, it
must be their deliberate endeavour to barbarize mankind. There has been,
since that day, one such attempt, and only one, which has had a
momentary success: it was that of a man in whom all the evil influences
of his age were concentered with an intensity and energy truly terrific,
less tempered by any of its good influences than could appear possible
in the times in which he lived—I need scarcely say that I refer to
Napoleon. May his abortive effort to uncivilize human nature, to
uncultivate the mind of man, and turn it into a desolate waste, be the
last!

It remains to trace the history of moral influence in the nations of
Europe, subsequently to the Reformation.

 

 

##### <span id="chapter-2.xhtml#chapter-2-sh3"></span>PART V [Part 2] [EXAMINER, 29 MAY, 1831]

 

In the countries which remained Catholic, but where the Catholic
hierarchy did not retain sufficient moral ascendancy to succeed in
stopping the progress of civilization, the church was compelled, by the
decline of its separate influence, to link itself more and more closely
with the temporal sovereignty. And thus did it retard its own downfal,
until the spirit of the age became too strong for the two united, and
both fell together to the ground.

I have said that the three sources of moral influence are, supposed
wisdom and virtue, the sacerdotal office, and the possession of worldly
power. But in Protestant countries, the authority of the ministers of
religion, considered as an independent source of moral influence, must
be blotted out from the catalogue. None of the churches which were the
successors of the Catholic church in the nations in which the
Reformation prevailed, succeeded, as churches, to any portion of the
moral influence of their predecessor. The reason is, that no Protestant
church ever claimed a special mission from the Deity to itself; or ever
numbered among the obligations of religion, that of receiving its
doctrines from teachers accredited by that particular church. The
Catholics received the priest from God, and their religion from the
priest. But in the Protestant sects, you resorted to the teacher,
because you had already decided, or because it had been decided for you,
that you would adopt his religion. In the popular religions you chose
your own creed, and having so done, you naturally had recourse to its
ministers;—in the state religions, your creed was chosen for you by your
worldly superiors, and you were instigated by conscience, or, it may be,
urged by motives of a more worldly nature, to resort for religious
instruction to the minister of their appointment.

Every head of a family, even of the lowest rank, in Scotland, is a
theologian; he discusses points of doctrine with his neighbours, and
expounds the scripture to his family. He defers, indeed, though with no
slavish deference, to the opinion of his minister; but in what capacity?
only as a man whom his understanding owns as being at least more versed
in the particular subject—as being probably a wiser, and possibly, a
better man than himself. This is not the influence of an interpreter of
religion, as such; it is that of a purer heart, and a more cultivated
intelligence. It is not the ascendancy of a priest: it is the combined
authority of a professor of religion, and an esteemed private friend.

What I have said of the Scottish church, may be said of all Protestant
churches, except state churches (which the Scottish church,
notwithstanding its national endowment, is not). It may be said of all
dissenters from our own establishment; except, indeed, those who inherit
their religion, and adhere to it (not an uncommon case) as they would to
any other family connexion. To the followers of the Church of England, a
similar observation is wholly inapplicable: those excepted, who would
abide by that communion for its doctrine, were it a dissenting sect. The
people in general have not, nor ever had, any reason or motive for
adhering to the established religion, except that it was the religion of
their political superiors: and in the same ratio as their attachment to
those superiors has declined, so has their adherence to the established
church. From the time when the Church of England became firmly seated in
its temporalities; from the period when its title to the fee-simple of
our consciences acquired the sanctity of prescription, and when it was
enabled to dispense with any support but what it derived from the stable
foundations of the social fabric of which it formed a part; it sunk from
its independent rank, into an integral part, or a kind of appendage, of
the aristocracy. It merged into the higher classes: and what moral
influence it possessed, was merely a portion of the general moral
influence of temporal superiors.

From the termination, therefore, of that period of intellectual
excitement and hardy speculation which succeeded the crisis of the
Reformation, and which was prolonged in our own country to the end of
the seventeenth century;—that moral influence, that power over the minds
of mankind, which had been for so many ages the unquestioned heritage of
the Catholic clergy, passed into the hands of the wealthy classes, and
became united with worldly power. The ascendancy of the aristocracy was
not so dictatorial and enthralling as that of the Catholic priesthood;
because it was backed in a far inferior degree by the terrors of
religion: and because unity of doctrine was not maintained, by the same
powerful means, among the dominant class itself. Nevertheless, the
higher classes set the fashion, as in dress, so in opinion. The opinions
generally received among them, were the prevalent ones throughout the
rest of the nation. A bookish man here and there might have his
individual theories, but they made no converts. All who had no opinions
of their own, assumed those of their superiors. Few men wrote and
published doctrines which the higher classes did not approve; or if
published, their books were successfully cried down, or at best, were
little read or attended to. Such questions, and such only, as divided
the aristocracy, were (modestly) debated by the people: whose various
denominations or divisions were each headed by an aristocratic <span
class="c2">côterie.</span> Even the Dissenters made amends for their
preference of a vulgar religion, by evincing a full measure of
pliability and acquiescence in all that concerned politics and social
life; though the banner they in general followed, was that of a section
of the aristocracy less wedded than the other section to the monopoly of
the sect which possessed advowsons and archbishoprics.

The wealthy classes, then, from the revolution downwards, possessed all
that existed both of moral authority and worldly power. Under their
influence grew up the received doctrines of the British constitution;
the opinions, respecting the proper limits of the powers of government,
and the proper mode of constituting and administering it, which were
long characteristic of Englishmen. Along with these arose a vast variety
of current opinions respecting morality, education, and the structure of
society. And feelings in unison with those opinions, spread far, and
took a deep root in the English mind.

 

“The government of the wealthy classes was, after all, the government of
an irresponsible few; it therefore swarmed with abuses.”

 

At no time, during this period, could the predominant class be said,
with truth, to comprise among its members all the persons qualified to
govern men’s minds, or to direct their temporal interests, whom the
state of society afforded. As a whole, however, that class contained,
for a long time, a larger share of civilization and mental culture, than
all other classes taken together. The difficulties, to men of merit and
energy, of lifting themselves into that class, were not insuperable; and
the leading and active spirits among the governing body, had capacity to
comprehend intellectual superiority, and to value it. The conditions,
therefore, of a natural state of society were for some time, upon the
whole, tolerably well fulfilled.

 

“I believe it would be impossible to mention any portion whatever of the
business of government (except some parts of the defence of the country
against external enemies), of which the exact counterpart is not, in
some instance or other, performed by a committee chosen by the people
themselves: performed with less means, and under incomparably greater
difficulties, but performed unexceptionably, and to the general
satisfaction of the persons interested.”

 

But they have now ceased to be fulfilled. The government of the wealthy
classes was, after all, the government of an irresponsible few; it
therefore swarmed with abuses. Though the people, by the growth of their
intelligence, became more and more sensible of whatever was vicious in
their government, they might possibly have borne with it, had they
themselves remained as they were formerly, unfit, and conscious of their
unfitness, for the business of government. But the comparative freedom
of the practical administration of our Constitution—the extensive
latitude of action which it allowed to the energies of
individuals—enabled the people to train themselves in every habit
necessary for self-government; for the rational management of their own
affairs. I believe it would be impossible to mention any portion
whatever of the business of government (except some parts of the defence
of the country against external enemies), of which the exact counterpart
is not, in some instance or other, performed by a committee chosen by
the people themselves: performed with less means, and under incomparably
greater difficulties, but performed unexceptionably, and to the general
satisfaction of the persons interested. It is notorious that much of the
most important part of what in most other countries composes the
business of government, is here performed wholly by voluntary
associations: and other portions are done by the government in so clumsy
and slovenly a manner, that it is found necessary to have recourse to
voluntary associations as a subsidiary resource.

 

“It is notorious that much of the most important part of what in most
other countries composes the business of government, is here performed
wholly by voluntary associations”

 

When the people were thus trained to self-government, and had learned by
experience that they were fit for it, they could not continue to suppose
that none but persons of rank and fortune were entitled to have a voice
in the government, or were competent to criticise its proceedings. The
superior capacity of the higher ranks for the exercise of worldly power
is now a broken spell.

It <span class="c2">was</span> in the power of those classes, possessed
as they were of leisure and boundless opportunities of mental culture,
to have kept themselves on the level of the most advanced intellects of
the age; not to have been overtopped by the growth around them of a mass
of intelligence, superior, on the average, to their own. They might also
have preserved the confidence of the people in the integrity of their
purposes, by abating each abuse, in proportion as the public conscience
rose against it. They might thus have retained, in right of their virtue
and intellect, that moral ascendancy which an intelligent people never
long continues to yield to mere power. But they have flung away their
advantages.

I have already adverted to the decline of the higher classes in active
talent, as they became enervated by lazy enjoyment. In the same ratio in
which they have advanced in humanity and refinement, they have fallen
off in energy of intellect and strength of will. Many of them were
formerly versed in business: and into the hands of such, the remainder
committed the management of the nation’s affairs. Now, the men of
hereditary wealth are mostly inexperienced in business, and unfit for
it. Many of them formerly knew life and the world: but their knowledge
of life is now little more than the knowledge of two or three hundred
families, with whom they are accustomed to associate; and it may be
safely asserted, that not even a fellow of a college is more ignorant of
the world, or more grossly mistakes the signs of the times, than an
English nobleman. Their very opinions,—which, before they had passed
into aphorisms, were the result of choice, and something like an act of
the intelligence,—are now merely hereditary. Their minds were once
active—they are now passive: they once generated impressions—they now
merely take them. What are now their political maxims? Traditional
texts, relating, directly or indirectly, to the privileges of their
order, and to the exclusive fitness of men of their own sort for
governing. What is their public virtue? Attachment to these texts, and
to the prosperity and grandeur of England, on condition that she shall
never swerve from them; idolatry of certain abstractions, called church,
constitution, agriculture, trade, and others: by dint of which they have
gradually contrived, in a manner, to exclude from their minds the very
idea of their living and breathing fellow-citizens, as the subjects of
moral obligation in their capacity of rulers. They love their country as
Bonaparte loved his army—for whose glory he felt the most ardent zeal,
at a time when all the men who composed it, one with another, were
killed off every two or three years. They do not love England as one
loves human beings, but as a man loves his house or his acres.

Being such persons as has now been described, and being at last
completely found out by the more intelligent, they no longer retain
sufficient moral influence to give, as heretofore, vogue and currency to
their opinions. But they retain—and the possessors of worldly power must
always retain—enough of that influence, to prevent any opinions, which
they do not acknowledge, from passing into received doctrines. They
must, therefore, be divested of the monopoly of worldly power, ere the
most virtuous and best-instructed of the nation will acquire that
ascendancy over the opinions and feelings of the rest, by which alone
England can emerge from this crisis of transition, and enter once again
into a natural state of society.

 

 

<span class="c4">“</span>They must, therefore, be divested of the
monopoly of worldly power, ere the most virtuous and best-instructed of
the nation will acquire that ascendancy over the opinions and feelings
of the rest, by which alone England can emerge from this crisis of
transition, and enter once again into a natural state of society.”

 

A few months before the first of these papers was written, it would have
seemed a paradox to assert that the present aera is one of moral and
social transition. The same proposition now seems almost the tritest of
truisms. The revolution which had already taken place in the human mind,
is rapidly shaping external things to its own form and proportions.

That we are in a state of transition, is a point which needs no further
illustration. That the passage we are in the midst of, will conduct us
to a healthier state, has perhaps been rendered probable in the
preceding papers, to some few who might otherwise have questioned it.

 

“The revolution which had already taken place in the human mind, is
rapidly shaping external things to its own form and proportions... the
futurity ... awaits us.”

 

But it greatly imports us to obtain a far deeper insight into the
futurity which awaits us, and into the means by which the blessings of
that futurity may be best improved, and its dangers avoided.

How shall we attain this insight? By a careful survey of the properties
which are characteristic of the English national mind, in the present
age—for on these the future fate of our country must depend.

But “fit audience,” even “though few,’ [1] cannot be found for such
discussions, at a moment when the interests of the day and of the hour
naturally and properly engross every mind. The sequel of these papers
must therefore be postponed until the interval of repose, after the
present bustle and tumult. I shall resume my subject as early as
possible after the passing of the Reform Bill. [2]

 

### Notes

 

[1] John Milton (1608-74), <span class="c2">Paradise Lost</span> (1667),
Bk. VII, 1. 31; in <span class="c2">The Poetical Works</span> (London:
Tonson, 1695), p. 180.

[2] The elections returned a substantial majority for Grey and the
Reform Bill. After Parliament resumed on 14 June, the second version was
brought in, “A Bill to Amend the Representation of the People in England
and Wales,” 2 William IV (25 June, 1831), <span class="c2">PP,</span>
1831, III, 9-46.

 

 

\

</div>

<span id="chapter-3.xhtml"></span>

<div class="body" style="white-space:pre-wrap">

### Further Information

 

##### <span id="chapter-3.xhtml#chapter-3-sh1"></span>Source

The edition used for this extract: “The Spirit of the Age” (<span
class="c2">The Examiner</span>, 1831) in <span class="c2">The Collected
Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXII - Newspaper Writings December
1822 - July 1831 Part I,</span> ed.  Ann P. Robson and John M. Robson,
Introduction by Ann P. Robson and John M. Robson (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986). Part I (9 Jan.
1831) \<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/256/50800\>, Part V (1) (15
May, 1831) \<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/256/50860\>, Part V (2)
(29 May, 1831) \<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/256/50868\>.

Copyright: The online edition of the <span class="c2">Collected
Works</span> is published under licence from the copyright holder, The
University of Toronto Press. ©2006 The University of Toronto Press. All
rights reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form
or medium without the permission of The University of Toronto Press.

 

##### <span id="chapter-3.xhtml#chapter-3-sh2"></span>Further Reading

Other works by John Stuart Mill (1806-1873)
\<oll.libertyfund.org/person/21\>.

School of Thought: Utilitarians ???

 

 

“The distinctive principle of Western social philosophy is
individualism. It aims at the creation of a sphere in which the
individual is free to think, to choose, and to act without being
restrained by the interference of the social apparatus of coercion and
oppression, the State.”\
[Ludwig von Mises, “Liberty and Property” (1958)]

 

 

<div
style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:baseline;width:18.162%;">

![image.png](images/image.png)

</div>

</p>
##### <span id="chapter-3.xhtml#chapter-3-sh3"></span>About the Best of the OLL

<span class="c2">The Best of the Online Library of Liberty</span> is a
collection of some of the most important material in the Online Library
of Liberty. They are chapter length extracts which have been formatted
as pamphlets in <span class="c4">PDF, </span> <span
class="c4">ePub</span>, and <span class="c4">Kindle</span> formats for
easier distribution. These extracts are designed for use in the
classroom and discussion groups, or material for a literature table for
outreach. The full list can be found here
\<oll.libertyfund.org/title/2465\>.

A subset of <span class="c2">The Best of the OLL</span> is <span
class="c2">The Best of Bastiat</span> which is a collection of some of
the best material in Liberty Fund's 6 volume edition of <span
class="c2">The Collected Works of Frédéric Bastiat</span> (2011-). The
full list can be found here \<oll.libertyfund.org/title/2477\>.

Another useful sampling of the contents of the OLL website is the
collection of weekly <span class="c2">Quotations about Liberty and
Power</span> which are organized by themes such as Free Trade, Money and
Banking, Natural Rights, and so on. See for example, Richard Cobden’s “I
have a dream” speech \<oll.libertyfund.org/quote/326\>.

 

##### <span id="chapter-3.xhtml#chapter-3-sh4"></span>Copyright and Fair Use

The copyright to this material is held by Liberty Fund unless otherwise
indicated. It is made available to further the educational goals of
Liberty Fund, Inc. and may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

##### <span id="chapter-3.xhtml#chapter-3-sh5"></span>About the OLL and Liberty Fund

The <span class="c2">Online Library of Liberty</span> is a project of
Liberty Fund, Inc., a private educational foundation established in 1960
to encourage the study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible
individuals. The OLL website has a large collection of books and study
guides about individual liberty, limited constitutional government, the
free market, and peace.

Liberty Fund: \<www.libertyfund.org\>.

OLL: \<oll.libertyfund.org\>.

 

</div>

<span id="footnotes.xhtml"></span>

<div class="body">

<span id="footnotes.xhtml#footnote1"></span></a>
[<span class="c3">^1^</span>](#chapter-2.xhtml#footnote-ref1) “The
Spirit of the Age” (<span class="c2">The Examiner,</span> 1831) in <span
class="c2">The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXII -
Newspaper Writings December 1822 - July 1831 Part I,</span> ed.  Ann P.
Robson and John M. Robson, Introduction by Ann P. Robson and John M.
Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1986). Part I (9 Jan. 1831)
\<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/256/50800\>, Part V (1) (15 May,
1831) \<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/256/50860\>, Part V (2) (29
May, 1831) \<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/256/50868\>.

\

</div>
