AN EXAMINATION OF SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON’S PHILOSOPHY


CHAPTER I: Introductory Remarks

among the philosophical writers of the present century in these islands,
no one occupies a higher position than Sir William Hamilton. He alone,
of our metaphysicians of this and the preceding generation, has
acquired, merely as such, an European celebrity: while, in our own
country, he has not only had power to produce a revival of interest in a
study which had ceased to be popular, but has made himself, in some
sense, the founder of a school of thought. The school, indeed, is not
essentially new; for its fundamental doctrines are those of the
philosophy which has everywhere been in the ascendant since the setting
in of the reaction against Locke and Hume, which dates from Reid among
ourselves and from Kant for the rest of Europe. But that general scheme
of philosophy is split into many divisions, and the Hamiltonian form of
it is distinguished by as marked peculiarities as belong to any other of
its acknowledged varieties. From the later German and French
developments of the common doctrine, it is separated by differences
great in reality, and still greater in appearance; while it stands
superior to the earlier Scottish and English forms by the whole
difference of level which has been gained to philosophy through the
powerful negative criticism of Kant. It thus unites to the prestige of
independent originality, the recommendation of a general harmony with
the prevailing tone of thought. These advantages, combined with an
intellect highly trained and in many respects highly fitted for the
subject, and a knowledge probably never equalled in extent and accuracy
of whatever had been previously thought and written in his department,
have caused Sir William Hamilton to be justly recognised as, in the
province of abstract speculation, one of the important figures of the
age.

The acknowledged position of Sir W. Hamilton at the head, so far as
regards this country, of the school of philosophy to which he belongs,
has principally determined me to connect with his name and writings the
speculations and criticisms contained in the present work. The
justification of the work itself lies in the importance of the
questions, to the discussion of which it is a contribution. England is
often reproached by Continental thinkers, with indifference to the
higher philosophy. But England did not always deserve this reproach, and
is already showing, by no doubtful Edition: current; Page: [2] symptoms,
that she will not deserve it much longer. Her thinkers are again
beginning to see, what they had only temporarily forgotten, that a true
Psychology is the indispensable scientific basis of Morals, of Politics,
of the science and art of Education; that the difficulties of
Metaphysics lie at the root of all science; that those difficulties can
only be quieted by being resolved, and that until they are resolved,
positively awhenevera possible, but at any rate negatively, we are never
assured that any human knowledge, even physical, stands on solid
foundations.

My subject, therefore, is blessb Sir W. Hamilton, cthanc the questions
which Sir W. Hamilton discussed. It is, however, impossible to write on
those questions in our own country and in our own time, without
incessant reference, express or tacit, to his treatment of them. On all
the subjects on which he touched, he is either one of the most powerful
allies of what I deem a sound philosophy, or (more frequently) by far
its most formidable antagonist; both because he came the latest, and
wrote with a full knowledge of the flaws which had been detected in his
predecessors, and because he was one of the ablest, the most
dfar-sightedd, and the most candid. Whenever any opinion which he
deliberately expressed, is contended against, his form of the opinion,
and his arguments for it, are those which especially require to be faced
and carefully appreciated: and it being thus impossible that any fit
discussion of his topics should not involve an estimate of his
doctrines, it seems worth while that the estimate should be rendered as
complete as practicable, by being extended to all the subjects on which
he has made, or on which he is believed to have made, any important
contribution to thought.

In thus attempting to anticipate, as far as is yet possible, the
judgment of posterity on Sir W. Hamilton’s labours, I sincerely lament
that on the many points on which I am at issue with him, I have the
unfair advantage possessed by one whose opponent is no longer in a
condition to reply. Personally I might have had small cause to
congratulate myself on the reply which I might have received, for though
a strictly honourable, he was a most unsparing controversialist, and
whoever assailed even the most unimportant of his opinions, might look
for hard blows in return. But it would have been worth far more, even to
myself, than any polemical success, to have known with certainty in what
manner he would have met the objections raised in the present volume. I
feel keenly, with Plato, how much more is to be learnt by discussing
with a man, who can question and Edition: current; Page: [3] answer,
than with a book, which cannot.[*] But it was not possible to take a
general review of Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrines while they were only known
to the world in the fragmentary state in which they were published
during his life. His Lectures, the fullest and the only consecutive
exposition e(as far as it goes)e of his philosophy, are a posthumous
publication; while the latest and most matured expression of many of his
opinions, the “Dissertations on Reid,”[†] left off, scarcely half
finished, in the middle of a sentence; and so long as he lived, his
readers were still hoping for the remainder. The Lectures, it is true,
have added less than might have been expected to the knowledge we
already possessed of the author’s doctrines; but it is something to know
that we have now all that is to be had; and though we should have been
glad to have his opinions on more subjects, we could scarcely have known
more thoroughly than we are now at last enabled to do, what his thoughts
were on the points to which he attached the greatest importance, and
which are most identified with his name and fame.

Edition: current; Page: [4]


CHAPTER II: The Relativity of Human Knowledge

the doctrine which is thought to belong in the most especial manner to
Sir W. Hamilton, and which was the ground of his opposition to the
transcendentalism of the later French and German metaphysicians, is that
which he and others have called the Relativity of Human Knowledge. It is
the subject of the most generally known, and most impressive, of all his
writings,[*] the one which first revealed to the English metaphysical
reader that a new power had arisen in philosophy; and, together with its
developments, it composes the “Philosophy of the Conditioned,” which he
opposed to the German and French philosophies of the Absolute, and which
is regarded by most of his admirers as the greatest of his titles to a
permanent place in the history of metaphysical thought.

But the “relativity of human knowledge,” like most other phrases into
which the words relative or relation enter, is vague, and admits of a
great variety of meanings. In one of its senses, it stands for a
proposition respecting the nature and limits of our knowledge, in my
judgment true, fundamental, and full of important consequences in
philosophy. From this amplitude of meaning its significance shades down
through a number of gradations, successively more thin and
unsubstantial, till it fades into a truism leading to no consequences,
and hardly worth enunciating in words. When, therefore, a philosopher
lays great stress upon the relativity of our knowledge, it is necessary
to cross-examine his writings, and compel them to disclose in which of
its many degrees of meaning he understands the phrase.

There is one of its acceptations, which, for the purpose now in view,
may be put aside, though in itself defensible, and though, when thus
employed, it expresses a real and important law of our mental nature.
This is, that we only know anything, by knowing it as distinguished from
something else; that all consciousness is of difference; that two
objects are the smallest number required to constitute consciousness;
that a thing is only seen to be what it is, by contrast with what it is
not. The employment of the proposition, Edition: current; Page: [5] that
all human knowledge is relative, to express this meaning, is sanctioned
by high authorities,* and I have no fault to find with that use of the
phrase. But we are not concerned with it in the present case; for it is
not in this sense, that the expression is ordinarily or intentionally
used by Sir W. Hamilton; though he fully recognises the truth which,
when thus used, it serves to express. In general, when he says that all
our knowledge is relative, the relation he has in view is not between
the thing known and other objects compared with it, but between the
thing known and the mind knowing.

All language recognises a distinction between myself—the Ego—and a
world, either material, or spiritual, or both, external to me, but of
which I can, in some mode and measure, take cognizance. The most
fundamental questions in philosophy are those which seek to determine
what we are able to know of these external objects, and by what evidence
we know it.

In examining the different opinions which are or may be entertained on
this subject, it will simplify the exposition very much, if we at first
limit ourselves to the case of physical, or what are commonly called
material objects. These objects are of course known to us through the
senses. By those channels and no otherwise do we learn whatever we do
learn concerning them. Without the senses we should not know nor suspect
that such things existed. We know no more of what they are, than the
senses tell us, nor does nature afford us any means of knowing more.
Thus much, in the obvious meaning of the terms, is denied by no one,
though there are thinkers who prefer to express the meaning in other
language.

There are, however, conflicting opinions as to what it is that the
senses tell us concerning objects. About one part of the information
they give, there is no dispute. They tell us our sensations. The objects
excite, or awaken in us, certain states of feeling. A part, at least, of
what we know of the objects, is the feelings to which they give rise.
What we term the properties of an object, are the powers it exerts of
producing sensations in our consciousness. Take any familiar object,
such as an orange. It is yellow; that is, it affects us, through our
sense of sight, with a particular sensation of colour. It is soft; in
other words it produces a sensation, through our muscular feelings, of
resistance overcome by a slight effort. It is sweet; for it causes a
peculiar kind of pleasurable sensation through our organ of taste. It is
of a globular figure, somewhat flattened at the ends: we affirm this on
account of sensations that it causes in us, respecting which it is still
in dispute among psychologists whether they originally came to us solely
through touch and the muscles, or also through the organ of sight.
Edition: current; Page: [6] When it is cut open, we discover a certain
arrangement of parts, distinguishable as being, in certain respects,
unlike one another; but of their unlikeness we have no measure or proof
except that they give us different sensations. The rind, the pulp, the
juice, differ from one another in colour, in taste, in smell, in degree
of consistency (that is, of resistance to pressure) all of which are
differences in our feelings. The parts are, moreover, aoutsidea one
another, occupying different portions of space: and even this
distinction, it is maintained (though the doctrine is vehemently
protested against by some) may be resolved into a difference in our
sensations. When thus analysed, it is affirmed that all the attributes
which we ascribe to objects, consist in their having the power of
exciting one or another variety of sensation in our minds; that to us
the properties of an object have this and no other meaning; that an
object is to us nothing else than that which affects our senses in a
certain manner; that we are incapable of attaching to the word object,
any other meaning; that even an imaginary object is but a conception,
such as we are able to form, of something which would affect our senses
in some new way; so that our knowledge of objects, and even our fancies
about objects, consist of nothing but the sensations which they excite,
or which we imagine them exciting, in ourselves.

This is the doctrine of the Relativity of Knowledge to the knowing mind,
in the simplest, purest, and, as I think, the most proper acceptation of
the words. There are, however, two forms of this doctrine, which differ
materially from one another.

According to one of the forms, the sensations which, in common parlance,
we are said to receive from objects, are not only all that we can
possibly know of the objects, but are all that we have any ground for
believing to exist. What we term an object is but a complex conception
made up by the laws of association, out of the ideas of various
sensations which we are accustomed to receive simultaneously. There is
nothing real in the process but these sensations. They do not, indeed,
accompany or succeed one another at random; they are held together by a
law, that is, they occur in fixed groups, and a fixed order of
succession: but we have no evidence of anything which, not being itself
a sensation, is a substratum or hidden cause of sensations. The idea of
such a substratum is a purely mental creation, to which we have no
reason to think that there is any corresponding reality exterior to our
minds. Those who hold this opinion are said to doubt or deny the
existence of matter. They are sometimes called by the name Idealists,
sometimes by that of Sceptics, according to the other opinions which
they hold. They include the followers of Berkeley and those of Hume.
Among recent thinkers, the acute and accomplished Edition: current;
Page: [7] Professor Ferrier, though by a circuitous path, and expressing
himself in a very different phraseology, seems to have arrived at
essentially the same point of view. These philosophers maintain the
Relativity of our knowledge in the most extreme form in which the
doctrine can be understood, since they contend, not merely that all we
can possibly know of anything is the manner in which it affects the
human faculties, but that there is nothing else to be known; that
affections of human or of some other minds are all that we can know to
exist.

This, however, is far from being the shape in which the doctrine of the
Relativity of our knowledge is usually held. To most of those who hold
it, the difference between the Ego and the Non-Ego is not one of
language only, nor a formal distinction between two aspects of the same
reality, but denotes two realities, each bhaving a separate existenceb,
and neither dependent on the other. In the phraseology borrowed from the
Schoolmen by the German Transcendentalists, they regard the Noumenon as
in itself a different thing from the Phænomenon, and equally real; many
of them would say, much more real, being the permanent Reality, of which
the other is but the passing manifestation. They believe that there is a
real universe of “Things in Themselves,” and that whenever there is an
impression on our senses, there is a “Thing in itself,” which is behind
the phænomenon, and is the cause of it. But as to what this Thing is “in
itself,” we, having no corgansc except our senses for communicating with
it, can only know what our senses tell us; and as they tell us nothing
but the impression which the thing makes upon us, we do not know what it
is in itself at all. We suppose (at least these philosophers suppose)
that it must be dsomethingd “in itself,” but all that we know it to be
is merely relative to us, consisting in the power of affecting us in
certain ways, or, as it is technically called, of producing Phænomena.
External things exist, and have an inmost nature, but their inmost
nature is inaccessible to our faculties. We know it not, and can assert
nothing of it with a meaning. Of the ultimate Realities, as such, we
know the existence, and nothing more. But the impressions which these
Realities make on us—the sensations they excite, the similitudes,
groupings, and successions of those sensations, or, to sum up all this
in a common though improper expression, the representations generated in
our minds by the action of the Things themselves—these we may know, and
these are all that we can know respecting them. In some future state of
existence it is conceivable that we may know more, and more may be known
by intelligences superior to us. Yet even this can only be true in the
same sense in which a person with the use of his eyes knows more than is
Edition: current; Page: [8] known to one born blind, or in which we
should know more than we do if we were endowed with two or three
additional senses. We should have more sensations; phænomena would exist
to us of which we have at present no conception; and we emighte know
better than we now do, many of those which are within our present
experience; for fiff the new impressions gwereg linked with the old, as
the old are with one another, by uniformities of succession and
coexistence, we should now have new marks indicating to us known
phænomena in cases in which we should otherwise have been unaware of
them. But all this additional knowledge would be, like that which we now
possess, merely phænomenal. We should not, any more than at present,
know things as they are in themselves, but merely an increased number of
relations between them and us. And in the only meaning which we are able
to attach to the term, all knowledge, by however exalted an
Intelligence, can only be relative to the knowing Mind. If Things have
an inmost nature, apart not only from the impressions which they
produce, but from all those which they are fitted to produce, on any
sentient being, this inmost nature is unknowable, inscrutable, and
inconceivable, not to us merely, but to every other creature. To say
that even the Creator could know it, is to use language which to us has
no meaning, because we have no faculties by which to apprehend that
there is any such thing for him to know.

It is in this form that the doctrine of the Relativity of Knowledge is
held by the greater number of those who profess to hold it, attaching
any definite idea to the term. These again are divided into several
distinct schools of thinkers, by some of whom the doctrine is held with
a modification of considerable importance.

Agreeing in the opinion that what we know of Noumena, or Things in
themselves, is but their bare existence, all our other knowledge of
Things being but a knowledge of something in ourselves which derives its
origin from them; there is a class of thinkers who hold that our mere
sensations, and an outward cause which produces them, do not compose the
whole of this relative knowledge. The Attributes which we ascribe to
outward things, or such at least as are inseparable from them in
thought, contain, it is affirmed, other elements, over and above
sensations plus an unknowable cause. These additional elements are still
only relative, for they are not in the objects themselves, nor have we
evidence of anything in the objects that answers to them. They are added
by the mind itself, and belong, not to the Things, but to our
perceptions and conceptions of them. Such properties as the objects can
be conceived divested of, such as sweetness or Edition: current; Page:
[9] sourness, hardness or softness, hotness or coldness, whiteness,
redness, or blackness—these, it is sometimes admitted, exist in our
sensations only. But the attributes of filling space, and occupying a
portion of time, are not properties of our sensations in their crude
state, neither, again, are they properties of the objects, nor is there
in the objects any prototype of them. They result from the nature and
structure of the Mind itself: which is so constituted that it cannot
take any impressions from objects except in those particular modes. We
see a thing in a place, not because the Noumenon, the Thing in itself,
is in any place, but because it is the law of our perceptive faculty
that we must see as in some place, whatever we see at all. Place is not
a property of the Thing, but a mode in which the mind is compelled to
represent it. Time and Space are only modes of our perceptions, not
modes of existence, and higher Intelligences are possibly not bound by
them. Things, in themselves, are neither in time nor in space, though we
cannot represent them to ourselves except under that twofold condition.
Again, when we predicate of a thing that it is one or many, a whole or a
part of a whole, a Substance possessing Accidents, or an Accident
inhering in a Substance—when we think of it as producing Effects, or as
produced by a Cause, (I omit other attributes not necessary to be here
enumerated,) we are ascribing to it properties which do not exist in the
Thing itself, but with which it is clothed by the laws of our conceptive
faculty—properties not of the Things, but of our mode of conceiving
them. We are compelled by our nature to construe things to ourselves
under these forms, but they are not forms of the Things. The attributes
exist only in relation to us, and as inherent laws of the human
faculties; but differ from Succession and Duration in being laws of our
intellectual, not our sensitive faculty; technically termed Categories
of the Understanding. This is the doctrine of the Relativity of our
knowledge as held by Kant, who has been followed in it by many
subsequent thinkers, German, English, and French.

By the side of this there is another philosophy, older in date, which,
though temporarily eclipsed and often contemptuously treated by it, is,
according to present appearances, likely to survive it. Taking the same
view with Kant of the unknowableness of Things in themselves, and also
agreeing with him that we mentally invest the objects of our perceptions
with attributes which do not all point, like whiteness and sweetness, to
specific sensations, but are in some cases constructed by the mind’s own
laws; this philosophy, however, does not think it necessary to ascribe
to the mind certain innate forms, in which the objects are (as it were)
moulded into these appearances, but holds that Place, Extension,
Substance, Cause, and the rest, are conceptions put together out of
ideas of sensation by the known laws of association. This, the doctrine
of Hartley, of James Mill, of Professor Bain, and other eminent
thinkers, and which is compatible with Edition: current; Page: [10]
either the acceptance or the rejection of the Berkeleian theory, is the
extreme form of one mode of the doctrine of Relativity, as Kant’s is of
another. Both schemes accept the doctrine in its widest sense—the entire
inaccessibility to our faculties of any other knowledge of Things than
that of the impressions which they produce in our mental consciousness.

Between these there are many intermediate systems, according as
different thinkers have assigned more or less to the original furniture
of the mind on the one hand, or to the associations generated by
experience on the other. Brown, for example, regards our notion of Space
or Extension as a product of association, while many of our intellectual
ideas are regarded by him as ultimate and undecomposable facts. But he
accepts, in its full extent, the doctrine of the Relativity of our
knowledge, being of opinion that though we are assured of the objective
existence of a world external to the mind, our knowledge of that world
is absolutely limited to the modes in which we are affected by it. The
same doctrine is very impressively taught by one of the acutest
metaphysicians of recent times, Mr. Herbert Spencer, who, in his First
Principles, insists with equal force upon the certainty of the existence
of Things in Themselves, and upon their absolute and eternal relegation
to the region of the Unknowable.* This is also, apparently, the doctrine
of Auguste Comte: though while maintaining with great emphasis the
unknowableness of Noumena by our faculties, his aversion to metaphysics
prevented him from giving any definite opinion as to their real
existence, which, however, his language always by implication
assumes.[*]

It is obvious that what has been said respecting the unknowableness of
Things “in themselves,” forms no obstacle to our ascribing attributes or
properties to them, provided these are always conceived as relative to
us. If a thing produces effects of which our sight, hearing, or touch
can take cognizance, it follows, and indeed is but the same statement in
other words, that the thing has power to produce those effects. These
various powers are its properties, and of such, an indefinite multitude
is open to our knowledge. But this knowledge is merely phænomenal. The
object is known to us only in one special relation, namely, as that
which produces, or is capable of producing, certain impressions on our
senses; and all that we really know is these impressions. This negative
meaning is all that should be understood by the assertion, that we
cannot know the Thing in itself; that we cannot know its inmost nature
or essence. The inmost nature or essence of a Thing is apt to be
regarded as something unknown, which, if we knew it, would Edition:
current; Page: [11] explain and account for all the phænomena which the
thing exhibits to us. But this unknown something is a supposition
without evidence. We have no ground for supposing that there is anything
which if known to us would afford to our intellect this satisfaction;
would sum up, as it were, the knowable attributes of the object in a
single sentence. Moreover, if there were such a central property, it
would not answer to the idea of an “inmost nature;” for if knowable by
any intelligence, it must, like other properties, be relative to the
intelligence which knows it, that is, it must hsolelyh consist in
iproducing in that intelligence some specifically definite state of
consciousnessi; for this is the only idea we have of knowing; the only
sense in which the verb “to know” means anything.

It would, no doubt, be absurd to assume that our words exhaust the
possibilities of Being. There may be innumerable modes of it which are
inaccessible to our faculties, and which consequently we are unable to
name. But we ought not to speak of these modes of Being by any of the
names we possess. These are all inapplicable, because they all stand for
known modes of Being. We might invent new names for jsuchj unknown
modes; but the new names would have no more meaning than the x, y, z, of
Algebra. The only name we can give them which really expresses an
attribute, is the word Unknowable.

The doctrine of the Relativity of our knowledge, in the sense which has
now been explained, is one of great weight and significance, which
impresses a character on the whole mode of philosophical thinking of
whoever receives it, and is the key-stone of one of the only two
possible systems of Metaphysics and Psychology. But the doctrine is
capable of being, and is, understood in at least two other senses. In
one of them, instead of a definite and important tenet, it means
something quite insignificant, which no one ever did or could call in
question. Suppose a philosopher to maintain that certain properties of
objects are in the Thing, and not in our senses; in the thing itself,
not as whiteness may be said to be in the thing (namely, that there is
in the thing a power whereby it produces in us the sensation of white),
but in quite another manner; and are known to us not indirectly, as the
inferred causes of our sensations, but by direct perception of them in
the outward object. Suppose the same philosopher nevertheless to affirm
strenuously that all our knowledge is merely phænomenal, and relative to
ourselves; that we do not and cannot know anything of outward objects,
except relatively to our own faculties. I think our first feeling
respecting a thinker who professed both these doctrines, would be to
wonder what he could possibly mean by the latter of them. It would seem
Edition: current; Page: [12] that he must mean one of two trivialities;
either that we can only know what we have the power of knowing, or else
that all our knowledge is relative to us inasmuch as it is we that know
it.

There is another mode of understanding the doctrine of Relativity,
intermediate between these insignificant truisms and the substantial
doctrine previously expounded. The position taken may be, that
perception of Things as they are in themselves is not entirely denied to
us, but is so mixed and kconfoundedk with impressions derived from their
action on us, as to give a relative character to the whole aggregate.
Our absolute knowledge may be vitiated and disguised by the presence of
a relative element. Our faculty (it may be said) of perceiving things as
they are in themselves, though real, has its own laws, its own
conditions, and necessary mode of operation: our cognitions consequently
depend, not solely on the nature of the things to be known, but also on
that of the knowing faculty, as our sight depends not solely upon the
object seen, but upon that together with the structure of the eye. If
the eye were not achromatic, we should see all visible objects with
colours derived from the organ, as well as with those truly emanating
from the object. Supposing, therefore, that Things in themselves are the
natural and proper object of our knowing faculty, and that this faculty
carries to the mind a report of what is in the Thing itself, apart from
its effects on us, there would still be a portion of uncertainty in
these reports, inasmuch as we could not be sure that the eye of our mind
is achromatic, and that the message it brings from the Noumenon does not
arrive tinged and falsified, in an unknown degree, through an influence
arising from the necessary conditions of the mind’s action. We may, in
short, be looking at Things in themselves, but through imperfect
glasses: what we see may be the very Thing, but the colours and forms
which the glass conveys to us may be partly an optical illusion. This is
a possible opinion: and one who, holding this opinion, should speak of
the Relativity of our knowledge, would not use the term wholly without
meaning. But he could not, consistently, assert that all our knowledge
is relative; since his opinion would be that we have a capacity of
Absolute knowledge, but that we are liable to mistake relative knowledge
for it.

In which, if in any, of these various meanings, was the doctrine of
Relativity held by Sir W. Hamilton? To this question, a more puzzling
one than might have been expected, we shall endeavour in the succeeding
chapter to find an answer.

Edition: current; Page: [13]


CHAPTER III: The Doctrine of the Relativity of Human Knowledge, as Held by Sir William Hamilton

it is hardly possible to affirm more strongly or more explicitly than
Sir W. Hamilton has done, that Things in themselves are to us altogether
unknowable, and that all we can know of anything is its relation to us,
composed of, and limited to, the Phænomena which it exhibits to our
organs. Let me cite a passage from one of the Appendices to the
Discussions.

Our whole knowledge of mind and of matter is relative,
conditioned—relatively conditioned. Of things absolutely or in
themselves, be they external, be they internal, we know nothing, or know
them only as incognisable; and become aware of their incomprehensible
existence, only as this is indirectly and accidentally revealed to us,
through certain qualities related to our faculties of knowledge, and
which qualities, again, we cannot think as unconditioned, irrelative,
existent in and of themselves. All that we know is therefore
phænomenal,—phænomenal of the unknown. . . . Nor is this denied; for it
has been commonly confessed, that, as substances, we know not what is
Matter, and are ignorant of what is Mind.*

This passage might be matched by many others, equally emphatic, and in
appearance equally decisive; several of which I shall have occasion to
quote. Yet in the sense which the author’s phrases seem to convey—in the
only aimportanta meaning capable of being attached to them—the doctrine
they assert was certainly not held by Sir W. Hamilton. He by no means
admits that we know nothing of objects except their existence, and the
impressions produced by them upon the human mind. He affirms this in
regard to what have been called by metaphysicians the Secondary
Qualities of Matter, but denies it of the Primary.

On this point his declarations are very explicit. One of the most
elaborate of his “Dissertations on Reid” is devoted to expounding the
distinction. The “Dissertation” begins thus:

The developed doctrine of Real Presentationism, the basis of Natural
Realism [the doctrine of the author himself] asserts the consciousness
or immediate perception Edition: current; Page: [14] of certain
essential attributes of Matter objectively existing; while it admits
that other properties of body are unknown in themselves, and only
inferred as causes to account for certain subjective affections of which
we are cognizant in ourselves. This discrimination, which to other
systems is contingent, superficial, extraneous, but to Natural Realism
necessary, radical, intrinsic, coincides with what since the time of
Locke has been generally known as the distinction of the Qualities of
Matter or Body, using these terms as convertible, into Primary and
Secondary.*

Further on, he states, in additional development of so-called Natural
Realism,

that we have not merely a notion, a conception, an imagination, a
subjective representation—of Extension, for example—called up or
suggested in some incomprehensible manner to the mind, on occasion of an
extended object being presented to the sense; but that in the perception
of such an object we really have, as by nature we believe we have, an
immediate knowledge of that external object as extended.†

If we are not percipient of any extended reality, we are not percipient
of body as existing; for body exists, and can only be known immediately
and in itself, as extended. The material world, on this supposition,
sinks into something unknown and problematical; and its existence, if
not denied, can, at least, be only precariously affirmed, as the occult
cause, or incomprehensible occasion, of certain subjective affections we
experience in the form either of a sensation of the secondary quality or
of a perception of the primary.‡

Not only, in Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, do we know, by direct
consciousness or perception, certain properties of Things as they exist
in the Things themselves, but we may also know those properties as in
the Things, by demonstration à priori. “The notion of body being given,
every primary quality is to be evolved out of that notion, as
necessarily involved in it, independently altogether of any experience
of sense.”§ “The Primary Qualities may be deduced à priori, the bare
notion of matter being given; they being, in fact, only evolutions of
the conditions which that notion necessarily implies.”¶ He goes so far
as to say, that our belief of the Primary Qualities is, not merely
necessary as involved in a fact of which we have a direct perception,
but necessary in itself, by our mental constitution. He speaks of “that
absolute or insuperable resistance which we are compelled, independently
of experience, to think that every part of matter would oppose to any
attempt to deprive it of its space, by compressing it into an
inextended.”∥

The following is still more specific. “The Primary” Qualities “are
apprehended as they are in bodies; the Secondary, as they are in us: the
Edition: current; Page: [15] Secundo-primary” (a third class created by
himself, comprising the mechanical as distinguished from the geometrical
properties of Body)

as they are in bodies and as they are in us. . . . We know the Primary
qualities immediately as objects of perception; the Secundo-primary both
immediately as objects of perception and mediately as causes of
sensation; the Secondary only mediately as causes of sensation. In other
words: The Primary are known immediately in themselves; the
Secundo-primary, both immediately in themselves and mediately in their
effects on us; the Secondary, only mediately in their effects on us. . .
. We are conscious, as objects, in the Primary Qualities, of the modes
of a not-self; in the Secondary, of the modes of self; in the
Secundo-primary, of the modes of self and of a not-self at once.*

There is nothing wonderful in Sir W. Hamilton’s entertaining these
opinions; they are held by perhaps a majority of metaphysicians. But it
is surprising that, entertaining them, he should have believed himself,
and been believed by others, to maintain the Relativity of all our
knowledge. What he deems to be relative, in any sense of the term that
is not insignificant, is only our knowledge of the Secondary Qualities
of objects. Extension and the other Primary Qualities he positively
asserts that we have an immediate intuition of, “as they are in
bodies”—“as modes of a not-self;” in express contradistinction to being
known merely as causes of certain impressions on our senses or on our
minds. As there cannot have been, in his own thoughts, a flat
contradiction between what he would have admitted to be the two cardinal
doctrines of his philosophy, the only question that can arise is, which
of the two is to be taken in a non-natural sense. Is it the doctrine
that we know certain properties as they are in the Things? Were we to
judge from a foot-note to the same Dissertation, we might suppose so. He
there observes—“In saying that a thing is known in itself, I do not mean
that this object is known in its absolute existence, that is, out of
relation to us. This is impossible: for our knowledge is only of the
relative. To know a thing in itself or immediately, is an expression I
use merely in contrast to the knowledge of a thing in a representation,
or mediately:”† in other words, he merely means that we perceive objects
directly, and not through the species sensibiles of Lucretius,[*] the
Ideas of bLockeb, or the Mental Modifications of Brown.[†] Let us
suppose this Edition: current; Page: [16] granted, and that the
knowledge we have of objects is gained by direct perception. Still, the
question has to be answered whether the knowledge so acquired is of the
objects as they are in themselves, or only as they are relatively to us.
Now what, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is this knowledge? Is it a
knowledge of the Thing, merely in its effects on us, or is it a
knowledge of somewhat in the Thing, ulterior to any effect on us? He
asserts in the plainest terms that it is the latter. Then it is not a
knowledge wholly relative to us. If what we perceive in the Thing is
something of which we are only aware as existing, and as causing
impressions on us, our knowledge of the Thing is only relative. But if
what we perceive and cognise is not merely a cause of our subjective
impressions, but a Thing possessing, in its own nature and essence, a
long list of properties, Extension, Impenetrability, Number, Magnitude,
Figure, Mobility, Position, all perceived as “essential attributes” of
the Thing as “objectively existing”—all as “Modes of a Not-Self” and by
no means as an occult cause or causes of any Modes of Self—(and that
such is the case Sir W. Hamilton asserts in every form of language,
leaving no stone unturned to make us apprehend the breadth of the
distinction) then I am willing to believe that in affirming this
knowledge to be entirely relative to Self, such a thinker as Sir W.
Hamilton had a meaning, but I have no small difficulty in discovering
what it is.

The place where we should expect to find this difficulty cleared up, is
the formal exposition of the Relativity of Human Knowledge, in the first
volume of the Lectures. He declares his intention of

now stating and explaining the great axiom that all human knowledge,
consequently that all human philosophy, is only of the relative or
phænomenal. In this proposition, the term relative is opposed to the
term absolute; and therefore, in saying that we know only the relative,
I virtually assert that we know nothing absolute,—nothing existing
absolutely, that is, in and for itself, and without relation to us and
our faculties. I shall illustrate this by its application. Our knowledge
is either of matter or of mind. Now, what is matter? What do we know of
matter? Matter, or body, is to us the name either of something known, or
of something unknown. In so far as matter is a name for something known,
it means that which appears to us under the forms of extension,
solidity, divisibility, figure, motion, roughness, smoothness, colour,
heat, cold, &c.; in short, it is a common name for a certain series, or
aggregate, or complement, of appearances or phænomena manifested in
coexistence.

But as these phænomena appear only in conjunction, we are compelled by
the constitution of our nature to think them conjoined in and by
something; and as they are phænomena, we cannot think them the phænomena
of nothing, but must regard them as the properties or qualities of
something that is extended, solid, figured, &c. But this something,
absolutely and in itself, i.e. considered apart from its phænomena—is to
us as zero. It is only in its qualities, only in its effects, in its
relative or phænomenal existence, that it is cognizable or conceivable;
and it is only by a law of thought which compels us to think something
absolute and unknown, as Edition: current; Page: [17] the basis or
condition of the relative and known, that this something obtains a kind
of incomprehensible reality to us. Now, that which manifests its
qualities—in other words, that in which the appearing causes inhere,
that to which they belong,—is called their subject, or substance, or
substratum. To this subject of the phænomena of extension, solidity,
&c., the term matter or material substance is commonly given; and
therefore, as contradistinguished from these qualities, it is the name
of something unknown and inconceivable.

The same is true in regard to the term mind. In so far as mind is the
common name for the states of knowing, willing, feeling, desiring, &c.,
of which I am conscious, it is only the name for a certain series of
connected phænomena or qualities, and, consequently, expresses only what
is known. But in so far as it denotes that subject or substance in which
the phænomena of knowing, willing, &c., inhere—something behind or under
these phænomena,—it expresses what, in itself or in its absolute
existence, is unknown.

Thus, mind and matter, as known or knowable, are only two different
series of phænomena or qualities; mind and matter, as unknown and
unknowable, are the two substances, in which these two different series
of phænomena or qualities are supposed to inhere. cThe existence of an
unknown substance is only an inferencec we are compelled to make from
the existence of known phænomena; and the distinction of two substances
is only inferred from the seeming incompatibility of the two series of
phænomena to coinhere in one.

Our whole knowledge of mind and matter is thus, as we have said, only
relative; of existence, absolutely and in itself, we know nothing: and
we may say of man what Virgil said of Æneas, contemplating in the
prophetic sculpture of his shield the future glories of Rome—

“Rerumque ignarus, imagine gaudet.”*

Here is an exposition of the nature and limits of our knowledge, which
would have satisfied Hartley, Brown, and even Comte. It cannot be more
explicitly laid down, that Matter, as known to us, is but the
incomprehensible and incognisable basis or substratum of a bundle of
sensible qualities, appearances, phænomena; that we know it “only in its
effects;” that its very existence is “only an inference we are compelled
to make” from those sensible appearancesd. On the subject of Mind,
again, could it have been more explicitly affirmed, that all we know of
Mind is its successive states “of knowing, willing, feeling, desiring,
&c.,” and that Mind, considered as “something behind or under these
phænomena,” is to us unknowable?

Subsequently he says, that not only all the knowledge we have of
anything, but all which we could have if we were a thousandfold better
endowed than we are, would still be only knowledge of the mode in which
the thing would affect us. Had we as many senses (the illustration is
his Edition: current; Page: [18] own) as the inhabitants of Sirius, in
the Micromegas of Voltaire;[*] were there, as there may well be, a
thousand modes of real existence as definitely distinguished from one
another as are those which manifest themselves to our present senses,
and “had we, for each of these thousand modes, a separate organ
competent to make it known to us,—still would our whole knowledge be, as
it is at present, only of the relative. Of existence, absolutely and in
itself, we should then be as ignorant as we are now. We should still
apprehend existence only in certain special modes—only in certain
relations to our faculties of knowledge.”*

Nothing can be truer or more clearly stated than all this: but the
clearer it is, the more irreconcileable does it appear with our author’s
doctrine of the direct cognoscibility of the Primary Qualities. If it be
true that Extension, Figure, and the other qualities enumerated, are
known “immediately in themselves,” and not, like Secondary qualities,
“in their effects on us;” if the former are “apprehended as they are in
bodies,” and not, like the Secondary, “as they are in us;” if it is
these last exclusively that are “unknown in themselves, and only
inferred as causes to account for certain subjective affections in
ourselves:” while, of the former, we are immediately conscious as
“attributes of matter objectively existing;” and if it is not to be
endured that matter should “sink into something unknown and
problematical,” whose existence “can be only precariously affirmed as
the occult cause or incomprehensible occasion of certain subjective
affections we experience in the form either of a sensation of the
secondary quality or of a perception of the primary” (being precisely
what Sir W. Hamilton, in the preceding quotations, appeared to say that
it is); if these things be so, our faculties, as far as the Primary
Qualities are concerned, do cognise and know Matter as it is in itself,
and not merely as an unknowable and incomprehensible substratum; they do
cognise and know it as it exists absolutely, and not merely in relation
to us; it is known to us directly, and not as a mere “inference” from
Phænomena.

Will it be said that the attributes of extension, figure, number,
magnitude, and the rest, though known as in the Things themselves, are
yet known only relatively to us, because it is by our faculties that we
know them, and because appropriate faculties are the necessary condition
of knowledge? If so, the “great axiom” of Relativity is reduced to this,
that we can know Things as they are in themselves, but can know no more
of them than our faculties are competent to inform us of. If such be the
meaning of Relativity, our author might well maintain that it is a truth
“harmoniously reechoed by every philosopher of every school;” nor need
he have added Edition: current; Page: [19] “with the exception of a few
late Absolute theorizers in Germany;”* for certainly neither Schelling
nor Hegel claims for us any other knowledge than such as our faculties
are, in their opinion, competent to give.

Is it possible, that by knowledge of qualities “as they are in Bodies,”
no more was meant than knowing that the Body must have qualities whereby
it produces the affection of which we are conscious in ourselves? But
this is the very knowledge which our author predicates of Secondary
Qualities, as contradistinguished from the Primary. Secondary he frankly
acknowledges to be occult qualities: we really, in his opinion, have no
knowledge, and no conception, what that is in an object, by virtue of
which it has its specific smell or taste. But Primary qualities,
according to him, we know all about: there is nothing occult or
mysterious to us in these; we perceive and conceive them as they are in
themselves, and as they are in the body they belong to. They are
manifested to us, not, like the Secondary qualities, only in their
effects, in the sensations they excite in us, but in their own nature
and essence.

Perhaps it may be surmised, that in calling knowledge of this sort by
the epithet Relative, Sir W. Hamilton meant that though we know those
qualities as they are in themselves, we only discover them through their
relation to certain effects in us; that in order that there may be
Perception there must also be Sensation; and we thus know the Primary
Qualities, in their effects on us and also in themselves. But neither
will this explanation serve. This theory of Primary Qualities does not
clash with the Secondary, but it runs against the Secundo-primary. It is
this third class, which, as he told us, are known “both immediately in
themselves and mediately in their effects on us.” The Primary are only
known “immediately in themselves.” He has thus with his own hands
deliberately extruded from our knowledge of the Primary qualities the
element of relativity to us:—except, to be sure, in the acceptation in
which knowing is itself a relation, inasmuch as it implies a knower;
whereby instead of the doctrine that Things in themselves are not
possible objects of knowledge, we obtain the “great axiom” that they
cannot be known unless there is somebody to know them.e

Edition: current; Page: [20]
Can any light be derived from the statement that we do not know any
qualities of things except those which are in connexion with our
faculties, or, as our author expresses it (surely by a very strained use
of language), which are “analogous to our faculties?”* If, by “our
faculties,” is to be understood our knowing faculty, this proposition is
but the trivial one already noticed, that we can know only what we can
know. And this is what the author actually seems to mean; for in a
sentence immediately following, he paraphrases the expression “analogous
to our faculties,” by the phrase that we must “possess faculties
accommodated to their apprehension.”† To be able to see, we must have a
faculty accommodated to seeing. Is this what we are intended to
understand by the “great axiom?”f But if “our faculties” does not here
mean our knowing faculty, it must mean our sensitive faculties; and the
statement is, that, to be known by us, a quality must be “analogous”
(meaning, I suppose, related) to our senses. But what is meant by being
related to our senses? That it must be fitted to give us sensations. We
thus return as before to an identical proposition.

gThere is still another possible supposition; that, in calling our
knowledge relative in contradistinction to absolute, Sir W. Hamilton was
not thinking of our knowledge of qualities, but of substances—of Matter
and Mind; and meant that qualities might be cognised absolutely, or as
they are in themselves, but that, since substances are only known
through their qualities, the knowledge of substances is not knowledge of
them as they are in themselves, but is merely relative. According to
this interpretation, the relativity which Sir W. Hamilton ascribes to
our knowledge of substances is relativity not to us, but to their
attributes: we “become aware of their incomprehensible existence only as
this is revealed to us through certain qualities.” And when he adds,
“which qualities, again, we cannot think as unconditioned, irrelative,
existent in and of themselves,”[*] thus predicating relativity of
attributes also (considered as known or conceived by us), he means
relativity to a substance. We can only know a substance through its
qualities, but also, we can only know qualities as inhering in a
substance. Substance and attribute are correlative, and can only be
thought together: the knowledge of each, therefore, is relative to the
other; but need not be, Edition: current; Page: [21] and indeed is not,
relative to us. For we know attributes as they are in themselves, and
our knowledge of them is only relative inasmuch as attributes have only
a relative existence. It is relative knowledge in a sense not
contradictory to absolute. It is an absolute knowledge, though of things
which only exist in a necessary relation to another thing called a
substance.*

I am not disposed to deny that this interpretation of Sir W. Hamilton’s
doctrine is, to a certain point, correct. He did draw a distinction
between our manner of knowing attributes and our manner of knowing
substances; and did regard certain attributes (the primary qualities) as
objects of direct and immediate knowledge; which, in his opinion,
substances are not, but are merely assumed or inferred from phænomena,
by a law of our nature which compels us to think phænomena as attributes
of something beyond themselves. I do not doubt that when he said that
our knowledge of attributes is relative, the necessity of thinking every
attribute as an attribute of a substance was present to his mind, and
formed a part of his meaning. hThere is, however, abundant evidence that
the relativity which Sir W. Hamilton ascribed to our knowledge of
attributes was not merely relativity to their substances, but also
relativity to us. He affirms of attributes as positively as of
substances, that all our knowledge of them is relative to us. The
passages already quoted apply as much to attributes as to substances.
“In saying that we know only the relative, I virtually assert that we
know nothing absolute—nothing existing absolutely, that is, in and for
itself, and without relation to us and our faculties.”† “In saying that
a thing is known in itself, I do not mean that this object is known in
its absolute existence, that is, out of relation to us. This is
impossible, for our knowledge is only of the relative.”‡ In the
following passages he is speaking solely of attributes. “By the
expression what they are in themselves, in reference to the primary
qualities, and of relative notion in reference to the secondary, Reid
cannot mean that the former are known to us absolutely and in
themselves, that is, out of relation to our cognitive faculties; for he
elsewhere admits that all our knowledge is relative.”§ “We can know, we
can conceive, only what is relative. Our knowledge of qualities or
phænomena is necessarily relative; for these exist only as they exist in
Edition: current; Page: [22] relation to our faculties.”* The
distinction, therefore, which Sir W. Hamilton recognises between our
knowledge of substances and that of attributes, though authentically a
part of his philosophy, is quite irrelevant here.h He affirms without
reservation, that certain attributes (extension, figure, &c.) are known
to us as they really exist out of ourselves; and also that all our
knowledge of them is relative to us. And these two assertions are only
reconcileable, if relativity to us is understood in the altogether
trivial sense, that we know them only so far as our faculties permit.†g

The conclusion I cannot help drawing from this collation of passages is,
that Sir W. Hamilton either never held, or when he wrote the
“Dissertations” had ceased to hold i(for his theory respecting knowledge
of the Primary Qualities does not occur in the Lectures)i the doctrine
for which he has been so often praised and nearly as often attacked—the
Relativity of Human Knowledge. He certainly did sincerely believe that
he held it. But he repudiated it in every sense which makes it other
than a barren truism. In the only meaning in which he really maintained
it, there is nothing to maintain. It is an identical proposition, and
nothing more.

And to this, or something next to this, hej reduces it in kthe first
portion ofk the summary with which he concludes its exposition. “From
what has been said,” he observes, “you will be able, I hope, to
understand what is meant by the proposition, that all our knowledge is
only relative. It is relative, 1st. Because existence is not cognisable
absolutely in itself, but only in special modes; 2nd. Because these
modes can be known only if they stand in a certain relation to our
faculties.” Whoever can find anything more in these two statements, than
that we do not know all about a Thing, but only as much about it as we
are capable of knowing, is more ingenious or more fortunate than myself.

He adds, however, to these reasons why our knowledge is only relative, a
third reason. “3rd. Because the modes, thus relative to our faculties,
are assented to, and known by, the mind only under modifications
determined by those faculties themselves.”‡ Of this addition to the
theory we took Edition: current; Page: [23] notice near the conclusion
of the preceding chapter.[*] It shall have the advantage of a fuller
explanation in Sir W. Hamilton’s words.

In the perception of an external object, the mind does not know it in
immediate relation to itself, but mediately, in relation to the material
organs of sense. If, therefore, we were to throw these organs out of
consideration, and did not take into account what they contribute to,
and how they modify, our knowledge of that object, it is evident that
our conclusion in regard to the nature of external perception would be
erroneous. Again, an object of perception may not even stand in
immediate relation to the organ of sense, but may make its impression on
that organ through an intervening medium. Now, if this medium be thrown
out of account, and if it be not considered that the real external
object is the sum of all that externally contributes to affect the
sense, we shall, in like manner, run into error. For example, I see a
book—I see that book through an external medium (what that medium is, we
do not now inquire) and I see it through my organ of sight, the eye.
Now, as the full object presented to the mind (observe that I say the
mind) in perception, is an object compounded of the external object
emitting or reflecting light, i.e., modifying the external medium—of
this external medium—and of the living organ of sense, in their mutual
relation, let us suppose, in the example I have taken, that the full or
adequate object perceived is equal to twelve, and that this amount is
made up of three several parts; of four, contributed by the book,—of
four, contributed by all that intervenes between the book and the
organ,—and of four, contributed by the living organ itself. I use this
illustration to show that the phænomenon of the external object is not
presented immediately to the mind, but is known by it only as modified
through certain intermediate agencies; and to show, that sense itself
may be a source of error, if we do not analyze and distinguish what
elements, in an act of perception, belong to the outward reality, what
to the outward medium, and what to the action of sense itself. But this
source of error is not limited to our perceptions; and we are liable to
be deceived, not merely by not distinguishing in an act of knowledge
what is contributed by sense, but by not distinguishing what is
contributed by the mind itself. This is the most difficult and important
function of philosophy; and the greater number of its higher problems
arise in the attempt to determine the shares to which the knowing
subject, and the object known, may pretend in the total act of
cognition. For according as we attribute a larger or a smaller
proportion to each, we either run into the extremes of Idealism and
Materialism, or maintain an equilibrium between the two.*

The proposition, that our cognitions of objects are only in part
dependent on the objects themselves, and in part on elements superadded
by our organs or by our minds, is not identical, nor primâ facie absurd.
It cannot, however, warrant the assertion that all our knowledge, but
only that the part so added, is relative. If our author had gone as far
as Kant, and had said that all lthe primary qualities which we think we
perceive in bodies, arel put in by the mind itself, he would have really
held, in one of its forms, the doctrine of the Relativity of our
knowledge. But what he does say, far from Edition: current; Page: [24]
implying that the whole of our knowledge is relative, distinctly imports
that all of it which is real and authentic is the reverse. If any part
of what we fancy that we perceive in the objects themselves, originates
in the perceiving organs or in the cognising mind, thus much is purely
relative; but since, by supposition, it does not all so originate, the
part that does not, is as much absolute as if it were not liable to be
mixed up with these delusive subjective impressions. The admixture of
the relative element not only does not take away the absolute character
of the remainder, but does not even (if our author is right) prevent us
from recognising it. The confusion, according to him, is not
inextricable. It is for us to “analyze and distinguish what elements” in
an “act of knowledge” are contributed by the object, and what by our
organs, or by the mind. We may neglect to do this, and as far as the
mind’s share is concerned, can only do it by the help of philosophy; but
it is a task to which in his opinion philosophy is equal. By thus
stripping off such of the elements in our apparent cognitions of Things
as are but cognitions of something in us, and consequently relative, we
may succeed in uncovering the pure nucleus, the direct intuitions of
Things in themselves; as we correct the observed positions of the
heavenly bodies by allowing for the error due to the refracting
influence of the atmospheric medium, an influence which does not alter
the facts, but only our perception of them.

mThis last doctrine, however,—that the mind’s own constitution
contributes along with the outward object, to make up what is called our
knowledge of the object,—is what Mr. Mansel maintains Sir W. Hamilton to
have meant by the assertion that our whole knowledge of the object is
relative. And this is the foundation of all that Mr. Mansel presents as
a refutation of the present chapter.

If it be true (to use Mr. Mansel’s words) that, in the constitution of
our knowledge, the mind “reacts on the objects affecting it, so as to
produce a result different from that which would be produced, were it
merely a passive recipient,”* this modifying action of the mind must
consist, as is affirmed by Kant and by all others who profess the
doctrine, in making us ascribe to the object, and apprehend as in the
object, properties which are not really in the object, but are merely
lent to it by the constitution of our mental nature. Now, if the
attributes which we perceive, or think we perceive, in objects, are
partly given by the mind, but not wholly, being also partly given by the
nature of the object itself (which is admitted to be Sir W. Hamilton’s
opinion); this joint agency of the object and of the mind’s own laws in
generating what we call our knowledge of the object, may be conceived in
two ways.

Edition: current; Page: [25]
First: The two factors may be jointly operative in every part of the
effect. Every attribute with which we perceive the thing as invested,
may be a joint product of the thing itself and of the modifying action
of the mind. If this be the case, we do not really know any property as
it is in the object: we have no reason to think that the object as we
apprehend it, and as we figure to ourselves that we perceive and know
it, agrees in any respect with the object that exists without us; but
only that it depends upon that outward object, as one of its joint
causes. Such was the opinion of Kant; and whoever is of this opinion,
holds, in one of its forms, as I have expressly admitted, the genuine
doctrine of the Relativity of our knowledge. For all must agree with Mr.
Mansel when he says, that an object of thought, into which the mind puts
a positive element of its own, thereby making it different from what it
otherwise would be, is that which it is, only relatively to the mind.
This seems to be Mr. Mansel’s own mode of representing to himself the
combined action of the mind and the object in perception. For he
compares it to the action of an acid and an alkali in forming a neutral
salt;* and to a chemical fusion together of two elements, in
contradistinction to a mere mechanical juxtaposition.† If we had never
seen, and could not get at, the acid or the alkali except as united in
the salt, Mr. Mansel could not think that our knowledge of the salt gave
us any knowledge of the acid or the alkali themselves.

But, secondly: There is another mode in which the co-operation of the
object and the mind’s own properties in producing our cognition of the
object, may be conceived as taking place. Instead of their being joint
agents in producing our cognitions of all the attributes with which we
mentally clothe the object, some of the attributes as cognised by us may
come from the object only, and some from the mind only, or from both.
Now it is not open to a holder of this second opinion, as it is to one
of the first, to affirm that all the attributes are only known
relatively to us. Such of them, indeed, as are made to be that which
they are by what the mind puts into them, are, on this theory, only
known relatively to the mind: they have even no existence except
relatively to the mind. But those into which no positive element is
introduced by the mind’s laws (I say no positive element, because a mere
negative limitation by the mind’s capacities is nothing to the purpose),
these, as their cognition contains nothing but what is presented in the
external object, must be held to be known not relatively, but
absolutely. The doubt how much of what we apprehend in them is due to
our own constitution, and how much to the external world, has no place
here: they are, by supposition, wholly perceptions of something in the
external world.

Edition: current; Page: [26]
Now, this second view of the joint action of the mind and the outward
thing, as the two factors in our cognition of the thing, is Sir W.
Hamilton’s. The passages in which he characterizes our knowledge of the
Primary Qualities place this beyond question. He affirms clearly and
consistently that extension, figure, and the other Primary Qualities are
known by us “as they are in bodies,” and not “as they are in us;” that
they are known as “essential attributes of matter objectively existing;”
as “modes of a notself,” not even combined, as in the Secundo-primary,
with any “modes of self;”[*] so that no element originating in our
subjective constitution interferes with the purity of the apperception.
In this respect the physical phenomena which Mr. Mansel calls in as
illustrations afford no parallel. No one would say that the acid in a
neutral salt is perceived and known by us in the salt as what it is as
an acid. Indeed, the ndiscrimination whichn Sir W. Hamilton thinks it
possible for philosophy to omake,o between that in our knowledge which
the object contributes and that which the mind contributes, palmost
requires as its condition that some attributes should bep wholly
contributed by the one and some by the other: for if every attribute was
the joint product of both, qit is difficult to see what means the case
could affordq of making the discrimination, any more than of
discriminating between the acid and the alkali in Mr. Mansel’s salt. The
question, how much of the salt is due to the acid and how much to the
alkali, is not merely unresolvable, but intrinsically absurd.*

Edition: current; Page: [27]
Mr. Mansel’s mode of reconciling Sir W. Hamilton’s emphatic declaration,
that we know the Primary Qualities as they are in objects, with his
assertion of the entire incognoscibility of Things in themselves, is by
saying that “objects” are not identical with “things in themselves.”*
“Objective existence,” he says,

does not mean existence per se; and a phenomenon does not mean a mere
mode of mind. Objective existence is existence as an object, in
perception, and therefore in relation; and a phenomenon may be material,
as well as mental. The thing per se may be only the unknown cause of
what we directly know; but what we directly know is something more than
our own sensations. In other words, the phenomenal effect is material as
well as the cause, and is, indeed, that from which our primary
conceptions of matter are derived.†

Now, this is a possible opinion; it was really the opinion of Kant. That
philosopher did recognise a direct object of our perceptions, different
from the thing itself, and intermediate between it and the perceiving
mind. And it was open to Kant to do so; because he held what Sir W.
Hamilton calls a representative theory of perception. He maintained that
the object of our perception, and of our knowledge, is a representation
in our own minds. In his philosophy, both object and subject are
accommodated within the mind itself—the object within the subject. The
mind has no perception of the external thing, nor comes into any contact
with it in the act of perception.‡ Was this Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion?
On the contrary, if there be a doctrine of his philosophy which he has
laboured at beyond any other, against, as he Edition: current; Page:
[28] affirms, nearly all philosophers, it is, that the thing we perceive
is the real thing which exists outside us, and that the perceiving mind
is in direct contact with it, without any intermediate link whatever. We
never hear from Sir W. Hamilton of three elements in our cognition of
the outward world, but of two only, the mind, and the real object; which
he sometimes calls the external object, sometimes Body, sometimes
Matter, sometimes a Non-ego. Yet, according to Mr. Mansel, he must have
believed that this object, which he so strenuously contended to be the
very thing itself, is not the very thing in itself, but that behind it
there is another Thing in itself, the unknown cause of it. I can
discover no trace in Sir W. Hamilton’s writings of any such entity. The
outward things which he believed to exist, he believed that we perceive
and know: not, indeed, “absolutely or in themselves,” because only in
such of their attributes as we have senses to reveal to us; but yet as
they really are. He did not believe in, or recognise, a Thing per se,
itself unknowable, but engendering another material object called a
phænomenon, which is knowable. The only distinction he recognised
between a phænomenon and a Thing per se, was that between attributes and
a substance. But he believed the primary attributes to be known by us as
they exist in the substance, and not in some intermediate object.*

Edition: current; Page: [29]
The mark by which Mr. Mansel distinguishes between the object and the
Thing in itself, is that the object is in space and time, but the Thing
out of space and time; space and time having merely a subjective
existence, in us, not in external nature. This is Kantism, but it is not
Hamiltonism. I do not believe that the expression “out of space and
time” is to be found once in all Sir W. Hamilton’s writings. It belongs
to the Kantian, not to the Hamiltonian philosophy. Sir W. Hamilton does
indeed hold with Kant, and on Edition: current; Page: [30] Kant’s
shewing, that space and time are à priori forms of the mind, but he
believes that they are also external realities, known empirically.* And
it is worth notice, that he grounds the outward reality of Space, not on
his favourite evidence, that of our Natural Beliefs, but on the specific
reason, that (Extension being only another name for Space), if Space was
not an outward thing cognizable à posteriori, we could not, as he
affirms that we do, cognize Extension as an external reality. He must
therefore have thought, not that Space is a mere form in which our
perceptions of objects are clothed by the laws of our perceiving
faculty, but that we perceive real things in real space.†

Mr. Mansel is not the only one of my critics who has interpreted Sir W.
Hamilton’s doctrine of our direct knowledge of outward objects, as if
those outward objects were a tertium quid, between the mind and the real
outward, or if the expression may be permitted, the outer outward
object. For, irreconcilable as this supposition is with the evidence of
his writings, it is the only one which can be thought of to give a
substantial meaning to his doctrine of Relativity, consistent with the
external reality of the Primary Qualities. Professor Masson consequently
had already taken refuge in the same interpretation as Mr. Mansel; but
propounded it in the modest form of Edition: current; Page: [31] an
hypothesis, not a dogmatical assertion. The North American Reviewer in
like manner says:

An existence non-ego may be immediately cognizable consistently with the
doctrine of the relativity of knowledge, provided this non-ego be
phenomenal, that is, necessarily dependent on some other incognizable
existence among the real causes of things. . . . If the meaning of the
word phenomenon which we have attributed to Hamilton be a valid one, his
philosophy escapes from this criticism by affirming that the primary
qualities of matter, that is, the having extension, figure, &c., though
not cognized as the effects of matter on us, are yet modes of existence
implying an unknown substance, and are hence phenomenal in Hamilton’s
meaning of the word.*

This explanation might pass, if Sir W. Hamilton’s assertion of the
relativity of our knowledge to our mind were all contained in the word
phænomenal, and could be explained away by supposing that word to mean
relativity not to us, but to an unknown cause. But I need not requote
his declaration that our knowledge of Qualities is all relative to us,
nor his assertion that nevertheless certain qualities are in the object,
and are perceived and known in the object, and that the object perceived
and known is no other than the real Thing itself. Nowhere in his works
do I find any recognition of another real Thing, which is not the Thing
perceived by us through its attributes. He does not tell us of a Body
perceived, and an unperceived Substance in the background: the Body is
the Substance. He does indeed say that the Substance is only an
inference from the Attributes; but he also says that certain attributes
are perceived as in the real external Thing; and he never drops the
smallest hint of any real external thing in which the attributes can be,
except the Substance itself, which he expressly defines as “that which
manifests its qualities,” that in which the “phænomena or qualities are
supposed to inhere.”[*]

Professor Fraser, in the (in many respects) profound Essay of which he
has done this work the honour of making it the occasion, vindicates at
once the consistency of Sir W. Hamilton, and the substantial
significance of his doctrine of Relativity, by ascribing to him, in
opposition to his incessant declarations, Mr. Fraser’s own far clearer
views of the subject. Mr. Fraser, like myself, believes the Primary
Qualities to have no more existence out of our own or other minds, than
the Secondary Qualities have, or than our pains and pleasures have; and
he asks, “Where does he” (Sir W. Hamilton) “say that we have an absolute
knowledge of the primary qualities of matter, in any other sense than
that in which he says that we have a like knowledge of a feeling of pain
or pleasure in our minds while it is being felt, or of an act Edition:
current; Page: [32] of consciousness while it is being acted?”* To this
“where,” I answer, in every place where he says that we know the Primary
Qualities not as they are in us, but as they are in the Body. That is
asserting an absolute knowledge of them, as distinguished from
relativity to us: and he would not have made a similar assertion of our
pains and pleasures, or of our acts of internal consciousness. Again,
asks Mr. Fraser, “How does the assertion that we are percipient
directly, and not through a medium, of phenomena of solidity and
extension, contradict the principle that all our knowledge is relative,
when the assertion that we are percipient, directly and not through a
medium, of the phenomena of sensation or emotion or intelligence does
not?”† Because the phænomena of sensation or emotion or intelligence are
admitted to be perceived or felt as facts that have no reality out of
us, and the facts being only relative to us, the knowledge of the facts
partakes of the same relativity: but the phænomena of solidity and
extension are alleged by Sir W. Hamilton to be perceived as facts whose
reality is out of our minds, and in the material object: which is indeed
knowing them relatively to the outward object, but is the diametrical
opposite of knowing them relatively to us.‡m

Edition: current; Page: [33]
It has vnowv been shown, by accumulated proof, that Sir W. Hamilton did
not hold any opinion in virtue of which it could rationally be asserted
that all human knowledge is relative; but did hold, as one of the main
elements of his philosophical creed, the opposite doctrine, of the
cognoscibility of external Things, in certain of their aspects, as they
are in themselves, absolutely.

But if this be true, what becomes of his dispute with Cousin, and with
Cousin’s German predecessors and teachers? That celebrated controversy
surely meant something. Where there was so much smoke there must have
been some fire. Some difference of opinion must really have existed
between Sir W. Hamilton and his antagonists.

Assuredly there was a difference, and one of great importance from the
point of view of either disputant; not unimportant in the view of those
who dissent from them both. In the succeeding chapter I shall endeavour
to point out what the difference was.

Edition: current; Page: [34]


CHAPTER IV: In What Respect Sir William Hamilton Really Differs from the Philosophers of the Absolute

the question really at issue in Sir W. Hamilton’s celebrated and
striking review of Cousin’s philosophy,[*] is this: Have we, or have we
not, an immediate intuition of God. The name of God is veiled under two
extremely abstract phrases, “The Infinite” and “The Absolute,” perhaps
from a reverential feeling: such, at least, is the reason given by Sir
W. Hamilton’s disciple, Mr. Mansel,* for preferring the more vague
expressions. But it is one of the most unquestionable of all logical
maxims, that the meaning of the abstract must be sought for in the
concrete, and not conversely; and we shall see, both in the case of Sir
W. Hamilton and of Mr. Mansel, that the process cannot be reversed with
impunity.†

Edition: current; Page: [35]
I proceed to state, chiefly in the words of Sir W. Hamilton, the
opinions of the two parties to the controversy. Both undertake to decide
what are the facts which (in their own phraseology) are given in
Consciousness; or, as others say, of which we have intuitive knowledge.
According to Cousin, there are, in every act of consciousness, three
elements; three things of which we are intuitively aware. There is a
finite element; an element of plurality, compounded of a Self or Ego,
and something different from Self, or Non-ego. There is also an infinite
element; a consciousness of something infinite. “At the same instant
when we are conscious of these [finite] existences, plural, relative,
and contingent, we are conscious likewise of a Edition: current; Page:
[36] superior unity in which they are contained, and by which they are
explained; a unity absolute as they are conditioned, substantive as they
are phænomenal, and an infinite cause as they are finite causes. This
unity is God.”* The first two elements being the Finite and God, the
third element is the relation between the Finite and God, which is that
of cause and effect. These three things are immediately given in every
act of consciousness, and are, therefore, apprehended as real existences
by direct intuition.

Of these alleged elements of Consciousness, Sir W. Hamilton only admits
the first; the Finite element, compounded of Self and a Not-self,
“limiting and conditioning one another.”[*] He denies that God is given
in immediate consciousness—is apprehended by direct intuition. It is in
no such way as this that God, according to him, is known to us: and as
an Infinite and Absolute Being he is not, and cannot be, known to us at
all; for we have no faculties capable of apprehending the Infinite or
the Absolute. The second of M. Cousin’s elements being thus excluded,
the third (the Relation between the first and second) falls with it; and
Consciousness remains limited to the finite element, compounded of an
Ego and a Non-ego.

In this contest it is almost superfluous for me to say, that I am
entirely with Sir W. Hamilton. The doctrine, that we have an immediate
or intuitive knowledge of God, I consider to be bad metaphysics,
involving a false conception of the nature and limits of the human
faculties, and grounded on a superficial and erroneous psychology.
Whatever relates to God I holdc to be matter of inference; I would add,
of inference à posteriori. And in so far as Sir W. Hamilton has
contributed, which he has done very materially, towards discrediting the
opposite doctrine, he has rendered, in my estimation, a dvaluabled
service to philosophy. But though I assent to his conclusion, his
arguments seem to me very far from inexpugnable: a sufficient answer, I
conceive, might without difficulty be given to emoste of them, though I
do not say that it was always competent to M. Cousin to give it. And the
arguments, in the present case, are of as much importance as the
conclusion: not only because they are quite as essential a part of Sir
W. Hamilton’s philosophy, but because they afford the premises from
which some of his followers, if not himself, have drawn inferences which
I venture to think extremely mischievous. While, therefore, I sincerely
applaud the scope and purpose of this celebrated piece of philosophical
criticism, I think it important to sift with some minuteness the
reasonings it employs, and the general mode of thought which it
exemplifies.

Edition: current; Page: [37]
The question is, as already remarked, whether we have a direct intuition
of “the Infinite” and “the Absolute:” M. Cousin maintaining that we
have—Sir W. Hamilton that we have not; that the Infinite and the
Absolute are inconceivable to us, and, by consequence, unknowable.

It is proper to explain to any reader not familiar with these
controversies, the meaning of the terms. Infinite requires no
explanation. It is universally understood to signify that, to the
magnitude of which there is no limit. If we speak of infinite duration,
or infinite space, we are supposed to mean duration which never ceases,
and extension which nowhere comes to an end. Absolute is much more
obscure, being a word of several meanings; but, in the sense in which it
stands related to Infinite, it means (conformably to its etymology) that
which is finished or completed. There are some things of which the
utmost ideal amount is a limited quantity, though a quantity never
actually reached. In this sense, the relation between the Absolute and
the Infinite is (as Bentham would have said) a tolerably close one,
namely a relation of contrariety. For example, to assert an absolute
minimum of matter, is to deny its infinite divisibility. Again, we may
speak of absolutely, but not of infinitely, pure water. The purity of
water is not a fact of which, whatever degree we suppose attained, there
remains a greater beyond. It has an absolute limit: it is capable of
being finished or complete, in thought, if not in reality. The
extraneous substances existing in any vessel of water cannot be of more
than finite amount, and if we suppose them all withdrawn, the purity of
the water cannot, even in idea, admit of further increase.

fThe idea of Absolute, in this sense of the term, being thus contrasted
with that of Infinite, they cannot, both of them, be truly predicated of
God; or, if truly, not in respect of the same attributes. But the word
Absolute, without losing the signification of perfect or complete, may
drop that of limited. It may continue to mean the whole of that to which
it is applied; but without requiring that this whole should be finite.
Granted (for instance) a being of infinite power, that Being’s
knowledge, if supposed perfect, must be infinite; and may therefore, in
an admissible sense of the term, be said to Edition: current; Page: [38]
be both absolute and infinite.* In this acceptation there is no
inconsistency or incongruity in predicating both these words of God.

The word Absolute, however, has other meanings, which have nothing to do
with perfection or completenessf, though often mixed and confounded with
hith; the more readily as they are all ihabitually predicated of the
Deityi. By Absolute is often meant the opposite of Relative; and this is
rather many meanings than one; for Relative also is a term used very
indefinitely, and wherever it is employed, the word Absolute always
accompanies it as its negative. In another of its senses, Absolute means
that which is independent of anything else: which exists, and is what it
is, by its own nature, and not because of any other thing. In this
jfourth sense as in the thirdj, Absolute stands for the negation of a
relation; not now of Relation in general, but of the specific relation
expressed by the term Effect. In this signification it is synonymous
with kuncaused, and is therefore most naturally identified with thek
First Cause. The meaning of a First Edition: current; Page: [39] Cause
is, that all other things exist, and are what they are, by reason of it
and of its properties, but that it is not itself made to exist, nor to
be what it is, by anything else. It does not depend, for its existence
or attributes, on other things: there is nothing upon the existence of
which its own is conditional: it exists absolutely.l

mIn which of these meanings is the term used in the polemic with M.
Cousin? M. Cousin makes no distinction at all between the Infinite and
the Absolute. Sir W. Hamilton distinguishes them as two species of a
higher genus, the Unconditioned; andm defines the Infinite as “the
unconditionally unlimited,” the Absolute as “the unconditionally
limited.”* Here is a new word introduced, the word “unconditionally;” of
which we look in vain for any direct explanation, nbut which needs it as
much as either of the words which it is employed to explain. In the
Essay itself, this is the only attempt made to define the Absolute: but
in the reprint Sir W. Hamilton appends the following note:

“The term Absolute is of a twofold (if not threefold) ambiguity,
corresponding to the double (or treble) signification of the word in
Latin.” The third application he, with reason, dismisses, as here
irrelevant. The other two are as follows:

“1. Absolutum means what is freed or loosed: in which sense the Absolute
will be what is aloof from relation, comparison, limitation, condition,
dependence, &c., and thus is tantamount to τὸ ὰπόλυτον of the lower
Edition: current; Page: [40] Greeks.[*] In this meaning the Absolute is
not opposed to the Infinite.” This is an amplification of my third
meaning.

“2. Absolutum means finished, perfected, completed; in which sense the
Absolute will be what is out of relation, &c. as finished, perfect,
complete, total, and thus corresponds to τὸ ὅλον and τὸ τέλειον of
Aristotle.[†] In this acceptation—and it is that in which for myself I
exclusively use it,—the Absolute is diametrically opposed to, is
contradictory of, the Infinite.”* This second meaning of Sir W.
Hamilton, which I, in the first edition, by a blameable inadvertence,
confounded with my own first meaning,† must be reckoned as a fifth,
compounded of the first and third—of the idea of finished or completed,
and the idea of being out of relation. How to make an intelligible
meaning out of the two combined, is the question. One can, with some
difficulty, find a meaning in being “aloof from relation, comparison,
limitation, condition, dependence;” but what is meant by being all this
“as finished, perfect, complete, total?” Does it mean, being both out of
relation and also complete? and must the Absolute in Sir W. Hamilton’s
second sense be also Absolute in his first, and be out of all relation
whatever? or does the particle “as” signify that it is out of relation
only in respect of its completeness, which (I suppose) means that it
does not depend for its completeness on anything but itself? Mr.
Mansel’s comment, which otherwise does not help us much, decides for the
latter. “Out of relation as completed” means (he says)‡ “self-existent
in its completeness, and not implying the existence of anything else.”§
Without further attempt to clear Edition: current; Page: [41] up the
obscurity, let it suffice that Sir W. Hamilton’s Absolute, though not
synonymous with a “finished, perfected, completed,” but limited, whole,
includes that idea, and is therefore incompatible with Infinite.*n

Having premised these verbal explanations, I proceed to state, as far as
possible in Sir W. Hamilton’s own words, the heads of his argumentation
to prove that the oAbsolute and Infinite areo unknowable. His first
summary statement of the doctrine is as follows:

The unconditionally unlimited, or the Infinite, the unconditionally
limited, or the Absolute, cannot positively be construed to the mind:
they can be conceived only by a thinking away from, or abstraction of,
those very conditions under which thought itself is realized;
consequently, the notion of the Unconditioned is only negative; negative
of the conceivable itself. For example: On the one hand, we can
positively conceive neither an absolute whole, that is, a whole so great
that we cannot also conceive it as a relative part of a still greater
whole; nor an absolute part, that is, a part so small that we cannot
also conceive it as a relative whole divisible into smaller parts. On
the other hand, we cannot positively represent, or realize, or construe
to the mind (as here Understanding and Imagination coincide) an infinite
whole, for this could only be done by the infinite synthesis in thought
of finite wholes, which would itself require an infinite time for its
accomplishment; nor, for the same reason, can we follow out in thought
an infinite divisibility of parts. The result is the same, whether we
apply the process to limitation in space, in time, or in degree. The
unconditional negation, and the unconditional affirmation of limitation;
in other words, the Infinite and the Absolute properly so called, are
thus equally inconceivable to us.†

This argument, that the Infinite and the Absolute are unknowable by us
because the only conceptions we are able to form of them are negative,
is stated still more emphatically a few pages later.

Kant has clearly shown, that the Idea of the Unconditioned can have no
objective reality,—that it conveys no knowledge,—and that it involves
the most insoluble contradictions. But he ought to have shown that the
Unconditioned had no objective application, because it had, in fact, no
subjective affirmation; that it afforded no real knowledge, because it
contained nothing even conceivable; and that it is self-contradictory,
because it is not a notion, either simple or positive, but only a
fasciculus of negations—negations of the Conditioned in its opposite
extremes, and bound together merely by the aid of language, and their
common character of incomprehensibility.‡

Edition: current; Page: [42]
Let us note, then, as the first and most fundamental of Sir W.
Hamilton’s arguments, that our ideas of the Infinite and the Absolute
are ppurely negative, and the Unconditioned which combines the two, “ap
fasciculus of negations.” I reserve consideration of the validity of
this and every other part of the argumentation, until we have the whole
before us. He proceeds:

As the conditionally limited (which we may briefly call the Conditioned)
is thus the only possible object of knowledge and of positive
thought,—thought qnecessarilyq supposes condition. To think is to
condition; and conditional limitation is the fundamental law of the
possibility of thought. For, as the greyhound cannot outstrip his
shadow, nor (by a more appropriate simile) the eagle outsoar the
atmosphere in which he floats, and by which alone he is supported; so
the mind cannot transcend that sphere of limitation, within and through
which exclusively the possibility of thought is realized. Thought is
only of the conditioned; because, as we have said, to think is simply to
condition. The Absolute is conceived merely by a negation of
conceivability; and all that we know, is known as—

“Won from the cold and formless Infinite.”[*]

How, indeed, it could ever be doubted that thought is only of the
conditioned, may well be deemed a matter of the profoundest admiration.
Thought cannot transcend consciousness; consciousness is only possible
under the antithesis of a subject and object of thought known only in
correlation, and mutually limiting each other; while, independently of
this, all that we know either of subject or object, either of mind or
matter, is only a knowledge in each of the particular, of the plural, of
the different, of the modified, of the phænomenal. We admit that the
consequence of this doctrine is—that philosophy, if viewed as more than
a science of the conditioned, is impossible. Departing from the
particular, we admit that we can never, in our highest generalizations,
rise above the Finite; that our knowledge, whether of mind or matter,
can be nothing more than a knowledge of the relative manifestations of
an existence which in itself it is our highest wisdom to recognise as
beyond the reach of philosophy. This is what, in the language of St.
Austin, Cognoscendo ignoratur, et ignoratione cognoscitur.*

The dictum that “to think is to condition” r(the meaning of which will
be examined hereafter)r may be noted as our author’s second argument.
And here ends the positive part of his argumentation. There remains his
refutation of opponents. After an examination of Schelling’s opinion,
into which I need not follow him, he grapples with M. Cousin, against
whom he undertakes to show, that “his argument to prove the correality
of his three Ideas proves directly the reverse;” “that the conditions
under which alone he allows intelligence to be possible, necessarily
exclude the possibility of a knowledge, not to say a conception, of the
Absolute;” and “that the Absolute, Edition: current; Page: [43] as
defined by him, is only a relative and a conditioned.”* Of this argument
in three parts, if we pass over (or, as our author would say, discount)
as much as is only ad hominem, what is of general application is as
follows:

sFirst:s M. Cousin and our author are agreed that there can be no
knowledge except “where there exists a plurality of terms;”[*] there are
at least a perceived and a perceiver, a knower and a known. But this
necessity of “difference and plurality” as a condition of knowledge, is
inconsistent with the meaning of the Absolute, which

as absolutely universal, is absolutely one. Absolute unity is
convertible with the absolute negation of plurality and difference. . .
. The condition of the Absolute as existing, and under which it must be
known, and the condition of intelligence, as capable of knowing, are
incompatible. For, if we suppose the Absolute cognisable: it must be
identified either—1°, with the subject knowing: or, 2°, with the object
known: or, 3°, with the indifference of both. The first hypothesis, and
the second, are contradictory of the Absolute. For in these the Absolute
is supposed to be known, either as contradistinguished from the knowing
subject, or as contradistinguished from the object known: in other
words, the Absolute is asserted to be known as absolute unity, i.e., as
the negation of all plurality, while the very act by which it is known,
affirms plurality as the condition of its own possibility. The third
hypothesis, on the other hand, is contradictory of the plurality of
intelligence; for if the subject and the object of consciousness be
known as one, a plurality of terms is not the necessary condition of
intelligence. The alternative is therefore necessary: either the
Absolute cannot be known or conceived at all; or our author is wrong in
subjecting thought to the conditions of plurality and difference.†

tSecondly:t In order to make the Absolute knowable by us, M. Cousin,
says the author, is obliged to present it in the light of an absolute
cause: now causation is a relation; therefore M. Cousin’s Absolute is
but a relative. Moreover, “what exists merely as a cause, exists merely
for the sake of something else—is not final in itself, but simply a mean
towards an end. . . . Abstractly considered, the effect is therefore
superior to the cause.” Hence an absolute cause “is dependent on the
effect for its perfection;” and, indeed,

even for its reality. For to what extent a thing exists necessarily as a
cause, to that extent it is not all-sufficient to itself; since to that
extent it is dependent on the effect, as on the condition through which
it realizes its existence; and what exists absolutely Edition: current;
Page: [44] as a cause, exists therefore in absolute dependence on the
effect for the reality of its existence. An absolute cause, in truth,
only exists in its effects: it never is, it always becomes: for it is an
existence in potentia, and not an existence in actu, except through and
by its effects. The Absolute is thus, at best, something merely
inchoative and imperfect.*

Let me ask, en passant, vwhy M. Cousin is under an obligation to thinkv
that if the Absolute, or, to speak plainly, if God, is only known to us
in the character of a cause, he must therefore “exist merely as a
cause,” and be merely “a mean towards an end?” It is surely possible to
maintain that the Deity is known to us only as he who feeds the ravens,
without supposing that the Divine Intelligence exists solely in order
that the ravens may be fed.†

In reviewing the series of arguments adduced by Sir W. Hamilton for the
incognoscibility and inconceivability of the Absolute, the first remark
that Edition: current; Page: [45] occurs is, that most of them lose
their application by simply substituting for the metaphysical
abstraction “The Absolute,” the more intelligible concrete expression
“Something Absolute.” If the first phrase has any meaning, it must be
capable of being expressed in terms of the other. When we are told of an
“Absolute” in the abstract, or of an Absolute Being, even though called
God, we are entitled, and if we would know what we are talking about,
are bound to ask, absolute in what? Do you mean, for example, absolute
in goodness, or absolute in knowledge? or do you, perchance, mean
absolute in ignorance, or absolute in wickedness? for any Edition:
current; Page: [46] one of these is as much an Absolute as any other.
And when you talk of something in the abstract which is called the
Absolute, does it means one, or more than one, of these? or does it,
peradventure, mean all of them? When (descending to a less lofty height
of abstraction) we speak of The Horse, we mean to include every object
of which the name horse can be predicated. Or, to take our examples from
the same region of thought to which the controversy belongs—when The
True or The Beautiful are spoken of, the phrase is meant to include all
things whatever that are true, or all things whatever that are
beautiful.* If this rule is good for other abstractions, it is good for
the Absolute. The word is devoid of meaning unless in reference to
predicates of some sort. What is absolute must be absolutely something;
absolutely this or absolutely that. The Absolute, then, ought to be a
genus comprehending whatever is absolutely anything—whatever possesses
any predicate in finished completeness. If we are told therefore that
there is some one Being who is, or which is, The Absolute—not something
absolute, but the Absolute itself,—the proposition can be understood in
no other sense than that the supposed Being possesses in absolute
completeness all predicates; is absolutely good, and absolutely bad;
absolutely wise, and absolutely stupid; and so forth.† The conception of
such a being, I will not say of such a God, is worse than a “fasciculus
of negations;” it is a fasciculus of contradictions: and our author
might have spared himself the Edition: current; Page: [47] trouble of
proving a thing to be unknowable, which cannot be spoken of but in words
implying the impossibility of its existence. To insist on such a truism
is not superfluous, for there have been philosophers who saw that this
must be the meaning of “The Absolute,” and yet accepted it as a reality.
“What kind of an Absolute Being is that,” asked Hegel, “which does not
contain in itself all that is actual, even evil included?”* Undoubtedly:
and it is therefore necessary to admit, either that there is no Absolute
Being, or that the law, that contradictory propositions cannot both be
true, does not apply to the Absolute. Hegel chose the latter side of the
alternative; and by this, among other things, has fairly earned the
honour which will probably be awarded to him by posterity, of having
logically extinguished transcendental metaphysics by a series of
reductiones ad absurdissimum.

What I have said of the Absolute is true, mutatis mutandis, of the
Infinite. This also is a phrase of no meaning, except in reference to
some particular predicate; it must mean the infinite in something—as in
size, in duration, or in power. These are intelligible conceptions. But
an abstract Infinite, a Being not merely infinite in one or in several
attributes, but which is “The Infinite” itself, must be not only
infinite in greatness, but also in littleness; its duration is not only
infinitely long, but infinitely short; it is not only infinitely awful,
but infinitely contemptible; it is the same mass of contradictions as
its companion the Absolute. There is no need to prove that neither of
them is knowable, since, if the universal law of Belief is of objective
validity, neither of them exists.

It is these unmeaning abstractions, however, these muddles of
self-contradiction, which alone our author has proved, against Cousin
and others, to be unknowable. He has shown, without difficulty, that we
cannot know The Infinite or The Absolute. He has not shown that we
cannot know a concrete reality as infinite or as absolute. Applied to
this latter thesis, his reasoning breaks down.

We have seen his principal argument, the one on which he substantially
relies. It is, that the Infinite and the Absolute are unknowable because
inconceivable, and inconceivable because the only notions we can have of
them are purely negative. If he is right in his antecedent, the
consequent Edition: current; Page: [48] follows. A conception made up of
negations is a conception of Nothing. It is not a conception at all.

But is a conception, by the fact of its being a conception of something
infinite, reduced to a negation? This is quite true of the senseless
abstraction “The Infinite.” That indeed is purely negative, being formed
by excluding from the concrete conceptions classed under it, all their
positive elements. But in place of “the Infinite,” put the idea of
Something infinite, and the argument collapses at once. “Something
infinite” is a conception which, like most of our complex ideas,
contains a negative element, but which contains positive elements also.
Infinite space, for instance: is there nothing positive in that? The
negative part of this conception is the absence of bounds. The positive
are, the idea of space, and of space greater than any finite space. So
of infinite duration: so far as it signifies “without end” it is only
known or conceived negatively; but in so far as it means time, and time
longer than any given time, the conception is positive. The existence of
a negative element in a conception does not make the conception itself
negative, and a non-entity. It would surprise most people to be told
that “the life eternal” is a purely negative conception; that
immortality is inconceivable. Those who hope for it for themselves have
a very positive conception of what they hope for. True, we cannot have
an adequate conception of space or duration as infinite; but between a
conception which though inadequate is real, and correct as far as it
goes, and the impossibility of any conception, there is a wide
difference. Sir W. Hamilton does not admit this difference. He thinks
the distinction without meaning. “To say that the infinite can be
thought, but only inadequately thought, is a contradiction in adjecto;
it is the same as saying that the infinite can be known, but only known
as finite.”* I answer, that to know it as greater than anything finite
is not to know it as finite. The conception of Infinite as that which is
greater than any given quantity, is a conception we all possess,
sufficient for all human purposes, and as genuine and good a positive
conception as one need wish to have. It is not adequate; our conception
of a reality never is. But it is positive; and the assertion that there
is nothing positive in the idea of infinity can only be maintained by
leaving out and ignoring, as Sir W. Hamilton invariably does, the very
element which constitutes the idea. Considering how many recondite laws
of physical nature, afterwards verified by experience, have been arrived
at by trains of mathematical reasoning grounded on what, if Sir W.
Hamilton’s doctrine be correct, is a non-existent conception, one would
be obliged to suppose that conjuring is a highly successful mode of the
investigation of nature. If, indeed, we trifle by setting up an
imaginary Infinite which is infinite in Edition: current; Page: [49]
nothing in particular, our notion of it is truly nothing, and a
“fasciculus of negations.” But this is a good example of the bewildering
effect of putting nonsensical abstractions in the place of concrete
realities. Would Sir W. Hamilton have said that the idea of God is but a
xnegation, or a fasciculus of negations?x As having nothing greater than
himself, he is indeed conceived negatively. But as himself greater than
all other real or imaginable existences, the conception of him is
positive.

Put Absolute instead of Infinite, and we come to the same result. “The
Absolute,” as already shown, is a heap of contradictions, but “absolute”
in reference to any given attribute, signifies the possession of that
attribute in finished perfection and completeness. A Being absolute in
knowledge, for example, is one who knows, in the literal meaning of the
term, everything. Who will pretend that this conception is negative, or
unmeaning to us? We cannot, indeed, form an adequate conception of a
being as knowing everything, since to do this we must have a conception,
or mental representation, of all that he knows. But neither have we an
adequate conception of any person’s finite knowledge. I have no adequate
conception of a shoemaker’s knowledge, since I do not know how to make
shoes: but my conception of a shoemaker and of his knowledge is a real
conception; it is not a fasciculus of negations. If I talk of an
Absolute Being (in the sense in which we are now employing the term) I
use words without meaning; but if I talk of a Being who is absolute in
wisdom and goodness, that is, who knows everything, and at all times
intends what is best for every sentient creature, I understand perfectly
what I mean: and however much the fact may transcend my conception, the
shortcoming can only consist in my being ignorant of the details of
which the reality is composed: as I have a positive, and may have a
correct conception of the empire of China, though I know not the aspect
of any of the places, nor the physiognomy of any of the human beings,
comprehended therein.

It appears, then, that the leading argument of Sir W. Hamilton to prove
the inconceivability and consequent unknowability of the Unconditioned,
namely, that our conception of it is merely negative, holds good only of
an abstract Unconditioned which cannot possibly exist, and not of a
concrete Being, supposed infinite and absolute in certain definite
attributes.* Let us now see if there be any greater value in his other
arguments.

Edition: current; Page: [50]
The first of them is,z that all knowledge is of things plural and
different; that a thing is only known to us by being known as different
from something else; from ourselves as knowing it, and also from other
known things which Edition: current; Page: [51] are not it. Here we have
at length something which the mind can rest on as a fundamental truth.
It is one of the profound psychological observations which the world
owes to Hobbes;[*] it is fully recognised both by M. Cousin and by Sir
W. Hamilton; and it has, more recently, been admirably illustrated and
applied by Mr. Bain and by Mr. Herbert Spencer. That to know a thing is
to distinguish it from other things, is, as I formerly remarked, one of
the truths which the very ambiguous expression “the relativity of human
knowledge” has been employed to denotea. With this doctrine I have no
quarrel. But Sir W. Hamilton proceeds to argue that the Absolute, being
“absolutely One,” cannot be known under the conditions of plurality and
difference, and as these are the acknowledged conditions of all our
knowledge, cannot, therefore, be known at all. There is here, as it
seems to me, a strange confusion of ideas. Sir W. Hamilton seems to mean
that, being absolutely One, it cannot be known as plural. But the
proposition that plurality is a condition of knowledge, does not mean
that the thing known must be known as itself plural. It means, that a
thing is only known, by being known as distinguished from something
else. The plurality required is not within the thing itself, but is made
up between itself and other things. Again, even if we concede that a
thing cannot be known at all unless known as plural, does it follow that
it cannot be known as plural because it is also One? bAre the One and
the Many, then,b incompatible things, instead of different aspects of
the same thing? Sir W. Hamilton surely does not mean by Absolute Unity,
an indivisible Unit; the minimum, instead of the maximum of Being. He
must mean, as M. Cousin certainly means, an absolute Whole; the Whole
which comprehends all things. If this be so, does not this Whole not
only admit of, but necessitate, the supposition of parts? Is not an
Unity which comprehends everything, ex vi termini known as a plurality,
and the most plural of all pluralities, plural in an unsurpassable
degree? If there is any meaning in the words, must not Absolute Unity be
Absolute cTotality, which is the highest degree of Pluralityc? There is
no escape from the alternative: dthe Absoluted either means a single
atom or monad, or it means Plurality in the extreme degree.

Though it is hardly needful, we will try this argument by the test we
Edition: current; Page: [52] applied to a previous one; by substituting
the concrete, God, for the abstract Absolute. Would Sir W. Hamilton have
said that God is not cognizable under the condition of Plurality—is not
known as distinguished from ourselves, and from the objects in nature?
Call any positive Thing by a name which expresses only its negative
predicates, and you may easily prove it under that name to be
incognizable and a non-entity. Give it back its full name (if Mr.
Mansel’s reverential feelings will permit), its positive attributes
reappear, and you find, to your surprise, that what is a reality can be
known as one.*

The next argument is chiefly directed against the doctrine of M. Cousin,
that we know the Absolute as Absolute Cause.[*] This doctrine, says Sir
W. Hamilton, destroys itself. The idea of a Cause is irreconcilable with
the Absolute, for a Cause is relative, and implies an Effect: this
Absolute, therefore, is not an Absolute at all. efThis would be
unanswerable, if by the Edition: current; Page: [53] Absolute we were
obliged to understand something which is not only “out of” all relation,
but incapable of ever passing into relation. But is this what any one
can possibly mean by the Absolute, who identifies it with the Creator?
Granting that the Absolute implies an existence in itself, standing in
no relation to anything: the only Absolute with which we are concerned,
or in which anybody believes, must not only be capable of entering into
relation with things, but must be capable of entering into any relation
whatever, except that of dependence, with anything. May it not be known
in some, at least, of those relations, and particularly in the relation
of a Cause? And if it is a “finished, perfected, completed”[*] Cause,
i.e. the most a cause that it is possible to be—the cause of everything
except itself—then, if known as such, it is known as an Absolute Cause.e
Has Sir W. Hamilton shown that an Absolute Cause, thus understood, is
inconceivable, or unknowable? No: all he shows is, that, though gcapable
of being known, itgf is known relatively to something else, namely, to
its effects; and that such knowledge of God is not of God in himself,
but of God in relation to his works. The truth is, M. Cousin’s doctrine
is too legitimate a product of the metaphysics common to them both, to
be capable of being refuted by Sir W. Hamilton. For this knowledge of
God in and by his effects, according to M. Cousin, is knowing him as he
is in himself: because the creative power whereby he causes, is in
himself, is inseparable from him, and belongs to his essence.[†] And as
far as I can see, the principles common to the two philosophers are as
good a warrant to M. Cousin for saying this, as to Sir W. Hamilton for
maintaining that extension and figure are h“essential attributes”h of
matter, and perceived as such by intuition.

I have now examined, with one exception, every argument (which is not
merely ad hominem) advanced by Sir W. Hamilton to prove against M.
Cousin the unknowableness of the Unconditioned. The argument which I
have reserved, is the emphatic and oracular one, that the Unconditioned
must be unthinkable, because “to think is to condition.”[‡] I have kept
this Edition: current; Page: [54] for the last, because it will occupy
us the longest time: for we must begin by finding the meaning of the
proposition; which cannot be done very briefly, so little help is
afforded us by the author.

According to the best notion I can form of the meaning of “condition,”
either as a term of philosophy or of common life, it means that on which
something else is contingent, or (more definitely) which being given,
something else exists, or takes place. I promise to do something on
condition that you do something else: that is, if you do this, I will do
that; if not, I will do as I please. A Conditional Proposition, in
logic, is an assertion in this form: “If so and so, then so and so.” The
conditions of a phænomenon are the various antecedent circumstances
which, when they exist simultaneously, are followed by its occurrence.
As all these antecedent circumstances must coexist, each of them in
relation to the others is a conditio sine quâ non; i.e. without it the
phænomenon will not follow from the remaining conditions, though it
perhaps may from some set of conditions totally different.

If this be the meaning of Condition, the Unconditioned should mean, that
which does not depend for its existence or its qualities on any
antecedent; in other words, it should be synonymous with iUncausedi.
This, however, cannot be the meaning intended by Sir W. Hamilton: for,
in a passage already quoted from his argument against Cousin, he speaks
of the effect as a condition of its cause. The condition, therefore, as
he understands it, needs not be an antecedent, and may be a subsequent
fact to that which it conditions.

He appears, indeed, in his writings generally, to reckon as a condition
of a thing, anything necessarily implied by it: and uses the word
Conditioned almost interchangeably with Relative. For relatives are
always in pairs: a term of relation implies the existence of two things,
the one which it is affirmed of, and another: parent implies child,
greater implies less, like implies another like, and vice versâ.
Relation is an abstract name for all concrete facts which concern more
than one object. Wherever, therefore, a relation is affirmed, or
anything is spoken of under a relative name, the existence of the
correlative may be called a condition of the relation, as well as of the
truth of the assertion. When, accordingly, Sir W. Hamilton calls an
effect a condition of its cause, he speaks intelligibly, and the
received use of the term affords him a certain amount of justification
for thus speaking.

But, if the Conditioned means the Relative, the Unconditioned must mean
its opposite; and in this acceptation, the Unconditioned would mean all
Noumena; Things in themselves, considered without reference to the
effects they produce in us, which are called their phænomenal agencies
or Edition: current; Page: [55] properties. Sir W. Hamilton does, very
frequently, seem to use the term in this sense. In denying all knowledge
of the Unconditioned, he often seems to be denying any other than
phænomenal knowledge of Matter or of Mind. Not only, however, he does
not consistently adhere to this meaning, but it directly conflicts with
the only approach he ever makes to a definition or an explanation of the
term. We have seen him declaring that the Unconditioned is the genus of
which the Infinite and the Absolute are the two species. But Things in
themselves are not all of them infinite and absolute. Matter and Mind,
as such, are neither the one nor the other. It is evident that Sir W.
Hamilton had never decided what extent he intended giving to the term
Unconditioned. Sometimes he gives it one degree of amplitude, sometimes
another. Between the meanings in which he uses it there is undoubtedly a
link of connexion; but this only makes the matter still worse than if
there were none. The phrase has that most dangerous kind of ambiguity,
in which the meanings, though essentially different, are so nearly
allied that the thinker unconsciously interchanges them one with
another.*

jThe probability is that when our author asserts that “to think is to
Edition: current; Page: [56] condition,” he uses the word Condition in
neither of these senses, but in a third meaning, equally familiar to
him, and recurring constantly in such phrases as “the conditions of our
thinking faculty,” “conditions of thought,” and the like. He means by
Conditions something similar to Kant’s Forms of Sense and Categories of
Understanding; a meaning more correctly expressed by another of his
phrases, “Necessary Laws of Thought.” He is applying to the mind the
scholastic maxim, “Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis.”
He means that our perceptive and conceptive faculties have their own
laws, which not only determine what we are capable of perceiving and
conceiving, but put into our perceptions and conceptions elements not
derived from the thing perceived or conceived, but from the mind itself:
That, therefore, we cannot at once infer that whatever we find in our
perception or conception of an object, has necessarily a prototype in
the object itself: and that we must, in each instance, determine this
question by philosophic investigation. According to this doctrine, which
no fault can be found with our author for maintaining, though often for
not carrying it far enough—the “conditions of thought” would mean the
attributes with which, it is supposed, the mind cannot help investing
every object of thought—the elements which, derived from its own
structure, cannot but enter into every conception it is able to form;
even if there should be nothing corresponding in the object which is the
prototype of the conception: though our author, in most cases, (therein
differing from Kant) believes that there is this correspondence.

We have here an intelligible meaning for the doctrine that to think is
to conditionk; and as Mr. Mansel, in his reply, guarantees this as the
true meaning of Sir W. Hamilton,[*] I will accept it as being so. If,
then (which I do not here discuss), the philosophical doctrine be true,
which was held partially by Sir W. Hamilton, and in a more
thorough-going manner by Kant, viz. that, in the act of thought, the
mind, by an à priori necessity, invests the object of thought with
attributes which are not in itself, but are created by the mind’s own
laws; and if we consent to call these necessities Edition: current;
Page: [57] of thought the conditions of thought; then evidently to think
is to condition, and to think the Unconditioned would be to think the
unthinkable. But the Unconditioned, in this application of the term, is
not identical with the Infinite plus the Absolute. The Infinite and the
Absolute are not necessarily, in this sense, unconditioned. The words
infinite and absolute, as I have already said, have no meaning save as
expressing some concrete reality or supposed reality, possessing
infinitely or absolutely attributes of some sort, which attributes, as
finite and limited, we are able to think. In thinking these attributes,
we are not able to divest ourselves of our mental conditions, but we can
think the attributes as surpassing the conditions. “To condition,” and
“to think under conditions,” are ambiguous phrases. An Infinite Being
may be thought, and is thought, with reference to the conditions, but
not as limited by them. The most familiar examples of the alleged
necessary conditions of thought, are Time and Space: we cannot, it is
affirmed, think anything, except in time and space. Now, an Infinite
Being is not thought as in time and space, if this means as occupying a
portion of time or a portion of space. But (substituting for Time the
word Duration, to get rid of the theological antithesis of Time and
Eternity) we do actually conceive God in reference to Duration and
Extension, namely, as occupying lthe whole of both; and these being
conceived as infinite, to conceive a Being as occupying the whole of
them is to conceive that Being as infinite. If thinking God as eternal
and omnipresent is thinking him in Space and Time, we do think God in
Space and Time: if thinking him as eternal and omnipresent is not
thinking him in Space and Time, we are capable of thinking something out
of Space and Time. Mr. Mansel may make his choice between the two
opinions. I have already shown that the ideas of infinite space and time
are real and positive conceptions:[*] that of a Being who is in all
Space and in all Time is no less so. To think anything, must of course
be to condition it by attributes which are themselves thinkable; but not
necessarily to condition it by a limited quantum of those attributes: on
the contrary, we may think it under a degree of them greater than all
limited degrees, and this is to think it as infinite.*kl

Edition: current; Page: [58]
If we now ask ourselves, as the result of this long discussion, what Sir
W. Hamilton can be considered as having accomplished in this celebrated
Essay, our answer must be: That he has established, more thoroughly
perhaps than he intended, the futility of all speculation respecting
those meaningless abstractions “The Infinite” and “The Absolute,”
notions contradictory in themselves, and to which no corresponding
realities do or can exist.*m Respecting the unknowableness, not of “the
Infinite,” or “the Absolute,” but of concrete persons or things
possessing infinitely or absolutely certain specific attributes, I
cannot think that our author has proved anything; nor do I think it
possible to prove them any otherwise unknowable, than that they can only
be known in their relations to us, and not as Noumena, or Things in
themselves. This, however, is true of the finite as well as of the
infinite, of the imperfect as well as of the completed or Edition:
current; Page: [59] absolute. Our author has merely proved the
uncognoscibility of a being which is nothing but infinite, or nothing
but absolute: and since nobody supposes that there is such a being, but
only beings which are something positive carried to the infinite, or to
the absolute, to have established this point cannot be regarded as any
great achievement. He has not even refuted M. Cousin; whose doctrine of
an intuitive cognition of the Deity,[*] like every other doctrine
relating to intuition, can only be disproved by showing it to be a
mistaken interpretation of facts; which, again, as we shall see
hereafter, can only be done by pointing out in what other way the
seeming perceptions may have originated, which are erroneously supposed
to be intuitive.

Edition: current; Page: [60]


CHAPTER V: What is Rejected as Knowledge by Sir William Hamilton, Brought Back Under the Name of Belief

we have found Sir W. Hamilton maintaining with great earnestness, and
taking as the basis of his philosophy, an opinion respecting the
limitation of human knowledge, which, if he did not mean so much by it
as the language in which he often clothed it seemed to imply, meant at
least this, that the Absolute, the Infinite, the Unconditioned, are
necessarily unknowable by us. I have discussed this opinion as a serious
philosophical dogma, expressing a definite view of the relation between
the universe and human apprehension, and fitted to guide us in
distinguishing the questions which it is of any avail to ask, from those
which are altogether closed to our investigations.

But had the doctrine, in the mind of Sir W. Hamilton, meant ten times
more than it did—had he upheld the relativity of human knowledge in the
fullest, instead of the scantiest meaning of which the words are
susceptible—the question would still have been reduced to naught, or to
a mere verbal controversy, by his admission of a second akinda of
intellectual conviction called Belief; which is anterior to knowledge,
is the foundation of it, and is not subject to its limitations; and
through the medium of which we may have, and are justified in having, a
full assurance of all the things which he has pronounced unknowable to
us; and this not exclusively by revelation, that is, on the supposed
testimony of a Being whom we have ground for trusting as veracious, but
by our natural faculties.

From some philosophers, this distinction would have the appearance of a
mere fetch—one of those transparent evasions which have sometimes been
resorted to by the assailants of received opinions, that they might have
an opportunity of ruining the rational foundations of a doctrine without
exposing themselves to odium by its direct denial: as the writers
against Christianity in the eighteenth century, after declaring some
doctrine to be contradictory to reason, and exhibiting it in the
absurdest possible light, were Edition: current; Page: [61] wont to add
that this was not of the smallest consequence, religion being an affair
of faith, not of reason. But Sir W. Hamilton evidently meant what he
says; he was expressing a serious conviction, and one of the tenets of
his philosophy: he really recognised bunder the name ofb Belief a
substantive source, I was going to say, of knowledge; I may at all
events say of trustworthy evidence. This appears in the following
passages:

The sphere of our belief is much more extensive than the sphere of our
knowledge, and therefore, when I deny that the Infinite can by us be
known, I am far from denying that by us it is, must, and ought to be,
believed. This I have indeed anxiously evinced, both by reasoning and
authority.*

St. Austin accurately says, “We know, what rests upon reason; but
believe, what rests upon authority.” But reason itself must rest at last
upon authority; for the original data of reason do not rest on reason,
but are necessarily accepted by reason on the authority of what is
beyond itself. These data are, therefore, in rigid propriety, Beliefs or
Trusts. Thus it is that in the last resort we must perforce
philosophically admit, that belief is the primary condition of reason,
and not reason the ultimate ground of belief. We are compelled to
surrender the proud Intellige ut credas of Abelard, to content ourselves
with the humble Crede ut intelligas of Anselm.†

And in another part of the same Dissertation, (he is arguing that we do
not believe, but know, the external world)—

If asked, indeed, how we know that we know it? how we know that what we
apprehend in sensible perception is, as consciousness assures us, an
object, external, extended, and numerically different from the conscious
subject? how we know that this object is not a mere mode of mind,
illusively presented to us as a mere mode of matter; then indeed we must
reply that we do not in propriety know that what we are compelled to
perceive as not-self is not a perception of self, and that we can only
on reflection believe such to be the case, in reliance on the original
necessity of so believing, imposed on us by our nature.‡

It thus appears that, in Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, Belief is a
cconviction of higher authorityc than Knowledge; Belief is ultimate,
knowledge only derivative; Knowledge itself finally rests on Belief;
natural beliefs are the Edition: current; Page: [62] sole warrant for
all our knowledge. Knowledge, therefore, is an inferior ground of
assurance to natural Belief; and as we have beliefs which tell us that
we know, and without which we could not be assured of the truth of our
knowledge, so we have, and are warranted in having, beliefs beyond our
knowledge; beliefs respecting the Unconditioned—respecting that which is
in itself unknowable.

I am not now considering what it is that, in our author’s opinion, we
are bound to believe concerning the unknowable. What here concerns us
is, the nullity to which this doctrine reduces the position to which our
author seemed to cling so firmly—viz., that our knowledge is relative to
ourselves, and that we can have no knowledge of the infinite and
absolute. In telling us that it is impossible to the human faculties to
know anything about Things in themselves, we naturally suppose he
intends to warn us off the ground—to bid us understand that this subject
of enquiry is closed to us, and exhort us to turn our attention
elsewhere. It appears that nothing of the kind was intended: we are to
understand, on the contrary, that we may have the best grounded and most
complete assurance of the things which were declared unknowable—an
assurance not only equal or greater in degree, but the same in nature,
as we have for the truth of our knowledge: and that the matter dind
dispute was only whether this assurance or conviction shall be called
knowledge, or by another name. If this be all, I must say I think it not
of the smallest consequence. If no more than this be intended by the
“great axiom”[*] and the elaborate argument against Cousin, a great deal
of trouble has been taken to very little purpose; and the subject would
have been better left where Reid left it, who did not trouble himself
with nice distinctions between belief and knowledge, but was content to
consider us as knowing that which, by the constitution of our nature, we
are forced, with entire conviction, to believe. According to Sir W.
Hamilton, we believe premises, but know the conclusions from them. The
ultimate facts of consciousness are “given less in the form of
cognitions than of beliefs:” “Consciousness in its last analysis, in
other words our primary experience, is a faith.”* But if we know the
theorems of Euclid, and do not know the definitions and axioms on which
they rest, the word knowledge, thus singularly applied, must be taken in
a merely technical sense. eTo say that we believe the premises, but know
the conclusion, would be understood by every one as meaning that we had
other independent evidence of the conclusion. If we only know it through
the premises, the same name ought Edition: current; Page: [63] in reason
to be given to our assurance of both.*e In common language, when Belief
and Knowledge are distinguished, Knowledge is understood to mean
complete conviction, Belief a conviction somewhat short of complete; or
else we are said to believe when the evidence is probable (as that of
testimony), but to know, when it is intuitive, or demonstrative from
intuitive premises: we believe, for example, that there is a Continent
of America, but know that we are alive, that two and two make four, and
that the sum of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the third
side. This is a distinction of practical value: but in Sir W. Hamilton’s
use of the term, it is the intuitive convictions that are the Beliefs,
and those which are dependent and contingent upon them, compose our
knowledge. Whether a particular portion of our convictions, which are
not more certain, but if anything less certain, than the remainder, and
according to our author rest on the same ultimate basis, shall in
opposition to the common usage of mankind, receive exclusively the
appellation of knowledge, is at the most a question of terminology, and
can only be made to appear philosophically important by confounding
difference of name with difference of fact. That anything capable of
being said on such a subject should pass for a fundamental principle of
philosophy, and be fone of the chief sourcesf of the reputation of a
metaphysical system, is but an example how the mere forms of logic and
metaphysics can blind mankind to the total absence of their substance.

gIt must not be supposed, from anything which has been here said, that I
wish to abolish the distinction between Knowledge and Belief (meaning
True Belief) or maintain that it is necessarily a distinction without a
difference. Those terms are employed to denote more than one real
difference, and neither of them can conveniently be dispensed with in
philosophy.† What concerns us in the present chapter is not the
rationale of the distinction between knowledge and belief, but whether
that distinction Edition: current; Page: [64] is relevant to the
question between Sir W. Hamilton and M. Cousin about the Infinite and
the Absolute; and whether Sir W. Hamilton is warranted in giving back
under the name of Belief, the assurance or conviction respecting these
objects which he refuses under the name of knowledge. My position is,
that the Infinite and Absolute which Sir W. Hamilton has been proving to
be unknowable, being made up of contradictions, are as incapable of
being believed as of being known; that the only attitude in reference to
them, of any intellect which apprehends the meaning of language, is that
of disbelief. On the other hand, there are Infinites and Absolutes
which, not being self-contradictory, admit of being believed, namely,
concrete realities supposed to be infinite or absolute in respect of
certain attributes: but Sir W. Hamilton, as I maintain, has done nothing
towards proving that Edition: current; Page: [65] such concrete
realities cannot be known, in the way in which we know other things,
namely, in their relations to us. When, therefore, he affirms that
though the Infinite cannot by us be known, “by us it is, must, and ought
to be believed,”[*] I answer, that the Infinite which, as he has so
laboriously proved, cannot be known, neither is, must, nor ought to be
believed; not because it cannot be known, but because there exists no
such thing for us to know; unless, with Hegel, we hold that the Absolute
is not subject to the Law of Contradiction, but is at once a real
existence and the synthesis of contradictories. And, on the other hand,
the Infinite and Absolute which are really capable of being believed,
are also, for anything Sir W. Hamilton has shown to the contrary,
capable of being, in certain of their aspects, known.g

Edition: current; Page: [66]


CHAPTER VI: The Philosophy of the Conditioned

the “philosophy of the conditioned,” in its wider sense, includes all
the doctrines that we have been discussing. In its narrower, it
consists, I think, mainly of a single proposition, which Sir W. Hamilton
often reiterates, and insists upon as a fundamental law of human
intellect. Though suggested by Kant’s Antinomies of Speculative Reason,
in the form which it bears in Sir W. Hamilton’s writings it belongs, I
believe, originally to himself. No doctrine which he has anywhere laid
down is more characteristic of his mode of thought, and none is more
strongly associated with his fame.

For the better understanding of this theory, it is necessary to premise
some explanations respecting another doctrine, which is also his, but
not peculiar to him. He protests, frequently and with emphasis, against
the notion that whatever is inconceivable must be false. “There is no
ground,” he says, “for inferring a certain fact to be impossible, merely
from our inability to conceive its possibility.”* I regard this opinion
as perfectly just. It is one of the psychological truths, highly
important, and by no means generally recognised, which frequently meet
us in his writings, and which give them, in my eyes, most of their
philosophical value. I am obliged to add, that though he often furnishes
a powerful statement and vindication of such truths, he seldom or never
consistently adheres to them. Too often what he has affirmed in generals
is taken back in details, and arguments of his own are found to rest on
philosophical commonplaces which he has himself repudiated and refuted.
I am afraid that the present is one of these cases, and that Sir W.
Hamilton will sometimes be found contending that a thing cannot possibly
be true because we cannot conceive it: but at all events he disclaims
any such inference, and broadly lays down, that things not only may be,
but are, of which it is impossible for us to conceive even the
possibility.

Before showing how this proposition is developed into the “Philosophy of
the Conditioned,” let us make the ground safe before us, by bestowing a
Edition: current; Page: [67] brief consideration upon the proposition
itself, its meaning, and the foundations on which it rests.

We cannot conclude anything to be impossible, because its possibility is
inconceivable to us; for two reasons. First; what seems to us
inconceivable, and, so far as we are personally concerned, may really be
so, usually owes its inconceivability only to a strong association.
When, in a prolonged experience, we have often had a particular
sensation or mental impression, and never without a certain other
sensation or impression immediately accompanying it, there grows up so
firm an adhesion between our ideas of the two, that we are unable to
think of the former without thinking the latter in close combination
with it. And unless other parts of our experience afford us some analogy
to aid in disentangling the two ideas, our incapacity of imagining the
one fact without the other grows, or is prone to grow, into a belief
that the one cannot exist without the other. This is the law of
Inseparable Association, an element of our nature of which few have
realized to themselves the full power. It was for the first time largely
applied to the explanation of the more complicated mental phænomena by
Mr. James Mill;[*] and is, in an especial manner, the key to the
phænomenon of inconceivability. As that phænomenon only exists because
our powers of conception are determined by our limited experience,
Inconceivables are incessantly becoming Conceivables as our experience
becomes enlarged. There is no need to go farther for an example than the
case of Antipodes. This physical fact was, to the early speculators,
inconceivable: not, of course, the fact of persons in that position;
this the mind could easily represent to itself; but the possibility
that, being in that position, and not being nailed on, nor having any
glutinous substance attached to their feet, they could help falling off.
Here was an inseparable, though, as it proved to be, not an indissoluble
association, which while it continued made a real fact what is called
inconceivable; and because inconceivable, it was unhesitatingly believed
to be impossible. Inconceivabilities of similar character have, at many
periods, obstructed the reception of new scientific truths: the
Newtonian system had to contend against several of them; and we are not
warranted in assigning a different origin and character to those which
still subsist, because the experience that would be capable of removing
them has not occurred. If anything which is now inconceivable by us were
shown to us as a fact, we should soon find ourselves able to conceive
it. We should even be in danger of going over to the opposite error, and
believing that the negation of it is inconceivable. There are many cases
in the history Edition: current; Page: [68] of science (I have dilated
on some of them in another work)[*] where something which had once been
inconceivable, and which people had with great difficulty learnt to
conceive, becoming itself fixed in the bonds of an inseparable
association, scientific men came to think that it alone was conceivable,
and that the conflicting hypothesis which all mankind had believed, and
which a vast majority were probably believing still, was inconceivable.
In Dr. Whewell’s writings on the Inductive Sciences, this transition of
thought is not only exemplified but defended.[†] Inconceivability is
thus a purely subjective thing, arising from the mental antecedents of
the individual mind, or from those of the human mind generally at a
particular period, and cannot give us any insight into the possibilities
of Nature.

But, secondly, aeven assuminga that inconceivability is not solely the
consequence of limited experience, but that some incapacities of
conceiving are inherent in the mind, and inseparable from it; this would
not entitle us to infer, that what we are thus incapable of conceiving
cannot exist. Such an inference would only be warrantable, if we could
know à priori that we must have been created capable of conceiving
whatever is capable of existing: that the universe of thought and that
of reality, the Microcosm and the Macrocosm (as they once were called)
must have been framed in complete correspondence with one another. That
this is really the case has been laid down expressly in some systems of
philosophy, by implication in more, and is the foundation (among others)
of the systems of Schelling and Hegel: but an assumption more destitute
of evidence could scarcely be made, nor can one easily imagine any
evidence that could prove it, unless it were revealed from above.

What is inconceivable, then, cannot therefore be inferred to be false.
But let us vary the terms of the proposition, and express it thus: what
is inconceivable, is not therefore incredible. We have now a statement,
which may mean either exactly the same as the other, or more. It may
mean only that our inability to conceive a thing, does not entitle us to
deny its possibility, nor its existence. Or it may mean that a thing’s
being inconceivable to us is no reason against our believing, and
legitimately believing, that it actually is. This is a very different
proposition from the preceding. Sir W. Edition: current; Page: [69]
Hamilton, as we have said, goes this length. It is now necessary to
enter more minutely than at first seemed needful, into the meaning of
“inconceivable;” which, like almost all the metaphysical terms we are
forced to make use of, is weighed down with ambiguities.

Reid pointed out and discriminated two meanings of the verb “to
conceive,”* giving rise to two different meanings of inconceivable. But
Sir W. Hamilton uses “to conceive” in three meanings, and has
accordingly three meanings for Inconceivable; though he does not give
the smallest hint to his readers, nor seems ever to suspect, that the
three are not one and the same.

The first meaning of Inconceivable is, that of which the mind cannot
form to itself any representation; either (as in the case of Noumena)
because no attributes are given, out of which a representation could be
framed, or because the attributes given are incompatible with one
another—are such as the mind cannot put together in a single image. Of
this last case numerous instances present themselves to the most cursory
glance. The fundamental one is that of a simple contradiction. We cannot
represent anything to ourselves as at once being something, and not
being it; as at once having, and not having, a given attribute. The
following are other examples. We cannot represent to ourselves time or
space as having an end. We cannot represent to ourselves two and two as
making five; nor two straight lines as Edition: current; Page: [70]
enclosing a space. We cannot represent to ourselves a round square;
bnorb a body all black, and at the same time all white.

These things are literally inconceivable to us, our minds and our
experience being what they are. Whether they would be inconceivable if
our minds were the same but our experience different, is open to
discussion. A distinction may be made, which, I think, will be found
pertinent to the question. That the same thing should at once be and not
be—that identically the same statement should be both true and false—is
not only inconceivable to us, but we cannot cimaginec that it could be
made conceivable. We cannot attach sufficient meaning to the
proposition, to be able to represent to ourselves the supposition of a
different experience on this matter. We cannot therefore even entertain
the question, whether the incompatibility is in the original structure
of our minds, or is only put there by our experience. The case is
otherwise in all the other examples of inconceivability. Our incapacity
of conceiving the same thing as A and not A, may be primordial; but our
inability to conceive A without B, is because A, by experience or
teaching, has become inseparably associated with B: and our inability to
conceive A with C, is, because, by experience or teaching, A has become
inseparably associated with some mental representation which includes
the negation of C. Thus all inconceivabilities may be reduced to
inseparable association, combined with the original inconceivability of
a direct contradiction. All the cases which I have cited as instances of
inconceivability, and which are the strongest I could have chosen, may
be resolved in this manner. We cannot conceive a round square, not
merely because no such object has ever presented itself in our
experience, for that would not be enough. Neither, for anything we know,
are the two ideas in themselves incompatible. To conceive a round
square, or to conceive a body all black and yet all white, would only be
to conceive two different sensations as produced in us simultaneously by
the same object; a conception familiar to our experience; and we should
probably be as well able to conceive a round square as a hard square, or
a heavy square, if it were not that, in our uniform experience, at the
instant when a thing begins to be round it ceases to be square, so that
the beginning of the one impression is inseparably associated with the
departure or cessation of the other.* Thus our inability to form a
conception always arises from our being compelled Edition: current;
Page: [71] to form another contradictory to it. We cannot conceive time
or space as having an end, because the idea of any portion whatever of
time or space is inseparably associated with the idea of a time or space
beyond it. We cannot conceive two and two as five, because an
inseparable association compels us to conceive it as four; and it cannot
be conceived as both, because four and five, like round and square, are
so related in our experience, that each is associated with the
cessation, or removal, of the other. We cannot conceive two straight
lines as enclosing a space, because enclosing a space means approaching
and meeting a second time; and the mental image of two straight lines
which have once met is inseparably associated with the representation of
them as diverging. Thus it is not wholly without ground that the notion
of a round square, and the assertion that two and two make five, or that
two straight lines can enclose a space, are said, in common and even in
scientific parlance, to involve a contradiction. The statement is not
logically correct, for contradiction is only between a positive
representation and its negative. But the impossibility of uniting
contradictory conceptions in the same representation, is the real ground
of the inconceivability in these cases. And we should probably have no
difficulty in putting together the two ideas supposed to be
incompatible, if our experience had not first inseparably associated one
of them with the contradictory of the other.*

Edition: current; Page: [72]
Thus far, of the first kind of Inconceivability; the first and most
proper meaning in which the word is used. But there is another meaning,
in which things are often said to be inconceivable which the mind is
under no Edition: current; Page: [73] incapacity of representing to
itself in an image. It is often said, that we are unable to conceive as
possible that which, in itself, we are perfectly well able to conceive:
we are able, it is admitted, to conceive it as an imaginary Edition:
current; Page: [74] object, but unable to conceive it realized. This
extends the term inconceivable to every combination of facts which to
the mind simply contemplating it, appears incredible.* It was in this
sense that Antipodes were inconceivable. They could be figured in
imagination; they could even be painted, or Edition: current; Page: [75]
modelled in clay. The mind could put the parts of the conception
together, butg could not realize the combination as one which could
exist in nature. The cause of the inability was the powerful tendency,
generated by experience, to expect falling off, when a body, not of
adhesive quality, was in contact only with the under side of another
body. The association was not so powerful as to disable the mind from
conceiving the body as holding on; doubtless because other facts of our
experience afforded models on which such a conception could be framed.
But though not disabled from conceiving the combination, the mind was
disabled from believing it. The difference between belief and
conception, and between the conditions of belief and those of simple
conception, are psychological questions into which I do not enter. It is
sufficient that inability to believe can coexist with ability to
conceive, and that a mental association between two facts which is not
intense enough to make their separation unimaginable, may yet create,
and, if there are no counter associations, always does create, more or
less of difficulty in believing that the two can exist apart: a
difficulty often amounting to a local or temporary impossibility.

This is the second meaning of Inconceivability; which by Reid is
carefully distinguished from the first,[*] but his editor Sir W.
Hamilton employs the word in both senses indiscriminately.* How he came
to miss the distinction is tolerably obvious to any one who is familiar
with his writings, and especially with his theory of Judgment; but needs
not be pointed out here. It is more remarkable that he gives itoi the
term a third sense, Edition: current; Page: [76] answering to a third
signification of the verb “to conceive.” To conceive any thing, has with
him not only its two ordinary meanings—to represent the thing as an
image, and to be able to realize it as possible—but an additional one,
which he denotes by various phrases. One of his common expressions for
it is, “to construe to the mind in thought.” This, he often says, can
only be done “through a higher notion.” “We think, we conceive, we
comprehend a thing only as we think it as within or under something
else.”* So that a fact, or a supposition, is conceivable or
comprehensible by us (conceive and comprehend being with him in this
case synonymous) only by being reduced to some more general fact, as a
particular case under it. Again, “to conceive the possibility” of a
thing, is defined “conceiving it as the consequent of a certain
reason.”† The inconceivable, in this third sense, is simply the
inexplicable. Accordingly all first truths are, according to Sir W.
Hamilton, inconceivable. “The primary data of consciousness, as
themselves the conditions under which all else is comprehended, are
necessarily themselves incomprehensible . . . that is . . . we are
unable to conceive through a higher notion how that is possible, which
the deliverance avouches actually to be.”‡ And we shall find him arguing
things to be inconceivable, merely on the ground that we have no higher
notion under which to class them. This use of the word inconceivable,
being a complete perversion of it from its established meanings, I
decline to recognise. If all the general truths which we are most
certain of are to be called inconceivable, the word no longer serves any
purpose. Inconceivable is not to be confounded with unprovable, or
unanalysable. A truth which is not inconceivable in either of the
received meanings of the term—a truth which is completely apprehended,
and without difficulty believed, I cannot consent to call inconceivable
merely because we cannot account for it, or deduce it from a higher
truth.§

Edition: current; Page: [77]
These being Sir W. Hamilton’s three kinds of inconceivability; is the
inconceivability of a proposition in any of these senses, consistent
with believing it to be true? The third kind lis avowedly compatible not
only with belief, but with our strongest and most natural beliefsl. An
inconceivable Edition: current; Page: [78] of the second kind can not
only be believed, but believed with full understanding. In this case we
are perfectly able to represent to ourselves mentally what is said to be
inconceivable; only, from an association in our mind, it does not look
credible: but, this association being the result of experience or of
teaching, contrary experience or teaching is able to dissolve it; and
even before this has been done—while the thing still feels incredible,
the intellect may, on sufficient evidence, accept it as true. An
inconceivable of the first kind, inconceivable in the proper sense of
the term—that which the mind is actually unable to put together in a
representation—may nevertheless be believed, if we attach any meaning to
it, but cannot be said to be believed with understanding. We cannot
believe it on direct evidence, i.e. through its being presented in our
experience, for if it were so presented it would immediately cease to be
inconceivable. We may believe it because its falsity would be
inconsistent with something which we otherwise know to be true. Or we
may believe it because it is affirmed by some one wiser than ourselves,
who, we suppose, may have had the experience which has not reached us,
and to whom it may thus have become conceivable. But the belief is
without understanding, for we form no mental picture of what we believe.
We do not so much believe the fact, as believe that we should believe it
if we could have the needful presentation in our experience; and that
some other being has, or may have, had that presentation. Our inability
to conceive it, is no argument whatever for its being false, and no
hindrance to our believing it, to the above-mentioned extent.

But though facts, which we cannot join together in an image, may be
united in the universe, and though we may have sufficient ground for
believing that they are so united in point of fact, it is impossible to
believe a proposition which conveys to us no meaning at all. If any one
says to me, Humpty Dumpty is an Abracadabra, I neither knowing what is
meant by an Abracadabra, nor what is meant by Humpty Dumpty, I may, if I
have confidence in my informant, believe that he means something, and
that the something which he means is probably true: but I do not believe
the very thing which he means, since I am entirely ignorant what it is.
Propositions of this kind, the unmeaningness of which lies in the
subject or predicate, are not those generally described as
inconceivable. The unmeaning propositions spoken of under that name, are
usually those which involve contradictions. That the same thing is and
is not—that it did and did not rain at the same time and place, that a
man is both alive and not alive, are forms of words which carry no
signification to my mind. As Sir W. Hamilton truly says,* one half of
the statement simply sublates or takes away the meaning which the other
half has laid down. The unmeaningness here resides in the Edition:
current; Page: [79] copula. The word is has no meaning, except as
exclusive of is not. The case is more hopeless than that of Humpty
Dumpty, for no explanation by the speaker of what the words mean can
make the assertion intelligible. Whatever may be meant by a man, and
whatever may be meant by alive, the statement that a man can be alive
and not alive is equally without meaning to me. I cannot make out
anything which the speaker intends me to believe. The sentence affirms
nothing of which my mind can take hold. Sir W. Hamilton, indeed,
maintains the contrary. He says, “When we conceive the proposition that
A is not A, we clearly comprehend the separate meaning on the terms A
and not A, and also the import of the assertion of their identity.”* We
comprehend the separate meaning of the terms, but as to the meaning of
the assertion, I think we only comprehend what the same form of words
would mean in another case. The very import of the form of words is
inconsistent with its meaning anything when applied to terms of this
particular kind. Let any one who doubts this, attempt to define what is
meant by applying a predicate to a subject, when the predicate and the
subject are the negation of one another. To make sense of the assertion,
some new meaning must be attached to is or is not, and if this be done
the proposition is no longer the one presented for our assent. Here,
therefore, is one kind of inconceivable proposition which nothing
whatever can make credible to us. Not being able to attach any meaning
to the proposition, we are equally incompetent to assert that it is, or
that it is not, possible in itself. But we have not the power of
believing it; and there the matter must rest.

We are now prepared to enter on the peculiar doctrine of Sir W.
Hamilton, called the Philosophy of the Conditioned. Not content with
maintaining that things which from the natural and fundamental laws of
the human mind are for ever inconceivable to us, may, for aught we know,
be true, he goes farther, and says, we know that many such things are
true. “Things there are which may, nay must, be true, of which the
understanding is wholly unable to construe to itself the possibility.”†
Of what nature these things are, is declared in many parts of his
writings, in the form of a general law. It is thus stated in the review
of Cousin:

The Conditioned is the mean between the two extremes—two
unconditionates, exclusive of each other, neither of which can be
conceived as possible, but of which, on the principles of contradiction
and excluded middle, one must be admitted as necessary. . . . The mind
is not represented as conceiving two propositions subversive of each
other as equally possible; but only, as unable to understand as
possible, either of the extremes; one of which, however, on the ground
of their mutual repugnance, it is compelled to recognise as true.‡

In the “Dissertations on Reid” he enunciates, in still more general
terms, Edition: current; Page: [80] as “the Law of the Conditioned: That
all positive thought lies between two extremes, neither of which we can
conceive as possible, and yet as mutual contradictories, the one or the
other we must recognise as necessary.” And it is (he says) “from this
impotence of intellect” that “we are unable to think aught as absolute.
Even absolute relativity is unthinkable.”*

The doctrine is more fully expanded in the Lectures on Logic, from which
I shall quote at greater length.

All that we can positively think . . . lies between two opposite poles
of thought, which, as exclusive of each other, cannot, on the principles
of Identity and Contradiction, both be true, but of which, on the
principle of Excluded Middle, one or the other must. Let us take, for
example, any of the general objects of our knowledge. Let us take body,
or rather, since body as extended is included under extension, let us
take extension itself, or space. Now extension alone will exhibit to us
two pairs of contradictory inconceivables,† that is, in all, four
incomprehensibles, but of which, though all are equally unthinkable . .
. we are compelled, by the law of Excluded Middle, to admit some two as
true and necessary.

Extension may be viewed either as a whole or as a part; and in each
aspect it affords us two incogitable contradictions. 1st. Taking it as a
whole: space, it is evident, must either be limited, that is, have an
end, and circumference; or unlimited, that is, have no end, no
circumference. These are contradictory suppositions; both, therefore,
cannot, but one must, be true. Now let us try positively to comprehend,
positively to conceive,‡ the possibility of either of these two mutually
exclusive alternatives. Can we represent, or realize in thought,
extension as absolutely limited? in other words, can we mentally hedge
round the whole of space, conceive§ it absolutely bounded, that is, so
that beyond its boundary there is no outlying, no surrounding space?
This is impossible. Whatever compass of space we may enclose by any
limitation of thought, we shall find that we have no difficulty in
transcending these limits. Nay, we shall find that we cannot but
transcend them; for we are unable to think any extent of space except as
within a still ulterior space, of which, let us think till the powers of
thinking fail, we can never reach the circumference. It is thus
impossible for us to think space as a totality, that is, as absolutely
bounded, but all-containing. We may, therefore, lay down this first
extreme as inconceivable.¶ We cannot think space as limited.

Let us now consider its contradictory: can we comprehend the possibility
of infinite or unlimited space? To suppose this is a direct
contradiction in terms; it is to comprehend the incomprehensible. We
think, we conceive,∥ we comprehend a thing, only as we think it as
within or under something else; but to do this of the infinite is to
think the infinite as finite, which is contradictory and absurd.

Edition: current; Page: [81]
Now here it may be asked, how have we then the word infinite? How have
we the notion which this word expresses? The answer to this question is
contained in the distinction of positive and negative thought. We have a
positive concept of a thing when we think it by the qualities of which
it is the complement. But as the attribution of qualities is an
affirmation, as affirmation and negation are relatives, and as relatives
are known only in and through each other, we cannot, therefore, have a
consciousness of the affirmation of any quality, without having at the
same time the correlative consciousness of its negation. Now, the one
consciousness is a positive, the other consciousness is a negative
notion. But, in point of fact, a negative notion is only the negation of
a notion; we think only by the attribution of certain qualities, and the
negation of these qualities and of this attribution is simply, in so
far, a denial of our thinking at all. As affirmation always suggests
negation, every positive notion must likewise suggest a negative notion:
and as language is the reflex of thought, the positive and negative
notions are expressed by positive and negative names. Thus it is with
the infinite. The finite is the only object of real or positive thought;
it is that alone which we think by the attribution of determinate
characters; the infinite, on the contrary, is conceived only by the
thinking away of every character by which the finite was conceived: in
other words, we conceive it only as inconceivable.* . . .

It is manifest that we can no more realize the thought or conception of
infinite, unbounded, or unlimited space, than we can realize the
conception of a finite or absolutely bounded space.† But these two
inconceivables are reciprocal contradictories: we are unable to
comprehend‡ the possibility of either, while, however, on the principle
of Excluded Middle, one or other must be admitted. . . .

It is needless to show that the same result is given by the experiment
made on extension considered as a part, as divisible. Here if we attempt
to divide extension in thought, we shall neither, on the one hand,
succeed in conceiving the possibility§ of an absolute minimum of space,
that is, a minimum ex hypothesi extended, but which cannot be conceived
as divisible into parts,¶ nor, on the other, of carrying on this
division to infinity. But as these are contradictory opposites,∥

one or the other of them must be true.

In other passages our author applies the same order of considerations to
Time, saying that we can neither conceive an absolute commencement, nor
an infinite regress; an absolute termination, nor a duration infinitely
prolonged; though either the one or the other must be true. And again,
of the Will: we cannot, he says, conceive the Will to be Free, because
this would be to conceive an event uncaused, or, in other words, an
absolute commencement: neither can we conceive the Will not to be Free,
because this would be supposing an infinite regress from effect to
cause. The will, however, must be either free or not free; and in this
case, he thinks we have Edition: current; Page: [82] independent grounds
for deciding one way, namely, that it is free, because if it were not,
we could not be accountable for our actions, which our consciousness
assures us that we are.[*]

This, then, is the Philosophy of the Conditioned: into the value of
which it now remains to enquire.

In the case of each of the Antinomies which the author presents, he
undertakes to establish two things: that neither of the rival hypotheses
can be conceived by us as possible, and that we are nevertheless certain
that one or the other of them is true.o

To begin with his first position, that we can neither conceive an end to
space, nor space without end.

That we are unable to conceive an end to space I fully acknowledge. To
account for this there needs no inherent incapacity. We are disabled
from forming this conception, by known psychological laws. We have never
perceived any object, or any portion of space, which had not other space
beyond it. And we have been perceiving objects and portions of space
from the moment of birth. How then could the idea of an object, or of a
portion of space, escape becoming inseparably associated with the idea
of additional space beyond? Every instant of our lives helps to rivet
this association, and we never have had a single experience tending to
disjoin it. The association, under the present constitution of our
existence, is indissoluble. But we have no ground for believing that it
is so from the original structure of our minds. We can suppose that in
some other state of existence we might be transported to the end of
space, when, being apprised of what had happened by some impression of a
kind utterly unknown to us now, we should at the same instant become
capable of conceiving the fact, and learn that it was true. After some
experience of the new impression, the fact of an end to space would seem
as natural to us as the revelations of sight to a person born blind,
after he has been long enough couched to have become familiar with them.
But as this cannot happen in our present state of existence, the
experience which would render the association dissoluble is never
obtained; and an end to space remains inconceivable.

One half, then, of our author’s first proposition, must be conceded. But
the other half? Is it true that we are incapable of conceiving infinite
space? I have already shown strong reasons for dissenting from this
assertion: and those which our author, in this and other places, assigns
in its support, seem to me quite untenable.

He says, “we think, we conceive, we comprehend, a thing, only as we
think it as within or under something else. But to do this of the
infinite is to Edition: current; Page: [83] think the infinite as
finite, which is contradictory and absurd.” When we come to Sir W.
Hamilton’s account of the Laws of Thought, we shall have some remarks to
make on the phrase “to think one thing within or under another;” a
favourite expression with the Transcendental school, one of whose
characteristicsp is, that they are always using the prepositions in a
metaphorical sense. But granting that to think a thing is to think it
under something else, we must understand this statement as it is
qinvariablyq interpreted by those who employ it. According to them, we
think a thing when we make any affirmation respecting it, and we think
it under the notion which we affirm of it. Whenever we judge, we think
the subject under the predicate. Consequently when we say “God is good,”
we think God under the notion “good.” Is this, in our author’s opinion,
to think the infinite as finite, and hence “contradictory and absurd?”

If this doctrine hold, it follows that we cannot predicate anything of a
subject which we regard as being in any of its attributes, infinite. We
are unable, without falling into a contradiction, to assert anything not
only of God, but of Time, and of Space. Considered as a reductio ad
absurdum, this is sufficient. But we may go deeper into the matter, and
deny the statement that to think anything “under” the notion expressed
by a general term is to think it as finite. None of our general
predicates are, in the proper sense of the term, finite; they are all,
at least potentially, infinite. “Good” is not a name for the things or
persons possessing that attribute which exist now, or at any other given
moment, and which are only a finite aggregate. It is a name for all
those which ever did, or ever will, or even in hypothesis or fiction
can, possess the attribute. This is not a limited number. It is the very
nature and constituent character of a general notion that its extension
(as Sir W. Hamilton would say) is rwithout limitr.

But he might perhaps say, that though its extension, consisting of the
possible individuals included in it, smays be infinite, its
comprehension, the set of attributes contained in it (or as I prefer to
say, connoted by its name) is a limited quantity. Undoubtedly it is. But
see what follows. If, because the comprehension of a general notion is
finite, anything infinite cannot without contradiction be thought under
it, the consequence is, that a being possessing in an infinite degree a
given attribute, cannot be thought under that very attribute. Infinite
goodness cannot be thought as goodness, because that would be to think
it as finite. Surely there must be some great confusion of ideas in the
premises, when this comes out as the conclusion.

Our author goes on to repeat the argument used in his reply to Cousin,
Edition: current; Page: [84] that Infinite Space is inconceivable,
because all the conception we are able to form of it is negative, and a
negative conception is the same as no conception. “The infinite is
conceived only by the thinking away of every character by which the
finite was conceived.” To this assertion I oppose my former reply.
Instead of thinking away every character of the finite, we think away
only the idea of an end, or a boundary. Sir W. Hamilton’s proposition is
true of “The Infinite,” the meaningless abstraction; but it is not true
of Infinite Space. In trying to form a conception of that, we do not
think away its positive characters. We leave to it the character of
Space; all that belongs to it as space; its three dimensions, with all
their geometrical properties. We leave to it also a character which
belongs to it as Infinite, that of being greater than any tfinitet
space. If an object which has these well-marked positive attributes is
unthinkable, because it has a negative attribute as well, the number of
thinkable objects must be remarkably small. Nearly all our positive
conceptions which are at all complex, include negative attributes. I do
not mean merely the negatives which are implied in affirmatives, as in
saying that snow is white we imply that it is not black; but independent
negative attributes superadded to these, and which are so real that they
are often the essential characters, or differentiæ, of classes. Our
conception of dumb, is of something which cannot speak; of the brutes,
as of creatures which have not reason; of the mineral kingdom, as the
part of Nature which has not organization and life; of immortal, as that
which never dies. Are all these examples of the Inconceivable? So false
is it that to think a thing under a negation is to think it as
unthinkable.

In other passages, Sir W. Hamilton argues that we cannot conceive
infinite space, because we should require infinite time to do it in. It
would of course require infinite time to carry our thoughts in
succession over every part of infinite space. But on how many of our
finite conceptions do we think it necessary to perform such an
operation? Let us try the doctrine upon a complex whole, short of
infinite; such as the number 695, 788. Sir W. Hamilton would not, I
suppose, have maintained that this number is inconceivable. How long did
he think it would take to go over every separate unit of this whole, so
as to obtain a perfect knowledge of that exact sum, as different from
all other sums, either greater or less? Would he have said that we could
have no conception of the sum until this process had been gone through?
We could not, indeed, have an adequate conception. Accordingly we never
have an adequate conception of any real thing. But we have a real
conception of an object if we conceive it by any of its attributes that
are sufficient to distinguish it from all other things. We have a
conception of any large number, when we have conceived it by some one of
its modes of composition, such as that indicated by the position of its
digits. We seldom Edition: current; Page: [85] get nearer than this to
an adequate conception of any large number. But for all intellectual
purposes, this limited conception is sufficient: for it not only enables
us to avoid confounding the number, in our calculations, with any other
numerical whole—even with those so nearly equal to it that no difference
between them would be perceptible by sight or touch, unless the units
were drawn up in a manner expressly adapted for displaying it—but we can
also, by means of this attribute of the number, ascertain and add to our
conception as many more of its properties as we please. If, then, we can
obtain a real conception of a finite whole without going through all its
component parts, why deny us a real conception of an infinite whole
because to go through them all is impossible? Not to mention that even
in the case of the finite number, though the units composing it are
limited, yet, Number being infinite, the possible modes of deriving any
given number from other numbers are numerically infinite; and as all
these are necessary parts of an adequate conception of any number, to
render our conception even of this finite whole perfectly adequate would
also require an infinite time.*

But though our conception of infinite space can never be adequate, since
we can never exhaust its parts, the conception, as far as it goes, is a
real conception. Wex realize in imagination the various attributes
composing it. We realize it as space. We realize it as greater than any
given space. We even realize it as endless, in an intelligible manner,
that is, we clearly represent to ourselves that however much of space
has been already explored, and however much more of it we may imagine
ourselves to traverse, we are no nearer to the end of it than we were at
firsty; sincey, however often we repeat the process of imagining
distance extending in any direction from us, that process is always
susceptible of being carried further. This conception is both real and
perfectly definite. zA merely negative notion may correspond to any
number of the most heterogeneous positive things, but this notion
corresponds to one thing only.z We possess Edition: current; Page: [86]
it as completely as we possess any of our clearest conceptions, and can
avail ourselves of it as well for ulterior mental operations. As regards
the Extent of Space, therefore, Sir W. Hamilton ahas nota made out his
point: one of the two contradictory hypotheses is not inconceivable.

The same thing may be said, equally decidedly, respecting the
Divisibility of Space. According to our author, a minimum of
divisibility, and a divisibility without limit, are both inconceivable.
I venture to think, on the contrary, that both are conceivable.
Divisibility, of course, does not here mean physical separability of
parts, but their mere existence; and the question is, can we conceive a
portion of extension so small as not to be composed of parts, and can
we, on the other hand, conceive parts consisting of smaller parts, and
these of still smaller, without end? As to the latter, smallness without
limit is as positive a conception as greatness without limit. We have
the idea of a portion of space, and to this we add that of being smaller
than any given portion. The other side of the alternative is still more
evidently conceivable. It is not denied that there is a portion of
extension which to the naked eye appears an indivisible point; it has
been called by philosophers the minimum visibile. This minimum we can
indefinitely magnify by means of optical instruments, making visible the
still smaller parts which compose it. In each successive experiment
there is still a minimum visibile, anything less than which, cannot be
discerned with that instrument, but can with one of a higher power.
Suppose, now, that as we increase the magnifying bpowersb of our
instruments, and before we have reached the limit of possible increase,
we arrive at a stage at which that which seemed the smallest visible
space under a given microscope, does not appear larger under one which,
by its mechanical construction, is adapted to magnify more—but still
remains apparently indivisible. I say, that if this happened, we should
believe in a minimum of extension; cand as we should be unable to
conceive, that is, to represent to ourselves in an image, anything
smaller, any further divisibility would be as inconceivable to us as it
would be unbelievablec.

There would be no difficulty in applying a similar line of argument to
the case of Time, or to any other of the Antinomies, (there is a long
list of them,* to some of which I shall have to return for another
purpose,) but it would needlessly encumber our pages. In no one case
mentioned by Sir W. Hamilton do I believe that he could substantiate his
assertion, that “the Conditioned,” by which he means every object of
human knowledge, lies Edition: current; Page: [87] between two
“inconditionate” hypotheses, both of them inconceivable. Let me add,
that even granting the inconceivability of the two opposite hypotheses,
I cannot see that any distinct meaning is conveyed by the statement that
the Conditioned is “the mean” between them, or that “all positive
thought,” “all that we can positively think,” “lies between” these two
“extremes,” these “two opposite poles of thought.” The extremes are,
Space in the aggregate considered as having a limit, Space in the
aggregate considered as having no limit. Neither of these, says Sir W.
Hamilton, can we think. But what we can positively think (according to
him) is not Space in the aggregate at all; it is some limited Space, and
this we think as square, as circular, as triangular, or as elliptical.
Are triangular and elliptical a mean between infinite and finite? They
are, by the very meaning of the words, modes of the finite. So that it
would be more like the truth to say that we think the pretended mean
under one of the extremes; and if infinite and finite are “two opposite
poles of thought,” then in this polar opposition, unlike voltaic
polarity, all the matter is accumulated at one pole. But this
counter-statement would be no more tenable than Sir W. Hamilton’s; for
in reality, the thought which he affirms to be a medium between two
extreme statements, has no correlation with those statements at all. It
does not relate to the same object. The two counter-hypotheses are
suppositions respecting Space at large, Space as a collective whole. The
“conditioned” thinking, said to be the mean between them, relates to
parts of Space, and classes of such parts: circles and triangles, or
planetary and stellar distances. The alternative of opposite
inconceivabilities never presents itself in regard to them; they are all
finite, and are conceived and known as such. What the notion of extremes
and a mean can signify, when applied to propositions in which different
predicates are affirmed of different subjects, passes my comprehension:
but it served to give greater apparent profundity to the “Fundamental
Doctrine,” in the eyes not of disciples (for Sir W. Hamilton was wholly
incapable of quackery) but of the teacher himself.

dIf these arguments are valid, the “Law of the Conditioned” rests on no
rational foundation. The proposition that the Conditioned lies between
two hypotheses concerning the Unconditioned, neither of which hypotheses
Edition: current; Page: [88] we can conceive as possible,d must be
placed in that numerous class of metaphysical doctrines, which have a
magnificent sound, but are empty of the smallest substance.*

Edition: current; Page: [89]


CHAPTER VII: The Philosophy of the Conditioned, as Applied by Mr. Mansel to the Limits of Religious Thought

mr. mansel may be affirmed, by a fair application of the term, to be, in
metaphysics, a pupil of Sir W. Hamilton. I do not mean that he agrees
with him in all his opinions; for he avowedly dissents from the peculiar
Hamiltonian theory of Cause: still less that he has learnt nothing from
any other teacher, or from his own independent speculations. On the
contrary, he has shown considerable power of original thought, both of a
good and of what seems to me anot a gooda quality. But he is the
admiring editor of Sir W. Hamilton’s Lectures; he invariably speaks of
him with a deference which he pays to no other philosopher; he expressly
accepts, in language identical with Sir W. Hamilton’s own, the doctrines
regarded as specially characteristic of the Hamiltonian philosophy, and
may with reason be considered as a representative of the same general
mode of thought. Mr. Mansel has bestowed especial cultivation upon a
province but slightly touched by his master—the application of the
Philosophy of the Conditioned to the theological department of thought;
the deduction of such of its corollaries and consequences as directly
concern religion.

The premises from which Mr. Mansel reasons are those of Sir W. Hamilton.
He maintains the necessary relativity of all our knowledge. He holds
that the Absolute and the Infinite, or, to use a more significant
expression, an Absolute and an Infinite Being, are inconceivable by us;
and that when we strive to conceive what is thus inaccessible to our
faculties, we fall into self-contradiction. That we are, nevertheless,
warranted in believing, and bound to believe, the real existence of an
absolute and infinite being, and that this being is God. God, therefore,
is inconceivable and unknowable by us, and cannot even be thought of
without self-contradiction; that is (for Mr. Mansel is careful thus to
qualify the assertion), thought of as Absolute, and as Infinite. Through
this inherent imposibility Edition: current; Page: [90] of our
conceiving or knowing God’s essential attributes, we are disqualified
from judging what is or is not consistent with them. If, then, a
religion is presented to us, containing any particular doctrine
respecting the Deity, our belief or rejection of the doctrine ought to
depend exclusively upon the evidences which can be produced for the
divine origin of the religion; and no argument grounded on the
incredibility of the doctrine, as involving an intellectual absurdity,
or on its moral badness as unworthy of a good or wise being, ought to
have any weight, since of these things we are incompetent to judge.
This, at least, is the drift of Mr. Mansel’s argument; but I am bound to
admit that he affirms the conclusion with a certain limitation; for he
acknowledges, that the moral character of the doctrines of a religion
ought to count for something among the reasons for accepting or
rejecting, as of divine origin, the religion as a whole. That it ought
also to count for something in the interpretation of the religion when
accepted, he neglects to say; but we must in fairness suppose that he
would admit it. These concessions, however, to the moral feelings of
mankind, are made at the expense of Mr. Mansel’s logic. If his theory is
correct, he has no right to make either of them.

There is nothing new in this line of argument as applied to theology.
That we cannot understand God; that his ways are not our ways; that we
cannot scrutinize or judge his counsels—propositions which, in a
reasonable sense of the terms, could not be denied by any Theist—have
often before been tendered as reasons why we may assert any absurdities
and any moral monstrosities concerning God, and miscall them Goodness
and Wisdom. The novelty is in presenting this conclusion as a corollary
from the most advanced doctrines of modern philosophy—from the true
theory of the powers and limitations of the human mind, on religious and
on all other subjects.

My opinion of this doctrine, in whatever way presented, is, that it is
simply the most morally pernicious doctrine now current; and that the
question it involves is, beyond all others which now engage speculative
minds, the decisive one between moral good and evil for the Christian
world. It is a momentous matter, therefore, to consider whether we are
obliged to adopt it. Without holding Mr. Mansel accountable for the
moral consequences of the doctrine, further than he himself accepts
them, I think it supremely important to examine whether the doctrine
itself is really the verdict of a sound metaphysic; and essential to a
true estimation of Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy to enquire, whether the
conclusion thus drawn from his principal doctrine, is justly affiliated
on it. I think it will appear that the conclusion not only does not
follow from a true theory of the human faculties, but is not even
correctly drawn from the premises from which Mr. Mansel infers it.

Edition: current; Page: [91]
We must have the premises distinctly before us as conceived by Mr.
Mansel, since we have hitherto seen them only as taught by Sir W.
Hamilton. Clearness and explicitness of statement being in the number of
Mr. Mansel’s merits, it is easier to perceive the flaws in his arguments
than in those of his master, because he often leaves us less in doubt
what he means by his words.

To have “such a knowledge of the Divine Nature” as would enable human
reason to judge of theology, would be, according to Mr. Mansel, “to
conceive the Deity as he is.” This would be to “conceive him as First
Cause, as Absolute, and as Infinite.”* The First Cause Mr. Mansel
defines in the usual manner. About the meaning of Infinite there is no
difficulty. But when we come to the Absolute we are on more slippery
ground. Mr. Mansel, however, tells us his meaning plainly. By the
Absolute, he does not mean what Sir W. Hamilton bprofesses always to
mean by it, something which includes the idea of completed or finished.
He adopts the other meaning, which Sir W. Hamilton mentions, but
disclaims—b the opposite of Relative. “By the Absolute is meant that
which exists in and by itself, having no necessary relation to any other
Being.”[*]

This explanation by Mr. Mansel of Absolute in the sense in which it is
opposed to Relative, is more definite in its terms than that which Sir
W. Hamilton gives when attempting the same thing. For Sir W. Hamilton
recognises (as already remarked) this second meaning of Absolute, and
this is the account he gives of it: “Absolutum means what is freed or
loosed; in which sense the Absolute will be what is aloof from relation,
comparison, limitation, condition, dependence, &c., and thus is
tantamount to τὸ ἀπόλυτον of the lower Greeks.”† May it not be surmised
that the vagueness in which the master here leaves the conception, was
for the purpose of avoiding difficulties upon which the pupil, in his
desire of greater precision, has unwarily run? Mr. Mansel certainly
gains nothing by the more definite character of his language. The
cwords, “having no necessary relation to any other Being,”c admit of two
constructions. The words, in their natural sense, only mean, capable of
existing out of relation to anything else. The Edition: current; Page:
[92] argument requires that they should mean, incapable of existing in
relation with anything else. Mr. Mansel cannot intend the latter. He
cannot mean that the Absolute is incapable of entering into relation
with any other being; for he would not affirm this of God; on the
contrary, he is continually speaking of God’s relations to the world and
to us. Moreover, he accepts, from dDr.d Calderwood, an interpretation
inconsistent with this.* This, however, is the meaning necessary to
support his case. For what is his first argument? That God cannot be
known by us as Cause, as Absolute, and as Infinite, because these
attributes are, to our conception, incompatible with one another. And
why incompatible? Because “a Cause cannot, as such, be absolute; the
Absolute cannot, as such, be a cause. The cause, as such, exists only in
relation to its effect: the cause is a cause of the effect; the effect
is an effect of the cause. On the other hand, the conception of the
Absolute involves a possible existence out of all relation.”† But in
what manner is a possible existence out of all relation, incompatible
with the notion of a cause? Have not causes a possible existence apart
from their effects? Would the sun (for example) not exist if there were
no earth or planets for it to illuminate? Mr. Mansel seems to think that
what is capable of existing out of relation, cannot possibly be
conceived or known in relation. But this is not so. Anything which is
capable of existing in relation, is capable of being conceived or known
in relation. If the Absolute Being cannot be conceived as Cause, it must
be that he cannot exist as Cause; he must be incapable of causing. If he
can be in any relation whatever to any finite thing, he is conceivable
and knowable in that relation, if no otherwise. Freed from this
confusion of ideas, Mr. Mansel’s argument resolves itself into this—The
same Being cannot be thought by us both as Cause and as Absolute,
because a Cause as such is not Absolute, and Absolute as such is not a
Cause; which is exactly as if he had said that Newton cannot be thought
by us both as an Englishman and as a mathematician, because an
Englishman, as such, is not a mathematician, nor a mathematician, as
such, an Englishman.‡

Edition: current; Page: [93]
Again, Mr. Mansel argues, that, “supposing the Absolute to become a
cause,” since ex vi termini it is not necessitated to do so, it must be
a voluntary agent, and therefore conscious; for “volition is only
possible in a conscious being.”* But consciousness, again, is only
conceivable as a relation; and any relation conflicts with the notion of
the Absolute, since relatives are mutually dependent on one another.
Here it comes out distinctly as a premise in the reasoning, that to be
in a relation at all, even if only a relation to itself, the relation of
being “conscious of itself,” is inconsistent with being the Absolute.†

Edition: current; Page: [94]
Mr. Mansel, therefore, must alter his definition of the Absolute if he
would maintain his argument. He must either fall back on the happy
ambiguity of Sir W. Hamilton’s definition, “what is aloof from
relation,” which does not decide whether the meaning is merely that it
can exist out of relation, or that it is incapable of existing in it; or
he must take courage, and affirm that an Absolute Being is incapable of
all relation. But as he will certainly refuse to predicate this of God,
the consequence follows, that God is not an Absolute Being.

The whole of Mr. Mansel’s argument for the inconceivability of the
Infinite and of the Absolute is one long ignoratio elenchi. It has been
pointed out in a former chapter that the words Absolute and Infinite
have no real meaning, unless we understand by them that which is
absolute or infinite in some given attribute; as space is called
infinite, meaning that it is infinite in extension; and as God is termed
infinite in the sense of possessing infinite power, and absolute in the
sense of absolute goodness, or knowledge.[*] It has also been shown that
Sir W. Hamilton’s arguments for the unknowableness of the Unconditioned,
do not prove that we cannot know an object which is absolute or infinite
in some specific attribute, but only that we cannot know an abstraction
called “The Absolute” or “The Infinite,” which is supposed to have all
attributes at once. The same remark is applicable to Mr. Mansel,* with
only this difference, that he, with the laudable ambition I have already
noticed of stating everything explicitly, Edition: current; Page: [95]
draws this important distinction himself, and says, of his own motion,
that the Absolute he means is the abstraction. He says, that the
Absolute gand Infiniteg can be “nothing less than the sum of all
reality,” the complex of all positive predicates, even those which are
exclusive of one another: and expressly identifies it with Hegel’s
Absolute Being, which contains in itself “all that is actual, even evil
included.”* “That which is conceived as absolute and infinite,” says Mr.
Mansel, “must be conceived as containing within itself the sum not only
of all actual, but of all possible modes of being.”† One may well agree
with Mr. Mansel that this farrago of contradictory attributes cannot be
conceived: but what shall we say of his equally positive averment that
it must be believed? If this be what the Absolute is, what does he mean
by saying that we must believe God to be the Absolute?

The remainder of Mr. Mansel’s argumentation is suitable to this
commencement. The Absolute, as conceived, that is, as he defines it,
cannot be “a whole composed of parts,” or “a substance consisting of
attributes,” or

a conscious subject in antithesis to an object. For if there is in the
absolute any principle of unity, distinct from the mere accumulation of
parts or attributes, this principle alone is the true absolute. If, on
the other hand, there is no such principle, then there is no absolute at
all, but only a plurality of relatives. The almost unanimous voice of
philosophy, in pronouncing that the absolute is both one and simple,
must be accepted as the voice of reason also, so far as reason has any
voice in the matter. But this absolute unity, as indifferent and
containing no attributes, Edition: current; Page: [96] can neither be
distinguished from the multiplicity of finite beings by any
characteristic feature, nor be identified with them in their
multiplicity.*

It will be noticed that the Absolute, which was just before defined as
having all attributes, is here declared to have none: but this, Mr.
Mansel would say, is merely one of the contradictions inherent in the
attempt to conceive what is inconceivable.

Thus we are landed in an inextricable dilemma. The Absolute cannot be
conceived as conscious, neither can it be conceived as unconscious: it
cannot be conceived as complex, neither can it be conceived as simple:
it cannot be conceived by difference, neither can it be conceived by the
absence of difference: it cannot be identified with the universe,
neither can it be distinguished from it.[*]

Is this chimerical abstraction the Absolute Being whom anybody need be
concerned about, either as knowable or as unknowable? Is the
inconceivableness of this impossible fiction any argument against the
possibility of conceiving God, who is neither supposed to have no
attributes nor to have all attributes, but to have good attributes? Is
it any hindrance to our being able to conceive a Being absolutely just,
for example, or absolutely wise? Yet it is of this that Mr. Mansel
undertook to prove the impossibility.

Again, of the Infinite: according to Mr. Mansel, being “that than which
a greater is inconceivable,” it “consequently can receive no additional
attribute or mode of existence which it had not from all eternity.” It
must therefore be the same complex of all possible predicates which the
Absolute is, and all of them infinite in degree. It “cannot be regarded
as consisting of a limited number of attributes, each unlimited in its
kind. It cannot be conceived, for example, after the analogy of a line,
infinite in length, but not in breadth; or of a surface, infinite in two
dimensions of space, but bounded in the third; or of an intelligent
being, possessing some one or more modes of consciousness in an infinite
degree, but devoid of others.”† This Infinite, which is infinite in all
attributes, and not solely in those which it would be thought decent to
predicate of God, cannot, as Mr. Mansel very truly says, be conceived.
For

the Infinite, if it is to be conceived at all, must be conceived as
potentially everything and actually nothing; for if there is anything
general which it cannot become, it is thereby limited; and if there is
anything in particular which it actually is, it is thereby excluded from
being any other thing. But again, it must also be conceived as actually
everything and potentially nothing; for an unrealized potentiality is
likewise a limitation. If the infinite can be that which it is not, it
is by that very possibility marked out as incomplete, and capable of a
higher perfection. If it is actually everything, it possesses no
characteristic feature by which it can be distinguished from anything
else, and discerned as an object of consciousness.‡

Edition: current; Page: [97]
Here certainly is an Infinite whose infinity does not seem to be of much
use to it. But can a writer be serious who bids us conjure up a
conception of something which possesses infinitely all conflicting
attributes, and because we cannot do this without contradiction, would
have us believe that there is a contradiction in the idea of infinite
goodness, or infinite wisdom? Instead of “the Infinite,” substitute “an
infinitely good Being,” and Mr. Mansel’s argument reads thus: If there
is anything which an infinitely good Being cannot become—if he cannot
become bad—that is a limitation, and the goodness cannot be infinite. If
there is anything which an infinitely good Being actually is (namely
good), he is excluded from being any other thing, as from being wise or
powerful. I hardly think that Sir W. Hamilton would patronize this
logic, learnt though it be in his school.*

It cannot be necessary to follow up Mr. Mansel’s metaphysical
dissertation any farther. It is all, as I have said, the same ignoratio
elenchi. I have been able to find only one short passage in which he
attempts to show that we are unable to represent in thought a particular
attribute carried to the infinite. For the sake of fairness, I cite it
in a note.† All the argument that I Edition: current; Page: [98] can
discover in it, I conceive that I have already answered, as stated much
better by Sir W. Hamilton.

Mr. Mansel thinks it necessary to declare that the contradictions are
not in “the nature of the Absolute” or Infinite “in itself, but only” in
“our own conception of that nature.”* He did not mean to say that the
Divine Nature is itself contradictory. But he says “We are compelled by
the constitution of our minds, to believe in the existence of an
Absolute and Infinite Being.”† Such being the case, I ask, is the Being,
whom we must believe to be infinite and absolute, infinite and absolute
in the meaning which those terms bear in Mr. Mansel’s hdefinitionh of
them? If not, he is bound to tell us in what other meaning. Believing
God to be infinite and absolute must be believing something, and it must
be possible to say what. If Mr. Mansel means that we must believe the
reality of an Infinite and Absolute Being in some other sense than that
in which he has proved such a Being to be inconceivable, his point is
not made out, since he undertook to prove the inconceivability of the
very Being in whose reality we are required to believe. But the truth is
that the Infinite and Absolute which he says we must believe in, are the
very Infinite and Absolute of his definitions. The Infinite is that
which is opposed to the Finite; the Absolute, that which is opposed to
the Relative. He has therefore either proved nothing, or vastly more
than he intended. For the contradictions which he asserts to be involved
in the notions, do not follow from an imperfect mode of apprehending the
Infinite and Absolute, but lie in the definitions of them; in the
meaning of the iphrasesi themselves. The contradictions are in the very
object which we are called upon to believe. If, therefore, Mr. Mansel
would escape from the conclusion that an Infinite and Absolute Being is
intrinsically impossible, it must be by affirming, with Hegel, that the
law of Contradiction does not apply to the Absolute; that, respecting
the Absolute, contradictory propositions may both be true.‡

Let us now pass from Mr. Mansel’s metaphysical argumentation on an
Edition: current; Page: [99] irrelevant issue, to jaj much more
important subjectk, thatk of his practical conclusion, namely, that we
cannot know the divine attributes in such a manner, as can entitle us to
reject any statement respecting the Deity on the ground of its being
inconsistent with his character. Let us examine whether Edition:
current; Page: [100] this assertion is a legitimate corollary from the
relativity of human knowledge, either as it really is, or as it is
understood to be by Sir W. Hamilton and by Mr. Mansel.

The fundamental property of our knowledge of God, Mr. Mansel says, is
that we do not and cannot know him as he is in himself: certain persons,
therefore, whom he calls Rationalists, he condemns as unphilosophical,
when they reject any statement as inconsistent with the character of
God.[*] This is a valid answer, as far as words go, to some of the later
Transcendentalists—to those who think that we have an intuition of the
Divine Nature; though even as to them it would not be difficult to show
that the answer is but skin-deep. But those “Rationalists” who hold,
with Mr. Mansel himself, the relativity of human knowledge, are not
touched by his reasoning. We cannot know God as he is in himself (they
reply); granted: and what then? Can we know man as he is in himself, or
matter as it is in itself? We do not claim any other knowledge of God
than such as we have of man or of matter. Because I do not know my
fellow-men, nor any of the powers of nature, as they are in themselves,
am I therefore not at liberty to disbelieve anything I hear respecting
them as being inconsistent with their character? I know something of Man
and Nature, not as they are in themselves, but as they are relatively to
us; and it is as relative to us, and not as he is in himself, that I
suppose myself to know anything of God. The attributes which I ascribe
to him, as goodness, knowledge, power, are all relative. They are
attributes (says the rationalist) which my experience enables me to
conceive, and which I consider as proved, not absolutely, by an
intuition of God, but phænomenally, by his action on the creation, as
known through my senses and my rational faculty. These relative
attributes, each of them in an infinite degree, are all I pretend to
predicate of God. When I reject a doctrine as inconsistent with God’s
nature, it is not as being inconsistent with what God is in himself, but
with what he is as manifested to us. If my knowledge of him is only
phænomenal, the assertions which I reject are phænomenal too. If those
assertions are inconsistent with my relative knowledge of him, it is no
answer to say that all my knowledge of him is relative. That is no more
a reason against disbelieving an alleged fact as unworthy of God, than
against disbelieving another alleged fact as unworthy of Turgot, or of
Washington, whom also I do not know as Noumena, but only as Phænomena.

There is but one way for Mr. Mansel out of this difficulty, and he
adopts it. He must maintain, not merely that an Absolute Being is
unknowable in himself, but that the Relative attributes of an Absolute
Being are unknowable likewise. He must say that we do not know what
Wisdom, Justice, Edition: current; Page: [101] Benevolence, Mercy, are,
as they exist in God. Accordingly he does say so. The following are his
direct utterances on the subject: as an implied doctrine, it pervades
his whole argument.

It is a fact which experience forces upon us, and which it is useless,
were it possible, to disguise, that the representation of God after the
model of the highest human morality which we are capable of conceiving,
is not sufficient to account for all the phenomena exhibited by the
course of his natural Providence. The infliction of physical suffering,
the permission of moral evil, the adversity of the good, the prosperity
of the wicked, the crimes of the guilty involving the misery of the
innocent, the tardy appearance and partial distribution of moral and
religious knowledge in the world—these are facts which no doubt are
reconcilable, we know not how, with the Infinite Goodness of God, but
which certainly are not to be explained on the supposition that its sole
and sufficient type is to be found in the finite goodness of man.*

In other words, it is necessary to suppose that the infinite goodness
ascribed to God is not the goodness which we know and love in our
fellow-creatures, distinguished only as infinite in degree, but is
different in kind, and another quality altogether. When we call the one
finite goodness and the other infinite goodness, we do not mean what the
words assert, but something else: we intentionally apply the same name
to things which we regard as different.

Accordingly Mr. Mansel combats, as a heresy of his opponents, the
opinion that infinite goodness differs only in degree from finite
goodness. The notion “that the attributes of God differ from those of
man in degree only, not in kind, and hence that certain mental and moral
qualities of which we are immediately conscious in ourselves, furnish at
the same time a true and adequate image of the infinite perfections of
God,” (the word adequate must have slipped in by inadvertence, since
otherwise it would be an inexcusable misrepresentation) he identifies
with “the vulgar Rationalism which regards the reason of man, in its
ordinary and normal operation, as the supreme criterion of religious
truth.”† And in characterizing the mode of arguing of this vulgar
Rationalism, he declares its principles to be, that “all the excellences
of which we are conscious in the creature, must necessarily exist in the
same manner, though in a higher degree, in the Creator. God is indeed
more wise, more just, more merciful, than man; but for that very reason,
his wisdom and justice and mercy must contain nothing that is
incompatible with the corresponding attributes in their human
character.”‡ It is against this doctrine that Mr. Mansel feels called on
to make an emphatic protest.

Edition: current; Page: [102]
Here, then, I take my stand on the acknowledged principle of logic and
of morality, that when we mean different things we have no right to call
them by the same name, and to apply to them the same predicates, moral
and intellectual. Language has no meaning for the words Just, Merciful,
Benevolent, save that in which we predicate them of our
fellow-creatures; and unless that is what we intend to express by them,
we have no business to employ the words. If in affirming them of God we
do not mean to affirm these very qualities, differing only as greater in
degree, we are neither philosophically nor morally entitled to affirm
them at all. If it be said that the qualities are the same, but that we
cannot conceive them as they are when raised to the infinite, I grant
that we cannot adequately conceive them in one of their elements, their
infinity. But we can conceive them in their other elements, which are
the very same in the infinite as in the finite development. Anything
carried to the infinite must have all the properties of the same thing
as finite, except those which depend upon the finiteness. Among the many
who have said that we cannot conceive infinite space, did any one ever
suppose that it is not space? that it does not possess all the
properties by which space is characterized? Infinite Space cannot be
cubical or spherical, because these are modes of being bounded: but does
any one imagine that in ranging through it we might arrive at some
region which was not extended; of which one part was not outside
another; where, though no Body intervened, motion was impossible; or
where the sum of two sides of a triangle was less than the third side?
The parallel assertion may be made respecting infinite goodness. What
belongs to it leither as Infinite or as Absolutel I do not pretend to
know; but I know that infinite goodness must be goodness, and that what
is not consistent with goodness, is not consistent with infinite
goodness. If in ascribing goodness to God I do not mean what I mean by
goodness; if I do not mean the goodness of which I have some knowledge,
but an incomprehensible attribute of an incomprehensible substance,
which for aught I know may be a totally different quality from that
which I love and venerate—and even must, if Mr. Mansel is to be
believed,[*] be in some important particulars opposed to this—what do I
mean by calling it goodness? and what reason have I for venerating it?
If I know nothing about what the attribute is, I cannot tell that it is
a proper object of veneration. To say that God’s goodness may be
different in kind from man’s goodness, what is it but saying, with a
slight change of phraseology, that God may possibly not be good? To
assert in words what we do not think in meaning, is as suitable a
definition as can be given of a moral falsehood. Besides, suppose that
certain unknown attributes are Edition: current; Page: [103] ascribed to
the Deity in a religion the external evidences of which are so
conclusive to my mind, as effectually to convince me that it comes from
God. Unless I believe God to possess the same moral attributes which I
find, in however inferior a degree, in a good man, what ground of
assurance have I of God’s veracity? All trust in a Revelation
presupposes a conviction that God’s attributes are the same, in all but
degree, with the best human attributes.

If, instead of the “glad tidings” that there exists a Being in whom all
the excellences which the highest human mind can conceive, exist in a
degree inconceivable to us, I am informed that the world is ruled by a
being whose attributes are infinite, but what they are we cannot learn,
not what are the principles of his government, except that “the highest
human morality which we are capable of conceiving”[*] does not sanction
them; convince me of it, and I will bear my fate as I may. But when I am
told that I must believe this, and at the same time call this being by
the names which express and affirm the highest human morality, I say in
plain terms that I will not. Whatever power such a being may have over
me, there is one thing which he shall not do: he shall not compel me to
worship him. I will call no being good, who is not what I mean when I
apply that epithet to my fellow-creatures;* and if such a being can
sentence me to hell for not so calling him, to hell I will go.[†]

Neither is this to set up my own limited intellect as a criterion of
divine or of any other wisdom. If a person is wiser and better than
myself, not in some unknown and unknowable meaning of the terms, but in
their known human acceptation, I am ready to believe that what this
person thinks may be true, and that what he does may be right, when, but
for the opinion I have of him, I should think otherwise. But this is
because I believe that he and I have at bottom the same standard of
truth and rule of right, and that he probably understands better than I
the facts of the particular case. If I thought it not improbable that
his notion of right might be my notion of wrong, I should not defer to
his judgment. In like manner, one who sincerely believes in an
absolutely good ruler of the world, is not warranted in disbelieving any
act ascribed to him, merely because the very small part of its
circumstances which we can possibly know does not sufficiently justify
it. But if what I am told respecting him is of a kind which no facts
that Edition: current; Page: [104] can be supposed added to my knowledge
could make me perceive to be right; if his alleged ways of dealing with
the world are such as no imaginable hypothesis respecting things known
to him and unknown to me, could make consistent with the goodness and
wisdom which I mean when I use the terms, but are in direct
contradiction to their signification; then, if the law of contradiction
is a law of human thought, I cannot both believe these things, and
believe that God is a good and wise being. If I call any being wise or
good, not meaning the only qualities which the words import, I am
speaking insincerely; I am flattering him by epithets which I fancy that
he likes to hear, in the hope of winning him over to my own objects. For
it is worthy of remark that the doubt whether words applied to God have
their human signification, is only felt when the words relate to his
moral attributes; it is never heard of in regard to his power. We are
never told that God’s omnipotence must not be supposed to mean an
infinite degree of the power we know in man and nature, and that perhaps
it does not mean that he is able to kill us, or consign us to eternal
flames. The Divine Power is always interpreted in a completely human
signification, but the Divine Goodness and Justice must be understood to
be such only in an unintelligible sense. Is it unfair to surmise that
this is because those who speak in the name of God, have need of the
human conception of his power, since an idea which can overawe and
enforce obedience must address itself to real feelings; but are content
that his goodness should be conceived only as something inconceivable,
because they are so often required to teach doctrines respecting him
which conflict irreconcilably with all goodness that we can conceive?*

Edition: current; Page: [105]
I am anxious to say once more, that Mr. Mansel’s conclusions do not go
the whole length of his arguments, and that he disavows the doctrine
that God’s justice and goodness are wholly different from what human
beings understand by the terms. He would, and does, admit that the
qualities as conceived by us bear some likeness to the justice and
goodness which Edition: current; Page: [106] belong to God, since man
was made in God’s image. But such a semiconcession, which no Christian
could avoid making, since without it the whole Christian scheme would be
subverted, cannot save him; he is not relieved by it from any
difficulties, while it destroys the whole fabric of his argument. The
Divine goodness, which is said to be a different thing from human
goodness, but of which the human conception of goodness is some
imperfect reflexion or resemblance, does it agree with what men call
Edition: current; Page: [107] goodness in the essence of the quality—in
what constitutes it goodness? If it does, the “Rationalists” are right;
it is not illicit to reason from the one to the other. If not, the
divine attribute, whatever else it may be, is not goodness, and ought
not to be called by the name. Unless there be some human conception
which agrees with it, no human name can properly be applied to it; it is
simply the unknown attribute of a thing unknown; it has no existence in
relation to us, we can affirm nothing of it, and owe it no worship. Such
is the inevitable alternative.*

To conclude: Mr. Mansel has not made out any connexion between his
philosophical premises and his theological conclusion. The relativity of
human knowledge, the uncognoscibility of the Absolute, and the
contradictions Edition: current; Page: [108] which follow the attempt to
conceive a Being with all or without any attributes, are no obstacles to
our having the same kind of knowledge of God which we have of other
things, namely not as they exist absolutely, but relatively. The
proposition, that we cannot conceive the moral attributes of God in such
a manner as to be able to affirm of any doctrine or assertion that it is
inconsistent with them, has no foundation in the laws of the human mind:
while, if admitted, it would not prove that we should ascribe to God
attributes bearing the same name as human qualities, but not to be
understood in the same sense; it would prove that we ought not to
ascribe any moral attributes to God at all, inasmuch as no moral
attributes known or conceivable by us are true of him, and we are
condemned to absolute ignorance of him as a moral being.

Edition: current; Page: [109]


CHAPTER VIII: Of Consciousness, as Understood by Sir William Hamilton

in the discussion of the Relativity of human knowledge and the
Philosophy of the Conditioned, we have brought under consideration those
of Sir W. Hamilton’s metaphysical doctrines which have the greatest
share in giving to his philosophy the colour of individuality which it
possesses, and the most important of those which can be regarded as
belonging specially to himself. On a certain number of minor points, and
on one of primary importance, Causation, we shall again have to examine
opinions of his which are original. But on most of the subjects which
remain to be discussed, at least in the psychological department (as
distinguished from the logical), Sir W. Hamilton is merely an eminent
representative of one of the two great schools of metaphysical thought;
that which derives its popular appellation from Scotland, and of which
the founder and most celebrated champion was a philosopher whom, on the
whole, Sir W. Hamilton seems to prefer to any other, Dr. Reid. For the
future, therefore, we shall be concerned less with Sir W. Hamilton’s
philosophy as such, than with the general mode of thought to which it
belongs. We shall be engaged in criticizing doctrines common to him with
many other thinkers; but in doing so we shall take his writings as
text-books, and deal with the opinions chiefly in the form in which he
presented them. No other course would be so fair to the opinions
themselves: not only because they have not, within the last half
century, had so able a teacher, and never one so well acquainted with
the teachings of others, but also because he had the great advantage of
coming last. All theories, at their commencement, bear the burthen of
mistakes and inadvertences not inherent in the theories themselves, but
either personal to their authors, or arising from the imperfect state of
philosophical thought at the time of their origin. At a later period,
the errors which accidentally adhered to the theory are stript off, the
most obvious objections to it are perceived, and more or less
successfully met, and it is rendered, at least apparently, consistent
with such admitted truths as it at first seemed to contradict. One of
the unfairest, though commonest tricks of controversy, is that of
directing the attack exclusively against the Edition: current; Page:
[110] first crude form of a doctrine.* Whoever should judge Locke’s
philosophy as it is in Locke, Berkeley’s philosophy as it is in
Berkeley, or Reid’s as it is in Reid, would often condemn them on the
ground of incidental misapprehensions, which form no essential part of
their doctrine, and from which its later adherents and expositors are
free. Sir W. Hamilton’s is the latest form of the Reidian theory; and by
no other of its supporters has that theory been so well guarded, or
expressed in such discriminating terms, and with such studious
precision. Though there are a few points on which the earlier
philosopher seems to me nearer the truth, on the whole it is impossible
to pass from Reid to Sir W. Hamilton, or from Sir W. Hamilton back to
Reid, and not be struck with the immense progress which their common
philosophy has made in the interval between them.

All theories of the human mind profess to be interpretations of
Consciousness: the conclusions of all of them are supposed to rest on
that ultimate evidence, either immediately or remotely. What
Consciousness directly reveals, together with what can be legitimately
inferred from its revelations, composes, by universal admission, all
that we know of the mind, or indeed of any other thing. When we know
what any philosopher considers to be revealed in Consciousness, we have
the key to the entire character of his metaphysical system.

There are some peculiarities requiring notice, in Sir W. Hamilton’s mode
of conceiving and defining Consciousness. The words of his definition do
not, of themselves, indicate those peculiarities. Consciousness, he
says, is “the recognition by the mind or ego of its own acts or
affections;” and in this, as he truly observes, “all philosophers are
agreed.”† But all philosophers have not, by any means, meant the same
thing by it. Most of them (including Reid and Stewart) have meant, as
the words naturally mean, Self-consciousness. They have held, that we
can be conscious only of some state of our own mind. The mind’s “own
acts or affections” are in the mind itself, and not external to it:
accordingly we have, in their opinion, the direct evidence of
consciousness, only for the internal world. An external world is but an
inference, which, according to most philosophers, is justified, or even,
by our mental constitution, compelled: according to others, not
justified.

Nothing, however, can be farther from Sir W. Hamilton’s mind than he
declares this opinion to be. Though consciousness, according to him, is
a recognition of the mind’s own acts and affections, we are nevertheless
conscious of things outside the mind. Some of the mind’s acts are
perceptions of outward objects; and we are, of course, conscious of
those acts: Edition: current; Page: [111] now, to be conscious of a
perception, necessarily implies being conscious of the thing perceived.

It is palpably impossible that we can be conscious of an act, without
being conscious of the object to which that act is relative. This,
however, is what Dr. Reid and Mr. Stewart maintain. They maintain that I
can know that I know, without knowing what I know—or that I can know the
knowledge without knowing what the knowledge is about: for example, that
I am conscious of perceiving a book, without being conscious of the book
perceived,—that I am conscious of remembering its contents without being
conscious of these contents remembered—and so forth.*

An act of knowledge existing and being what it is only by relation to
its object, it is manifest that the act can be known only through the
object to which it is correlative; and Reid’s supposition that an
operation can be known in consciousness to the exclusion of its object,
is impossible. For example, I see the inkstand. How can I be conscious
that my present modification exists,—that it is a perception and not
another mental state,—that it is a perception of sight, to the exclusion
of every other sense,—and finally, that it is a perception of the
inkstand, and of the inkstand only,—unless my own consciousness
comprehend within its sphere the object, which at once determines the
existence of the act, qualifies its kind, and distinguishes its
individuality? Annihilate the inkstand, you annihilate the perception;
annihilate the consciousness of the object, you annihilate the
consciousness of the operation. It undoubtedly sounds strange to say, I
am conscious of the inkstand, instead of saying, I am conscious of the
perception of the inkstand. This I admit, but the admission can avail
nothing to Dr. Reid, for the apparent incongruity of the expression
arises only from the prevalence of that doctrine of perception in the
schools of philosophy, which it is his principal merit to have so
vigorously assailed.†

This is Sir W. Hamilton’s first difference, on the subject of
Consciousness, from his predecessor, Reid. In being conscious of those
of our mental operations which regard external objects, we are,
according to Sir W. Hamilton, conscious of the objects. Consciousness,
therefore, is not solely of the ego and its modifications, but also of
the non-ego.

This first difference is not the only one. Consciousness, according to
Sir W. Hamilton, may be of things external to self, but it can only be
of things actually present. In the first place, they must be present in
time. We are not conscious of the past. Thus far Sir W. Hamilton agrees
with Reid, who holds that memory is of the past, consciousness only of
the present. Reid, however, is of opinion that memory is an “immediate
knowledge of the past,”[*] exactly as consciousness is an immediate
knowledge of the present. Sir W. Hamilton contends that this opinion of
Reid is “not only false,” but “involves a contradiction in terms.”
Memory is an act, and an act “exists only in the now:”‡ it can therefore
be cognizant only of what now is. In the case of memory, what now is, is
not the thing remembered, but a Edition: current; Page: [112] present
representation of it in the mind, which representation is the sole
object of consciousness. We are aware of the past, not immediately, but
mediately, through the representation.

An act of memory, is merely a present state of mind, which we are
conscious of, not as absolute, but as relative to, and representing,
another state of mind, and accompanied with the belief that the state of
mind, as now represented, has actually been. . . . All that is
immediately known in the act of memory, is the present mental
modification; that is, the representation and concomitant belief. . . .
So far is memory from being an immediate knowledge of the past, that it
is at best only a mediate knowledge of the past; while in philosophical
propriety, it is not a knowledge of the past at all, but a knowledge of
the present, and a belief of the past. . . . We may doubt, we may deny
that the representation and belief are true. We may assert that they
represent what never was, and that all beyond their present mental
existence is a delusion:[*]

but it is impossible for us to doubt or deny that of which we have
immediate knowledge.

Again, that of which we are conscious must not only be present in time,
it must also, if external to our minds, be present in place. It must be
in direct contact with our bodily organs. We do not immediately perceive
a distant object.

To say, for example, that we perceive by sight the sun or moon, is a
false or an elliptical expression. We perceive nothing but certain
modifications of light, in immediate relation to our organ of vision;
and so far from Dr. Reid being philosophically correct when he says that
“when ten men look at the sun or moon, they all see the same individual
object,” the truth is that each of these persons sees a different
object, because each person sees a different complement of rays, in
relation to his individual organ:*

to which, in another place, he adds, that each individual sees two
different objects, with his right and with his left eye.

It is not by perception, but by a process of reasoning, that we connect
the objects of sense with existences beyond the sphere of immediate
knowledge. It is enough that perception affords us the knowledge of the
non-ego at the point of sense. To arrogate to it the power of
immediately informing us of external things which are only the causes of
the object we immediately perceive, is either positively erroneous, or a
confusion of language arising from an inadequate discrimination of the
phænomena.†

Edition: current; Page: [113]
There can, I think, be no doubt that these remarks on knowledge of the
past and perception of the distant, are correct, and a great improvement
upon Reid.

It appears, then, that the true definition of Consciousness in Sir W.
Hamilton’s use of the term, would be Immediate Knowledge. And he
expressly says, “Consciousness and immediate knowledge are thus terms
universally convertible: and if there be an immediate knowledge of
things external, there is consequently the Consciousness of an outer
world.”* Immediate knowledge, again, he treats as universally
convertible with Intuitive knowledge:† and the terms are really
equivalent. We know intuitively, what we know by its own evidence—by
direct apprehension of the fact, and not through the medium of a
previous knowledge of something from which we infer it. Regarded in this
light, our author’s difference with Reid as to our being conscious of
outward objects, would appear, on his own showing, to be chiefly a
dispute about words: for Reid also says that we have an immediate and
intuitive knowledge of things without, aand (if Sir W. Hamilton
understands him rightly) that it is immediate and intuitive in the same
meaning and mode, as that claimed for us by Sir W. Hamiltona. Sir W.
Hamilton stretches the word Consciousness so as to include this
knowledge, while Reid, with greater regard for the origin and etymology
of the word, restricts it to the cases in which the mind is “conscia
sibi.”[*] Sir W. Hamilton has a right to his own use of the term; but
care must be taken that it do not serve as a means of knowingly or
unknowingly begging any question. One of the most disputed questions in
psychology is exactly this—Have we, or not, an immediate intuition of
material objects? and this question must not be prejudged by affirming
that those objects are in our consciousness. On the contrary, it is only
allowable to say that they are in our consciousness, after it bhadb been
already proved that we cognise them intuitively.

It is a little startling, after so much has been said of the limitation
of Consciousness to immediate knowledge, to find Sir W. Hamilton, in the
“Dissertations on Reid,” maintaining that “consciousness comprehends
every cognitive act; in other words, whatever we are not conscious of,
that we do not know.”‡ If consciousness comprehends all our knowledge,
but yet is limited to immediate knowledge, it follows that all our
knowledge must be immediate, and that we have, therefore, no knowledge
of the past or of the absent. Sir W. Hamilton might have cleared up this
difficulty by Edition: current; Page: [114] saying, as he had already
done, that our mediate cognitions—those of the past and the
absent—though he never hesitates to call them knowledge, are in strict
propriety Belief. We could then have understood his meaning. But the
explanation he actually gives is quite different. It is, that “all our
mediate cognitions are contained in our immediate.”[*] This is a
manifest attempt to justify himself in calling them, not belief, but
knowledge, like our immediate cognitions. But what is the meaning of
“contained?” If it means that our mediate cognitions are part of our
immediate, then they are themselves immediate, and we have no mediate
cognitions. Sir W. Hamilton has told us, that in the case of a
remembered fact, what we immediately cognise is but a present mental
representation of it, “accompanied with the belief that the state of
mind, as now represented, has actually been.”[†] Having said this, he
also says that the past fact, which does not now exist, is
“contained”[‡] in the representation and in the belief which do exist.
But if it is contained in them, it must have a present existence too,
and is not a past fact. Perhaps, however, by the word “contained,” all
that is meant is, that it is implied in them; that it is a necessary or
legitimate inference from them. But if it is only this, it remains
absent in time; and what is absent in time, our author has said, is not
a possible object of consciousness. If, therefore, a past fact is an
object of knowledge, we can know what we are not conscious of;
consciousness does not comprehend all our cognitions. To state the same
thing in another manner; a remembered fact is either a part of our
consciousness, or it is not. If it is, Sir W. Hamilton is wrong when he
says that we are not conscious of the past. If not, he is wrong, either
in saying that we can know the past, or in saying that what we are not
conscious of, we do not know.

This inconsistency, which emerges only in the “Dissertations,” I shall
not further dwell upon: it is chiefly important as showing that the most
complicated and elaborate version of Sir W. Hamilton’s speculations is
not always the freest from objection. The doctrine of his Lectures is,
that a part of our knowledge—the knowledge of the past, the future, and
the distant—is mediate and representative, but that such mediate
knowledge is not Consciousness; consciousness and immediate knowledge
being coextensive.

From our author’s different deliverances as above quoted, it appears
that he gives two definitions of Consciousness. In the one, it is
synonymous with direct, immediate, or intuitive knowledge; and we are
conscious not only of ourselves but of outward objects, since, in our
author’s opinion, we know these intuitively. According to the other
definition, consciousness is Edition: current; Page: [115] the mind’s
recognition of its own acts and affections. It is not at once obvious
how these two definitions can be reconciled: for Sir W. Hamilton would
have been the last person to say that the outward object is identical
with the mental act or affection. He must have meant that consciousness
is the mind’s recognition of its own acts and affections together with
all that is therein implied, or as he would say, contained. But this
involves him in a new inconsistency: for how can he then refuse the name
of consciousness to our mediate knowledge—to our knowledge or belief
(for instance) of the past? The past reality is certainly cimpliedc in
the present recollection of which we are conscious: and our author has
said that all our mediate knowledge is contained in our immediate, das
he has elsewhere said thatd knowledge of the outward object is contained
in our knowledge of the perception. If, then, we are conscious of the
outward object, why not of the past sensation or impression?

From the definition of Consciousness as “the recognition by the mind or
Ego of its own acts or affections,”[*] our author might be supposed to
think (as has been actually thought by many philosophers) that
consciousness is not the fact itself of knowing or feeling, but a
subsequent operation by which we become aware of that fact. This however
is not his opinion. By “the mind’s recognition of its acts and
affections” he does not mean anything different from the acts and
affections themselves. He denies that we have one faculty by which we
know or feel, and another by which we know that we know, and by which we
know that we feel. These are not, according to him, different facts, but
the same fact seen under another point of view. And he takes this
occasion for making a remark, of wide application in philosophy, which
it would be of signal service to all students of metaphysics to keep
constantly in mind; that difference of names often does not signify
difference of things, but only difference in the particular easpecte
under which a thing is considered.[†] On the real identity between our
various mental states and our consciousness of them, he seems to be of
the opinion which was maintained before him by Brown, and which is
stated by Mr. James Mill, with his usual clearness and force, in the
following passage:

Having a sensation, and having a feeling, are not two things. The thing
is one, the names only are two. I am pricked by a pin. The sensation is
one; but I may call it sensation, or a feeling, or a pain, as I please.
Now, when, having the sensation, I say I feel the sensation, I only use
a tautological expression; the sensation is not one thing, the feeling
another; the sensation is the feeling. When instead of the word Edition:
current; Page: [116] feeling, I use the word conscious, I do exactly the
same thing—I merely use a tautological expression. To say I feel a
sensation, is merely to say that I feel a feeling; which is an
impropriety of speech. And to say I am conscious of a feeling, is merely
to say that I feel it. To have a feeling is to be conscious; and to be
conscious is to have a feeling. To be conscious of the prick of the pin,
is merely to have the sensation. And though I have these various modes
of naming my sensation, by saying, I feel the prick of a pin, I feel the
pain of a prick, I have the sensation of a prick, I have the feeling of
a prick, I am conscious of the feeling; the thing named in all these
various ways is one and the same.

The same explanation will easily be seen to apply to ideas. Though at
present I have not the sensation, called the prick of a pin, I have a
distinct idea of it. The having an idea, and the not having it, are
distinguished by the existence or nonexistence of a certain feeling. To
have an idea, and the feeling of that idea, are not two things; they are
one and the same thing. To feel an idea, and to be conscious of that
feeling, are not two things; the feeling and the consciousness are but
two names for the same thing. In the very word feeling, all that is
implied in the word Consciousness is involved.

Those philosophers, therefore, who have spoken of Consciousness as a
feeling distinct from all other feelings, committed a mistake, and one,
the evil consequences of which have been most important; for, by
combining a chimerical ingredient with the elements of thought, they
involved their enquiries in confusion and mystery from the very
commencement.

It is easy to see what is the nature of the terms Conscious and
Consciousness, and what is the marking function which they are destined
to perform. It was of great importance, for the purpose of naming, that
we should not only have names to distinguish the different classes of
our feelings, but also a name applicable equally to all those classes.
This purpose is answered by the concrete term, Conscious, and the
abstract of it, Consciousness. Thus, if we are in any way sentient; that
is, have any of the feelings whatsoever of a living creature; the word
Conscious is applicable to the feeler, and Consciousness to the feeling:
that is to say, the words are Generical marks, under which all the names
of the subordinate classes of the feelings of a sentient creature are
included. When I smell a rose, I am conscious; when I have the idea of a
fire, I am conscious; when I remember, I am conscious; when I reason,
and when I believe, I am conscious; but believing and being conscious of
belief, are not two things, they are the same thing: though this same
thing I can name at one time without the aid of the generical mark,
while at another time it suits me to employ the generical mark.*

Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine is exactly this, except that he expresses the
latter part of it in less perspicuous phraseology, saying that
consciousness is “the fundamental form, the generic condition” of all
the modes of our mental activity;† “in fact, the general condition of
their existence.”‡ But, while holding the same theory with Brown andf
Mill, he completes it by the addition that though our mental states and
our consciousness of them are Edition: current; Page: [117] only the
same fact, they are the same fact regarded in different relations.
Considered in themselves, as acts and feelings, or considered in
relation to the external object with which they are concerned, we do not
call them consciousness. It is when these mental modifications are
referred to a subject or ego, and looked at in relation to Self, that
consciousness is the term used: consciousness being “the
self-affirmation that certain modifications are known by me, and that
these modifications are mine.” In this self-affirmation, however, no
additional fact is introduced. It “is not to be viewed as anything
different from” the “modifications themselves.”* There is but one mental
phænomenon, the act of feeling: but as this implies an acting or feeling
Self, we give it a name which connotes its relation to the Self, and
that name is Consciousness. Thus, “consciousness and knowledge”—and I
think he would have added feeling (the mind’s “affections”) as well as
knowledge—

are not distinguished by different words as different things, but only
as the same thing considered in different aspects. The verbal
distinction is taken for the sake of brevity and precision, and its
convenience warrants its establishment. . . . Though each term of a
relation necessarily supposes the other, nevertheless one of these terms
may be to us the more interesting, and we may consider that term as the
principal, and view the other only as subordinate and correlative. Now,
this is the case in the present instance. In an act of knowledge, my
attention may be principally attracted either to the object known, or to
myself, as the subject knowing; and in the latter case, although no new
element be added to the act, the condition involved in it,—I know that I
know, becomes the primary and permanent matter of consideration. And
when, as in the philosophy of mind, the act of knowledge comes to be
specially considered in relation to the knowing subject, it is, at last,
in the progress of the science, found convenient, if not absolutely
necessary, to possess a scientific word in which this point of view
should be permanently and distinctively embodied.†

If any doubt could have existed, after this passage, of Sir W.
Hamilton’s opinion on the question, it would have been removed by one of
the fragments recently published by his editors, in continuation of the
“Dissertations on Reid.” I extract the words:

Consciousness is not to be regarded as aught different from the mental
modes or movements themselves. It is not to be viewed as an illuminated
place within which objects coming are presented to, and passing beyond
are withdrawn from, observation; nor is it to be considered even as an
observer—the mental modes as phænomena observed. Consciousness is just
the movements themselves, rising above a certain degree of intensity. .
. . It is only a comprehensive word for those mental movements which
rise at once above a certain degree of intension.‡

Edition: current; Page: [118]
We now pass to a question which is of no little importance to the
character of Sir W. Hamilton’s system of philosophy. We found, not long
ago, that he makes between Knowledge and Belief a broad distinction, on
which he lays great stress, and which plays a conspicuous part both in
his own speculations and in those of some of his followers. Let us now
look at this distinction in the light thrown upon it by those doctrines
of Sir W. Hamilton which are the subject of the present chapter.

Though Sir W. Hamilton allows a mediate, or representative, knowledge of
the past and the absent, he has told us that “in philosophical
propriety” it ought not to be called knowledge, but belief. We do not,
properly speaking, know a past event, but believe it, by reason of the
present recollection which we immediately know. We do not, properly
speaking, perceive or Edition: current; Page: [119] know the sun, but we
perceive and know an image in contact with our organs, and believe the
existence of the sun through “a process of reasoning,”[*] which connects
the image that we directly perceive, with something else as its cause.
Again, though we cannot know an Infinite or an Absolute Being, we may
and ought to believe in the reality of such a Being. But in all these
cases the belief itself, the conviction we feel of the existence of the
sun, and of the reality of the past event, and which according to Sir W.
Hamilton we ought to feel of the existence of ha Being who ish the
Infinite and the Absolute—this belief is a fact present in time and in
place—a phænomenon of our own mind; of this we are conscious; this we
immediately know. Such, it is impossible to doubt, is Sir W. Hamilton’s
opinion.

Let us now apply to this the general principle emphatically affirmed by
him, and forming the basis of his argument against Reid and Stewart on
the subject of Consciousness. “It is palpably impossible that we can be
conscious of an act, without being conscious of the object to which that
act is relative.”[†] “The knowledge of an operation necessarily involves
the knowledge of its object.” “It is impossible to make consciousness
conversant about the intellectual operations to the exclusion of their
objects,”[‡] and therefore, since we are conscious of our perceptions,
we must be conscious of the external objects perceived. Such is Sir W.
Hamilton’s theory. But perceptions are not the only mental operations we
are conscious of, which point to an external object. This is no less
true of beliefs. We are conscious of belief in a past event, in the
reality of a distant body, and (according to Sir W. Hamilton) in the
existence of the Infinite and the Absolute. Consequently, on Sir W.
Hamilton’s principle, we are conscious of the objects of those beliefs;
conscious of the past event, conscious of the distant body, conscious of
the Infinite and of the Absolute. To disclaim this conclusion would be
to bring down upon himself the language in which he criticized Reid and
Stewart; it would be to maintain “that I can know that I [believe]
without knowing what I [believe]—or that I can know the [belief] without
knowing what the [belief] is about: for example, that I am conscious of
[remembering a past event] without being conscious of [the past event
remembered]; that I am conscious of [believing in God], without being
conscious of the [God believed in].”[§] If it be true that “an act of
knowledge” exists, and is what it is, “only by relation to its object,”
this must be equally true of an act of belief: and it must be as
“manifest” of the one act as Edition: current; Page: [120] of the other,
“that it can be known only through the object to which it is
correlative.”[*] Therefore past events, distant objects, and the
Absolute, inasmuch as they are believed, are as much objects of
immediate knowledge as things finite and present: since they are
presupposed and implicitly contained in the mental fact of belief,
exactly as a present object is implicitly contained in the mental fact
of perception. Either, therefore, Sir W. Hamilton was wrong in his
doctrine that consciousness of our perceptions implies consciousness of
their external object, or if he was right in this, the distinction
between Belief and Knowledge collapses: all objects of Belief are
objects of Knowledge: Belief and Knowledge are the same thing: and he
was wrong in asserting that the Absolute ought to be believed, or wrong
in maintaining against Cousin that it is incapable of being known.

Another reasoner might escape from this dilemma by saying that the
knowledge of the object of belief, which is implied in knowledge of the
belief itself, is not knowledge of the object as existing, but knowledge
of it as believed—the mere knowledge what it is that we believe. And
this is true; but it could not be said by Sir W. Hamilton; for he
rejects the same reasonable explanation in the parallel case. He will
not allow it to be said that when we have what we call a perception, and
refer it to an external object, we are conscious not of the external
object as existing, but of ourselves as inferring an external existence.
He maintains that the actual outward existence of the object is a
deliverance of consciousness, because “it is impossible that we can be
conscious of an act without being conscious of the object to which that
act is relative.”[†] He cannot, then, reject as applied to the act of
Belief, a law which, when he has occasion for applying it to the acts of
Perception and Knowledge, he affirms to be common to all our mental
operations. If we can be conscious of an operation without being
conscious of its object, the reality of an external world is not indeed
subverted, but there is an end to Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of the mode
in which it is known, and to his particular mode of proving it.

The difficulty in which Sir W. Hamilton is thus involved seems to have
become, though very insufficiently, perceptible to himself. Towards the
end of his Lectures on Logic, after saying that “we may be equally
certain of what we believe as of what we know,” and that, “it has, not
without ground, been maintained by many philosophers, both in ancient
and modern times, that the certainty of all knowledge is, in its
ultimate analysis, resolved into a certainty of belief,”* he adds, “But,
on the other hand, the manifestation of this belief necessarily involves
knowledge; for we cannot believe without some consciousness or knowledge
of the belief, and consequently Edition: current; Page: [121] without
some consciousness or knowledge of the object of the belief.” The remark
which this tardy reflexion suggests to him is merely this: “The
consideration, however, of the relation of Belief and Knowledge does not
properly belong to Logic, except so far as it is necessary to explain
the nature of Truth and Error. It is altogether a metaphysical
discussion; and one of the most difficult problems of which Metaphysics
attempts the solution.”* Accordingly, he takes the extremely
unphilosophical liberty of leaving it unsolved. But when a thinker is
compelled by one part of his philosophy to contradict another part, he
cannot leave the conflicting assertions standing, and throw the
responsibility of his scrape on the arduousness of the subject. A
palpable self-contradiction is not one of the difficulties which can be
adjourned, as belonging to a higher department of science. Though it may
be a hard matter to find the truth, that is no reason for holding to
what is self-convicted of error. If Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of
consciousness is correct, it does not leave the difference between
Belief and Knowledge in a state of obscurity, but abolishes that
distinction entirely, and along with it a great part of his own
philosophy. If his premises are true, we not only cannot believe what we
do not know, but we cannot believe that of which we are not conscious;
the distinction between our immediate and our mediate or representative
cognitions, and the doctrine of things believable but not knowable, must
both succumb; or if these can be saved, it must be by abandoning the
proposition, which is at the root of so much of his philosophy, that
consciousness of an operation is consciousness of the object of the
operation.

But when Sir W. Hamilton began to perceive that if his theory is correct
nothing can be believed except in so far as it is known, he did not
therefore renounce the attempt to distinguish Belief from Knowledge. In
the very same Lecture, he says, “Knowledge and Belief differ not only in
degree but in kind. Knowledge is a certainty founded upon insight;
Belief is a certainty founded upon feeling. The one is perspicuous and
objective; the other is obscure and subjective. Each, however, supposes
the other: and an assurance is said to be a knowledge or a belief,
according as the one element or the other preponderates.”† If Sir W.
Hamilton had bestowed any sufficient consideration on the difficulty, he
would hardly have consented to pay himself with such mere words. If each
of his two certainties supposes the other, it follows that whenever we
have a certainty founded upon feeling, we have a parallel certainty
founded upon insight. We therefore have always insight when we are
certain; and we are never certain except to the extent to which we have
insight. It is not a case in which we can talk of one or the other
element preponderating. They must be equal and coextensive. Edition:
current; Page: [122] The whole of what we know we must believe; and the
whole of what we believe we must know: for we know that we believe it,
and the act of belief “can only be known through the object to which it
is correlative.” Our conviction is not divided, in varying proportions,
between knowledge and belief: the two must always keep abreast of one
another.

All this follows, whatever may be the meaning of the “insight” which
forms the distinction in kind between belief and knowledge. But what is
this insight? “The immediate consciousness of an object” (he goes on to
say) “is called an intuition, an insight.”* So that if knowledge is
distinguished from belief by being grounded on insight, it is
distinguished by being grounded on immediate consciousness. But belief
also supposes immediate consciousness, since “we cannot believe without
some consciousness or knowledge of the belief, and consequently without
some consciousness or knowledge of the object of the belief.” Not merely
without some consciousness, but, if our author’s theory is correct,
without a consciousness coextensive with the belief. As far as we
believe, so far we are conscious of the belief, and so far, therefore,
if the theory be true, we are conscious of the thing believed.

But though Sir W. Hamilton cannot extricate himself from this
entanglement, having, by the premises he laid down, cut off his own
retreat, other thinkers can find a way through it. For, in truth, what
can be more absurd than the notion that belief of anything implies
knowledge of the thing believed? Were this so, there could be no such
thing as false belief. Every day’s experience shows that belief of the
most peremptory kind—assurance founded on the most intense “feeling,” is
compatible with total ignorance of the thing which is the object of
belief; though of course not with ignorance of the belief itself. And
this absurdity is a full refutation of the theory which leads to it—that
consciousness of an operation involves consciousness of that about which
the operation is conversant. The theory does not seem so absurd when
affirmed of knowledge as of belief, because, (the term knowledge being
only applied in common parlance to what is regarded as true, while
belief may confessedly be false,) to say that if we are conscious of our
knowledge, we must be conscious of that which we know, is not so
manifestly ridiculous, as it is to affirm that if we are conscious of a
mistaken belief, we must be conscious of a non-existent fact. Yet the
one proposition must be equally true with the other, if consciousness of
an act involves consciousness of the object of the act. It is over the
ruins of this false theory that we must force our way out of the
labyrinth in which Sir W. Hamilton has imprisoned us. It may be true, or
it may not, that an external world is an object of immediate knowledge.
But assuredly we cannot conclude that we have an immediate knowledge of
external things, because Edition: current; Page: [123] we have an
immediate knowledge of our cognitions of them; whether those cognitions
are to be termed belief, with Reid, or knowledge, with Sir W. Hamilton.*

Edition: current; Page: [124] Edition: current; Page: [125]


CHAPTER IX: Of the Interpretation of Consciousness

according to all philosophers, the evidence of Consciousness, if only we
can obtain it pure, is conclusive. This is an obvious, but by no means a
mere identical proposition. If consciousness be defined as intuitive
knowledge, it is indeed an identical proposition to say, that if we
intuitively know anything, we do know it, and are sure of it. But the
meaning lies in the implied assertion, that we do know some things
immediately, or intuitively. That we must do so is evident, if we know
anything; for what we know mediately, depends for its evidence on our
previous knowledge of something else: unless, therefore, we knew
something immediately, we could not know anything mediately, and
consequently could not know anything at all. That imaginary being, a
complete Sceptic, might be supposed to answer, that perhaps we do not
know anything at all. I shall not reply to this problematical antagonist
in the usual manner, by telling him that if he does not know anything, I
do. I put to him the simplest case conceivable of immediate knowledge,
and ask, if we ever feel anything? If so, then, at the moment of
feeling, do we know that we feel? Or if he will not call this knowledge,
will he deny that when we have a feeling, we have at least some sort of
assurance, or conviction, of having it? This assurance or conviction is
what other people mean by knowledge. If he dislikes the word, I am
willing in discussing with him to employ some other. By whatever name
this assurance is called, it is the test to which we bring all our other
convictions. He may say it is not certain; but such as it may be, it is
our model of certainty. We consider all our other assurances and
convictions as more or less certain, according as they approach the
standard of this. I have a conviction that there are icebergs in the
Arctic seas. I have not had the evidence of my senses for it: I never
saw an iceberg. Neither do I intuitively believe it by a law of my mind.
My conviction is mediate, grounded on testimony, and on inferences from
physical laws. When I say I am convinced of it, I mean that the evidence
is equal to that of my senses. I am as certain of the fact as if I had
seen it. And, on a more complete analysis, when I say I am convinced of
it, what I am convinced of is that if I were in the Arctic seas I should
see it. We mean by knowledge, and by certainty, an assurance similar and
equal to that afforded by our senses: if the evidence Edition: current;
Page: [126] in any other case can be brought up to this, we desire no
more. If a person is not satisfied with this evidence, it is no concern
of anybody but himself, nor, practically, of himself, since it is
admitted that this evidence is what we must, and may with full
confidence, act upon. Absolute scepticism, if there be such a thing, may
be dismissed from discussion, as raising an irrelevant issue, for in
denying all knowledge it denies none. The dogmatist may be quite
satisfied if the doctrine he maintains can be attacked by no arguments
but those which apply to the evidence of the senses. If his evidence is
equal to that, he needs no more; nay, it is philosophically maintainable
that by the laws of psychology we can conceive no more, and that this is
the certainty which we call perfect.

The verdict, then, of consciousness, or, in other words, our immediate
and intuitive conviction, is admitted, on all hands, to be a decision
without appeal. The next question is, to what does consciousness bear
witness? And here, at the outset, a distinction manifests itself, which
is laid down by Sir W. Hamilton, and stated, in a very lucid manner, in
the first volume of his Lectures. I give it in his own words.

A fact of consciousness is that whose existence is given and guaranteed
by an original and necessary belief. But there is an important
distinction to be here made, which has not only been overlooked by all
philosophers, but has led some of the most distinguished into no
inconsiderable errors.

The facts of consciousness are to be considered in two points of view;
either as evidencing their own ideal or phænomenal existence, or as
evidencing the objective existence of something else beyond them. A
belief in the former is not identical with a belief in the latter. The
one cannot, the other may possibly, be refused. In the case of a common
witness, we cannot doubt the fact of his personal reality, nor the fact
of his testimony as emitted,—but we can always doubt the truth of that
which his testimony avers. So it is with consciousness. We cannot
possibly refuse the fact of its evidence as given, but we may hesitate
to admit that beyond itself of which it assures us. I shall explain by
taking an example. In the act of External Perception, consciousness
gives as a conjunct fact, the existence of Me or Self as perceiving, and
the existence of something different from Me or Self as perceived. Now
the reality of this, as a subjective datum—as an ideal phænomenon—it is
absolutely impossible to doubt without doubting the existence of
consciousness, for consciousness is itself this fact; and to doubt the
existence of consciousness is absolutely impossible; for as such a doubt
could not exist except in and through consciousness, it would,
consequently, annihilate itself. We should doubt that we doubted. As
contained—as given—in an act of consciousness, the contrast of mind
knowing and matter known cannot be denied.

But the whole phænomenon as given in consciousness may be admitted, and
yet its inference disputed. It may be said, consciousness gives the
mental subject as perceiving an external object, contradistinguished
from it as perceived: all this we do not, and cannot, deny. But
consciousness is only a phænomenon;—the contrast between the subject and
object may be only apparent, not real; the object given as an external
reality, may only be a mental representation which the mind is, by an
unknown law, determined unconsciously to produce, and to mistake for
something Edition: current; Page: [127] different from itself. All this
may be said and believed, without self-contradiction,—nay, all this has,
by the immense majority of modern philosophers, been actually said and
believed.

In like manner, in an act of Memory, consciousness connects a present
existence with a past. I cannot deny the actual phænomenon, because my
denial would be suicidal, but I can without self-contradiction assert
that consciousness may be a false witness in regard to any former
existence; and I may maintain, if I please, that the memory of the past,
in consciousness, is nothing but a phænomenon, which has no reality
beyond the present. There are many other facts of consciousness which we
cannot but admit as ideal phænomena, but may discredit as guaranteeing
aught beyond their phænomenal existence itself. The legality of this
doubt I do not at present consider, but only its possibility; all that I
have now in view being to show that we must not confound, as has been
done, the double import of the facts, and the two degrees of evidence
for their reality. This mistake has, among others, been made by Mr.
Stewart. . . .

With all the respect to which the opinion of so distinguished a
philosopher as Mr. Stewart is justly entitled, I must be permitted to
say, that I cannot but regard his assertion that the present existence
of the phænomena of consciousness and the reality of that to which these
phænomena bear witness, rest on a foundation equally solid—as wholly
untenable. The second fact, the fact testified to, may be worthy of all
credit—as I agree with Mr. Stewart in thinking that it is; but still it
does not rest on a foundation equally solid as the fact of the testimony
itself. Mr. Stewart confesses that of the former no doubt had ever been
suggested by the boldest sceptic; and the latter, in so far as it
assures us of our having an immediate knowledge on the external
world,—which is the case alleged by Mr. Stewart,—has been doubted, nay
denied, not merely by sceptics, but by modern philosophers almost to a
man. This historical circumstance, therefore, of itself, would create a
strong presumption, that the two facts must stand on very different
foundations; and this presumption is confirmed when we investigate what
these foundations themselves are.

The one fact,—the fact of the testimony, is an act of consciousness
itself; it cannot, therefore, be invalidated without self-contradiction.
For, as we have frequently observed, to doubt of the reality of that of
which we are conscious is impossible: for as we can only doubt through
consciousness, to doubt of consciousness is to doubt of consciousness by
consciousness. If, on the one hand, we affirm the reality of the doubt,
we thereby explicitly affirm the reality of consciousness, and
contradict our doubt; if, on the other hand, we deny the reality of
consciousness, we implicitly deny the reality of our denial itself.
Thus, in the act of perception, consciousness gives, as a conjunct fact,
an ego or mind, and a non-ego or matter, known together, and
contradistinguished from each other. Now, as a present phænomenon, this
double fact cannot possibly be denied. I cannot, therefore, refuse the
fact, that, in perception, I am conscious of a phænomenon which I am
compelled to regard as the attribute of something different from my mind
or self. This I must perforce admit, or run into self-contradiction. But
admitting this, may I not still, without self-contradiction, maintain
that what I am compelled to view as the phænomenon of something
different from me is nevertheless (unknown to me) only a modification of
my mind? In this I admit the fact of the testimony of consciousness as
given, but deny the truth of its report. Whether this denial of the
truth of consciousness as a witness is or is not legitimate, we are not,
at this moment, to consider: all I have in view at present is, as I
said, to show that we must Edition: current; Page: [128] distinguish in
consciousness two kinds of facts,—the fact of consciousness testifying,
and the fact of which consciousness testifies; and that we must not, as
Mr. Stewart has done, hold that we can as little doubt of the fact of
the existence of an external world, as of the fact that consciousness
gives in mutual contrast, the phænomenon of self in contrast to the
phænomenon of not-self.*

He adds, that since no doubt has been, or can be, entertained of the
facts given in the act of consciousness itself, “it is only the
authority of these facts as evidence of something beyond
themselves,—that is, only the second class of facts,—which become matter
of discussion; it is not the reality of consciousness that we have to
prove, but its veracity.”[*]

By the conception and clear exposition of this distinction, Sir W.
Hamilton has contributed materially to make the issues involved in the
great question in hand, more intelligible; and the passage is a
considerable item for the appreciation both of his philosophy and of his
philosophical powers. It is one of the proofs that, whatever be the
positive value of his achievements in metaphysics, he had a greater
capacity for the subject than many metaphysicians of high reputation,
and particularly than his two distinguished predecessors in the same
school of thought, Reid and Stewart.

There are, however, some points in this long extract which are open to
criticism. The distinction it draws, is, in the main, beyond question,
just. Among the facts which Sir W. Hamilton considers as revelations of
consciousness, there is one kind which, as he truly says, no one does or
can doubt, another kind which they can and do. The facts which cannot be
doubted are those to which the word consciousness is by most
philosophers confined: the facts of internal consciousness; “the mind’s
own acts and affections.”[†] What we feel, we cannot doubt that we feel.
It is impossible to us to feel, and to think that perhaps we feel not,
or to feel not, and think that perhaps we feel. What admits of being
doubted, is the revelation which consciousness is supposed to make (and
which our author considers as itself consciousness) of an external
reality. But according to him, though we may doubt this external
reality, we are compelled to admit that consciousness testifies to it.
We may disbelieve our consciousness; but we cannot doubt what its
testimony is. This assertion cannot be granted in the same unqualified
manner as the others. It is true that I cannot doubt my present
impression: I cannot doubt that when I perceive colour or weight, I
perceive them as in an object. Neither can I doubt that when I look at
two fields, I perceive which of them is the farthest off. The majority
of philosophers, however, would not say that perception of distance by
the Edition: current; Page: [129] eye is testified by consciousness;
because although we really do so perceive distance, they believe it to
be an acquired perception. It is at least possible to think that the
reference of our sensible impressions to an external object is, in like
manner, acquired; and if so, though a fact of our consciousness in its
present artificial state, it would have no claim to the title of a fact
of consciousness generally, aor to the unlimited credence given to what
is originally consciousnessa. This point of psychology we shall have to
discuss farther on.

Another remark needs to be made. All the world admits with our author,
that it is impossible to doubt a fact of internal consciousness. To
feel, and not to know that we feel, is an impossibility. But Sir W.
Hamilton is not satisfied to let this truth rest on its own evidence. He
wants a demonstration of it. As if it were not sufficiently proved by
consciousness itself, he attempts to prove it by a reductio ad absurdum.
No one, he says, can doubt consciousness, because, doubt being itself
consciousness, to doubt consciousness would be to doubt that we doubt.
He sets so high a value on this argument, that he is continually
recurring to it in his writings; it actually amounts to a feature of his
philosophy.* Yet it seems to me no better than a fallacy. It treats
doubt as something positive, like certainty, forgetting that doubt is
uncertainty. Doubt is not a state of consciousness, but the negation of
a state of consciousness. Being nothing positive, but simply the absence
of a belief, it seems to be the one intellectual fact which may be true
without self-affirmation of its truth; without our either believing or
disbelieving that we doubt. If doubt is anything other than merely
negative, it means an insufficient assurance; a disposition to believe,
with an inability to believe confidently. But there are degrees of
insufficiency; and if we suppose, for argument’s sake, that it is
possible to doubt consciousness, it may be possible to doubt different
facts of consciousness in different degrees. The general uncertainty of
consciousness might be the one fact that appeared least uncertain. The
saying of Socrates, that the only thing he knew was Edition: current;
Page: [130] that he knew nothing, expresses a conceivable and not
inconsistent state of mind.[*] The only thing he felt perfectly sure of
may have been that he was sure of nothing else. Omitting Socrates (who
was no sceptic as to the reality of knowledge, but only as to its having
yet been attained) and endeavouring to conceive the hazy state of mind
of a person who doubts the evidence of his senses, it is quite possible
to suppose him doubting even whether he doubts. Most people, I should
think, must have found themselves in something like this predicament as
to particular facts, of which their assurance is all but perfect; they
are not quite certain that they are uncertain.*

But though our author’s proof of the position is as untenable as it is
superfluous, all agree with him in the position itself, that a real fact
of consciousness cannot be doubted or denied. Let us now, therefore,
return to his distinction between the facts “given in the act of
consciousness,”[†] and those “to the reality of which it only bears
evidence.”[‡] These last, or, in other words, “the veracity of
consciousness,” Sir W. Hamilton thinks it Edition: current; Page: [131]
possible to doubt or deny; he even says, that such facts, more or fewer
in number, have been doubted or denied by nearly the whole body of
modern philosophers. But this is a statement of the point in issue
between Sir W. Hamilton and modern philosophers, the correctness of
which, I will venture to affirm that very few if any of them would
admit. He represents “nearly the whole body of modern philosophers”[*]
as in the peculiar and paradoxical position, of believing that
consciousness declares to them and to all mankind the truth of certain
facts, and then of disbelieving those facts. That great majority of
philosophers of whom Sir W. Hamilton speaks, would, I apprehend,
altogether deny this statement. They never dreamed of disputing the
veracity of consciousness. They denied what Sir W. Hamilton thinks bitb
impossible to deny; the fact of its testimony. They thought it did not
testify to the facts to which he thinks it testifies. Had they thought
as he does respecting the testimony, they would have thought as he does
respecting the facts. As it is, many of them maintained that
consciousness gives no testimony to anything beyond itself; that
whatever knowledge we possess, or whatever belief we find in ourselves,
of anything but the feelings and operations of our own minds, has been
acquired subsequently to the first beginnings of our intellectual life,
and was not witnessed to by consciousness when it received its first
impressions. Others, again, did believe in a testimony of consciousness,
but not in the testimony ascribed to it by Sir W. Hamilton. Facts, to
which in his opinion it testifies, some of them did not believe at all,
others did not believe them to be known intuitively; nay, many of them
both believed the facts, and believed that they were known intuitively,
and if they differed from Sir W. Hamilton, differed in the merest shadow
of a shade; yet it is with these last, as we shall see, that he has his
greatest quarrel. In his contest, therefore, with (as he says) the
majority of philosophers, Sir W. Hamilton addresses his arguments to the
wrong point. He thinks it needless to prove that the testimony to which
he appeals, is really given by Consciousness, for that he regards as
undenied and undeniable: but he is incessantly proving to us that we
ought to believe our consciousness, a thing which few, if any, of his
opponents denied.* It is true his appeal is always to the same argument,
but that he is never tired of reiterating. It is stated the most
systematically in the first Dissertation on Reid, that “on the
Philosophy of Common Sense.” After Edition: current; Page: [132] saying
that there are certain primary elements of cognition, manifesting
themselves to us as facts of which consciousness assures us, he
continues,

How, it is asked, do these primary propositions—these cognitions at
first hand—these fundamental facts, feelings, beliefs, certify us of
their own veracity? To this the only possible answer is, that as
elements of our mental constitution—as the essential conditions of our
knowledge, they must by us be accepted as true. To suppose their
falsehood, is to suppose that we are created capable of intelligence, in
order to be made the victims of delusion; that God is a deceiver, and
the root of our nature a lie:*

that man is “organized for the attainment, and actuated by the love of
truth, only to become the dupe and victim of a perfidious creator.”† It
appears, therefore, that the testimony of consciousness must be
believed, because to disbelieve it, would be to impute mendacity and
perfidy to the Creator.

But there is a preliminary difficulty to be here resolved, which may be
stated without irreverence. If the proof of the trustworthiness of
consciousness is the veracity of the Creator, on what does the Creator’s
veracity itself rest? Is it not on the evidence of consciousness? The
divine veracity can only be known in two ways, 1st, by intuition, or
2ndly, through evidence. If it is known by intuition, it is itself a
fact of consciousness, and to have ground for believing it, we must
assume that consciousness is trustworthy. Those who say that we have a
direct intuition of God, are only saying in other words that
consciousness testifies to him. If we hold, on the contrary, with our
author, that God is not known by intuition, but proved by evidence, that
evidence must rest, in the last resort, on consciousness. All proofs of
religion, natural or revealed, must be derived either from the testimony
of the senses, or from internal feelings of the mind, or from reasonings
of which one or other of these sources supplied the premises. Religion,
thus itself resting on the evidence of consciousness, cannot be invoked
to prove that consciousness ought to be believed. We must already trust
our consciousness, before we can have any evidence of the truth of
religion.

I know not whether it is from an obscure sense of this objection to his
argument, that Sir W. Hamilton adopts what, in every other point of
view, is a very extraordinary limitation of it. After representing the
veracity of the Creator as staked on the truth of the testimony of
Consciousness, he is content to claim this argument as not amounting to
proof, but only to a primâ facie presumption. “Such a supposition” as
that of a perfidious creator, “if gratuitous, is manifestly
illegitimate.” “The data of our original consciousness must, it is
evident, in the first instance” (the italics are the Edition: current;
Page: [133] author’s), “be presumed true. It is only if proved false,”
which citc can only be by showing them to be inconsistent with one
another, “that their authority can, in consequence of that proof, be, in
the second instance, disallowed.”[*] “Neganti incumbit probatio. Nature
is not gratuitously to be assumed to work, not only in vain, but in
counteraction of herself; our faculty of knowledge is not, without a
ground, to be supposed an instrument of illusion.”* It is making a very
humble claim for the veracity of the Creator, that it should be held
valid merely as a presumption, in the absence of contrary evidence; that
the Divine Being, like a prisoner at the bar, should be presumed
innocent until proved guilty. Far, however, from intending this remark
in any invidious sense against Sir W. Hamilton, I regard it as one of
his titles to honour, that he has not been afraid, as many men would
have been, to subject a proposition surrounded by reverence to the same
logical treatment as any other statement, and has not felt himself
obliged, as a philosopher, to consider it from the first as final. My
complaint dcould only bed, that his logic is not sufficiently
consistente; and that thee divine veracity is entitled either to more or
to less weight than he accords to it. He is bound by the laws of correct
reasoning to prove his premise without the aid of the conclusion which
he means to draw from it. If he can do this—if the divine veracity is
certified by stronger evidence than the testimony of consciousness, it
may be appealed to, not merely as a presumption, but as a proof. If not,
it is entitled to no place in the discussion, even as a presumption.
There is no intermediate position for it, good enough for the one
purpose, but not good enough for the other. It would be a new view of
the fallacy of petitio principii to contend that a conclusion is no
proof of the premises from which it is deduced, but is primâ facie
evidence of them.

Our author, however, cannot be convicted of petitio principii. Though he
has not stated, I think he has enabled us to see, in what manner he
avoided it. True, he has deduced the trustworthiness of consciousness
from the veracity of the Deity; and the veracity of the Deity can only
be known from the evidence of consciousness. But he may fall back upon
the distinction between facts given in consciousness itself, and facts
“to the reality of which it only bears evidence.”[†] It is for the
trustworthiness of these last, that he assigns as presumptive evidence
(which the absence of counter-evidence raises into proof) the divine
veracity. That veracity itself, he may Edition: current; Page: [134]
say, is proved by consciousness, but to prove it requires only the other
class of facts of consciousness, those given in the act of consciousness
itself. There are thus two steps in the argument. “The phænomena of
consciousness considered merely in themselves,” with reference to which
“scepticism is confessedly impossible,”* suffice (we must suppose him to
think) for proving the divine veracity; and that veracity, being proved,
is in its turn a reason for trusting the testimony which consciousness
pronounces to facts without and beyond itself.

Unless, therefore, Sir W. Hamilton was guilty of a paralogism, by
adducing religion in proof of what is necessary to the proof of
religion, his opinion must have been that our knowledge of God rests
upon the affirmation which Consciousness makes of itself, and not of
anything beyond itself; that the divine existence and attributes may be
proved without assuming that consciousness testifies to anything but our
own feelings and mental operations. If this be so, we have Sir W.
Hamilton’s authority for affirming, that even the most extreme form of
philosophical scepticism, the Nihilism (as our author calls it)[*] of
Hume, which denies the objective existence of both Matter and Mind, does
not touch the evidences of Natural Religion. And it really does not
touch any evidences but such as religion can well spare. But what a mass
of religious prejudice has been directed against this philosophical
doctrine, on the strength of what we have now Sir W. Hamilton’s
authority for treating as a mere misapprehension.†

But something more is necessary to render the divine veracity available
in support of the testimony of consciousness, against those, if such
there be, who admit the fact of the testimony, but hesitate to admit its
truth. The divine veracity can only be implicated in the truth of
anything, by proving that the Divine Being intended it to be believed.
As it is not pretended that he has made any revelation in the matter,
his intention can only be inferred from the fresultf: and our author
draws the inference from his having made it an original and
indestructible part of our nature that our consciousness should declare
to us certain facts. Now this is what the philosophers who disbelieve
the facts, would not, any of them, admit. Many indeed have Edition:
current; Page: [135] admitted that we have a natural tendency to believe
something which they considered to be an illusion: but it cannot be
affirmed that God intended us to do whatever we have a natural tendency
to. On every theory of the divine government, it is carried on,
intellectually as well as morally, not by the mere indulgence of our
natural tendencies, but by the regulation and control of them. One
philosopher, Hume, has said that the tendency in question seems to be an
“instinct,” and has called a psychological doctrine, which he regarded
as groundless, as “universal and primary opinion of all men.” But he
never dreamed of saying that we are compelled by our nature to believe
it; on the contrary, he says that this illusive opinion “is soon
destroyed by the slightest philosophy.”[*] Of all eminent thinkers, the
one who comes nearest to our author’s description of those who reject
the testimony of consciousness, is Kant. That philosopher did maintain
that there is an illusion inherent in our constitution; that we cannot
help conceiving as belonging to Things themselves, attributes with which
they are only clothed by the laws of our sensitive and intellectual
faculties.[†] But he gdrew a marked distinction between an illusion and
a delusion. Heg did not believe in a mystification practised on us by
the Supreme Being, nor would he have admitted that God intended us
permanently to mistake the conditions of our mental conceptions for
properties of the things themselves. If God has provided us with the
means of correcting an error, it is probable that he does not intend us
to be misled by it: and in matters speculative as well as practical, it
surely is more religious to see the purposes of God in the dictates of
our deliberate reason, than in those of a “blind and powerful instinct
of nature.”[‡]

As regards almost all, however, if not all philosophers, it may truly be
said, that the questions which have divided them have never turned on
the veracity of consciousness. Consciousness, in the sense usually
attached to it by philosophers,—consciousness of the mind’s own feelings
and operations, cannot, as our author truly says, be disbelieved. The
inward fact, the feeling in our own minds, was never doubted, since to
do so would be to doubt that we feel what we feel. What our author calls
the testimony of consciousness to something beyond itself, may be, and
is, denied; but what is denied, has almost always been that
consciousness gives the testimony; not that, if given, it must be
believed.

At first sight it might seem as if there could not possibly be any doubt
Edition: current; Page: [136] whether our consciousness does or does not
affirm any given thing. Nor can there, if consciousness means, as it
usually does, self-consciousness. If consciousness tells me that I have
a certain thought or sensation, I assuredly have that thought or
sensation. But if consciousness, as with Sir W. Hamilton, means a power
which can tell me things that are not phænomena of my own mind, there is
immediately the broadest divergence of opinion as to what are the things
htoh which consciousness testifies. There is nothing which people do not
think and say that they know by consciousness, provided they do not
remember any time when they did not know or believe it, and are not
aware in what manner they came by the belief. For Consciousness, in this
extended sense, is, as iIi have so often observed, but another word for
Intuitive Knowledge: and whatever other things we may know in that
manner, we certainly do not know by intuition what knowledge is
intuitive. It is a subject on which both the vulgar and the ablest
thinkers are constantly making mistakes. No one is better aware of this
than Sir W. Hamilton. I transcribe a few of the many passages in which
he has acknowledged it. “Errors” may arise by attributing to
“intelligence as necessary and original data, what are only contingent
generalizations from experience, and consequently, make no part of its
complement of native truths.”* And again: “Many philosophers have
attempted to establish on the principles of common sense propositions
which are not original data of consciousness; while the original data of
consciousness, from which their propositions were derived, and to which
they owed their whole necessity and truth—these data the same
philosophers were (strange to say) not disposed to admit.”† It fares
still worse with the philosophers chargeable with this error, when Sir
W. Hamilton comes into personal controversy with them. M. Cousin’s mode
of proceeding, for example, he characterizes thus: “Assertion is
substituted for proof; facts of consciousness are alleged, which
consciousness never knew; and paradoxes that baffle argument, are
promulgated as intuitive truths, above the necessity of confirmation.”‡
M. Cousin’s particular misinterpretation of consciousness was, as we
saw, that of supposing that each of its acts testifies to three things,
of which three Edition: current; Page: [137] Sir W. Hamilton thinks that
it testifies only to one. Besides the finite element, consisting of a
Self and a Not-self, M. Cousin believes that there are directly revealed
in Consciousness an Infinite (God) and a relation between this Infinite
and the Finite.[*] But it is not only M. Cousin who, in our author’s
opinion, mistakes the testimony of consciousness. He brings the same
charge against a thinker with whom he agrees much oftener than with M.
Cousin; against Reid. That philosopher, as we have seen, is of opinion,
contrary to Sir W. Hamilton, that we have an immediate knowledge of
things past. This is to be conscious of them in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense
of the word, though not in Reid’s. Finally, Sir W. Hamilton imputes a
similar error, no longer to any particular metaphysician, but to the
world at large. He says that we do not see the sun, but only a luminous
image, in immediate contiguity to the eye, and that no two persons see
the same sun, but every person a different one. Now it is assuredly the
universal belief of mankind that all of them see the same sun, and that
this is the very sun which rises and sets, and which is 95 (or according
to more recent researches 92) millions of miles distant from the earth.
Nor can any of the appeals of Reid and Sir W. Hamilton from the
sophistries of metaphysicians to Common Sense and the universal
sentiment of mankind, be more emphatic than that to which Sir W.
Hamilton here lays himself open from Reid and from the non-metaphysical
world.*

Edition: current; Page: [138]
We see, therefore, that it is not enough to say that something is
testified by Consciousness, and refer all dissentients to Consciousness
to prove it. Substitute for Consciousness the equivalent phrase (in our
author’s acceptation at least) Intuitive Knowledge, and it is seen that
this is not a thing which can be proved by mere introspection of
ourselves. Introspection can show us a present belief or conviction,
attended with a greater or a less difficulty in accommodating the
thoughts to a different view of the subject: but that this belief, or
conviction, or knowledge, if we call it so, is intuitive, no mere
introspection can ever show; unless we are at liberty to assume that
every mental process which is now as unhesitating and as rapid as
intuition, was intuitive at its outset. Reid, in his commencements at
least, often expressed himself as if he believed this to be the case:
Sir W. Hamilton, wiser than Reid, knew better. With him (at least in his
better moments) the question, what is and is not revealed by
Consciousness, is a question for philosophers. “The first problem of
philosophy” is “to seek out, purify, and establish, by intellectual
analysis and criticism, the elementary feelings or beliefs, in which are
given the elementary truths of which all are in possession:” this
problem, he admits, is “of no easy accomplishment;” and the “argument
from common sense” is thus

manifestly dependent on philosophy as an art, as an acquired dexterity,
and cannot, notwithstanding the errors which they have so frequently
committed, be taken out of the hands of the philosophers. Common Sense
is like Common Law. Each may be laid down as the general rule of
decision; but in the one case it must be left to the Edition: current;
Page: [139] jurist, in the other to the philosopher, to ascertain what
are the contents of the rule; and though in both instances the common
man may be cited as a witness for the custom or the fact, in neither can
he be allowed to officiate as advocate or as judge.*

So far, good. But now, it being conceded that the question, what do we
know intuitively, or, in Sir W. Hamilton’s phraseology, what does our
consciousness testify, is not, as might be supposed, a matter of simple
self-examination, but of science, it has still to be determined in what
manner science should set about it. And here emerges the distinction
between two different methods of studying the problems of metaphysics,
forming the radical difference between the two great schools into which
metaphysicians are fundamentally divided. One of these I shall call, for
distinction, the introspective method; the other, the psychological.

The elaborate and acute criticism on the philosophy of Locke, which is
perhaps the most striking portion of M. Cousin’s Lectures on the History
of Philosophy, sets out with a remark which sums up the characteristics
of the two great schools of mental philosophy, by a summary description
of their methods. M. Cousin observes, that Locke went wrong from the
beginning, by placing before himself, as the question to be first
resolved, the origin of our ideas.[*] This was commencing at the wrong
end. The proper course would have been to begin by determining what the
ideas now are; to ascertain what it is that consciousness actually tells
us, postponing till afterwards the attempt to frame a theory concerning
the origin of any of the mental phænomena.

I accept the question as M. Cousin states it, and I contend, that no
attempt to determine what are the direct revelations of consciousness,
can be successful, or entitled to any regard, unless preceded by what M.
Cousin says ought only to follow it, an inquiry into the origin of our
acquired ideas. For we have it not in our power to ascertain, by any
direct process, what Consciousness told us at the time when its
revelations were in their pristine purity. It only offers itself to our
inspection as it exists now, when those original revelations are
overlaid and buried under a mountainous heap of acquired notions and
perceptions.

It seems to M. Cousin that if we examine, with care and minuteness, our
present states of consciousness, distinguishing and defining every
ingredient which we find to enter into them—every element that we seem
to recognise as real, and cannot, by merely concentrating our attention
upon it, analyse into anything simpler—we reach the ultimate and primary
truths, which are the sources of all our knowledge, and which cannot be
Edition: current; Page: [140] denied or doubted without denying or
doubting the evidence of consciousness itself, that is, the only
evidence which there is for anything. I maintain this to be a
misapprehension of the conditions imposed on inquirers by the
difficulties of psychological investigation. To begin the inquiry at the
point where M. Cousin takes it up, is in fact to beg the question. For
he must be aware, if not of the fact, at least of the belief of his
opponents, that the laws of the mind—the laws of association according
to one class of thinkers, the Categories of the Understanding according
to another—are capable of creating, out of those data of consciousness
which are uncontested, purely mental conceptions, which become so
identified in thought with all our states of consciousness, that we
seem, and cannot but seem, to receive them by direct intuition; and, for
example, the belief in Matter, in the opinion of some of these thinkers,
is, or at least may be, thus produced. Idealists, and Sceptics, contend
that the belief in Matter is not an original fact of consciousness, as
our sensations are, and is therefore wanting in the requisite which, in
M. Cousin’s and Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, gives to our subjective
convictions objective authority. Now, be these persons right or wrong,
they cannot be refuted in the mode in which M. Cousin and Sir W.
Hamilton attempt to do so—by appealing to Consciousness itself. For we
have no means of interrogating consciousness in the only circumstances
in which it is possible for it to give a trustworthy answer. Could we
try the experiment of the first consciousness in any infant—its first
reception of the impressions which we call external; whatever was
present in that first consciousness would be the genuine testimony of
Consciousness, and would be as much entitled to credit, indeed there
would be as little possibility of discrediting it, as our sensations
themselves. But we have no means of now ascertaining, by direct
evidence, whether we were conscious of outward and extended objects when
we first opened our eyes to the light. That a belief or knowledge of
such objects is in our consciousness now, whenever we use our eyes or
our muscles, is no reason for concluding that it was there from the
beginning, until we have settled the question whether it could possibly
have been brought in since. If any mode can be pointed out in which
within the compass of possibility it might have been brought in, the
hypothesis must be examined and disproved before we are entitled to
conclude that the conviction is an original deliverance of
consciousness. The proof that any of the alleged Universal Beliefs, or
Principles of Common Sense, are affirmations of consciousness, supposes
two things; that the beliefs exist, and that lthere are no means by
which they couldl have been acquired. The first is in most cases
undisputed, but the second is a subject of inquiry which often taxes the
utmost resources of psychology. Edition: current; Page: [141] Locke was
therefore right in believing that “the origin of our ideas” is the main
stress of the problem of mental science, and the subject which must be
first considered in forming the theory of the Mind.[*] Being unable to
examine the actual contents of our consciousness until our earliest,
which are necessarily our most firmly knit associations, those which are
most intimately interwoven with the original data of consciousness, are
fully formed, we cannot study the original elements of mind in the facts
of our present consciousness. Those original elements can only come to
light as residual phænomena, by a previous study of the modes of
generation of the mental facts which are confessedly not original; a
study sufficiently thorough to enable us to apply its results to the
convictions, beliefs, or supposed intuitions which seem to be original,
and to determine whether some of them may not have been generated in the
same modes, so early as to have become inseparable from our
consciousness before the time mto which memory goes backm. This mode of
ascertaining the original elements of mind I calln, for want of a better
word,n the psychological, as distinguished from the simply introspective
mode. It is the known and approved method of physical science, adapted
to the necessities of psychology.*

It might be supposed from incidental expressions of Sir W. Hamilton,
that he was alive to the need of a methodical scientific investigation,
to determine what portion of our “natural beliefs” are really original,
and what are inferences, or acquired impressions, mistakenly deemed
intuitive. To the declarations already quoted to this effect, the
following may be added. Speaking of Descartes’ plan, of commencing
philosophy by a reconsideration Edition: current; Page: [142] of all our
fundamental opinions,[*] he says, “There are among our prejudices, or
pretended cognitions, a great many hasty conclusions, the investigation
of which requires much profound thought, skill, and acquired knowledge.
. . . To commence philosophy by such a review, it is necessary for a man
to be a philosopher before he can attempt to become one.”* And he
elsewhere bestows high praise upon Aristotle for not falling “into the
error of many modern philosophers, in confounding the natural and
necessary with the habitual and acquired connexions of thought,” nor
attempting “to evolve the conditions under which we think from the
tendencies generated by thinking;”† a praise which cannot be bestowed on
our author himself. But, notwithstanding the ample concession which he
appeared to make when he admitted that the problem was one of extreme
difficulty, essentially scientific, and ought to be reserved for
philosophers, I regret to say that he as completely sets at naught the
only possible method of solving it, as M. Cousin himself. He even
expresses his contempt for that method. Speaking of Extension, he says,
“It is truly an idle problem to attempt imagining the steps by which we
may be supposed to have acquired the notion of Extension, when, in fact,
we are unable to imagine to ourselves the possibility of that notion not
being always in our possession.”‡ That things which we “are unable to
imagine to ourselves the possibility of,” may be, and many of them must
be, true, was a doctrine which we thought we had learnt from the author
of the Philosophy of the Conditioned. That we cannot imagine a time at
which we had no knowledge of Extension, is no evidence that there has
not been such a time. There are mental laws, recognised by Sir W.
Hamilton himself, which would inevitably cause such a state of things to
become inconceivable to us, even if it once existed. There are
artificial inconceivabilities equal in strength to any natural. Indeed
it is questionable if there are any natural inconceivabilities, or if
anything is inconceivable to us for any other reason than because Nature
does not afford the combinations in experience which are necessary to
make it conceivable.

I do not think that there can be found, in all Sir W. Hamilton’s
writings, a single instance in which, before registering a belief as a
part of our consciousness from the beginning, he thinks it necessary to
ascertain that it ocannoto have grown up subsequently. He demands,
indeed, “that no fact be assumed as a fact of consciousness but what is
ultimate and simple.” But Edition: current; Page: [143] to pronounce it
ultimate, the only condition he requires is that we be not able to
“reduce it to a generalization from experience.” This condition is
realized by its possessing the “character of necessity.” “It must be
impossible not to think it. In fact, by its necessity alone can we
recognise it as an original datum of intelligence, and distinguish it
from any mere result of generalization and custom.”* In this Sir W.
Hamilton is at one with the whole of his own section of the
philosophical world; with Reid, with Stewart, with Cousin, with Whewell,
pand we may add, with Kantp.† The test by which they all decide a belief
to be a part of our primitive consciousness—an original intuition of the
mind—is the necessity of thinking it. Their proof that we must always,
from the beginning, have had the belief, is the impossibility of getting
rid of it now. This argument, applied to any of the disputed questions
of philosophy, is doubly illegitimate: neither the major nor the minor
premise is admissible. For, in the first place, the very fact that the
qquestions areq disputed, disproves the alleged impossibility. Those
against rwhose dissentr it is needful to defend the belief which
Edition: current; Page: [144] is affirmed to be necessary, are
unmistakeable examples that it is not necessary. It may be a necessary
belief to those who think it so; they may personally be quite incapable
of not holding it. But even if this incapability extended to all
mankind, it might be merely the effect of a strong association; Edition:
current; Page: [145] like the impossibility of believing Antipodes; and
it cannot be shown that even where the impossibility is, for the time,
real, it might not, as in that case, be overcome. The history of science
teems with inconceivabilities which have been conquered, and supposed
necessary truths which have first ceased to be thought necessary, then
to be thought true, and have finally come to be deemed impossible.*
These philosophers, Edition: current; Page: [146] therefore, and among
them Sir W. Hamilton, mistake altogether the true conditions of
psychological investigation, when, instead of proving a belief to be an
original fact of consciousness by showing that it scannot, by any known
means,s have been acquired, they conclude that it was not acquired, for
the reason, often false, and never sufficiently substantiated, that our
consciousness cannot get rid of it now.

Since, then, Sir W. Hamilton not only neglects, but repudiates, the only
scientific mode of ascertaining our original beliefs, what does he mean
by Edition: current; Page: [147] treating the question as one of
science, and in what manner does he apply science to it? Theoretically,
he claims for science an exclusive jurisdiction over the whole domain,
but practically he gives it nothing to do except to settle the relations
of the supposed intuitive beliefs among themselves. It is the province
of science, he thinks, to resolve some of these beliefs into others. He
prescribes, as tat rule of judgment, what he calls “the Law of
Parcimony.” No greater number of ultimate beliefs are to be postulated
than is strictly indispensable. Where one such belief can be looked upon
as a particular case of another—the belief in Matter, for instance, of
the cognition of a Non-ego—the more special of the two necessities of
thought merges in the more general one. This identification of two
necessities of thought, and subsumption of one of them under the other,
he is not wrong in regarding as a function of science. He affords an
example of it, when, in a manner which we shall hereafter characterize,
he denies to Causation the character, which philosophers of his school
have commonly assigned to it, of an ultimate belief, and attempts to
identify it with another and more general law of thought. This limited
function is the only one which, it seems to me, is reserved for science
in Sir W. Hamilton’s mode of studying the primary facts of
consciousness. In the mode he practises of ascertaining them to be facts
of consciousness, there is nothing for science to do. For, to call them
so because in his opinion he himself, and those who agree with him,
cannot get rid of the belief in them, does not seem exactly a scientific
process.* It is, however, characteristic of what I have called the
introspective, Edition: current; Page: [148] in contradistinction to the
psychological, method of metaphysical inquiry. The difference between
these methods will now be exemplified by showing them at work on a
particular question, the most fundamental one in philosophy, the
distinction between the Ego and the Non-ego.

We shall first examine what Sir W. Hamilton has done by his method, and
shall afterwards attempt to exemplify the use which can be made of the
other.

Edition: current; Page: [149]


CHAPTER X: Sir William Hamilton’s View of the Different Theories Respecting the Belief in an External World

sir w. hamilton brings a very serious charge against the great majority
of philosophers. He accuses them of playing fast and loose with the
testimony of consciousness; rejecting it when it is inconvenient, but
appealing to it as conclusive when they have need of it to establish any
of their opinions. “No philosopher has ever openly thrown off allegiance
to the authority of consciousness.”* No one denies “that as all
philosophy is evolved from consciousness, so, on the truth of
consciousness, the possibility of all philosophy is dependent.”† But if
any testimony of consciousness be supposed false,

the truth of no other fact of consciousness can be maintained. The legal
brocard, Falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, is a rule not more applicable
to other witnesses than to consciousness. Thus every system of
philosophy which implies the negation of any fact of consciousness is
not only necessarily unable, without self-contradiction, to establish
its own truth by any appeal to consciousness; it is also unable, without
self-contradiction, to appeal to consciousness against the falsehood of
any other system. If the absolute and universal veracity of
consciousness be once surrendered, every system is equally true, or
rather all are equally false; philosophy is impossible, for it has now
no instrument by which truth can be discovered, no standard by which it
can be tried; the root of our nature is a lie. But though it is thus
manifestly the common interest of every scheme of philosophy to preserve
intact the integrity of consciousness, almost every scheme of philosophy
is only another mode in which this integrity has been violated. If,
therefore, I am able to prove the fact of this various violation, and to
show that the facts of consciousness have never, or hardly ever, been
fairly evolved, it will follow, as I said, that no reproach can be
justly addressed to consciousness as an ill-informed, or vacillating, or
perfidious witness, but to those only who were too proud or too
negligent to accept its testimony, to employ its materials, and obey its
laws.‡

That nearly all philosophers have merited this imputation, our author
Edition: current; Page: [150] endeavours to show by a classified
enumeration of the various theories which they have maintained
respecting the perception of material objects. No instance can be better
suited for trying the dispute. The question of an external world is the
great battle-ground of metaphysics, not so much from its importance in
itself, as because while it relates to the most familiar of all our
mental acts, it forcibly illustrates the characteristic differences
between the two metaphysical methods.

“We are immediately conscious in perception,” says Sir W. Hamilton,

of an ego and a non-ego, known together, and known in contrast to each
other. This is the fact of the Duality of Consciousness. It is clear and
manifest. When I concentrate my attention in the simplest act of
perception, I return from my observation with the most irresistible
conviction of two facts, or rather two branches of the same fact; that I
am, and that something different from me exists. In this act I am
conscious of myself as the perceiving subject, and of an external
reality as the object perceived; and I am conscious of both existences
in the same indivisible moment of intuition. The knowledge of the
subject does not precede, nor follow, the knowledge of the object;
neither determines, neither is determined by the other. Such is the fact
of perception revealed in consciousness, and as it determines mankind in
general in their almost equal assurance of the reality of an external
world, as of the existence of our own minds.[*]

We may, therefore, lay it down as an undisputed truth, that
consciousness gives, as an ultimate fact, a primitive duality; a
knowledge of the ego in relation and contrast to the non-ego; and a
knowledge of the non-ego in relation and contrast to the ego. The ego
and non-ego are thus given in an original synthesis, as conjoined in the
unity of knowledge, and in an original antithesis, as opposed in the
contrariety of existence. In other words, we are conscious of them in an
indivisible act of knowledge together and at once, but we are conscious
of them as, in themselves, different and exclusive of each other.

Again, consciousness not only gives us a duality, but it gives its
elements in equal counterpoise and independence. The ego and
non-ego—mind and matter—are not only given together, but in absolute
co-equality. The one does not precede, the other does not follow: and in
their mutual relation, each is equally dependent, equally independent.
Such is the fact as given in and by consciousness.

Or rather (he should have said) such is the answer we receive, when we
examine and interrogate our present consciousness. To assert more than
this, merely on this evidence, is to beg the question instead of solving
it.

Philosophers have not, however, been content to accept the fact in its
integrity, but have been pleased to accept it only under such
qualifications as it suited their systems to devise. In truth, there are
just as many different philosophical systems originating in this fact,
as it admits of various possible modifications. An enumeration of these
modifications, accordingly, affords an enumeration of philosophical
theories.

In the first place, there is the grand division of philosophers into
those who do, Edition: current; Page: [151] and those who do not, accept
the fact in its integrity. Of modern philosophers, almost all are
comprehended under the latter category, while of the former, if we do
not remount to the schoolmen and the ancients, I am only aware of a
single philosopher before Reid,[*] who did not reject, at least in part,
the fact as consciousness affords it.

As it is always expedient to possess a precise name for a precise
distinction, I would be inclined to denominate those who implicitly
acquiesce in the primitive duality as given in consciousness, the
Natural Realists, or Natural Dualists, and their doctrine, Natural
Realism or Natural Dualism.

This is, of course, the author’s own doctrine.

In the second place, the philosophers who do not accept the fact, and
the whole fact, may be divided and subdivided into various classes by
various principles of distribution.

The first subdivision will be taken from the total, or partial,
rejection of the import of the fact. I have previously shown that to
deny any fact of consciousness as an actual phænomenon is utterly
impossible.

(But it is very far from impossible to believe that something which we
now confound with consciousness, may have been altogether foreign to
consciousness awhen this was unmingled with acquired impressionsa.)

But though necessarily admitted as a present phænomenon, the import of
this phænomenon—all beyond our actual consciousness of its existence—may
be denied. We are able, without self-contradiction, to suppose, and
consequently to assert, that all to which the phænomenon of which we are
conscious refers, is a deception; [say rather, an unwarranted
inference;] that for example, the past, to which an act of memory
refers, is only an illusion involved in our consciousness of the
present,—that the unknown subject to which every phænomenon of which we
are conscious involves a reference, has no reality beyond this reference
itself,—in short, that all our knowledge of mind or matter is only a
consciousness of various bundles of baseless appearances. This doctrine,
as refusing a substantial reality to the phænomenal existence of which
we are conscious, is called Nihilism; and consequently, philosophers, as
they affirm or deny the authority of consciousness in guaranteeing a
substratum or substance to the manifestation of the ego and non-ego, are
divided into Realists or Substantialists, and into Nihilists or
Non-Substantialists. Of positive or dogmatic Nihilism there is no
example in modern philosophy. . . . But as a sceptical conclusion from
the premises of previous philosophers, we have an illustrious example of
Nihilism in Hume; and the celebrated Fichte admits that the speculative
principles of his own idealism would, unless corrected by his practical,
terminate in this result.*

The Realists, or Substantialists, those who do believe in a substratum,
but reject the testimony of consciousness to an immediate cognizance of
an Edition: current; Page: [152] Ego and a Non-ego, our author divides
into two classes, according as they admit the real existence of two
substrata, or only of one. These last, whom he denominates Unitarians or
Monists, either acknowledge the ego alone, or the non-ego alone, or
regard the two as identical. Those who admit the ego alone, looking upon
the non-ego as a product evolved from it (i.e. as something purely
mental) are the Idealists. Those who admit the non-ego alone, and regard
the ego as evolved from it (i.e. as purely material) are the
Materialists. The third class acknowledge the equipoise of the two, but
deny their antithesis, maintaining “that mind and matter are only
phænomenal modifications of the same common substance. This is the
doctrine of Absolute Identity, a doctrine of which the most illustrious
representatives among recent philosophers are Schelling, Hegel, and
Cousin.”*

There remain those who admit the coequal reality of the Ego and the
Non-ego, of mind and matter, and also their distinctness from one
another, but deny that they are known immediately. These are Dualists,
but

are distinguished from the Natural Dualists of whom we formerly spoke,
in this—that the latter establish the existence of the two worlds of
mind and matter on the immediate knowledge we possess of both series of
phænomena—a knowledge of which consciousness assures us; whereas the
former, surrendering the veracity of consciousness to our immediate
knowledge of material phænomena, and consequently, our immediate
knowledge of the existence of matter, still endeavour, by various
hypotheses and reasonings, to maintain the existence of an unknown
external world. As we denominate those who maintain a Dualism as
involved in the fact of consciousness, Natural Dualists; so we may style
those dualists who deny the evidence of consciousness to our immediate
knowledge of aught beyond the sphere of mind, Hypothetical Dualists, or
Cosmothetic Idealists.

To the class of Cosmothetic Idealists, the great majority of modern
philosophers are to be referred. Denying an immediate or intuitive
knowledge of the external reality, whose existence they maintain, they,
of course, hold a doctrine of mediate or representative perception; and,
according to the various modifications of that doctrine, they are again
subdivided into those who view, in the immediate object of perception, a
representative entity present to the mind, but not a mere mental
modification, and into those who hold that the immediate object is only
a representative modification of the mind itself. It is not always easy
to determine to which of these classes some philosophers belong. To the
former, or class holding the cruder hypothesis of representation,
certainly belong the followers of Democritus and Epicurus, those
Aristotelians who held the vulgar doctrine of species (Aristotle himself
was probably a natural dualist), and in recent times, among many others,
Malebranche, Berkeley, Clarke, Newton, Abraham Tucker, &c. To these is
also, but problematically, to be referred, Locke. To the second, or
class holding the finer hypothesis of representation, belong, without
any doubt, many of the Platonists, Leibnitz, Arnauld, Crousaz,
Condillac, Kant, &c., and to this class is also probably to be referred
Descartes.†

In our own country the best known and typical specimen of this mode of
Edition: current; Page: [153] thinking, is Brown; and it is upon him
that our author discharges most of the shafts which this class of
thinkers, as being the least distant from him of all his opponents,
copiously receive from him.*

With regard to the various opinions thus enumerated, I shall first make
a remark of general application, and shall then advert particularly to
the objects of Sir W. Hamilton’s more especial animadversion, the
Cosmothetic Idealists.

Concerning all these classes of thinkers, except the Natural Realists,
Sir W. Hamilton’s statement is, that they deny some part of the
testimony of consciousness, and by so doing invalidate the appeals which
they nevertheless make to consciousness, as a voucher for their own
doctrines. If he had said that they all run counter, in some particular,
to the general sentiment of mankind—that they all deny some common
opinion, some natural belief (meaning by natural, not one which rests on
a necessity of our nature, but merely one which, in common with
innumerable varieties of false opinion, mankind have a strong tendency
to adopt); had he said only this, no one could have contested its truth;
but it would not have been a reductio ad absurdum of his opponents. For
all philosophers, Sir W. Hamilton as much as the rest, deny some common
opinions, which others might call natural beliefs, but which those who
deny them consider, and have a right to consider, as natural prejudices;
held, nevertheless, by the generality of Edition: current; Page: [154]
mankind in the persuasion of their being self-evident, or, in other
words, intuitive, and deliverances of consciousness. Some of the points
on which Sir W. Hamilton is at issue with natural beliefs, relate to the
very subject in hand—the perception of external things. We have found
him maintaining that we do not see the sun, but an image of it, and that
no two persons see the same sun; in contradiction to as clear a case as
could be given of natural belief. And we shall find him affirming, in
opposition to an equally strong natural belief, that we immediately
perceive extension only in our own organs, and not in the objects we see
or touch. Beliefs, therefore, which seem among the most natural that can
be entertained, are sometimes, in his opinion, delusive; and he has told
us that to discriminate which these are, is not within the competence of
everybody, but only of philosophers. He would say, of course, that the
beliefs which he rejects were not in our consciousness originally. And
nearly all his opponents say the same thing of those which they reject.
Those, indeed, who, like Kant, believe that there are elements present,
even at the first moment of internal consciousness, which do not exist
in the object, but are derived from the mind’s own laws, are fairly open
to Sir W. Hamilton’s criticism. It is not my business to justify, in
point of consistency, any more than of conclusiveness, theb reasoning,
by which Kant, after getting rid of the outward reality of all the
attributes of Body, persuades himself that he demonstrates the
externality of Body itself.* But, as regards all existing schools of
thought not descended from Kant, Sir W. Hamilton’s accusation is without
ground.

There is something more to be said respecting the mixed multitude of
metaphysicians whom our author groups together under the title of
Cosmothetic Idealists, and whose mode of thought he judges more harshly
than that of any other school. He represents them as holding the
doctrine that we perceive external objects, not by an immediate, but by
a mediate or representative perception. And he recognises three
divisions of them, according to three different forms in which this
hypothesis may be entertained.† The supposed representative object may
be regarded, first, as not a Edition: current; Page: [155] state of
mind, but something else; either external to the mind, like the species
sensibiles of some of the ancients, and the “motions of the brain” of
some of the early moderns;[*] or in the mind, like the Ideas of
Berkeley. Secondly, it may be regarded as a state of mind, but a state
different from the mind’s act in perceiving or being conscious of it: of
this kind, perhaps, are the Ideas of Locke. Or, thirdly, as a state of
mind identical with the act by which we are said to perceive it. This
last is the form in which, as Sir W. Hamilton truly says, the doctrine
was held by Brown.*

Now, the first two of these three opinions may fairly be called what our
author calls them—theories of mediate or representative perception. The
object which, in these theories, the mind is supposed directly to
perceive, is a tertium quid, which by the one theory is, and by the
other is not, a state or modification of mind, but in both is distinct
equally from the act of perception, and from the external object: and
the mind is cognizant of the external object vicariously, through this
third thing, of which alone it has immediate cognizance—of which alone,
therefore, it is, in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense of the word, conscious.
Against both these theories Reid, Stewart, and our author, are
completely triumphant, and I am in no way interested in pressing for a
rehearing of the cause.

But the third opinion, which is Brown’s, cannot with any justness of
thought or propriety of language be called a theory of mediate or
representative perception. Had Sir W. Hamilton taken half the pains to
understand Brown which he took to understand far inferior thinkers, he
never would have described Brown’s doctrine in terms so inappropriate.

Representative knowledge is always understood by our author to be
knowledge of a thing by means of an image of it; by means of something
which is like the thing itself. “Representative knowledge,” he says, “is
only deserving of the name of knowledge in so far as it is conformable
with the intuitions which it represents.”† The representation must stand
in a relation to what it represents, like that of a picture to its
original: as the representation in memory of a past impression of sense,
does to that past impression; as a representation in imagination does to
a supposed possible presentation of sense; and as the Ideas of the
earlier Cosmothetic Idealists were supposed to do to the outward objects
of which they were the image or impress. But the Mental Modifications of
Brown and those who think with him, are not supposed to bear any
resemblance to the objects which excite them.[†] These objects are
supposed to be unknown to us, except as the causes of the mental
modifications. The only relation between the two is Edition: current;
Page: [156] that of cause and effect. Brown, being free from the vulgar
errord that a cause must be like its effect, and admitting no knowledge
of the cause (beyond its bare existence) except the effect itself,
naturally found nothing in it which it was possible to compare with the
effect, or in virtue of which any resemblance could be affirmed to exist
between the two. In another place, Sir W. Hamilton makes an ostensible
distinction between the fact of resembling, and that of truly
representing, the objects; but defines the last expression to mean,
affording us “such a knowledge of their nature as we should have were an
immediate intuition of the reality in itself competent to man.”* No one
who is at all acquainted with Brown’s opinions will pretend him to have
maintained that we have anything of this sort. He did not believe that
the mental modification afforded us any knowledge whatever of the nature
of the external object. There is no need to quote passages in proof of
this; it is a fact patent to whoever reads his Lectures.[*] It is the
more strange that Sir W. Hamilton should have failed to recognise this
opinion of Brown, because it is exactly the opinion which he himself
holds respecting our knowledge of objects in respect of their Secondary
Qualities. These, he says, are “in their own nature occult and
inconceivable,” and are known only in their effects on us, that is, by
the mental modifications which they produce.†

Further, Brown’s is not only not a theory of representative perception,
but it is not even a theory of mediate perception. He assumes no tertium
quid, no object of thought intermediate between the mind and the outward
object. He recognises only the perceptive act; which with him means, and
is always declared to mean, the mind itself perceiving. It will hardly
be pretended that the mind itself is the “representative object”
interposed by him between itself and the outward thing which is acting
upon it; and if it is not, there certainly is no other. But if Brown’s
theory is not a theory of mediate perception, it loses all that
essentially distinguishes it from Sir W. Hamilton’s own doctrine. For
Brown, also, thinks that we have, on the occasion of certain sensations,
an instantaneous and irresistible conviction of an outward object. And
if this conviction is immediate, and necessitated by the constitution of
our nature, in what does it differ from our author’s direct
consciousness? Consciousness, immediate knowledge, and intuitive
knowledge, are, Sir W. Hamilton tells us, convertible expressions; and
if it be granted that whenever our senses are affected by a material
object, we immediately and intuitively recognise that object as existing
and distinct Edition: current; Page: [157] from us, it requires a great
deal of ingenuity to make out any substantial difference between this
immediate intuition of an external world, and Sir W. Hamilton’s direct
perception of it.

The distinction which our author makes, resolves itself, as explained by
him, into the difference of which he has said so much, but of which he
seemed to have so confused an idea, between Belief and Knowledge. In
Brown’s opinion,[*] and I will add, in Reid’s, the mental modification
which we experience from the presence of an object, raises in us an
irresistible belief that the object exists. No, says Sir W. Hamilton: it
is not a belief, but a knowledge: we have indeed a belief, and our
knowledge is certified by the belief; but this belief of ours regarding
the object is a belief that we know it.

In perception, consciousness gives, as an ultimate fact, a belief of the
knowledge of the existence of something different from self. As
ultimate, this belief cannot be reduced to a higher principle; neither
can it be truly analysed into a double element. We only believe that
this something exists, because we believe that we know (are conscious
of) this something as existing; the belief of the existence is
necessarily involved in the belief of the knowledge of the existence.
Both are original, or neither. Does consciousness deceive us in the
latter, it necessarily deludes us in the former; and if the former,
though a fact of consciousness, is false, the latter, because a fact of
consciousness, is not true. The beliefs contained in the two
propositions,

1°. I believe that a material world exists;

2°. I believe that I immediately know a material world existing (in
other words, I believe that the external reality itself is the object of
which I am conscious in perception),

though distinguished by philosophers, are thus virtually identical. The
belief of an external world was too powerful, not to compel an
acquiescence in its truth. But the philosophers yielded to nature, only
in so far as to coincide in the dominant result. They falsely
discriminated the belief in the existence, from the belief in the
knowledge. With a few exceptions, they held fast by the truth of the
first; but they concurred, with singular unanimity, in abjuring the
second.*

Accordingly, Brown is rebuked because, while rejecting our natural
belief that we know the external object, he yet accepts our natural
belief that it exists as a sufficient warrant for its existence. But
what real distinction is there between Brown’s intuitive belief of the
existence of the object, and Sir W. Hamilton’s intuitive knowledge of
it? Just three pages previous, Sir W. Hamilton had said, “Our knowledge
rests ultimately on certain facts of consciousness, which as primitive,
and consequently incomprehensible, are given less in the form of
cognitions than of beliefs.”† The consciousness of an external world is,
on his own showing, primitive and incomprehensible; it therefore is less
a cognition than a belief. But if we do not so much Edition: current;
Page: [158] know as believe an external world, what is meant by saying
that we believe that we know it? Either we do not know, but only believe
it, and if so, Brown and the other philosophers assailed were right; or
knowledge and belief, in the case of ultimate facts, are identical, and
then, believing that we know is only believing that we believe, which
according to our author’s and to all rational principles, is but another
word for simple believing.

It would not be fair, however, to hold our author to his own confused
use of the terms Belief and Knowledge. He never succeeds in making
anything like an intelligible distinction between these two notions
considered generally, but in particular cases we may be able to find
something which he is attempting to express by them. In the present case
his meaning seems to be, that Brown’s Belief in an external object,
though instantaneous and irresistible, was supposed to be suggested to
the mind by its own sensation; ewhich suggestion Brown regarded as a
case of a more general law,[*] whereby every fact suggests the intuitive
belief of a cause or antecedent with which it is invariably connected:e
while Sir W. Hamilton’s Knowledge of the object is supposed to arise
along with the sensation, and to be co-ordinate with it. And this is
what Sir W. Hamilton means by calling Brown’s a mediate, his own an
immediate cognition of the object: the real difference being that, on
Sir W. Hamilton’s theory, the cognition of the ego or foff its
modification, and that of the non-ego, are simultaneous, while on
Brown’s the one immediately precedes the other. Our author expresses
this meaning, though much less clearly, when he declares Brown’s theory
to be “that in perception, the external reality is not the immediate
object of consciousness, but that the ego is only determined in some
unknown manner to represent the non-ego, which representation, though
only a modification of mind or self, we are compelled by an illusion of
our nature, to mistake for a modification of matter, or non-self.”* This
being our author’s conception of the doctrine which he has to refute,
let us see in what manner he proceeds to refute it.

“You will remark,” he says,

that Brown (and Brown only speaks the language of all the philosophers
who do not allow the mind a consciousness of aught beyond its own
states,) misstates the phænomenon when he asserts that, in perception,
there is a reference from the internal to the external, from the known
to the unknown. That this is not the fact, our observation of the
phænomenon will at once convince you. In an act of perception, I am
conscious of something as self and of something as not self: this is the
simple fact. The philosophers, on the contrary, who will not accept this
fact, Edition: current; Page: [159] misstate it. They say that we are
conscious of nothing but a certain modification of mind; but this
modification involves a reference to,—in other words, a representation
of,—something external as its object. Now this is untrue. We are
conscious of no reference, of no representation: we believe that the
object of which we are conscious is the object which exists.

To this argument (of the worth of which something has been said already)
I shall return presently. But he subjoins a second.

Nor could there possibly be such reference or representation; for
reference or representation supposes a knowledge already possessed of
the object referred to or represented; but perception is the faculty by
which our first knowledge is acquired, and therefore cannot suppose a
previous knowledge as its condition.”*

And further on:

Mark the vice of the procedure. We can only, 1°, assert the existence of
an external world inasmuch as we know it to exist; and we can only, 2°,
assert that one thing is representative of another, inasmuch as the
thing represented is known, independently of the representation. But how
does the hypothesis of a representative perception proceed? It actually
converts the fact into an hypothesis: actually converts the hypothesis
into a fact. On this theory, we do not know the existence of an external
world, except on the supposition that that which we do know, truly
represents it as existing. The hypothetical realist cannot, therefore,
establish the fact of the external world, except upon the fact of its
representation. This is manifest. We have, therefore, next to ask him,
how he knows the fact, that the external world is actually represented.
A representation supposes something represented, and the representation
of the external world supposes the existence of that world. Now the
hypothetical realist, when asked how he proves the reality of the outer
world, which, ex hypothesi, he does not know, can only say that he
infers its existence from the fact of its representation. But the fact
of the representation of an external world supposes the existence of
that world; therefore he is again at the point from which he started. He
has been arguing in a circle.†

Let me first remark that this reasoning assumes the whole point in
dispute; it presupposes that the supposition which it is brought to
disprove is impossible. The theory of the third form of Cosmothetic
Idealism is, that though we are conscious only of the sensations which
an object gives us, we are determined by a necessity of our nature,
which some call an instinct, others an intuition, others a fundamental
law of belief, to ascribe these sensations to something external, as
their substratum, or as their cause. There is surely nothing à priori
impossible in this supposition. The supposed instinct or intuition seems
to be of the same family with many other Laws of Thought, or Natural
Beliefs, which our author not only admits without scruple, but enjoins
obedience to, under the usual sanction, that otherwise our intelligence
must be a lie. In the present case, however, he, Edition: current; Page:
[160] without the smallest warrant, excludes this from the list of
possible hypotheses. He says that we cannot infer a reality from a
mental representation, unless we already know the reality independently
of the mental representation. Now he could hardly help being aware that
this is the very matter in dispute. Those who hold the opinion he argues
against, do not admit the premise upon which he argues. They say that we
may be, and are, necessitated to infer a cause, of which we know nothing
whatever except its effect. And why not? Sir W. Hamilton thinks us
entitled to infer a substance from attributes, though he allows that we
know nothing of the substance except its attributes.

But this is not the worst, and there are few specimens of our author in
which his deficiencies as a philosopher stand out in a stronger light.
As Burke in politics, so Sir W. Hamilton in metaphysics, was too often a
polemic rather than a connected thinker: the generalizations of both,
often extremely valuable, seem less the matured convictions of a
scientific mind, than weapons snatched up for the service of a
particular quarrel. If Sir W. Hamilton can only seize upon something
which will strike a hard blow at an opponent, he seldom troubles himself
how much of his own edifice may be knocked down by the shock. Had he
examined the argument he here uses, sufficiently to determine whether he
could stand by it as a deliberate opinion, he would have perceived that
it committed him to the doctrine that there is no such thing as
representative knowledge. But it is one of Sir W. Hamilton’s most
positive tenets that there is representative knowledge, and that Memory,
among other things, is an example of it. Let us turn back to his
discussion of that subject, and see what he, at that time, considered
representative knowledge to be.

Every act, and consequently every act of knowledge, exists only as it
now exists; and as it exists only in the Now, it can be cognizant only
of a now-existent object. But the object known in memory is, ex
hypothesi, past; consequently, we are reduced to the dilemma, either of
refusing a past object to be known in memory at all, or of admitting it
to be only mediately known, in and through a present object. That the
latter alternative is the true one, it will require a very few
explanatory words to convince you. What are the contents of an act of
memory? An act of memory is merely a present state of mind which we are
conscious of not as absolute, but as relative to, and representing,
another state of mind, and accompanied with the belief that the state of
mind, as now represented, has actually been. I remember an event I
saw—the landing of George IV at Leith. This remembrance is only a
consciousness of certain imaginations, involving the conviction that
these imaginations now represent ideally what I formerly really
experienced. All that is immediately known in the act of memory, is the
present mental modification, that is, the representation and concomitant
belief. Beyond this mental modification we know nothing; and this mental
modification is not only known to consciousness, but only exists in and
by consciousness. Of any past object, real or ideal, the mind knows and
can know nothing, for, ex hypothesi, no such object now exists; or if it
be Edition: current; Page: [161] said to know such an object, it can
only be said to know it mediately, as represented in the present mental
modification. Properly speaking, however, we know only the actual and
present, and all real knowledge is an immediate knowledge. What is said
to be mediately known, is, in truth, not known to be, but only believed
to be: for its existence is only an inference resting on the belief,
that the mental modification truly represents what is in itself beyond
the sphere of knowledge.*

Had Sir W. Hamilton totally forgotten all this, when a few lectures
afterwards, having then in front of him a set of antagonists who needed
the theory here laid down, he repudiated it—denying altogether the
possibility of the mental state so truly and clearly expressed in this
passage, and affirming that we cannot possibly recognise a mental
modification to be representative of something else, unless we have a
present knowledge of that something else, otherwise obtained?[*] With
merely the alteration of putting instead of a past state of mind, a
present external object, the Cosmothetic Idealists might borrow his
language down to the minutest detail. They, too, believe that the mental
modification is a present state of mind, which we are conscious of, not
as absolute, but as relative to, and representing, “an external object,
and accompanied with the belief that the object as now represented,
actually” is: that we know something (viz. matter) only “as represented
in the present mental modification,” and that “its existence is only an
inference, resting on the belief that the mental modification truly
represents what is in itself beyond the sphere of knowledge.” They do
not, strictly speaking, require quite so much as this: for the word
“represents,” especially with “truly” joined to it, suggests the idea of
a resemblance, such as does, in reality, exist between the picture of a
fact in memory, and the present impression to which it corresponds; but
the Cosmothetic Idealists only maintain that the mental modification
arises from something, and that the reality of this unknown something is
testified by a natural belief. That they apply to one case the same
theory which our author applies to another, does not, of course, prove
them to be right; but it proves the suicidal character (to use one of
his favourite expressions)[†] of our author’s argument, when he scouts
the supposition of an instinctive inference from a known effect to an
unknown cause, as an hypothesis which can in no possible case be
legitimate; forgetful that its legitimacy is required by his own
psychology, one of the leading doctrines of which is entirely grounded
on it.

It is not only in treating of Memory, that Sir W. Hamilton requires a
process of thought precisely similar to that which, when employed by
opponents, he declares to be radically illegitimate. I have already
mentioned[*] Edition: current; Page: [162] that in his opinion our
perceptions of sight are not perceptions of the outward object, but of
its image, a “modification of light in immediate relation to our organ
of vision,” and that no two persons see the same sun; propositions in
direct conflict with the “natural beliefs” to which he so often refers,
and to which Reid, not without reason, appeals in this instance;[†] for
assuredly people in general are as firmly convinced that what they see
is the real sun, as that what they touch is the real table. Let us hear
Sir W. Hamilton once more on this subject.

It is not by perception, but by a process of reasoning, that we connect
the objects of sense with existences beyond the sphere of immediate
knowledge. It is enough that perception affords us the knowledge of the
non-ego at the point of sense. To arrogate to it the power of
immediately informing us of external things, which are only the causes
of the object we immediately perceive, is either positively erroneous,
or a confusion of language arising from an inadequate discrimination of
the phænomenon.*

Here is a case in which we know something to be a representation,
though, in our author’s opinion, that which it represents not only is
not, at the present time, known to us, but never was, and never will be
so. The Cosmothetic Idealists desire only the same liberty which Sir W.
Hamilton here exercises, of concluding from a phænomenon directly known,
to something unknown which is the cause of the phænomenon. They
postulate the possibility that what our author holds to be true of the
non-ego at a distance, may be true of the non-ego at the point of sense,
namely, that it is not known immediately, but as a necessary inference
from what is known. To shut the door upon this supposition as inherently
inadmissible, and make an exactly similar one ourselves as often as our
system requires it, does not befit a philosopher, or a critic of
philosophers.†

Edition: current; Page: [163]
In the controversy with Brown, which forms the second paper in the
Discussions,[*] and much of which his reproduced verbatim inh our
author’s Lectures,[†] the argument which I have now examined does not
iappear.i In the room of it, we have the following argument. If Brown is
right, “the mind either knows the reality of what it represents, or it
does not.” The first supposition is dismissed for the absurdities it
involves, and because it is inconsistent with Brown’s doctrine. But if
the mind does not know the reality of what it represents, the
“alternative remains, that the mind is blindly determined to represent,
and truly to represent, the reality which it does not know.” And if so,
the mind “either blindly determines itself” or “is blindly determined”
by a supernatural power. The latter supposition he rejects because it
involves a standing miracle; the former as “utterly irrational, Edition:
current; Page: [164] inasmuch as it would explain an effect, by a cause
wholly inadequate to its production. On this alternative, knowledge is
supposed to be the effect of ignorance,—intelligence of stupidity—life
of death.”* All this artillery is directed against the simple
supposition that by a law of our nature, a modification of our own minds
may assure us of the existence of an unknown cause. The author’s
persistent ignorance of Brown’s opinion isj surprising. Brown knows
nothing of the mental modification as truly representing the unknown
reality; he claims no knowledge as arising out of ignorance, no
intelligence growing out of stupidity. He claims only an instinctive
belief implanted by nature; and the menacing alternative, that the mind
must either determine itself to this belief, or be determined to it by a
special interference of Providence, could be applied with exactly as
much justice to the earth’s motion. But though Sir W. Hamilton’s weapon
falls harmless upon Brown, it recoils with terrible effect upon his own
theories of representative cognition. A remembrance, for example, does
represent, and truly represent, the past fact remembered: and we do,
through that representation, mediately know the past fact, which in any
other sense of the word, according to our author, we do not know.
Although therefore the conclusion “that the mind is blindly determined
to represent, and truly to represent, the reality which it does not
know,” is not obligatory upon Brown, it is upon Sir W. Hamilton. On his
own showing he has to choose between the absurdity that the mind
“blindly determines itself,” and the perpetual miracle of its being
determined by divine interference. This is one of the weakest
exhibitions of Sir W. Hamilton that I have met with in his writings. For
the difficulty by which he thought to overwhelm Brown, and which does
not touch Brown, but falls back upon himself, is no difficulty at all,
but the merest moonshine. The transcendent absurdity, as he considers
it, that the mind should be blindly determined to represent, and truly
to represent, the reality which “it does not know,” instead of an
absurdity, is the exact expression of a fact. It is a literal
description of what takes place in an act of memory. As often as we
recollect a past event, and on the faith of that recollection, believe
or know that the event really happened, the mind, by its constitution,
is “blindly determined to represent, and truly to represent” a fact
which, except as witnessed by that representation, “it does not know.”†

Edition: current; Page: [165]
It may generally, I think, be observed of Sir W. Hamilton, that his most
recherché arguments are his weakest: they certainly are so in the
present case. It would have been wiser in him to have been contented
with his first and simpler argument, that Brown’s doctrine conflicts
with consciousness, Edition: current; Page: [166] inasmuch as “we are
conscious of no reference, of no representation:”[*] or, to speak more
clearly, we are not aware that the existence of an external reality is
suggested to us by our sensations. We seem to become aware of both at
once.

The fact is as alleged, but it proves nothing, being consistent with
Brown’s doctrine. Whether the belief in a non-ego arose in our first act
of perception, simultaneously with the sensation, or not until suggested
by the sensation, we have, as I before remarked, no means of directly
ascertaining.[†] As far as depends on direct evidence, the subject is
inscrutable. But this we may know, that even if the suggestion theory
were true, the belief suggested would by the laws of association become
so intimately blended with the sensation suggesting it, that long before
we were able to reflect on our mental operations, we should have become
entirely incapable of thinking of the two things as other than
simultaneous. An appeal to consciousness avails nothing, when, even
though the doctrine opposed were true, the appeal might equally, and
with the same plausibility, be made. The facts are Edition: current;
Page: [167] alike consistent with both opinions, and, for aught that
appears, Brown’s is as likely to be true as Sir W. Hamilton’s. The
difference between them, as already observed, is extremely small, and I
will add, supremely unimportant. If the reality of matter is certified
to us by an irresistible belief, it matters little whether we reach the
belief by two steps, or by only one.

The really important difference of opinion on the subject of Perception,
between Brown and Sir W. Hamilton, is far other than this. It is, that
Sir W. Hamilton believes us to have a direct intuition not solely of the
reality of matter, but also of its primary qualities, Extension,
Solidity, Figure, &c., which, according to him, we know as in the
material object, and not as modifications of ourselves: while Brown
believed that matter is suggested to us only as an unknown something,
all whose attributes, as known or conceived by us, are resolvable into
affections of our senses. In Brown’s opinion we are cognizant of a
non-ego in the perceptive act, only in the indefinite form of something
external; all else we are able to know of it is only that it produces
certain affections in us: which is also our author’s opinion as regards
the Secondary Qualities. The difference therefore, between Brown and Sir
W. Hamilton, is not of the kind which Sir W. Hamilton considers it to
be, but consists mainly in this, that Brown really held what Sir W.
Hamilton held only verbally, the doctrine of the Relativity ofn our
knowledge. I shall attempt, further on, to show that on the point on
which they really differed, Brown was right, and Sir W. Hamilton totally
wrong.*

The considerations which have now been adduced are subversive of a great
mass of triumphant animadversion by our author on the ignorance Edition:
current; Page: [168] and carelessness of Brown, and some milder
criticism on Reid. Sir W. Hamilton thinks it astonishing that neither of
these philosophers should have recognised Natural Realism, and the third
form of Cosmothetic Idealism, as two different modes of thought. Reid,
whom he makes a great point of claiming as a Natural Realist, was, he
says, quite unaware of the possibility of the other opinion, and did not
guard against it by his language, leaving it, therefore, open to dispute
whether, instead of being a Natural Realist, he was not, like Brown, a
Cosmothetic Idealist of the third class; while Brown, on the other hand,
never conceived Natural Realism, nor thought it possible that Reid held
any other than his own opinion, as he invariably affirms him to have
done.[*] I apprehend that both philosophers are entirely clear of the
blame thus imputed to them. Reid never imagined Brown’s doctrine, nor
Brown Reid’s, as anything different from his own, because in truth they
were not different. If the distinction between a Natural Realist and a
Cosmothetic Idealist of the third class, be that the latter believes the
existence of the external object to be inferred from, or suggested by,
our sensations, while the former holds it to be neither the one nor the
other, but to be apprehended in consciousness simultaneously and
co-ordinately with the sensations, Reid was as much a Cosmothetic
Idealist as Brownp. The question does not concern philosophy, but the
history of philosophy, which is Sir W. Hamilton’s strongest point, and
was not at all a strong point with either Brown or Reid; but the matter
of fact is worth the few pages necessary for clearing it up, because Sir
W. Hamilton’s vast and accurate learning goes near to obtaining for his
statements, on any such matter, implicit confidence, and it is therefore
important to show that even where he is strongest, he is sometimes
wrong.

In the severe criticism on Brown from which I have quoted, and which,
though in some respects unjust, in others I cannot deny to be well
merited, some of the strongest expressions have reference to the gross
misunderstanding of Reid, of which Brown is alleged to have been guilty
in not perceiving him to have been a Natural Realist. “We proceed,” says
our author,

to consider the greatest of all Brown’s errors, in itself and in its
consequences, his misconception of the cardinal position of Reid’s
philosophy, in supposing that philosopher as a hypothetical realist, to
hold with himself the third form of the representative hypothesis, and
not, as a natural realist, the doctrine of an intuitive Perception.*

Brown’s transmutation of Reid from a natural to a hypothetical realist,
as a misconception of the grand and distinctive tenet of a school by one
even of its Edition: current; Page: [169] disciples, is without a
parallel in the whole history of philosophy; and this portentous error
is prolific; chimæra chimæram parit. Were the evidence of the mistake
less unambiguous, we should be disposed rather to question our own
perspicacity than to tax so subtle an intellect with so gross a
blunder.*

And he did, in time, feel some misgiving as to his “own perspicacity.”
When, in preparing an edition of Reid, he was obliged to look more
closely into that author’s statements, we find a remarkable lowering of
the high tone of these sentences; and he felt obliged, in revising the
paper for the Discussions, to write “This is too strong,” after a
passage in which he had said that “Brown’s interpretation of the
fundamental tenet of Reid’s philosophy is not a simple misconception,
but an absolute reversal of its real and even unambiguous import.”† Well
would it have been for Brown’s reputation if all Sir W. Hamilton’s
attempts to bring home blunders to him, had been as little successful as
this.

In the work in which Reid first brought his opinions before the world,
the Inquiry into the Human Mind, his language is so unequivocally that
of a Cosmothetic Idealist, that it admits of no mistake. It is almost
more unambiguous than that of Brown himself. The external object is
always said to be perceived through the medium of “natural signs:” these
signs being our sensations, interpreted by a natural instinct. Our
sensations, he says, belong to that

class of natural signs which . . . though we never before had any notion
or conception of the thing signified, do suggest it, or conjure it up,
as it were, by a natural kind of magic, and at once give us a conception
and create a belief of it.‡

I take it for granted that the notion of hardness, and the belief of it,
is first got by means of that particular sensation which, as far back as
we can remember, does invariably suggest it, and that, if we had never
had such a feeling, we should never have had our notion of hardness.§

Again,

when a coloured body is presented, there is a certain apparition to the
eye, or to the mind, which we have called the appearance of colour. Mr.
Locke calls it an idea, and, indeed, it may be called so with the
greatest propriety. This idea can have no existence but when it is
perceived. It is a kind of thought, and can only be the act of a
percipient or thinking being. By the constitution of our nature, we are
led to conceive this idea as a sign of something external, and are
impatient till we learn its meaning.¶

Edition: current; Page: [170]
I must be excused if I am studious to prove, by an accumulation of
citations, that these are not passing expressions of Reid, but the
deliberate doctrine of his treatise.

I think it appears from what hath been said, that there are natural
suggestions; particularly, that sensation suggests the notion of present
existence, and the belief that what we perceive or feel does now exist.
. . . And, in like manner, certain sensations of touch, by the
constitution of our nature, suggest to us extension, solidity, and
motion.*

By an original principle of our constitution, a certain sensation of
touch both suggests to the mind the conception of hardness, and creates
the belief of it: or, in other words, this sensation is a natural sign
of hardness.†

The word gold has no similitude to the substance signified by it; nor is
it in its own nature more fit to signify this than any other substance;
yet, by habit and custom, it suggests this and no other. In like manner,
a sensation of touch suggests hardness, although it hath neither
similitude to hardness, nor, as far as we can perceive, any necessary
connexion with it. The difference betwixt these two signs lies only in
this—that, in the first, the suggestion is the effect of habit and
custom; in the second, it is not the effect of habit, but of the
original constitution of our minds.‡

Extension, therefore, seems to be a quality suggested to us [the italics
are Reid’s] by the very same sensations which suggest the other
qualities above mentioned. When I grasp a ball in my hand, I perceive it
at once hard, figured, and extended. The feeling is very simple, and
hath not the least resemblance to any quality of body. Yet it suggests
to us three primary qualities perfectly distinct from one another, as
well as from the sensation which indicates them. When I move my hand
along the table, the feeling is so simple that I find it difficult to
distinguish it into things of different natures, yet it immediately
suggests hardness, smoothness, extension, and motion—things of very
different natures, and all of them as distinctly understood as the
feeling which suggests them.§

The feelings of touch, which suggest primary qualities, have no names,
nor are they ever reflected upon. They pass through the mind
instantaneously, and serve only to introduce the notion and belief of
external things, which by our constitution, are connected with them.
They are natural signs, and the mind immediately passes to the thing
signified, without making the least reflection upon the sign, or
observing that there was any such thing.¶

This passage, with many others of like import, Sir W. Hamilton might
usefully have meditated on, before he laid so much stress on the
testimony of consciousness that the apprehension is not through the
medium of a sign.

Edition: current; Page: [171]
Let a man press his hand against the table—he feels it hard. But what is
the meaning of this? The meaning undoubtedly is, that he hath a certain
feeling of touch, from which he concludes, without any reasoning or
comparing ideas, that there is something external really existing, whose
parts stick so firmly together, that they cannot be displaced without
considerable force. There is here a feeling, and a conclusion drawn from
it, or some way suggested by it. . . . The hardness of the table is the
conclusion, the feeling is the medium by which we are led to that
conclusion.*

How a sensation should instantly make us conceive and believe the
existence of an external thing altogether unlike to it, I do not pretend
to know; and when I say that the one suggests the other, I mean not to
explain the manner of their connexion, but to express a fact, which
every one may be conscious of, namely, that by a law of our nature, such
a conception and belief constantly and immediately follow the
sensation.†

There are three ways in which the mind passes from the appearance of a
natural sign to the conception and belief of the thing signified—by
original principles of our constitution, by custom, and by reasoning.
Our original perceptions are got in the first of these ways. . . . In
the first of these ways, Nature, by means of the sensations of touch,
informs us of the hardness and softness of bodies; of their extension,
figure, and motion; and of that space in which they move and are
placed.‡

In the testimony of Nature given by the senses, as well as in human
testimony given by language, things are signified to us by signs: and in
one as well as the other, the mind, either by original principles or by
custom, passes from the sign to the conception and belief of the things
signified. . . . The signs in original perceptions are sensations, of
which Nature hath given us a great variety, suited to the variety of the
things signified by them. Nature hath established a real connexion
between the signs and the things signified, and Nature hath also taught
us the interpretation of the signs—so that, previous to experience, the
sign suggests the thing signified, and creates the belief of it.§

It is by one particular principle of our constitution that certain
features express anger; and by another particular principle, that
certain features express benevolence. It is, in like manner, by one
particular principle of our constitution that a certain sensation
signifies hardness in the body which I handle; and it is by another
particular principle that a certain sensation signifies motion in that
body.¶

I doubt if it would be possible to extract from Brown himself an equal
number of passagesq expressing as clearly and positively, and in terms
as irreconcilable with any other opinion, the doctrine which our author
terms the third form of Cosmothetic Idealism; in the exact shape, too,
in which Edition: current; Page: [172] Brown held it, unencumbered by
the gratuitous addition which Sir W. Hamilton fastens on him, that the
sign must “truly represent” the thing signified,—a notion which Reid
takes good care that he shall not be supposed to entertain, since he
repeatedly declares that there is no resemblance between them. That
Reid, at least when he wrote the Inquiry, was a Cosmothetic Idealist;
that up to that time it had never occurred to him that the rconvictionsr
of the existence and qualities of external objects could be regarded as
anything but suggestions by, and conclusions from, our sensations—is too
obvious to be questioned by any one who has the text fresh in his
recollection. Accordingly Sir W. Hamilton acknowledges as much in his
edition of Reid, both in the foot-notes and in the appended
“Dissertations.” After restating his own doctrine, that our natural
beliefs assure us of outward objects, only by assuring us that we are
immediately conscious of them, he adds, “Reid himself seems to have
become obscurely aware of this condition: and though he never retracted
his doctrine concerning the mere suggestion of extension, we find in his
Essays on the Intellectual Powers assertions in regard to the immediate
perception of external things, which would tend to show that his later
views were more in unison with the necessary convictions of mankind.”*
And in another place he says of the doctrine maintained by Reid “in his
earlier work,” that it is one which “if he did not formally retract in
his later writings, he did not continue to profess.”† It is hard that
Brown should be charged with blundering to a degree which is
“portentous” and “without a parallel in the whole history of
philosophy,” for attributing to Reid an opinion which Sir W. Hamilton
confesses that Reid maintained in one of his only two important
writings, and did not retract in the other. But Sir W. Hamilton is still
more wrong than he confesses. He is in a mistake when he says that Reid,
though he did not retract the opinion, did not continue to profess it.
For some reason, not apparent, he did cease to employ the word
Suggestion. But he continued to use terms equivalent to it.

Every different perception is conjoined with a sensation that is proper
to it. The one is the sign, the other thing signified.‡

I touch the table gently with my hand, and I feel it to be smooth, hard,
and cold. These are qualities of the table perceived by touch: but I
perceive them by means of a sensation which indicates them.§

Observing that the agreeable sensation is raised when the rose is near,
and ceases when it is removed, I am led by my nature to conclude some
quality to be in the rose, Edition: current; Page: [173] which is the
cause of this sensation. This quality in the rose is the object
perceived; and that act of my mind by which I have the conviction and
belief of this quality, is what in this case I call perception.*

Of this passage even Sir W. Hamilton honestly says in a foot-note, that
it “appears to be an explicit disavowal of the doctrine of an intuitive
or immediate perception.”[*] Again:

When a primary quality is perceived, the sensation immediately leads our
thought to the quality signified by it, and is itself forgot. . . . The
sensations belonging to primary qualities . . . carry the thought to the
external object, and immediately disappear and are forgot. Nature
intended them only as signs; and when they have served that purpose they
vanish.†

Nature has connected our perception of external objects with certain
sensations. If the sensation is produced, the corresponding perception
follows, even when there is no object, and in that case is apt to
deceive us.‡

In perception, whether original or acquired, there is something which
may be called the sign, and something which is signified to us, or
brought to our knowledge by that sign. In original perception, the signs
are the various sensations which are produced by the impressions made
upon our organs. The things signified, are the objects perceived in
consequence of those sensations, by the original constitution of our
nature. Thus, when I grasp an ivory ball in my hand, I have a certain
sensation of touch. Although this sensation be in the mind, and have no
similitude to anything material; yet, by the laws of my constitution, it
is immediately followed by the conception and belief, that there is in
my hand a hard smooth body of a spherical figure, and about an inch and
a half in diameter. This belief is grounded neither upon reasoning, nor
upon experience; it is the immediate effect of my constitution, and this
I call original perception.§

All these are as unequivocal, and the last passage as full and precise a
statement of Cosmothetic Idealism, as any in the Inquiry. In the
“Dissertations” appended to Reid,¶ Sir W. Hamilton, who never fails in
candour, acknowledges in the fullest manner the inferences which may be
drawn from passages like these, but thinks that they are balanced by
others which “seem to harmonize exclusively with the conditions of
natural presentationism,”∥ and on the whole is “decidedly of opinion
that, as the great end—the governing principle of Reid’s doctrine was to
reconcile philosophy with the necessary convictions of mankind, he
intended a doctrine of natural, consequently a doctrine of presentative,
realism; and that he would have at once surrendered, as erroneous, every
statement Edition: current; Page: [174] which was found at variance with
such a doctrine.”* But it is clear that the doctrine of perception
through natural signs did not, in Reid’s opinion, contradict “the
necessary convictions of mankind;” being brought into harmony with them
by his doctrine, that the signs, after they have served their purpose,
are “forgot,” which, as he conclusively shows in many places, it was
both natural and inevitable that they should be. The passages which Sir
W. Hamilton cites as inconsistent with any doctrine but Natural
Realism,[*] are those in which Reid affirms that we perceive objects
immediately, and that the external things which really exist are the
very ones which we perceive. But Reid evidently did not think these
expressions inconsistent with the doctrine that the notion and belief of
external objects are irresistibly suggested through natural signs.
Having this notion and belief irresistibly suggested, is what he means
by perceiving the external object. He says so in more than one of the
passages I have just quoted: and neither in his chapter on Perception,
nor anywhere else, does he speak of perception as implying anything
more. In that chapter he says, “If we attend to that act of our mind
which we call the perception of an external object of sense, we shall
find in it these three things: First, some conception or notion of the
object perceived; Secondly, a strong and irresistible conviction and
belief of its present existence; and, Thirdly, that this conviction and
belief are immediate, and not the effect of reasoning.”† We see in this
as in a hundred other places, what Reid meant when he said that our
perception of outward objects is immediate. He did not mean that it is
not a conviction suggested by something else, but only that the
conviction is not the effect of reasoning. “This conviction is not only
irresistible, but it is immediate; that is, it is not by a train of
reasoning and argumentation that we come to be convinced of the
existence of what we perceive.”‡ As Nature has given us the signs, so it
is by an original law of our nature that we are enabled to interpret
them. When Reid means anything but this in contending for an immediate
perception of objects, he merely means to deny that it takes place
through an image in the brain or in the mind, as maintained by
Cosmothetic Idealists of the first or the second class.

The only plausible argument produced by Sir W. Hamilton in proof of
Reid’s Natural Realism, and against his having held, as Brown
thought,[†] Brown’s own opinion, is, that when in the speculations of
Arnauld he had before him exactly the same opinion, he failed to
recognise it.§ But on a Edition: current; Page: [175] careful
examination of Reid’s criticism on Arnauld, it will be seen, that as
long as Reid had to do with Arnauld’s direct statement of his opinion,
he found nothing sin it differents from his own; but was puzzled, and
thought that Arnauld attempted to unite inconsistent opinions, because,
after throwing over the “ideal theory,” and saying that the only real
ideas are our perceptions, he maintained that it is still true, in a
sense, that we do not perceive things directly, but through our ideas.
What! asks Reid, do we perceive things through our perceptions? But if
we merely put the word sensations instead of perceptions, the doctrine
is exactly that of Reid in the Inquiry—that we perceive things through
our sensations. Most probably Arnauld meant this, but was not so
understood by Reid. If he meant anything else, his opinion was not the
same as Reid’s, and we need no explanation of Reid’s not recognising
it.[*]

One of the collateral indications that Reid’s opinion agreed with
Brown’s, and not with Sir W. Hamilton’s, is that in treating this
question he seldom or never uses the word Knowledge, but only Belief. On
Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine, the distinction between these two terms,
however vaguely and mistily conceived by him, is indispensable. The
total absence of any recognition of it in Reid, shows that of the two
opinions, if there was one which he had never conceived the possibility
of, it was not Brown’s, as Sir W. Hamilton supposes, but Sir W.
Hamilton’s. In our author’s mind this indication ought to have decided
the question: for in the case of another philosopher he, on precisely
the same evidence, brings in a verdict of Cosmothetic Idealism. Krug’s
system, he says, as first promulgated, “was, like Kant’s, a mere
Cosmothetic Idealism; for while he allowed a knowledge of the internal
world, he only allowed a belief of the external.”*

It is true, Reid did not believe in what our author terms
“representative perception,” if by this be meant perception through an
image in the mind, supposed, like the picture of a fact in memory, to be
like its original. But neither (as I have repeatedly observed) did
Brown. What Brown held was exactly the doctrine of Reid in the passages
that I have extracted. He thought that certain sensations, irresistibly,
and by a law of our nature, suggest, without any process of reasoning,
and without the intervention of any tertium quid, the notion of
something external, and an invincible belief in its real existence. If
representative perception be this, both Reid and Brown believed in it:
if anything else, Brown believed tint it no more than Reid. Not only was
Reid a Cosmothetic Idealist of Brown’s exact type, but Edition: current;
Page: [176] in stating his own doctrine, he has furnished, as far as I
am aware, the clearest and best statement extant of their common
opinion. They differed, indeed, as to our having, in this or in any
other manner, an intuitive perception of any of the attributes of
objects; Reid, like Sir W. Hamilton, affirming, while Brown denied, that
we have a direct intuition of the Primary Qualities of bodies. But Brown
did not deny, nor would Sir W. Hamilton accuse him of denying, the wide
difference between his opinion and Reid’s on this latter point.

Before closing this chapter, I will notice the curious fact, that after
insisting with so much emphasis upon the recognition of an Ego and a
Non-ego as an element in all consciousness, Sir W. Hamilton is obliged
to admit that the distinction is in certain cases a mistake, and that
our consciousness sometimes recognises a Non-ego where there is only an
Ego. It is a doctrine of his, repeated in many parts of his works, that
in our internal consciousness there is no non-ego. Even the remembrance
of a past fact, or the mental image of an absent object, is not a thing
separable or distinguishable from the mind’s act in remembering, but is
another name for that act itself. Now it is certain, that in thinking of
an absent or an imaginary object, we naturally imagine ourselves to be
thinking of an objective something, distinguishable from the thinking
act. Sir W. Hamilton, being obliged to acknowledge this, resolves the
difficulty in the very manner for which he so often rebukes other
thinkers—by representing this apparent testimony of consciousness as a
kind of illusion. “The object,” he says, “is in this case given as
really identical with the conscious ego, but still consciousness
distinguishes it, as an accident, from the ego, as the subject of that
accident: it projects, as it were, this subjective phænomenon from
itself,—views it at a distance,—in a word, objectifies it.”* But if, in
one half of the domain of consciousness—the internal half—it is in the
power of consciousness to “project” out of itself what is merely one of
its own acts, and regard it as external and a non-ego, why are those
accused of declaring consciousness a lie, who think that this may
possibly be the case with the other half of its domain also, and that
the non-ego altogether may be but a mode in which the mind represents to
itself the possible modifications of the ego? How the truth stands in
respect to this matter I will endeavour, in the following chapter, to
investigate. For the present, I content myself with asking, why the same
liberty in the interpretation of Consciousness, which Sir W. Hamilton’s
own doctrine cannot dispense with, should be held to be an
insurmountable objection to the ucounter-doctrine.u

Edition: current; Page: [177]


CHAPTER XI: The Psychological Theory of the Belief in an External World

we have seen Sir W. Hamilton at work on the question of the reality of
Matter, by the introspective method, and, as it seems, with little
result. Let us now approach the same subject by the psychological. I
proceed, therefore, to state the case of those who hold that the belief
in an external world is not intuitive, but an acquired product.

This theory postulates the following psychological truths, all of which
are proved by experience, and are not contested, though their force is
seldom adequately felt, by Sir W. Hamilton and the other thinkers of the
introspective school.

It postulates, first, that the human mind is capable of Expectation. In
other words, that after having had actual sensations, we are capable of
forming the conception of Possible sensations; sensations which we are
not feeling at the present moment, but which we might feel, and should
feel if certain conditions were present, the nature of which conditions
we have, in many cases, learnt by experience.

It postulates, secondly, the laws of the Association of Ideas. So far as
we are here concerned, these laws are the following: 1st. Similar
phænomena tend to be thought of together. 2nd. Phænomena which have
either been experienced or conceived in close contiguity to one another,
tend to be thought of together. The contiguity is of two kinds;
simultaneity, and immediate succession. Facts which have been
experienced or thought of simultaneously, recall the thought of one
another. Of facts which have been experienced or thought of in immediate
succession, the antecedent, or the thought of it, recalls the thought of
the consequent, but not conversely. 3rd. Associations produced by
contiguity become more certain and rapid by repetition. When two
phænomena have been very often experienced in conjunction, and have not,
in any single instance, occurred separately either in experience or in
thought, there is produced between them what has been called
Inseparable, or less correctly, Indissoluble Association: by which is
not meant that the association must inevitably last to the end of
life—that no subsequent experience or process of thought can possibly
Edition: current; Page: [178] avail to dissolve it; but only that as
long as no such experience or process of thought has taken place, the
association is irresistible; it is impossible for us to think the one
thing disjoined from the other. 4th. When an association has acquired
this character of inseparability—when the bond between the two ideas has
been thus firmly riveted, not only does the idea called up by
association become, in our consciousness, inseparable from the idea
which suggested it, but the facts or phænomena answering to those ideas
come at last to seem inseparable in existence: things which we are
unable to conceive apart, appear incapable of existing apart; and the
belief we have in their coexistence, though really a product of
experience, seems intuitive. Innumerable examples might be given of this
law. One of the most familiar, as well as the most striking, is that of
our acquired perceptions of sight. Even those who, with Mr. Bailey,
consider the perception of distance by the eye as not acquired, but
intuitive, admit that there are many perceptions of sight which, though
instantaneous and unhesitating, are not intuitive.[*] What we see is a
very minute fragment of what we think we see. We see artificially that
one thing is hard, another soft. We see artificially that one thing is
hot, another cold. We see artificially that what we see is a book, or a
stone, each of these being not merely an inference, but a heap of
inferences, from the signs which we see, to things not visible. aWe see,
and cannot help seeing, what we have learnt to infer, even when we know
that the inference is erroneous, and that the apparent perception is
deceptive. We cannot help seeing the moon larger when near the horizon,
though we know that she is of precisely her usual size. We cannot help
seeing a mountain as nearer to us and of less height, when we see it
through a more than ordinarily transparent atmosphere.a

Setting out from these premises, the Psychological Theory maintains,
that there are associations naturally and even necessarily generated by
the order of our sensations and of our reminiscences of sensation,
which, supposing no intuition of an external world to have existed in
consciousness, would inevitably generate the belief, and would cause it
to be regarded as an intuition.

What is it we meanb, or what is it which leads us to say, that the
objects we perceive areb external to us, and not a part of our own
thoughts? We mean, that there cis concernedc in our perceptions
something which exists when we are not thinking of it; which existed
before we had ever thought of Edition: current; Page: [179] it, and
would exist if we were annihilated; and further, that there exist things
which we never saw, touched, or otherwise perceived, and things which
never have been perceived by man. This idea of something which is
distinguished from our fleeting impressions by what, in Kantian
language, is called Perdurability; something which is fixed and the
same, while our impressions vary; something which exists whether we are
aware of it or not, and which is always square (or of some other given
figure) whether it appears to us square or round—constitutes altogether
our idea of external substance. Whoever can assign an origin to this
complex conception, has accounted for what we mean by the belief in
matter. Now all this, according to the Psychological Theory, is but the
form impressed by the known laws of association, upon the conception or
notion, obtained by experience, of Contingent Sensations; by which are
meant, sensations that are not in our present consciousness, and
dindividuallyd never were in our consciousness at all, but which in
virtue of the laws to which we have learnt by experience that our
sensations are subject, we know that we should have felt under given
supposable circumstances, and under these same circumstances, might
still feel.

I see a piece of white paper on a table. I go into another roome. If the
phænomenon always followed me, or if, when it did not follow me, I
believed it to disappear è rerum naturâ, I should not believe it to be
an external object. I should consider it as a phantom—a mere affection
of my senses: I should not believe that there had been any Body there.
But,e though I have ceased to see it, I am persuaded that the paper is
still there. I no longer have the sensations which it gave me; but I
believe that when I again place myself in the circumstances in which I
had those sensations, that is, when I go again into the room, I shall
again have them; and further, that there has been no intervening moment
at which this would not have been the case. Owing to this fpropertyf of
my mind, my conception of the world at any given instant consists, in
only a small proportion, of present sensations. Of these I may at the
time have none at all, and they are in any case a most insignificant
portion of the whole which I apprehend. The conception I form of the
world existing at any moment, comprises, along with the sensations I am
feeling, a countless variety of possibilities of sensation: namely, the
whole of those which past observation tells me that I could, under any
supposable circumstances, experience at this moment, together with an
indefinite and illimitable multitude of others which though I do not
know that I could, yet it is possible that I might, experience in
circumstances not known to me. These various possibilities are the
important Edition: current; Page: [180] thing to me in the world. My
present sensations are generally of little importance, and are moreover
fugitive: the possibilities, on the contrary, are permanent, which is
the character that mainly distinguishes our idea of Substance or Matter
from our notion of sensation. These possibilities, which are conditional
certainties, need a special name to distinguish them from mere vague
possibilities, which experience gives no warrant for reckoning upon.
Now, as soon as a distinguishing name is given, though it be only to the
same thing regarded in a different aspect, one of the most familiar
experiences of our mental nature teaches us, that the different name
comes to be considered as the name of a different thing.

There is another important peculiarity of these certified or guaranteed
possibilities of sensation; namely, that they have reference, not to
single sensations, but to sensations joined together in groups. When we
think of anything as a material substance, or body, we either have had,
or we think that on some given supposition we should have, not some one
sensation, but a great and even an indefinite number and variety of
sensations, generally belonging to different senses, but so linked
together, that the presence of one announces the possible presence at
the very same instant of any or all of the rest. In our mind, therefore,
not only is this particular Possibility of sensation invested with the
quality of permanence when we are not actually feeling any of the
sensations at all; but when we are feeling some of them, the remaining
sensations of the group are conceived by us in the form of Present
Possibilities, which might be realized at the very moment. And as this
happens in turn to all of them, the group as a whole presents itself to
the mind as permanent, in contrast not solely with the temporariness of
my bodily presence, but also with the temporary character of each of the
sensations composing the group; in other words, as a kind of permanent
substratum, under a set of passing experiences or manifestations: which
is another leading character of our idea of substance or matter, as
distinguished from sensation.

Let us now take into consideration another of the general characters of
our experience, namely, that in addition to fixed groups, we also
recognise a fixed Order in our sensations; an Order of succession,
which, when ascertained by observation, gives rise to the ideas of Cause
and Effect, according to what I hold to be the true theory of that
relation, and is gon any theoryg the source of all our knowledge hwhath
causes produce what effects. Now, of what nature is this fixed order
among our sensations? It is a constancy of antecedence and sequence. But
the constant antecedence and sequence do not generally exist between one
actual sensation and another. Very few such sequences are presented to
us by experience. In almost all Edition: current; Page: [181] the
constant sequences which occur in Nature, the antecedence and
consequence do not obtain between sensations, but between the groups we
have been speaking about, of which a very small portion is actual
sensation, the greater part being permanent possibilities of sensation,
evidenced to us by a small and variable number of sensations actually
present. Hence, our ideas of causation, power, activity, do not become
connected in thought with our sensations as actual at all, save in the
few physiological cases where these figure by themselves as the
antecedents in some uniform sequence. Those ideas become connected, not
with sensations, but with groups of possibilities of sensation. The
sensations conceived do not, to our habitual thoughts, present
themselves as sensations actually experienced, inasmuch as not only any
one or any number of them may be supposed absent, but none of them need
be present. We find that the modifications which are taking place more
or less regularly in our possibilities of sensation, are mostly quite
independent of our consciousness, and of our presence or absence.
Whether we are asleep or awake the fire goes out, and puts an end to one
particular possibility of warmth and light. Whether we are present or
absent the corn ripens, and brings a new possibility of food. Hence we
speedily learn to think of Nature as made up solely of these groups of
possibilities, and the active force in Nature as manifested in the
modification of some of these by others. The sensations, though the
original foundation of the whole, come to be looked upon as a sort of
accident depending on us, and the possibilities as much more real than
the actual sensations, nay, as the very realities of which these are
only the representations, appearances, or effects. When this state of
mind has been arrived at, then, and from that time forward, we are never
conscious of a present sensation without instantaneously referring it to
some one of the groups of possibilities into which a sensation of that
particular description enters; and if we do not yet know to what group
to refer it, we at least feel an irresistible conviction that it must
belong to some group or other; i.e. that its presence proves the
existence, here and now, of a great number and variety of possibilities
of sensation, without which it would not have been. The whole set of
sensations as possible, form a permanent background to any one or more
of them that are, at a given moment, actual; and the possibilities are
conceived as standing to the actual sensations in the relation of a
cause to its effects, or of canvas to the figures painted on it, or of a
root to the trunk, leaves, and flowers, or of a substratum to that which
is spread over it, or, in transcendental language, of Matter to Form.

When this point has been reached, the Permanent Possibilities in
question have assumed such unlikeness of aspect, and such difference of
iapparent Edition: current; Page: [182] relationi to us, from any
sensations, that it would be contrary to all we know of the constitution
of human nature that they should not be conceived as, and believed to
be, at least as different from sensations as sensations are from one
another. Their groundwork in sensation is forgotten, and they are
supposed to be something intrinsically distinct from it. We can withdraw
ourselves from any of our (external) sensations, or we can be withdrawn
from them by some other agency. But though the sensations cease, the
possibilities remain in existence; they are independent of our will, our
presence, and everything which belongs to us. We find, too, that they
belong as much to other human or sentient beings as to ourselves. We
find other people grounding their expectations and conduct upon the same
permanent possibilities on which we ground ours. But we do not find them
experiencing the same actual sensations. Other people do not have our
sensations exactly when and as we have them: but they have our
possibilities of sensation; whatever indicates a present possibility of
sensations to ourselves, indicates a present possibility of similar
sensations to them, except so far as their organs of sensation may vary
from the type of ours. This puts the final seal to our conception of the
groups of possibilities as the fundamental reality in Nature. The
permanent possibilities are common to us and to our fellow-creatures;
the actual sensations are not. That which other people become aware of
when, and on the same grounds, as I do, seems more real to me than that
which they do not know of unless I tell them. The world of Possible
Sensations succeeding one another according to laws, is as much in other
beings as it is in me; it has therefore an existence outside me; it is
an External World.

If this explanation of the origin and growth of the idea of Matter, or
External Nature, contains nothing at variance with natural laws, it is
at least an admissible supposition, that the element of Non-ego which
Sir W. Hamilton regards as an original datum of consciousness, and which
we certainly do find in jwhat we now call ourj consciousness, may not be
one of its primitive elements—may not have existed at all in its first
manifestations. But if this supposition be admissible, it ought, on Sir
W. Hamilton’s principles, to be received as true. The first of the laws
laid down by him for the interpretation of Consciousness, the law (as he
terms it) of Parcimony, forbids to suppose an original principle of our
nature in order to account for phænomena which admit of possible
explanation from known causes. If the supposed ingredient of
consciousness be one which might grow up (though we cannot prove that it
did grow up) through later experience; and if, when it had so grown up,
it would, by known laws of our nature, appear as completely intuitive as
our sensations themselves; we are bound, according to Sir W. Hamilton’s
and all sound philosophy, to assign to it that origin. Edition: current;
Page: [183] Where there is a known cause adequate to account for a
phænomenon, there is no justification for ascribing it to an unknown
one. And what evidence does Consciousness furnish of the intuitiveness
of an impression, except instantaneousness, apparent simplicity, and
unconsciousness on our part of how the impression came into our minds?
These features can only prove the impression to be intuitive, on the
hypothesis that there are no means of accounting for them otherwise. If
they not only might, but naturally would, exist, even on the supposition
that it is not intuitive, we must accept the conclusion to which we are
led by the Psychological Method, and which the Introspective Method
furnishes absolutely nothing to contradict.

Matter, then, may be defined, a Permanent Possibility of Sensation. If I
am asked, whether I believe in matter, I ask whether the questioner
accepts this definition of it. If he does, I believe in matter: and so
do all Berkeleians. In any other sense than this, I do not. But I affirm
with confidence, that this conception of Matter includes the whole
meaning attached to it by the common world, apart from philosophical,
and sometimes from theological, theories. The reliance of mankind on the
real existence of visible and tangible objects, means reliance on the
reality and permanence of Possibilities of visual and tactual
sensations, when no such sensations are actually experienced. We are
warranted in believing that this is the meaning of Matter in the minds
of many of its most esteemed metaphysical champions, though they
themselves would not admit as much: for example, of Reid, Stewart, and
Brown. For these three philosophers alleged that all mankind, including
Berkeley and Hume, really believed in Matter, inasmuch as unless they
did, they would not have turned aside to save themselves from running
against a post. Now all which this manœuvre really proved is, that they
believed in Permanent Possibilities of Sensation. We have therefore the
kunintentionalk sanction of these three eminent defenders of the
existence of matter, for affirming, that to believe in Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation lisl believing in Matter. It is hardly
necessary, after such authorities, to mention Dr. Johnson,[*] or any one
else who resorts to the argumentum baculinum of knocking a stick against
the ground. Sir W. Hamilton, a far subtler thinker than any of these,
never reasons in this manner. He never supposes that a disbeliever in
what he means by Matter, ought in consistency to act in any different
mode from those who believe in it. He knew that the belief on which all
the practical consequences depend, is the belief in Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation, Edition: current; Page: [184] and that if
nobody believed in a material universe in any other sense, life would go
on exactly as it now does. He, however, did believe in more than this,
but, I think, only because it had never occurred to him that mere
Possibilities of Sensation could, to our artificialized consciousness,
present the character of objectivity which, as we have now shown, they
not only can, but unless the known laws of the human mind were
suspended, must necessarily, present.

Perhaps it may be objected, that the very possibility of framing such a
notion of Matter as Sir W. Hamilton’s—the capacity in the human mind of
imagining an external world which is anything more than what the
Psychological Theory makes it—amounts to a disproof of the theory. If
(it may be said) we had no revelation in consciousness, of a world which
is not in some way or other identified with sensation, we should be
unable to have the notion of such a world. If the only ideas we had of
external objects were ideas of our sensations, supplemented by an
acquired notion of permanent possibilities of sensation, we must (it is
thought) be incapable of conceiving, and therefore still more incapable
of fancying that we perceive, things which are not sensations at all. It
being evident however that some philosophers believe this, and it being
maintainable that the mass of mankind do so, the existence of a
perdurable basis of sensations, distinct from sensations themselves, is
proved, it might be said, by the possibility of believing it.

Let me first restate what I apprehend the belief to be. We believe that
we perceive a something closely related to all our sensations, but
different from those which we are feeling at any particular minute; and
distinguished from sensations altogether, by being permanent and always
the same, while these are fugitive, variable, and alternately displace
one another. But these attributes of the object of perception are
properties belonging to all the possibilities of sensation which
experience guarantees. The belief in such permanent possibilities seems
to me to include all that is essential or characteristic in the belief
in substance. I believe that Calcutta exists, though I do not perceive
it, and that it would still exist if every percipient inhabitant were
suddenly to leave the place, or be struck dead. But when I analyse the
belief, all I find in it is, that were these events to take place, the
Permanent Possibility of Sensation which I call Calcutta would still
remain; that if I were suddenly transported to the banks of the Hoogly,
I should still have the sensations which, if now present, would lead me
to affirm that Calcutta exists here and now. We may infer, therefore,
that both philosophers and the world at large, when they think of
matter, conceive it really as a Permanent Possibility of Sensation. But
the majority of philosophers fancy that it is something more; and the
world at large, though they have really, as I conceive, nothing in their
minds but a Permanent Possibility of Sensation, would, if asked the
question, undoubtedly agree Edition: current; Page: [185] with the
philosophers: and though this is sufficiently explained by the tendency
of the human mind to infer difference of things from difference of
names, I acknowledge the obligation of showing how it can be possible to
believe in an existence transcending all possibilities of sensation,
unless on the hypothesis that such an existence actually is, and that we
actually perceive it.

The explanation, however, is not difficult. It is an admitted fact, that
we are capable of all conceptions which can be formed by generalizing
from the observed laws of our sensations. Whatever relation we find to
exist between any one of our sensations and something different from it,
that same relation we have no difficulty in conceiving to exist between
the sum of all our sensations and something different from them. The
differences which our consciousness recognises between one sensation and
another, give us the general notion of difference, and inseparably
associate with every sensation we have, the feeling of its being
different from other things: and when once this association has been
formed, we can no longer conceive anything, without being able, and even
being compelled, to form also the conception of something different from
it. This familiarity with the idea of something different from each
thing we know, makes it natural and easy to form the notion of something
different from all things that we know, collectively as well as
individually. It is true we can form no conception of what such a thing
can be; our notion of it is merely negative; but the idea of ma
substance, apart from its relation to the impressions which we conceive
it as makingm on our senses, is a merely negative one. There is thus no
psychological obstacle to our forming the notion of a something which is
neither a sensation nor a possibility of sensation, even if our
consciousness does not testify to it; and nothing is more likely than
that the Permanent Possibilities of sensation, to which our
consciousness does testify, should be confounded in our minds with this
imaginary conception. All experience attests the strength of the
tendency to mistake mental abstractions, even negative ones, for
substantive realities; and the Permanent Possibilities of sensation
which experience guarantees, are so extremely unlike in many of their
properties to actual sensations, that since we are capable of imagining
something which transcends sensation, there is a great natural
probability that we should suppose these to be it.

But this natural probability is converted into certainty, when we take
into consideration that universal law of our experience which is termed
the law of Causation, and which makes us nmentally connect with the
beginning of everything, somen antecedent condition, or Cause. The case
of Causation is one of the most marked of all the cases in which we
extend to the sum total of our consciousness, a notion derived from its
parts. It is a striking Edition: current; Page: [186] example of our
power to conceive, and our tendency to believe, that a relation which
subsists between every individual item of our experience and some other
item, subsists also between our experience as a whole, and something not
within the sphere of experience. By this extension to the sum of all our
experiences, of the internal relations obtaining between its several
parts, we are led to consider sensation itself—the aggregate whole of
our sensations—as deriving its origin from antecedent existences
transcending sensation. That we should do this, is a consequence of the
particular character of the uniform sequences, which experience
discloses to us among our sensations. As already remarked, the constant
antecedent of a sensation is seldom another sensation, or set of
sensations, actually felt. It is much oftener the existence of a group
of possibilities, not necessarily including any actual sensations,
except such as are required to show that the possibilities are really
present. Nor are actual sensations indispensable even for this purpose;
for the presence of the object (which is nothing more than the immediate
presence of the possibilities) may be made known to us by the very
sensation which we refer to it as its effect. Thus, the real antecedent
of an effect—the only antecedent which, being invariable and
unconditional, we consider to be the cause—may be, not any sensation
really felt, but solely the presence, at that or the immediately
preceding moment, of a group of possibilities of sensation. Hence it is
not with sensations as actually experienced, but with their Permanent
Possibilities, that the idea of Cause comes to be identified: and we, by
one and the same process, acquire the habit of regarding Sensation in
general, like all our individual sensations, as an Effect, and also that
of conceiving as the causes of most of our individual sensations, not
other sensations, but general possibilities of sensation. If all these
considerations put together do not completely explain and account for
our conceiving these Possibilities as a class of independent and
substantive entities, I know not what psychological analysis can be
conclusive.

It may perhaps be said, that the preceding theory gives, indeed, some
account of the idea of Permanent Existence which forms part of our
conception of matter, but gives no explanation of our believing these
permanent objects to be external, or out of ourselves. I apprehend, on
the contrary, that the very idea of anything out of ourselves is derived
solely from the knowledge experience gives us of the Permanent
Possibilities. Our sensations we carry with us wherever we go, and they
never exist where we are not; but when we change our place we do not
carry away with us the Permanent Possibilities of Sensation: they remain
until we return, or arise and cease under conditions with which our
presence has in general nothing to do. And more than all—they are, and
will be after we have ceased to feel, Permanent Possibilities of
sensation to other beings than ourselves. Thus our actual sensations and
the permanent possibilities of sensation, stand Edition: current; Page:
[187] out in obtrusive contrast to one another: and when the idea of
Cause has been acquired, and extended by generalization from the parts
of our experience to its aggregate whole, nothing can be more natural
than that the Permanent Possibilities should be classed by us as
existences generically distinct from our sensations, but of which our
sensations are the effect.*

The same theory which accounts for our ascribing to an aggregate of
possibilities of sensation, a permanent existence which our sensations
themselves do not possess, and consequently a greater reality than
belongs to our sensations, also explains our attributing greater
objectivity to the Primary Qualities of bodies than to the Secondary.
For the sensations which correspond to what are called the Primary
Qualities (as soon at least as we come to apprehend them by two senses,
the eye as well as the touch) are always present when any part of the
group is so. But colours, tastes, smells, and the like, being, in
comparison, fugacious, are not, in the same degree, conceived as being
always there, even when nobody is present to perceive them. The
sensations answering to the Secondary Qualities are only occasional,
those to the Primary, constant. The Secondary, moreover, vary with
different persons, and with the temporary sensibility of our organs; the
Primary, when perceived at all, are, as far as we know, the same to all
persons and at all times.

Edition: current; Page: [188]


CHAPTER XII: The Psychological Theory of the Belief in Matter, How Far Applicable to Mind

if the deductions in the preceding chapter are correctly drawn from
known and admitted laws of the human mind, the doctrine which forms the
basis of Sir W. Hamilton’s system of psychology, that Mind and Matter,
an ego and a non-ego, are original data of consciousness, is deprived of
its foundation. Although these two elements, an Ego and a Non-ego, are
in a(what we call)a our consciousness now, and are, or seem to be,
inseparable from it, there is no reason for believing that the latter of
them, the non-ego, was in consciousness from the beginning; since, even
if it was not, we can perceive a way in which it not only might, but
must have grown up. We can see that, supposing it absent in the first
instance, it would inevitably be present now, not as a deliverance of
consciousness in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense, for to call it so is to beg
the question; but as an instantaneous and irresistible suggestion and
inference, which has become by long repetition undistinguishable from a
direct intuition. I now propose to carry the inquiry a step farther, and
to examine whether the Ego, as a deliverance of consciousness, stands
onb firmer ground than the Non-ego; whether, at the first moment of our
experience, we already have in our consciousness the conception of Self
as a permanent existence; or whether it is formed subsequently, and
admits of a similar analysis to that which we have found that the notion
of Not-self is susceptible of.

It is evident, in the first place, that our knowledge of mind, like that
of matter, is entirely relative; Sir W. Hamilton indeed affirms this of
mind, in can evenc more unqualified manner than he believes it of
matter, making no ddistinction between Primary and Secondaryd Qualities.

In so far as mind is the common name for the states of knowing, willing,
feeling, desiring, &c., of which I am conscious, it is only the name for
a certain series of connected phænomena or qualities, and consequently
expresses only what is Edition: current; Page: [189] known. But in so
far as it denotes that subject or substance in which the phænomena of
knowing, willing, &c., inhere—something behind or under these
phænomena—it expresses what, in itself, or in its absolute existence, is
unknown.*

We have no conception of Mind itself, as distinguished from its
conscious manifestations. We neither know nor can imagine it, except as
represented by the succession of manifold feelings which metaphysicians
call by the name of States or Modifications of Mind. It is nevertheless
true that our notion of Mind, as well as of Matter, is the notion of a
permanent something, contrasted with the perpetual flux of the
sensations and other feelings or mental states which we refer to it; a
something which we figure as remaining the same, while the particular
feelings through which it reveals its existence, change. This attribute
of Permanence, supposing that there were nothing else to be considered,
would admit of the same explanation when predicated of Mind, as of
Matter. The belief I entertain that my mind exists when it is not
feeling, nor thinking, nor conscious of its own existence, resolves
itself into the belief of a Permanent Possibility of these states. If I
think of myself as in dreamless sleep, or in the sleep of death, and
believe that I, or in other words my mind, is or will be existing
through these states, though not in conscious feeling, the most
scrupulous examination of my belief will not detect in it any fact
actually believed, except that my capability of feeling is not, in that
interval, permanently destroyed, and is suspended only because it does
not meet with the combination of econditionse which would call it into
action: the moment it did meet with that combination it would revive,
and remains, therefore, a Permanent Possibility. Thus far, there seems
no hindrance to our regarding Mind as nothing but the series of our
sensations (to which must now be added our internal feelings), as they
actually occur, with the addition of infinite possibilities of feeling
requiring for their actual realization conditions which may or may not
take place, but which as possibilities are always in existence, and many
of them present.f

Edition: current; Page: [190]
In order to the further understanding of the bearings of this theory of
the Ego, it is advisable to consider it in its relation to three
questions, which may very naturally be asked with reference to it, and
which often have been asked, and sometimes answered very erroneously. If
the theory is correct, and my Mind is but a series of feelings, or, as
it has been called, a thread of consciousness, however supplemented by
believed Possibilities of consciousness which are not, though they might
be, realized; if this is all that Mind, or Myself, amounts to, what
evidence have I (it is asked) of the existence of my fellow-creatures?
What evidence of a hyperphysical world, or, in one word, of God? and,
lastly, what evidence of immortality?

Dr. Reid unhesitatingly answers, None.[*] If the doctrine is true, I am
alone in the universe.

I hold this to be one of Reid’s most palpable mistakes. Whatever
evidence to each of the three points there is on the ordinary theory,
exactly that same evidence is there on this.

In the first place, as to my fellow-creatures. Reid seems to have
imagined that if I myself am only a series of feelings, the proposition
that I have any fellow-creatures, or that there are any Selves except
mine, is but words without a meaning. But this is a misapprehension. All
that I am compelled to admit if I receive this theory, is that other
people’s Selves also are but series of feelings, like my own. Though my
Mind, as I am capable of conceiving it, be nothing but the succession of
my feelings, and though Mind itself may be merely a possibility of
feelings, there is nothing in that doctrine to prevent my conceiving,
and believing, that there are other successions of feelings besides
those of which I am conscious, and that these are as real as my own. The
belief is completely consistent with the metaphysical theory. Let us now
see whether the theory takes away the grounds of it.

What are those grounds? By what evidence do I know, or by what
considerations am I led to believe, that there exist other sentient
creatures; that the walking and speaking figures which I see and hear,
have sensations and thoughts, or in other words, possess Minds? The most
strenuous Intuitionist does not include this among the things that I
know by direct intuition. I conclude it from certain things, which my
experience of my own Edition: current; Page: [191] states of feeling
proves to me to be marks of it. These marks are of two kinds, antecedent
and subsequent; the previous conditions requisite for feeling, and the
effects or consequences of it. I conclude that other human beings have
feelings like me, because, first, they have bodies like me, which I
know, in my own case, to be the antecedent condition of feelings; and
because, secondly, they exhibit the acts, and other outward signs, which
in my own case I know by experience to be caused by feelings. I am
conscious in myself of a series of facts connected by an uniform
sequence, of which the beginning is modifications of my body, the middle
is feelings, the end is outward demeanour. In the case of other human
beings I have the evidence of my senses for the first and last links of
the series, but not for the intermediate link. I find, however, that the
sequence between the first and last is as regular and constant in those
other cases as it is in mine. In my own case I know that the first link
produces the last through the intermediate link, and could not produce
it without. Experience, therefore, obliges me to conclude that there
must be an intermediate link; which must either be the same in others as
in myself, or a different one: I must either believe them to be alive,
or to be automatons: and by believing them to be alive, that is, by
supposing the link to be of the same nature as in the case of which I
have experience, and which is in all other respects similar, I bring
other human beings, as phænomena, under the same generalizations which I
know by experience to be the true theory of my own existence. And in
doing so I conform to the legitimate rules of experimental enquiry. The
process is exactly parallel to that by which Newton proved that the
force which keeps the planets in their orbits is identical with that by
which an apple falls to the ground. It was not incumbent on Newton to
prove the impossibility of its being any other force; he was thought to
have made out his point when he had simply shown, that no other force
need be supposed. We know the existence of other beings by
generalization from the knowledge of our own: the generalization merely
postulates that what experience shows to be a mark of the existence of
something within the sphere of our consciousness, may be concluded to be
a mark of the same thing beyond that sphere.

This logical process loses none of its legitimacy on the supposition
that neither Mind nor Matter is anything but a permanent possibility of
feeling. Whatever sensation I have, I at once refer it to one of the
permanent groups of possibilities of sensation which I call material
objects. But among these groups I find there is one (my own body) which
is not only composed, like the rest, of a mixed multitude of sensations
and possibilities of sensation, but is also connected, in a peculiar
manner, with all my sensations. Not only is this special group always
present as an antecedent condition of every sensation I have, but the
other groups are only enabled to convert their respective possibilities
of sensation into actual sensations, by means Edition: current; Page:
[192] of some previous change in that particular one. I look about me,
and though there is only one group (or body) which is connected with all
my sensations in this peculiar manner, I observe that there is a great
multitude of other bodies, closely resembling in their sensible
properties (in the sensations composing them as groups) this particular
one, but whose modifications do not call up, as those of my own body do,
a world of sensations in my consciousness. Since they do not do so in my
consciousness, I infer that they do it out of my consciousness, and that
to each of them belongs a world of consciousness of its own, to which it
stands in the same relation in which what I call my own body stands to
mine. And having made this generalization, I find that all other facts
within my reach gaccordg with it. Each of these bodies exhibits to my
senses a set of phænomena (composed of acts and other manifestations)
such as I know, in my own case, to be effects of consciousness, and such
as might be looked for if each of the bodies has really in connexion
with it a world of consciousness. All this is as good and genuine an
inductive process on the theory we are discussing, as it is on the
common theory. Any objection to it in the one case would be an equal
objection in the other. I have stated the postulate required by the one
theory: the common theory is in need of the same. If I could not, from
my personal knowledge of one succession of feelings, infer the existence
of other successions of feelings, when manifested by the same outward
signs, I could just as little, from my personal knowledge of a single
spiritual substance, infer by generalization, when I find the same
outward indications, the existence of other spiritual substances.

As the theory leaves the evidence of the existence of my
fellow-creatures exactly as it was before, so does it also with that of
the existence of God. Supposing me to believe that the Divine Mind is
simply the series of the Divine thoughts and feelings prolonged through
eternity, that would be, at any rate, believing God’s existence to be as
real as my own. And as for evidence, the argument of Paley’s Natural
Theology, or, for that matter, of his Evidences of Christianity, would
stand exactly where it does.[*] The Design argument is drawn from the
analogy of human experience. From the relation which human works bear to
human thoughts and feelings, it infers a corresponding relation between
works, more or less similar but superhuman, and superhuman thoughts and
feelings. If it proves these, nobody but a metaphysician needs care
whether or not it proves a mysterious Edition: current; Page: [193]
substratum for them. Again, the arguments for Revelation undertake to
prove by testimony, that within the sphere of human experience works
were done requiring a greater than human power, and words said requiring
a greater than human wisdom. These positions, and the evidences of them,
neither lose nor gain anything by our supposing that the wisdom only
means wise thoughts and volitions, and that the power means thoughts and
volitions followed by imposing phænomena.

As to immortality, it is precisely as easy to conceive that a succession
of feelings, a thread of consciousness, may be prolonged to eternity, as
that a spiritual substance for ever continues to exist: and any evidence
which would prove the one, will prove the other. Metaphysical
theologians may lose the à priori argument by which they have sometimes
flattered themselves with having proved that a spiritual substance, by
the essential constitution of its nature, cannot perish. But they had
better drop this argument in any case. To do them justice, they seldom
insist on it now.

The notion that metaphysical Scepticism, even at the utmost length to
which it ever has been, or is capable of being, carried, has for its
logical consequence atheism, is grounded on an entire misapprehension of
the Sceptical argument, and has no locus standi except for persons who
think that whatever accustoms people to a rigid scrutiny of evidence is
unfavourable to religious belief. This is the opinion, doubtless, of
those who do not believe in any religion, and seemingly of a great
number who do: but it is not the opinion of Sir W. Hamilton, who says
that “religious disbelief and philosophical scepticism are not merely
not the same, but have no natural connexion;”* and who, as we have seen,
makes use of the veracity of the Deity as his principal argument for
trusting the testimony of consciousness to the substantiality of Matter
and of Mind, which would have been a gross petitio principii if he had
thought that our assurance of the divine attributes required that the
objective existence of Matter and Mind should be first recognised.

The theory, therefore, which resolves Mind into a series of feelings,
with a background of possibilities of feeling, can effectually withstand
the most invidious of the arguments directed against it. But, groundless
as are the extrinsic objections, the theory has intrinsic difficulties
which we have not yet set forth, and which it seems to me beyond the
power of metaphysical analysis to remove. Besides present feelings, and
possibilities of present feeling, there is another class of phænomena to
be included in an enumeration of the elements making up our conception
of Mind. The thread of consciousness which composes the mind’s
phænomenal life, consists not Edition: current; Page: [194] only of
present sensations, but likewise, in part, of memories and expectations.
Now what are these? In themselves, they are present feelings, states of
present consciousness, and in that respect not distinguished from
sensations. They all, moreover, resemble some given sensations or
feelings, of which we have previously had experience. But they are
attended with the peculiarity, that each of them involves a belief in
more than its own present existence. A sensation involves only this: but
a remembrance of sensation, even if not referred to any particular date,
involves the suggestion and belief that a sensation, of which it is a
copy or representation, actually existed in the past: and an expectation
involves the belief, more or less positive, that a sensation or other
feeling to which it directly refers, will exist in the future. Nor can
the phænomena involved in these two states of consciousness be
adequately expressed, without saying that the belief they include is,
that I myself formerly had, or that I myself, and no other, shall
hereafter have, the sensations remembered or expected. The fact believed
is, that the sensations did actually form, or will hereafter form, part
of the self-same series of states, or thread of consciousness, of which
the remembrance or expectation of those sensations is the part now
present. If, therefore, we speak of the Mind as a series of feelings, we
are obliged to complete the statement by calling it a series of feelings
which is aware of itself as past and future; and we are reduced to the
alternative of believing that the Mind, or Ego, is something different
from any series of feelings, or possibilities of them, or of accepting
the paradox, that something which ex hypothesi is but a series of
feelings, can be aware of itself as a series.

The truth is, that we are here face to face with that final
inexplicability, at which, as Sir W. Hamilton observes, we inevitably
arrive when we reach ultimate facts; and in general, one mode of stating
it only appears more incomprehensible than another, because the whole of
human language is accommodated to the one, and is so incongruous with
the other, that it cannot be expressed in any terms which do not deny
its truth. The real stumbling block is perhaps not in any theory of the
fact, but in the fact itself. The true incomprehensibility perhaps is,
that something which has ceased, or is not yet in existence, can still
be, in a manner, present: that a series of feelings, the infinitely
greater part of which is past or future, can be gathered up, as it were,
into a single present conception, accompanied by a belief of reality. I
think, by far the wisest thing we can do, is to accept the inexplicable
fact, without any theory of how it takes place; and when we are obliged
to speak of it in terms which assume a theory, to use them with a
reservation as to their meaning.

I have stated the difficulties attending the attempt to frame a theory
of Mind, or the Ego, similar to what I have called the Psychological
Theory of Edition: current; Page: [195] Matter, or the Non-ego. No such
difficulties attend the theory in its application to Matter; and I leave
it, as set forth, to pass for whatever it is worth as an antagonist
doctrine to that of Sir W. Hamilton and the Scottish School, respecting
the non-ego as a deliverance of consciousness.*

Edition: current; Page: [196]


hAPPENDIX TO THE TWO PRECEDING CHAPTERS

This attempt to bring out into distinctness the mode in which the
notions of Matter and Mind, considered as Substances, may have been
generated in us by the mere order of our sensations, has naturally
received from those whose metaphysical opinions were already made up, a
much greater amount of opposition than of assent. I think I have
observed, however, that the repugnance shown to it by writers has been
in tolerably correct proportion to the evidence they give of deficiency
in that indispensable aptitude of a metaphysician, facility in placing
himself at the point of view of a theory different from his own: and
that those who have ever (if the expression may be pardoned) thought
themselves into the Berkeleian or any other Idealistic scheme of
philosophy, however little favourable towards other parts of the present
volume, have either let this part of it alone, or expressed more or less
approbation of it. Those who are completely satisfied with the popular
every-day notion of Matter, or whose metaphysics have been adopted from
any of the Realistic thinkers who undertake to legitimate that common
notion, are usually content with going round the counter-theory on the
outside, and seldom place themselves sufficiently at the centre of it to
perceive what a person ought to think or do, who occupies that position.
They no longer, indeed, commit so gross a blunder as that which, not
very long ago, even Reid, Stewart, and Brown rushed blindly into—that of
charging a Berkeleian with inconsistency if he did not walk into the
water or into the fire. Acquaintance with the German metaphysicians, and
(it is but just to add) the teachings of Sir W. Hamilton, have had that
much of beneficial result. But if such thinkers as these three could
pass judgment on Berkeley’s doctrine while showing by such conclusive
proof that they had never understood its very alphabet—that, however
much consideration they may have given to the mere arguments of
Berkeley, they had not begun to realize his doctrine in their own
minds—to look at the sensible universe as he saw it, and see what
consequences would follow; it is not wonderful that those who have got
on a few steps further than this, have still much to do, before they are
able to accommodate their conceptive faculties to the conditions of what
I have called the Psychological Theory, and follow that theory correctly
into the ramification of its applications.

In principle, I must admit that my opponents, as a body, have referred
the Psychological Theory to the right test. They have aimed at showing
that its attempt to account for the belief in Matter (I say Matter only,
because I do not profess to have adequately accounted for the belief in
Mind) implies or requires that the belief should already exist, as a
condition of its own Edition: current; Page: [197] production. The
objection, if true, is conclusive; but they are not very particular
about the proof of its truth. They, one and all, think their case made
out, if I employ, in any part of the exposition, the language of common
life—a language constructed on the basis of the notions into the origin
of which I am inquiring. If I say, that after we have seen a piece of
paper on a table, our belief that it is still there during our absence
means a belief that if we went again into the room we should see it,
they cry out, Here is belief in Matter already assumed; the idea of
going into a room implies belief in matter. If, as a proof that
modifications may take place in our possibilities of sensation while the
sensations are not in actual consciousness, I say that whether we are
asleep or awake the fire goes out, I am told that I am assuming a
knowledge of ourselves as a substance, and of the difference between
being asleep and awake. They forget that to go into a room, to be asleep
or awake, are expressions which have a meaning in the Psychological
Theory as well as in theirs; that every assertion that can be made about
the external world, which means anything on the Realistic theory, has a
parallel meaning on the Psychological. Going into a room, on the
Psychological theory, is a mere series of sensations felt, and
possibilities of sensation inferred,* but distinguishable from every
other combination of sensations and possibilities, and which, with
others like to itself, forms as vast and variegated a picture of the
universe as can be had on the other theory; indeed, as I maintain, the
very same picture. The Psychological theory requires that we should have
a conception of this series of actual and contingent sensations, as
distinct from any other; but it does not require that we should have
referred these sensations to a substance ulterior to all sensation or
possibility of sensation. To suppose so, is to commit the same kind of
misapprehension, though in a less extreme degree, which Reid, Stewart,
and Brown committed.

When, in attempting an intelligible discussion of an abstruse
metaphysical question, I have occasion to speak of any combination of
physical facts, I must speak of it by the only names there are for it. I
must employ language, every word of which expresses, not things as we
perceive them, or as we may have conceived them originally, but things
as we conceive them now. I was addressing readers, all of whom had the
acquired notion of Matter, and nearly all of them the belief in it: and
it was my business to show, to these believers in Matter, a possible
mode in which the notion and belief of it might have been acquired, even
if Matter, in the metaphysical meaning of the term, did not exist. In
endeavouring to point out to them, by what facts the notion might have
been generated, it was competent to me to Edition: current; Page: [198]
state those facts in the language which was not only the most
intelligible, but, to the minds I was addressing, the truest. The real
paralogism would have been, if I had said anything implying, not the
existence of Matter, but that the belief in it or the notion of it was
part of the facts by which I was maintaining that this belief and notion
may have been generated. But in no single instance have any adversaries
whom I am aware of, been able to show this: and if they fairly placed
themselves at the point of view of the Psychological explanation, they
would see that I could not, in any circumstances whatever, have been
reduced to this necessity: because there is, as I have said, for every
statement which can be made concerning material phænomena in terms of
the Realistic theory, an equivalent meaning in terms of Sensation and
Possibilities of Sensation alone, and a meaning which would justify all
the same processes of thought.[*] In fact, almost all philosophers who
have narrowly examined the subject, have decided that Substance need
only be postulated as a support for phænomena, or as a bond of connexion
to hold a group or series of otherwise unconnected phænomena together:
let us only, then, think away the support, and suppose the phænomena to
remain, and to be held together in the same groups and series by some
other agency, or without any agency but an internal law, and every
consequence follows without Substance, for the sake of which Substance
was assumed. The Hindoos thought that the earth required to be supported
by an elephant; but the earth turned out quite capable of supporting
itself, and “hanging self-balanced” on its own “centre.”[†] Descartes
thought that a material medium filling the whole space between the earth
and the sun, was required to enable them to act on one another;[‡] but
it has been found sufficient to suppose an immaterial law of attraction,
and the medium and its vortices dropped off as superfluities.

To dispel some of the haze which seems still to hang about the data
assumed by the Psychological theory of the belief in Matter, it will be
well that, as I have stated what laws and capacities, in one word what
conditions, that theory postulates in the mind itself, I should also
state what conditions it postulates in Nature; in that which, to use the
Kantian phraseology, is given to the mind, as distinguished from the
mind’s own constitution.

First, then, it postulates Sensations; and a certain Order among
sensations. And the Order postulated, is of more kinds than one.

In the first place, there is the mere fact of succession. Sensations
exist before and after one another. This is as much a primordial fact as
sensation itself; it is a feature always present in sensation, and we
have the strongest Edition: current; Page: [199] ground that can ever be
had for regarding it as ultimate, because every genesis we assign to any
other fact of perception or thought, includes it as a condition. I shall
be told, that this is postulating the reality of Time: and it is so, if
by Time be understood an indefinite succession of successions, unequal
in rapidity. But an entity called Time, and regarded as not a succession
of successions, but as something in which the successions take place, I
do not and need not postulate.* Neither do I decide whether this
inseparable attribute of our sensations is annexed to them by the laws
of mind, or given in the sensations themselves; nor whether, at this
great height of abstraction, the distinction does not disappear. Let me
say also, that I have never pretended to account by association for the
idea of Time. It is the seeming infinity of Time, as of Space, which,
after Mr. James Mill,[*] I have tendered that explanation of: and that
of this it is the true and sufficient one, is to me obvious.

Sensations are not only successive, they are also simultaneous: it often
happens that several of them are felt, apparently at the same instant.
This attribute of sensations is not so evidently primordial as their
succession. There are philosophers who think that the sensations deemed
simultaneous are very rapidly successive, their distinction from other
cases of succession being that they may succeed one another in any
order. I do not agree in this opinion; but, even supposing it correct,
we should equally have to postulate the distinction. We should have to
assume that plurality of sensations exists in two modes, one consciously
successive, the other felt as simultaneous, and that the mind is able to
distinguish between the one sort and the other.

Besides this twofold order inherent in sensations, of being either
successive or simultaneous, there is an order within that order: they
are successive or simultaneous in constant combinations. The same
antecedent sensation is followed by the same consequent sensation; the
same sensation is accompanied by the same set of simultaneous
sensations. I use these expressions for shortness, for the uniformity of
order is not quite so simple as this. The consequent sensation is not
always actually felt after the Edition: current; Page: [200] antecedent,
nor are all the synchronous sensations actually felt whenever one of
them is felt. But the one which is felt gives us assurance, grounded on
experience, that each of the others, if not felt, is feelable, i.e.,
will be felt if the other facts be present which are the known
antecedent conditions of such a sensation as it is. For example, I have
the sensations of colour and of a visible disk, which are parts of our
present conception of a cast-iron ball. I infer that there are, now or
presently to be had by me, simultaneously with those visual sensations,
another feeling, called the sensation of hardness. But I do not have
this last sensation inevitably and at once. Why? Because (as I also know
by experience) no sensation of hardness is ever felt unless preceded by
a condition, the same in all cases, but itself sensational, the
sensations of muscular exertion and pressure. The visual sensation is
synchronous, not necessarily with the actual sensation of hardness, but
with a present possibility of that sensation. When we feel the one, we
are not always feeling the other, but we know that it is to be felt on
the ordinary terms: we know that so soon as the muscular sensations take
place which are the observed preliminary to every sensation of hardness,
that particular sensation of hardness will certainly be had,
simultaneously with the visual sensation. This is what is meant by
saying that a Body is a group of simultaneous possibilities of
sensation, not of simultaneous sensations. It rarely happens that the
sensations which enter into the group can all be experienced at once;
because many of them are never had without a long series of antecedent
sensations, including volitions, which may be incompatible with the
sensations and volitions necessary for having others. The sensations
which we receive when we study the internal structure of a closed body,
are not to be obtained without having previously the complex series of
sensations and volitions concerned in the operation of opening it. The
sensations we receive from the complicated process by which food
nourishes us, must be long waited for after our first sight of the food,
and many of them are not even then to be had without our being led up to
them through a long series of muscular and other sensations. But the
very first sensations we have, that are sufficient to identify the
group, guarantee to us the possibility or potentiality of all the
others. The potentiality becomes actuality on the occurrence of certain
known conditions sine quâ non of each, which are conditions not of
having that particular sensation at a given moment, but of having any
sensation of that kind; conditions which, when analysed, are themselves
also merely sensational. Any one who had thrown his mind, by an act of
imagination, into the Psychological theory, would see at a glance all
these applications and developments of it, even if he did not follow
them out into detail. But men will not, and mostly cannot, throw their
minds into any theory with which they are not familiar; and the bearings
and consequences of the Psychological theory will have to be Edition:
current; Page: [201] developed and minutely expounded innumerable times,
before it will be seen as it is, and have whatever chance it deserves of
being accepted as true.

I have postulated, first, Sensations; secondly, succession and
simultaneousness of sensations; thirdly, an uniform order in their
succession and simultaneousness, such that they are united in groups,
the component sensations of which are in such a relation to one another,
that when we experience one, we are authorized to expect all the rest,
conditionally on certain antecedent sensations called organic, belonging
to the kind of each. This is all we need postulate with regard to the
groups, considered in themselves, or considered in relation to the
perceiving Subject. Let us examine whether it is necessary to postulate
anything additional respecting the groups considered in relation to one
another.

In Dr. M‘Cosh’s opinion, the Psychological theory overlooks this part of
the subject.* In quoting the analysis of our conception of Matter into
Resistance, Extension, and Figure, together with miscellaneous powers of
exciting other sensations, he observes, “There is a palpable omission
here, for it omits those powers by which one body operates upon another;
thus the sun has a power to make wax white, and fire to make lead
fluid.”[*] If Dr. M‘Cosh had entered even a very little way into the
mode of thought which he is combating, he must have seen that after
mentioning the attribute of exciting sensations, it could not be
necessary to add that of making something else excite sensations. If
Body altogether is only conceived as a power of exciting sensations, the
action of one body upon another is simply the modification by one such
power, of the sensations excited by another; or, to use a different
expression, the joint action of two powers of exciting sensations. It is
easy for any one competent to such enquiries who will make the attempt,
to understand how one group of Possibilities of Sensation can be
conceived as destroying or modifying another such group.

Let there be granted a synchronous group, connected by the contingent
simultaneousness already described, which renders each of the component
sensations a mark of the possibility of having all the others; while
each, independently of the others, has conditions sine quâ non of its
own, also sensational, but of the kind which, in common language, we
call organic, and refer to an internal sense. Let us suppose that these
organic conditions, Edition: current; Page: [202] instead of existing
for one or more sensations of the group and not for the rest, do not at
present exist for any of them. The whole of the possibilities of
sensation which form the group, and which mutually testify to each
other’s presence, are now dormant: but they are ready to start into
actuality at any moment, when the conditions sine quâ non which belong
to them separately are realized: and whenever any of them thus starts
up, it informs us (so far as our experience happens to have reached)
what others are ready to do so in the same manner. This dormancy of all
the possibilities, while, as real possibilities guaranteeing one
another, they continue to exist, constitutes, on the Psychological
theory, the fact which is at the bottom of the assertion that the body
is in existence when we are not perceiving it. This fact is all that we
need postulate to account for our conceiving the groups of Possibilities
of Sensation as permanent and independent of us; for our projecting them
into objectivity; and for our conceiving them as perhaps capable of
being Possibilities of Sensation to other beings in like manner as to
ourselves, as soon as we have conceived the idea of other sentient
beings than ourselves. And since we do actually recognise other sentient
beings as existing, and receive impressions from them which entirely
accord with this hypothesis, we accept the hypothesis as a truth, and
believe that the Permanent Possibilities of Sensation really are common
to ourselves and other beings.

Having thus arrived at the conception of an absent group of
Possibilities, there is surely no more difficulty in conceiving the
annihilation or alteration of the Possibilities while absent, than of
the sensations themselves when present. The log which I saw on the fire
an hour ago, has been consumed and has disappeared when I look again;
the Possibilities of Sensation which I called by that name, are
possibilities no longer. The ice which I placed in front of the fire at
the same time, is now water; such Possibilities of Sensation as form
part of the groups called ice and not of the groups called water, have
ceased and given place to others. All this is intelligible without
supposing the wood, the ice, or the water, to be anything underneath or
beyond Permanent Possibilities of Sensation. Why, then, when I ascribe
the disappearance of the wood, and the conversion of the ice into water,
to the presence of the fire, must I suppose the fire to be something
underneath a Possibility of Sensation? My experience informs me that
those other Possibilities of Sensation do not vanish or change in the
manner mentioned, unless another Possibility of Sensation known by the
name of fire, has existed immediately before, and continued to exist
simultaneously with the change. Changes in the Permanent Possibilities I
find to have always for their antecedent conditions, other Permanent
Possibilities, and to be connected with them by an order or law, as
uniform as that which connects the elements of each group with one
another; indeed by a still stricter order, for Edition: current; Page:
[203] the laws of succession, those of Cause and Effect, are laws of
more rigid precision than those of simultaneousness. But the facts,
between which the observed uniformities of succession exist, are facts
of sense; that is, either actual sensations, or possibilities of
sensation inferred from the actual. Thus the whole variety of the facts
of nature as we know it, is given in the mere existence of our
sensations, and in the laws or order of their occurrence.*

I have now given an exposition of the Psychological Theory, and of the
mode in which it accounts for what is supposed to be our natural
conviction of the existence of Matter, from the objective point of view,
as I had previously done from the subjective; and I think it will be
found that the exposition does not presuppose anything which I have not
expressly postulated, and that I have not postulated any of the facts or
notions which I undertake to explain. It may be said that I postulate an
Ego—the sentient Subject of the sensations. I have stated what
subjective, as well as what objective data I postulate. Expectation
being one of these, in so far as reference to an Ego is implied in
Expectation I do postulate an Ego. But I am entitled to do so, for up to
this stage it is not Self, but Body, that I have been endeavouring to
trace to its origin as an acquired notion.†

Edition: current; Page: [204]
I now pass to this very subject, the Ego, and to the objections which
have been made against the manner in which it is treated in the
preceding chapter.

Having shown that in order to account for the belief in Matter, or, in
other words, in a non-ego supposed to be presented in or along with
sensation, it is not necessary to suppose anything but sensations and
possibilities of sensation connected in groups; it was natural and
necessary to enquire whether the Ego, supposed to be presented in or
along with all consciousness whatever, is also an acquired notion,
explicable in the same manner. I therefore stated this phænomenal theory
of the Ego; freed it from the prejudice which attaches to it on the
score of consequences to which it does not lead, the non-existence,
first, of our fellow-creatures, and secondly, of God;* but showed that
it has intrinsic difficulties, which no Edition: current; Page: [205]
one has been able to remove; since certain of the attributes comprised
in our notion of the Ego, and which are at the very foundation of it,
namely Memory and Expectation, have no equivalent in Matter, and cannot
be reduced to any elements similar to those into which Matter is
resolved by the Psychological theory. Having stated these facts, as
inexplicable by the Psychological theory, I left them to stand as facts,
without any theory whatever: not adopting the Permanent Possibility
hypothesis as a sufficient theory of Self in spite of the objections to
it, as some of my critics have Edition: current; Page: [206] imagined,
and have wasted no small amount of argument and sarcasm in exposing the
untenability of such a position: neither, on the other hand, did I, as
others have supposed, accept the common theory of Mind, as a so-called
Substance. Since the state in which I profess to leave the question has
been so ill understood, it is incumbent on me to explain myself more
fully.

Since the fact which alone necessitates the belief in an Ego, the one
fact which the Psychological theory cannot explain, is the fact of
Memory (for Edition: current; Page: [207] Expectation I hold to be, both
psychologically and logically, a consequence of Memory), I see no reason
to think that there is any cognizance of an Ego until Memory commences.
There seems no ground for believing, with Sir W. Hamilton and Mr.
Mansel, that the Ego is an original presentation of consciousness; that
the mere impression on our senses involves, or carries with it, any
consciousness of a Self, any more than I believe it to do of a Not-self.
Our very notion of a Self takes its commencement i(there is every reason
to suppose)i from the representation of a sensation in memory, when
awakened by the only thing there is to awaken it before any associations
have been formed, namely, the occurrence of a subsequent sensation
similar to the former one. The fact of recognising a sensation, of being
reminded of it, and, as we say, remembering that it has been felt
before, is the simplest and most elementary fact of memory: and the
inexplicable tie, or law, the organic union (as Professor Masson calls
it)[*] which connects the present consciousness with the past one, of
which it reminds me, is as near as I think we can get to a positive
conception of Self. That there is something real in this tie, real as
the sensations themselves, and not a mere product of the laws of thought
without any fact corresponding to it, I hold to be indubitable. The
precise nature of the process by which we cognise it, is open to much
dispute. Whether we are directly conscious of it in the act of
remembrance, as we are of succession in the fact of having successive
sensations, or whether, according to the opinion of Kant, we are not
conscious of a Self at all, but are compelled to assume it as a
necessary condition of Memory,* I do not undertake to decide. But this
original Edition: current; Page: [208] element, which has no community
of nature with any of the things answering to our names, and to which we
cannot give any name but its own peculiar one without implying some
false or ungrounded theory, is the Ego, or Self. As such, I ascribe a
reality to the Ego—to my own Mind—different from that real existence as
a Permanent Possibility, which is the only reality I acknowledge in
Matter: and by fair experiential inference from that one Ego, I ascribe
the same reality to other Egoes, or Minds.

Having thus, as I hope, more clearly defined my position in regard to
the reality of the Ego, considered as a question of Ontology, I return
to my first starting point, the Relativity of human knowledge, and
affirm (being here in entire accordance with Sir W. Hamilton) that
whatever be the nature of the real existence we are compelled to
acknowledge in Mind, the Mind is only known to itself phænomenally, as
the series of its feelings of consciousnesses. We are forced to
apprehend every part of the series as linked with the other parts by
something in common, which is not the feelings themselves, any more than
the succession of the feelings is the feelings themselves: and as that
which is the same in the first as in the second, in the second as in the
third, in the third as in the fourth, and so on, must be the same in the
first and in the fiftieth, this common element is a permanent element.
But beyond this, we can affirm nothing of it except the states of
consciousness themselves. The feelings or consciousnesses which belong
or have belonged to it, and its possibilities of having more, are the
only facts there are to be asserted of Self—the only positive
attributes, except permanence, which we can ascribe to it. In
consequence of this, I occasionally use the words “mind” and “thread of
consciousness” interchangeably, and treat Mind as existing, and Mind as
known to itself, as convertible: but this is only for brevity, and the
explanations which I have now given must always be taken as implied.h*

Edition: current; Page: [209] Edition: current; Page: [210]


CHAPTER XIII: The Psychological Theory of the Primary Qualities of Matter

for the reasons which have been set forth, I conceive Sir W. Hamilton to
be wrong in his statement that a Self and a Not-self are immediately
apprehended in our primitive consciousness. We have, in all probability,
no notion of Not-self, until after considerable experience of the
recurrence of sensations according to fixed laws, and in groups.* aNor
is ita credible that the first sensation which we experience awakens in
us any notion of an Ego or Self. To refer it to an Ego is to consider it
as part of a series of states of consciousness, some portion of which is
already past. The identification of a present state with a remembered
state cognised as past, is what, to my thinking, constitutes the
cognition that it is I who feel it. “I” means he who saw, touched, or
felt something yesterday or the day before. No single sensation can
suggest personal identity: this requires a series of sensations, thought
of as forming a line of succession, and summed up in thought into a
Unity.

But (however this may be) throughout the whole of our sensitive life
except its first beginnings, we unquestionably refer our sensations to a
me and a not-me. As soon as I have formed, on the one hand, the notion
of Permanent Possibilities of Sensation, and on the other, of that
continued series of feelings which I call my life, both these notions
are, by an irresistible association, recalled by every sensation I have.
They represent two things, with both of which the sensation of the
moment, be it what it may, stands in relation, and I cannot be conscious
of the sensation without being conscious of it as related to these two
things. They have accordingly Edition: current; Page: [211] received
relative names, expressive of the double relation in question. The
thread of consciousness which I apprehend the sensation as a part of, is
the subject of the sensation. The group of Permanent Possibilities of
Sensation to which I refer it, and which is partially realized and
actualized in it, is the object of the sensation. The sensation itself
ought to have a correlative name; or rather, ought to have two such
names, one denoting the sensation as opposed to its Subject, the other
denoting it as opposed to its Object. But it is a remarkable fact, that
this necessity has not been felt, and that the need of a correlative
name to every relative one has been considered to be satisfied by the
terms Object and Subject themselves; the object and the subject not
being attended to in the relation which they respectively bear to the
sensation, but being regarded as directly correlated with one another.
It is true that they are related to one another, but only through the
sensation: their relation to each other consists in the peculiar and
different relation in which they severally stand to the sensation. We
have no conception of either Subject or Object, either Mind or Matter,
except as something to which we refer our sensations, and whatever other
feelings we are conscious of. The very existence of them both, so far as
cognisable by us, consists only in the relation they respectively bear
to our states of feeling. Their relation to each other is only the
relation between those two relations. The immediate correlatives are not
the pair, Object, Subject, but the two pairs, Object, Sensation
objectively considered; Subject, Sensation subjectively considered. The
reason why this is overlooked, might easily be shown, and would furnish
a good illustration of that important part of the Laws of Association
which may be termed the Laws of Obliviscence.

I have next to speak of a psychological fact, also a consequence of the
Laws of Association, and without a full appreciation of which, the idea
of Matter can only be understood in its original groundwork, but not in
the superstructure which the laws of our actual experience have raised
upon it. There are certain of our sensations which we are accustomed
principally to consider subjectively, and others which we are
principally accustomed to consider objectively. In the case of the
first, the relation in which we most frequently, most habitually, and
therefore most easily consider them, is their relation to the series of
feelings of which they form a part, and which, consolidated by thought
into a single conception, is termed the Subject. In the case of the
second, the relation in which we by preference contemplate them is their
relation to some group, or some kind of group, of Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation, the present existence of which is certified
to us by the sensation we are at the moment feeling—and which is termed
the Object. The difference between these two classes of our sensations,
answers to the distinction made by the majority of philosophers between
the Primary and the Secondary Qualities of Matter.

Edition: current; Page: [212]
We can, of course, think of all or any of our sensations in relation to
their Objects, that is, to the permanent groups of possibilities of
sensation to which we mentally refer them. This is the main distinction
between our sensations, and what we regard as our purely mental
feelings. These we do not refer to any groups of Permanent
Possibilities; and in regard to them the distinction of Subject and
Object is merely nominal. These feelings have no Objects, except by
metaphor. There is nothing but the feeling and its Subject.
Metaphysicians are obliged to call the feeling itself the object. Our
sensations, on the contrary, have all of them objects; they all are
capable of being classed under some group of Permanent Possibilities,
and being referred to the presence of that particular set of
possibilities as the antecedent condition or cause of their own
existence. There are, however, some of our sensations, in our
consciousness of which the reference to their Object does not play so
conspicuous and predominant a part as in others. This is particularly
the case with sensations which are highly interesting to us on their own
account, and on which we willingly dwell, or which by their intensity
compel us to concentrate our attention on them. These are, of course,
our pleasures and pains. In the case of these, our attention is
naturally given in a greater degree to the sensations themselves, and
only in a less degree to that whose existence they are marks of. And of
the two conceptions to which they stand in relation, the one to which we
have most tendency to refer them is the Subject; because our pleasures
and pains are of no more importance as marks than any of our other
sensations, but are of very much more importance than any others as
parts of the thread of consciousness which constitutes our sentient
life. Many indeed of our internal bodily pains we should hardly refer to
an Object at all, were it not for the knowledge, late and slowly
acquired, that they are always connected with a local organic
disturbance, of which we have no present consciousness, and which is
therefore a mere Possibility of Sensation. Those of our sensations, on
the contrary, which are almost indifferent in themselves, our attention
does not dwell on; our consciousness of them is too momentary to be
distinct, and we pass on from them to the Permanent Possibilities of
Sensation which they are the signs of, and which alone are important to
us. We hardly notice the relation between these sensations and the
subjective chain of consciousness of which they form so extremely
insignificant a part: the sensation is hardly anything to us but the
link which draws into our consciousness a group of Permanent
Possibilities; this group is the only thing distinctly present to our
thoughts. The unimpressive organic sensation merges in the mere mental
suggestion, and we seem to cognise directly that which we think of only
by association, and know only by inference. Sensation is in a manner
blotted out, and Perception seems to be installed in its place. This
truth is expressed, though not with sufficient Edition: current; Page:
[213] distinctness, in a favourite doctrine of Sir W. Hamilton, that in
the operations of our senses Sensation is greatest when Perception is
least, and least when it is greatest; or, as he, by a very inaccurate
use of mathematical language, expresses it, Sensation and Perception are
in the inverse ratio of one another.

With regard to those sensations which, without being absolutely
indifferent, are not, in any absorbing degree, painful or pleasurable,
we habitually think of them only as connected with, or proceeding from,
Objects. And I am disposed to believe, contrary to the opinion of many
philosophers, that any of our senses, or at all events any combination
of more than one sense, would have been sufficient to give us some idea
of Matter. If we had only the senses of smell, taste, and hearing, but
had the sensations according to fixed laws of coexistence so that
whenever we had any one of them it marked to us a present possibility of
having all the others, I am inclined to think that we should have formed
the notion of groups of possibilities of sensation, and should have
referred every particular sensation to one of these groups, which, in
relation to all the sensations so referred to it, would have become an
Object, and would have been invested in our thoughts with the permanency
and externality which belong to Matter. But though we might, in this
supposed case, have had an idea of Matter, that idea would necessarily
have been of a very different complexion from what we now have. For, as
we are actually constituted, our sensations of smell, taste, and
hearing, and bas I believe (with the great majority ofb philosophers)
those of sight also, are not grouped together directly, but through the
connexion which they all have, by laws of coexistence or of causation,
with the sensations which are referable to the sense of touch and to the
muscles; those which answer to the terms Resistance, Extension, and
Figure. These, therefore, become the leading and conspicuous elements in
all the groups: where these are, the group is: every other member of the
group presents itself to our thoughts, less as what it is in itself,
than as a mark of these. As the entire group stands in the relation of
Object to any one of the component sensations which is realized at a
given moment, so do these special parts of the group become, in a
manner, Object, in relation not only to actual sensations, but to all
the remaining Possibilities of Sensation which the group includes. The
Permanent Possibilities of sensations of touch and of the muscles, form
a group within the group—a sort of inner nucleus, conceived as more
fundamental than the rest, on which all the other possibilities of
sensation included in the group seem to depend; these being regarded, in
one point of view, as effects, of which that nucleus is the cause, in
another as attributes, of which it is the substratum or substance.
Edition: current; Page: [214] In this manner our conception of Matter
comes ultimately to consist of Resistance, Extension, and Figure,
together with miscellaneous powers of exciting other sensations. These
three attributes become its essential constituents, and where these are
not found, we hesitate to apply the name.

Of these properties, which are consequently termed the Primary Qualities
of Matter, the most fundamental is Resistance: as is proved by numberous
scientific controversies. When the question arises whether something
which affects our senses in a peculiar way, as for instance whether
Heat, or Light, or Electricity, is or is not Matter, what seems always
to be meant is, does it offer any, however trifling, resistance to
motion? If it were shown that it did, this would at once terminate all
doubt. That Resistance is only another name for a sensation of our
muscular frame, combined with one of touch, has been pointed out by many
philosophers, and can scarcely any longer be questioned. When we
contract the muscles of our arm, either by an exertion of will, or by an
involuntary discharge of our spontaneous nervous activity, the
contraction is accompanied by a state of sensation, which is different
according as the locomotion consequent on the muscular contraction
continues freely, or meets with an impediment. In the former case, the
sensation is that of motion through empty space. After having had (let
us suppose) this experience several times repeated, we suddenly have a
different experience: the series of sensations accompanying the motion
of our arm is brought, without intention or expectation on our part, to
an abrupt close. This interruption would not, of itself, necessarily
suggest the belief in an external obstacle. The hindrance might be in
our organs; it might arise from paralysis, or simple loss of power
through fatigue. But in either of these cases, the muscles would not
have been contracted, and we should not have had the sensation which
accompanies their contraction. We may have had the will to exert our
muscular force, but the exertion has not taken place.* If it does take
place, and is accompanied by the usual muscular sensation, but the
cdistinctive feeling which I have called the Edition: current; Page:
[215] sensation of motion in empty spacec does not follow, we have what
is called the feeling of Resistance, or in other words, of muscular
dactiond impeded; and that feeling is the fundamental element in the
notion of Matter which results from our common experience. But
simultaneously with this feeling of Resistance, we have also feelings of
touch; sensations of which the organs are not the nerves diffused
through our muscles, but those which form a network under the skin; the
sensations which are produced by passive contact with bodies, without
muscular action. As these skin sensations of simple contact invariably
accompany the muscular sensation of resistance—for we must touch the
object before we can feel it resisting our pressure—there is early
formed an inseparable association between them. Whenever we feel
resistance we have first felt contacte. Whenevere we feel contact, we
know that were we to exercise muscular action, we should feel more or
less resistance. In this manner is formed the first fundamental group of
Permanent Possibilities of Sensation; and as we in time recognise that
all our other sensations are connected in point of fact with Permanent
Possibilities of resistance—that in coexistence with them we should
always, by sufficient search, encounter something which would give us
the feeling of contact combined with the muscular sensation of
resistance; our idea of Matter, as a Resisting Cause of miscellaneous
sensations, is now constituted.

Let us observe, in passing, the elementary example here afforded of the
Law of Inseparable Association, and the efficacy of that law to
construct what, after it has been constructed, is undistinguishable, by
any direct interrogation of consciousness, from an intuition. The
sensation produced by the simple contact of an object with the skin,
without any pressure—or even with pressure, but without any muscular
reaction against it—is no more likely than a sensation of warmth or cold
would be, to be spontaneously referred to any cause external to
ourselves. But when the constant coexistence, in experience, of this
sensation of contact with that of Resistance to our muscular effort
whenever such effort is made, has erected the former sensation into a
mark or sign of a Permanent Possibility of the latter; from that time
forward, no sooner do we have the skin sensation which we call a
sensation of contact, than we cognise, or, as we call it, perceive,
something external, corresponding to the idea we now form of Matter as a
resisting object. Our sensations of touch have become representative of
the sensations of resistance with which they habitually coexist: just as
philosophers have shown that the sensations of different shades of
colour given by our sense of sight, and the muscular sensations
accompanying the Edition: current; Page: [216] various movements of the
eye, become representative of those sensations of touch and of the
muscles of locomotion, which are the only real meaning of what we term
the distance of a body from us.*

The next of the primary qualities of Body is Extension; which has long
been considered as one of the principal stumbling blocks of the
Psychological Theory. Reid and Stewart were willing to let the whole
question of the intuitive character of our knowledge of Matter, depend
on the inability of psychologists to assign any origin to the idea of
Extension, or analyse it into any combination of sensations and
reminiscences of sensation. Sir W. Hamilton follows their example in
laying great stress on this point.

The answer of the opposite school I will present in its latest and most
improved form, as given by Professor Bain,f in the First Part of his
great work on the Mind.†

Edition: current; Page: [217]
Mr. Bain recognises two principal kinds or modes of discriminative
sensibility in the muscular sense: the one corresponding to the degree
of intensity of the muscular effort—the amount of energy put forth; the
other corresponding to the duration—the longer or shorter continuance of
the same effort. The first makes us acquainted with degrees of
resistance: which we estimate by the intensity of the muscular energy
required to overcome it. To the second we owe, in Mr. Bain’s opinion,
our idea of Extension.

When a muscle begins to contract, or a limb to bend, we have a distinct
sense of how far the contraction and the bending are carried; there is
something in the special sensibility that makes one mode of feeling for
half-contraction, another mode for three-fourths, and another for total
contraction. Our feeling of moving organs, or of contracting muscles,
has been already affirmed to be different from our feeling of dead
tension—something more intense, keen, and exciting; and I am now led to
assert, from my best observations and by inference from acknowledged
facts, that the extent of range of a movement, the degree of shortening
of a muscle, is a matter of discriminative sensibility. I believe it to
be much less pronounced, less exact, than the sense of resistance above
described, but to be not the less real and demonstrable.

If we suppose a weight raised, by the flexing of the arm, first four
inches, and then eight inches, it is obvious that the mere amount of
exertion or expended power will be greater, and the sensibility
increased in proportion. In this view, the sense of range would simply
be the sense of a greater or less continuance of the same effort, that
effort being expended in movement. We can have no difficulty in
believing that there should be a discriminating sensibility in this
case; it seems very natural that we should be differently affected by an
action continued four or five times longer than another. If this be
admitted, as true to observation, and as inevitably arising from the
existence of any discrimination whatsoever of degrees of expended power,
everything is granted that is contended for at present. It is not meant
to affirm that at each degree of shortening of a muscle, or each
intermediate attitude of a limb, there is an impression made on the
centres that can be distinguished from the impression Edition: current;
Page: [218] of every other position or degree of shortening; it is
enough to require that the range or amount of movement gone over should
be a matter of distinct perception, through the sensibility to the
amount of force expended in time, the degree of effort being the same.
The sensibility now in question differs from the former (from
sensibility to the intensity of effort) chiefly in making the degree
turn upon duration, and not upon the amount expended each instant; and
it seems to me impossible to deny that force increased or diminished
simply as regards continuance, is as much a subject of discriminative
sensibility as force increased or diminished in the intensity of the
sustained effort. . . .

If the sense of degrees of range be thus admitted as a genuine muscular
determination, its functions in outward perception are very important.
The attributes of extension and space fall under its scope. In the first
place, it gives the feeling of linear extension, inasmuch as this is
measured by the sweep of a limb, or other organ moved by muscles. The
difference between six inches and eighteen inches is expressed to us by
the different degrees of contraction of some one group of muscles;
those, for example, that flex the arm, or, in walking, those that flex
or extend the lower limb. The inward impression corresponding to the
outward fact of six inches in length, is an impression arising from the
continued shortening of a muscle, a true muscular sensibility. It is the
impression of a muscular effort having a certain continuance; a greater
length produces a greater continuance (or a more rapid movement) and in
consequence an increased feeling of expended power.

The discrimination of length in any one direction includes extension in
any direction. Whether it be length, breadth, or height, the perception
has precisely the same character. Hence superficial and solid
dimensions, the size or magnitude of a solid object, come to be felt in
a similar manner. . . .

It will be obvious that what is called situation or Locality must come
under the same head, as these are measured by distance taken along with
direction; direction being itself estimated by distance, both in common
observation and in mathematical theory. In like manner, form or shape is
ascertained through the same primitive sensibility to extension or
range.

By the muscular sensibility thus associated with prolonged contraction
we can therefore compare different degrees of the attribute of space, in
other words, difference of length, surface, situation, and form. When
comparing two different lengths we can feel which is the greater, just
as in comparing two different weights or resistances. We can also, as in
the case of weight, acquire some absolute standard of comparison,
through the permanency of impressions sufficiently often repeated. We
can engrain the feeling of contraction of the muscles of the lower limb
due to a pace of thirty inches, and can say that some one given pace is
less or more than this amount. According to the delicacy of the muscular
tissue we can, by shorter or longer practice, acquire distinct
impressions for every standard dimension, and can decide at once whether
a given length is four inches or four and a half, nine or ten, twenty or
twenty-one. This sensibility to size, enabling us to dispense with the
use of measures of length, is an acquirement suited to many mechanical
operations. In drawing, painting, and engraving, and in the plastic
arts, the engrained discrimination of the most delicate differences is
an indispensable qualification.

The third attribute of muscular discrimination is the velocity or speed
of the movement. It is difficult to separate this from the foregoing. In
the feeling of range, velocity answers the same purpose as continuance;
both imply an enhancement of Edition: current; Page: [219] effort, or of
expended power, different in its nature from the increase of dead effort
in one fixed situation. We must learn to feel that a slow motion for a
long time is the same as a quicker motion with less duration; which we
can easily do by seeing that they both produce the same effect in
exhausting the full range of a limb. If we experiment upon the different
ways of accomplishing a total sweep of the arm, we shall find that the
slow movements long continued are equal to quick motions of short
continuance, and we are thus able by either course to acquire to
ourselves a measure of range and lineal extension. . . .

We would thus trace the perception of the mathematical and mechanical
properties of matter to the muscular sensibility alone. We admit that
this perception is by no means very accurate if we exclude the special
senses, but we are bound to show at the outset that these senses are not
essential to the perception, as we shall afterwards show that it is to
the muscular apparatus associated with the senses that their more
exalted sensibility must be also ascribed. The space moved through by
the foot in pacing may be appreciated solely through the muscles of the
limb, as well as by the movements of the touching hand or the seeing
eye. Whence we may accede to the assertion sometimes made, that the
properties of space might be conceived, or felt, in the absence of an
external world, or of any other matter than that composing the body of
the percipient being; for the body’s own movements in empty space would
suffice to make the very same impressions on the mind as the movements
excited by outward objects. A perception of length, or height, or speed,
is the mental impression, or state of consciousness, accompanying some
mode of muscular movement, and this movement may be generated from
within as well as from without; in both cases the state of consciousness
is exactly the same.

A theory of Extension somewhat similar, though less clearly unfolded,
was advanced by Brown,[*] and as it stands in his statement, fell under
the criticism of Sir W. Hamilton; who gives it, as he thinks, a short
and crushing refutation, as follows:

As far as I can find his meaning in his cloud of words, he argues
thus:—The notion of Time or succession being supposed, that of
longitudinal extension is given in the succession of feelings which
accompanies the gradual contraction of a muscle; the notion of this
succession constitutes, ipso facto, the notion of a certain length; and
the notion of this length (he quietly takes for granted) is the notion
of longitudinal extension sought. The paralogism here is transparent.
Length is an ambiguous term; and it is length in space, extensive
length, and not length in time, protensive length, whose notion it is
the problem to evolve. To convert, therefore, the notion of a certain
kind of length (and that certain kind being also confessedly only length
in time) into the notion of a length in space, is at best an idle
begging of the question—Is it not? Then I would ask, whether the series
of feelings of which we are aware in the gradual contraction of a
muscle, involves the consciousness of being a succession in length, (1)
in time alone? or (2) in space alone? or (3) in time and space together?
These three cases will be allowed to be exhaustive. If the first be
affirmed; if the succession appear in consciousness a succession in time
exclusively, then nothing has been accomplished; for the notion of
extension or space is in no way contained in the notion of duration or
time. Again, if the second or third is affirmed; Edition: current; Page:
[220] if the series appear to consciousness a succession in length,
either in space alone, or in space and time together, then is the notion
it behoved to generate employed to generate itself.*

The dilemma looks formidable, but one of its horns is blunt; for the
very assertion of Brown, and of all who hold the Psychological theory,
is that the notion of length in space, not being in our consciousness
originally, is constructed by the mind’s laws out of the notion of
length in time. Their argument is not, as Sir W. Hamilton fancied, a
fallacious confusion between two different meanings of the word lengthi;
they maintain the one to be a product of the otheri. Sir W. Hamilton did
not fully understand the argument. He saw that a succession of feelings,
such as that which Brown spoke of, could not possibly give us the idea
of simultaneous existence. But he was mistaken in supposing that Brown’s
argument implied this absurdity. The notion of simultaneity must be
supposed to have been already acquired; as it necessarily would be at
the very earliest period, from the familiar fact that we often have
sensations simultaneously. What Brown had to show was, that the idea of
the particular mode of simultaneous existence called Extension, might
arise, not certainly out of a mere succession of muscular sensations,
but out of that added to the knowledge already possessed that sensations
of touch may be simultaneous. Suppose two small bodies, A and B,
sufficiently near together to admit of their being touched
simultaneously, one with the right hand, the other with the left. Here
are two tactual sensations which are simultaneous, just as a sensation
of colour and one of odour might be; and this makes us cognise the two
objects of touch as both existing at once. The question then is, what
have we in our minds, when we represent to ourselves the relation
between these two objects already known to be simultaneous, in the form
of Extension, or intervening Space—a relation which we do not suppose to
exist between the colour and the odour. Now those who agree with Brown,
say that whatever the notion of Extension may be, we acquire it by
passing our hand or some other organ of touch, in a longitudinal
direction from A to B: that this process, as far as we are conscious of
it, consists of a series of varied muscular sensations, differing
according to the amount of muscular effort, and, the effort being given,
differing in length of time. When we say that there is a space between A
and B, we mean that some amount of these muscular sensations must
intervene; and when we say that the space is greater or less, we mean
that the series of sensations (amount of muscular effort being given) is
longer or shorter. If another object, C, is farther off in the same
line, we judge its distance to be greater, because to reach it, the
Edition: current; Page: [221] series of muscular sensations must be
further prolonged, or else there must be the increase of effort which
corresponds to augmented velocity. Now this, which is jnot denied to bej
the mode in which we become kawarek of extension, lby any other sense
than sight,l is considered by the psychologists in question to be
extension. The idea of Extended Body they consider to be that of a
variety of resisting points, existing simultaneously, but which can be
perceived by the same tactile organ only successively, at the end of a
series of muscular sensations which constitutes their mdistancem; and
are said to be at different distances from one another because the
series of intervening muscular sensations is longer in some cases than
in others.*

The theory may be recapitulated as follows. The sensation of muscular
motion unimpeded constitutes our notion of empty space, and the
sensation of muscular motion impeded constitutes that of filled space.
Space is Room—room for movement; which its German name, Raum, distinctly
confirms. We have a sensation which accompanies the free movement of our
organs, say for instance of our arm. This sensation is variously
modified by the direction, and by the amount of the movement. We have
different states of muscular sensation corresponding to the movements of
the arm upward, downward, to right, to left, or in any radius whatever
of a sphere of which the joint, that the arm revolves round, forms the
centre. Edition: current; Page: [222] We have also different states of
muscular sensation according as the arm is moved more; whether this
consists in its being moved with greater velocity, or with the same
velocity during a longer time: and the equivalence of these two is
speedily learnt, by nfinding that a greater effort conducts the hand in
a shorter time from the same point to the same point; from the tactual
impression A to the tactual impression Bn. These different kinds and
qualities of muscular sensation, experienced in getting from one point
to another (that is, obtaining in succession two sensations of touch and
resistance, the objects of which are regarded as simultaneous) are all
we mean by saying that the points are separated by spaces, that they are
at different distances, and in different directions. An intervening
series of muscular sensations before the one object can be reached from
the other, is the only peculiarity which (according to this theory)
distinguishes simultaneity in space, from the simultaneity which may
exist between a taste and a colour, or a taste and a smell: and we have
no reason for believing that Space or Extension in itself, is anything
different from that which we recognise it by. It appears to me that this
doctrine is sound, and that the muscular sensations in question are the
sources of all the notion of Extension which we should ever obtain from
the tactual and muscular senses without the assistance of the eye.

But the participation of the eye in generating our actual notion of
Extension, very much alters its character, and is, I think, the main
cause of the difficulty felt in believing that Extension derives its
meaning to us from a phænomenon which is not synchronous but successive.
The fact is, that the conception we now have of Extension or Space is an
eye picture, and comprehends a great number of parts of Extension at
once, or in a succession so rapid that our consciousness confounds it
with simultaneity. How, then (it is naturally asked) can this vast
collection of consciousnesses which are sensibly simultaneous, be
generated by the mind out of its consciousness of a succession—the
succession of muscular feelings? An experiment may be conceived, which
would throw great light on this subject, but which unfortunately is more
easily imagined than obtained. There have been persons born blind who
were mathematicians, and I believe even naturalists; and it is not
impossible that one day a person born blind may be a metaphysician. The
first who is so, will be able to enlighten us on this point. For he will
be an experimentum crucis[*] on the mode in which extension is conceived
and known, independently of the eye. Not having the assistance of that
organ, a person blind from birth must necessarily Edition: current;
Page: [223] perceive the parts of extension—the parts of a line, of a
surface, or of a solid—in conscious succession. He perceives them by
passing his hand along them, if small, or by walking over them if great.
The parts of extension which it is possible for him to perceive
simultaneously, are only very small parts, almost the minima of
extension. Hence, if the Psychological theory of the idea of extension
is true, the blind metaphysician would feel very little of the
difficulty which seeing metaphysicians feel, in admitting that the idea
of Space is, at bottom, one of time—and that the notion of extension or
distance, is that of a motion of the muscles continued for a longer or a
shorter duration. If this analysis of extension appeared as paradoxical
to the metaphysician born blind, as it does to Sir W. Hamilton, this
would be a strong argument against the Psychological theory. But if, on
the contrary, it did not at all startle him, that theory would be very
strikingly corroborated.

We have no experiment directly in point. But we have one which is the
very next thing to it. We have not the perceptions and feelings of a
metaphysician blind from birth, told and interpreted by himself. But we
have those of an ordinary person blind from birth, told and interpreted
for him by a metaphysician. And the English reader is indebted for them
to Sir W. Hamilton. Platner, “a man no less celebrated as an acute
philosopher than as a learned physician and an elegant scholar,”[*]
endeavoured to ascertain by observation what notion of extension was
possessed by a person born blind, and made known the result in words
which Sir W. Hamilton has rendered into his clear English.

In regard to the visionless representation of space or extension, the
attentive observation of a person born blind, which I formerly
instituted in the year 1785, and again, in relation to the point in
question, have continued for three whole weeks—this observation, I say,
has convinced me, that the sense of touch, by itself, is altogether
incompetent to afford us the representation of extension and space, and
is not even cognisant of local exteriority; in a word, that a man
deprived of sight has absolutely no perception of an outer world, beyond
the existence of something effective, different from his own feeling of
passivity, and in general only of the numerical diversity—shall I say of
impressions, or of things? In fact, to those born blind, time serves
instead of space. Vicinity and distance means in their mouths nothing
more than the shorter or longer time, the smaller or greater number of
feelings, which they find necessary to attain from some one feeling to
another. That a person blind from birth employs the language of
vision—that may occasion considerable error; and did, indeed, at the
commencement of my observations, lead me wrong; but, in point of fact,
he knows nothing of things as existing out of each other; and (this in
particular I have very clearly remarked) if objects, and the parts of
his body touched by them, did not make different kinds of impression on
his nerves of sensation, he would take everything external for one and
the same. In his own body, he absolutely did not discriminate head and
foot at all by their distance, Edition: current; Page: [224] but merely
by the difference of the feelings (and his perception of such
differences was incredibly fine) which he experienced from the one and
from the other, and moreover through time. In like manner, in external
bodies, he distinguished their figure, merely by the varieties of
impressed feelings; inasmuch, for example, as the cube, by its angles,
affected his feeling differently from the sphere.*

The highly instructive representation here given by Platner, of this
person’s state of mind, is exactly that which we have just read in Mr.
Bain, and which that philosopher holds to be the primitive conception of
extension by all of us, before the wonderful power of sight and its
associations, in abridging the mental processes, has come into play. The
conclusion which, as we have seen, Platner draws from the case, is that
we obtain the idea of extension solely from sight; and even Sir W.
Hamilton is staggered in his belief of the contrary. But Platner, though
unintentionally, puts a false colour on the matter when he says that his
patient had no perception of extension. He used the terms expressive of
it with such propriety and discrimination, that Platner, by his own
account, did not at first suspect him of not meaning by those terms all
that is meant by persons who can see. He therefore meant something; he
had impressions which the words expressed to his mind; he had
conceptions of extension, after his own manner. But his idea of degrees
of extension was but the idea of a greater or smaller number of
sensations experienced in succession “to attain from some one feeling to
another;” that is, it was exactly what, according to Brown’s and Mr.
Bain’s theory, it ought to have been. And, the sense of touch and of the
muscles not being aided by sight, the sensations continued to be
conceived by him only as successive: his mental representation of them
remained a conception of a series, not of a coexistent group. Though he
must have had experience of simultaneity, for no being who has a
plurality of senses can be without it, he does not seem to have
thoroughly realized the conception of the parts of space as
simultaneous. Since what was thus wanting to him, is the principal
feature of the conception as it is in us, he seemed to Platner to have
no notion of extension. But Platner, fortunately, being a man who could
both observe, and express his observations precisely, has been able to
convey to our minds the conception which his patient really had of
extension; and we find that it was the same as our own, with the
exception of the element which, if the Psychological theory be true, was
certain to be added to it by the sense of sight. For, when this sense is
awakened, and its sensations of colour have become representative of the
tactual and muscular sensations with which they are coexistent, the fact
that we can receive a vast number of sensations of colour at the same
instant (or what appears such to our consciousness) puts us in the same
position as if we had been Edition: current; Page: [225] able to receive
that number of tactual and muscular sensations in a single instant. The
ideas of all the successive tactual and muscular feelings which
accompany the passage of the hand over the whole of the coloured
surface, are made to flash on the mind at once: and impressions which
were successive in sensation become coexistent in thought. From that
time we do with perfect facility, and are even compelled to do, what
Platner’s patient never completely succeeded in doing, namely, to think
all the parts of extension as coexisting, and to believe that we
perceive them as such. And if the laws of inseparable association, which
are already admitted as the basis of other acquired perceptions of
sight, are considered in their application to this case, it is certain
that this apparent perception of successive elements as simultaneous
owouldo be generated and would supply all that there is in our idea of
extension, more than there was in that of Platner’s patient.*

Edition: current; Page: [226]
I shall quote, in continuation, part of the exposition by Mr. Bain, of
the machinery by which our consciousness of Extension becomes an
appendage of our sensations of Sight. It is a striking example of the
commanding influence of that sense; which, though it has no greater
variety of original impressions than our other special senses, yet owing
to the two properties, of being able to receive a great number of its
impressions at once, and to receive them from all distances, takes the
lead altogether from the sense of touch: and is not only the organ by
which we read countless possibilities of tactual and muscular sensations
which can never, to us, become realities, but substitutes itself for our
touch and our muscles even where we can use them—causes their actual use
as avenues to knowledge, to become, in many cases, obsolete,—the
sensations themselves to be little heeded and very indistinctly
remembered,—and communicates its own prerogative of simultaneousness to
impressions and conceptions originating in other senses, which it could
never have given, but only suggests, through visible marks associated
with them by experience.

“The distinctive impressibility of the eye,” says Mr. Bain,

is for Colour. This is the effect specific to it as a sense. But the
feeling of Colour by itself, implies no knowledge of any outward object,
as a cause or a thing wherein the colour inheres. It is simply a mental
effect or influence, a feeling or conscious state, which we should be
able to distinguish from other conscious states, as for example, a smell
or a sound. We should also be able to mark the difference between it and
others of the same kind, more or less vivid, more or less enduring, more
or less voluminous. So we should distinguish the qualitative differences
between one colour and another. Pleasure or pain, with discrimination of
intensity and of duration, would attach to the mere sensation of colour.
Knowledge or belief in an external or material coloured body, there
would be none.

But when we add the active or muscular sensibility of the eye, we obtain
new products. The sweep of the eye over the coloured field gives a
feeling of a definite amount of action, an exercise of internal power,
which is something totally different from the passive feeling of light.
This action has many various modes, all of the same quality, but all
distinctively felt and recognised by us. Thus the movements may be in
any direction—horizontal, vertical, or slanting; and every one of these
movements is felt as different from every other. In addition to these,
we have the movements of adjustment of the eye, brought on by
differences in the remoteness of objects. We have distinctive feelings
belonging to these different adjustments, just as we have towards the
different movements across the field of view. If the eyes are adjusted,
first to clear vision for an object six inches from the eye, and
afterwards change their adjustment to suit an object six feet distant,
we are distinctly conscious of the change, and of the degree or amount
of it; we know that the change is greater than in extending the
adjustment to a three-feet object, while it is less than we should have
to go through for a twenty-feet object. Thus in the alterations of the
eyes for near and far, we have a distinctive consciousness of amount or
degree, no less than in the movements for right and left, up and down.
Feelings with the character of activity are thus incorporated with the
sensibility to colour; the luminous impression is associated with
exertion on our part, and is no longer a Edition: current; Page: [227]
purely passive state. We find that the light changes as our activity
changes, we recognise in it a certain connexion with our movements; and
association springs up between the passive feeling and the active energy
of the visible [“visual”] organ, or rather of the body generally; for
the changes of view are owing to movements of the head and trunk, as
well as to the sweep of the eye within its own orbit. . . .

When, along with a forward movement, we behold a steadily varying change
of appearance in the objects before us, we associate the change with the
locomotive effort, and after many repetitions, we firmly connect the one
with the other. We then know what is implied in a certain feeling in the
eye, a certain adjustment of the lenses and a certain inclination of the
axes, of all of which we are conscious; we know that these things are
connected with the further experience of a definite locomotive energy
needing to be expended, in order to alter this consciousness to some
other consciousness. Apart from this association, the eye-feeling might
be recognised as differing from other eye-feelings, but there could be
no other perception in the case. Experience connects these differences
of ocular adjustment with the various exertions of the body at large,
and the one can then imply and reveal the others. The feeling that we
have when the eyes are parallel and vision distinct, is associated with
a great and prolonged effort of walking, in other words, with a long
distance. An inclination of the eyes of two degrees, is associated with
two paces to bring us up to the nearest limit of vision, or with a
stretch of some other kind, measured in the last resort by pacing, or by
passing the hand along the object. The change from an inclination of 30°
to an inclination of 10°, is associated with a given sweep of the arm,
carrying the hand forward over eight inches and a half.*

These slight changes in the action of the muscles that move the eye,
habitually effected in a time too short for computation, are the means
by which our visual impressions from the whole of that portion of the
universe which is visible from the position where we stand, may be
concentrated within an interval of time so small that we are scarcely
conscious of any interval; and they are, in my apprehension, the
generating cause of all that we have in our notion of extension over and
above what Platner’s patient had in his. He had to conceive two or any
number of bodies (or resisting objects) with a long train of sensations
of muscular contraction filling up the interval between them: while we,
on the contrary, think of them as rushing upon our sight, many of them
at the same instant, all of them at what is scarcely distinguishable
from the same instant; and this visual imagery effaces from our minds
any distinct consciousness of the series of muscular sensations of which
it has become representative. The simultaneous visual sensations are to
us symbols of tactual and muscular ones which were slowly successive.

This symbolic relation being far briefer, is habitually thought of in
place of that it symbolizes: and by the continued use of such symbols,
and the union of them into more complex ones, are generated our ideas of
visible extension—ideas which, like Edition: current; Page: [228] those
of the algebraist working out an equation, are wholly unlike the ideas
symbolized; and which yet, like his, occupy the mind to the entire
exclusion of the ideas symbolized.

This last extract is from Mr. Herbert Spencer,* whose Principles of
Psychology, in spite of some doctrines which he holds in common with the
intuitive school, are on the whole one of the finest examples we possess
of the Psychological Method in its full power. His treatment of this
subject, and Mr. Bain’s, are at once corroborative and supplementary of
one another: and to them I must refer the reader who desires an ampler
elucidation of the general question. The remainder of this chapter will
be devoted to the examination of some peculiarities in Sir W. Hamilton’s
treatment of it.

Sir W. Hamilton relies mainly upon one argument to prove that Vision,
without the aid of Touch, gives an immediate knowledge of Extension:
which argument had been anticipated in a passage which he quotes from
D’Alembert.† The following is his own statement of it.

It can easily be shown that the perception of colour involves the
perception of extension. It is admitted that we have by sight a
perception of colours, consequently a perception of the difference of
colours. But a perception of the distinction of colours necessarily
involves the perception of a discriminating line; for if one colour be
laid beside or upon another, we only distinguish them as different by
perceiving that they limit each other, which limitation necessarily
affords a breadthless line,—a line of demarcation. One colour laid upon
another, in fact, gives a line returning upon itself, that is, a figure.
But a line and a figure are modifications of extension. The perception
of extension, therefore, is necessarily given in the perception of
colours.‡

And farther on:

All parties are, of course, at one in regard to the fact that we see
colour. Those who hold that we see extension, admit that we see it only
as coloured; and those who deny us any vision of extension, make colour
the exclusive object of sight. In regard to this first position, all
are, therefore, agreed. Nor are they less harmonious in reference to the
second;—that the power of perceiving colour involves the power of
perceiving the differences of colours. By sight we, therefore, perceive
colour, and discriminate one colour, that is, one coloured body,—one
sensation of colour, from another. This is admitted. A third position
will also be denied by none, that the colours discriminated in vision,
are, or may be, placed side by side in immediate juxtaposition; or, one
may limit another by being superinduced partially over it. A fourth
position is equally indisputable; that the contrasted colours, thus
bounding Edition: current; Page: [229] each other, will form by their
meeting a visible line, and that, if the superinduced colour be
surrounded by the other, this line will return upon itself, and thus
constitute the outline of a visible figure. These four positions command
a peremptory assent; they are all self-evident. But their admission at
once explodes the paradox under discussion [—that extension cannot be
cognised by sight alone]. And thus: A line is extension in one
dimension,—length; a figure is extension in two,—length and breadth.
Therefore, the vision of a line is a vision of extension in length; the
vision of a figure, the vision of extension in length and breadth.*

I must acknowledge that I cannot make the answer to this argument as
thorough and conclusive as I could wish; for we have not the power of
making an experiment, the completing converse of Platner’s. There is no
example of a person born with the sense of sight, but without those of
touch and the muscles: and nothing less than this would enable us to
define precisely the extent and limits of the conceptions which sight is
capable of giving, qindependentlyq of association with impressions of
another sense. There are, however, considerations well adapted to
moderate the extreme confidence which Sir W. Hamilton places in this
argument. First, it must be observed that when the eye, at present,
takes cognizance of rar visible figure, it does not cognise it by means
of colour alone, but by all those motions and modifications of the
muscles connected with the eye, which have so great a share in giving us
our acquired perceptions of sight. To determine what can be cognised by
sight alone, we must suppose an eye incapable of these changes; which
can neither have the curvature of its lenses modified nor the direction
of its axis changed by any mode of muscular action; which cannot,
therefore, travel along the boundary line that separates two colours,
but must remain fixed with a steady gaze on a definite spot. If we once
allow the eye to follow the direction of a line or the periphery of a
figure, we have no longer merely sight, but important muscular
sensations superadded. Now there is nothing more certain than that an
eye with its axis immovably fixed in one direction, gives a full and
clear vision of but a small portion of space, that to which the axis
directly points, and only a faint and indistinct one of the other points
surrounding it. When we are able to see any considerable portion of a
surface so as to form a distinct idea of it, we do so by passing the eye
over and about it, changing slightly the direction of the axis many
times in a second. When the eye is pointed directly to one spot, the
faint perceptions we have of others are barely sufficient to serve as
indications for directing the axis of the eye to each of them in turn,
when withdrawn from the first. Physiologists have explained this by the
fact, that the centre of the retina is furnished with a Edition:
current; Page: [230] prodigiously greater number of nervous papillæ,
much finer and more delicate individually, and crowded closer together,
than any other part. Whatever be its explanation, the fact itself is
indubitable; and seems to warrant the conclusion that if the axis of the
eye were immovable, and we were without the muscular sensations which
accompany and guide its movement, the impression we should have of a
boundary between two colours would be so vague and indistinct as to be
merely rudimentary.

A rudimentary conception must be allowed, for it is evident that even
without moving the eye we are capable of having two sensations of colour
at once, and that the boundary which separates the colours must give
some specific affection of sight, otherwise we should have no
discriminative impressions capable of afterwards becoming, by
association, representative of the cognitions of lines and figures which
we owe to the tactual and the muscular sense. But to confer on these
discriminative impressions the name which denotes our matured and
perfected cognition of Extension, or even to assume that they have in
their nature anything in common with it, seems to be going beyond the
evidence. sBerkeley acknowledged a very considerable amount of
perception by the eye alone, of something which it was possible to call
by the name of extension; and that which is so perceived has, since his
time, been known to philosophers as Visible Extension, in
contradistinction to Tangible.[*] But Berkeley maintained that Visible
Extension not only is not the same thing as Tangible Extension, but has
not the smallest likeness to it, and that a person born with only one of
the two senses, and afterwards acquiring the other, would, until there
had been time to learn their mutual relation by experience, never
suspect that there was any connexion between them.[†] In point of fact,
those who are born blind and afterwards acquire sight, know by the
information of others that the eye pictures and the tactual sensations
come from the same objects: yet even with that help it is always a work
of time and difficulty to connect the one with the other.s Sir W.
Hamilton appears to think that extension as revealed by the eye, is
identical with the extension which we know by touch, except that it is
only in two dimensions. “It is not,” he says, “all kind of extension and
form that is attributed to sight. It is not figured extension in all the
three dimensions, but only extension as involved in plane figures; that
is, only length and breadth.”* But to have the notion of extension even
in length and breadth as we have it, is to have it in such a manner that
we might know certain muscular facts without having tried: as, Edition:
current; Page: [231] for instance, that if we placed our finger on the
spot corresponding to one end of a line, or boundary of a surface, we
should have to go through a muscular motion before we could place it on
the other. Is there the smallest reason to suppose that on the evidence
of sight alone, we could arrive at this conclusion in anticipation of
the sense of touch? I cannot admit that we could have what is meant by a
perception of superficial space, unless we conceived it as something
which the hand could be moved across; and, whatever may be the retinal
impression conveyed by the line which bounds two colours, I see no
ground for thinking that by the eye alone we could acquire the
conception of what we now mean when we say that one of the colours is
outside the other.* On this point I may again quote Mr. Bain.

I do not see how one sensation can be felt as out of another, without
already supposing that we have a feeling of space. If I see two distinct
objects before me, as Edition: current; Page: [232] two candle flames, I
apprehend them as different objects, and as distant from one another by
an interval of space; but this apprehension presupposes an independent
experience and knowledge of lineal extension. There is no evidence to
show that, at the first sight of these objects, and before any
association is formed between visible appearances and other movements, I
should be able to apprehend in the double appearance a difference of
place. I feel a distinctness of impression, undoubtedly, partly optical
and partly muscular, but in order that this distinctness may mean to
Edition: current; Page: [233] me a difference of position in space, it
must reveal the additional fact, that a certain movement of my arm would
carry my hand from the one flame to the other; or that some other
movement of mine would change by a definite amount the appearance I now
see. If no information is conveyed respecting the possibility of
movements of the body generally, no idea of space is given, for we never
consider that we have a notion of space, unless we distinctly recognise
this possibility. But how a vision to Edition: current; Page: [234] the
eye can reveal beforehand what would be the experience of the hand or
the other moving members, I am unable to understand.*

Sir W. Hamilton does not limit the perception of Extension to sight and
touch, either separately or combined with one another. “The opinions,”
he says,

so generally prevalent, that through touch, or touch and muscular
feeling, or touch Edition: current; Page: [235] and sight, or touch,
muscular feeling, and sight,—that through these senses, exclusively, we
are percipient of extension, &c., I do not admit. On the contrary, I
hold that all sensations whatsoever of which we are conscious as one out
of another, eo ipso afford us the condition of immediately and
necessarily apprehending extension; for in the consciousness itself of
such reciprocal outness is actually involved a perception of difference
of place in space, and, consequently, of the extended.*

It may safely be admitted that whenever we are conscious of two
sensations as “one out of another,” in the sense of locality, we have a
perception of space; for the two expressions are equivalent. But to have
a consciousness of difference between two sensations which are felt
simultaneously, is not to feel them as “one out of another” in this
sense; and the very question to be decided is, whether any of our
senses, apart from feelings of muscular motion, gives us the notion of
“one out of another” in the sense necessary to support the idea of
Extension.

Sir W. Hamilton thinks that whenever two different nervous filaments are
simultaneously affected at their extremities, the sensations received
through them are felt as one out of the other. It is extremely probable
that the affection of two distinct nervous filaments is the condition of
the discriminative sensibility which furnishes us with sensations
capable of becoming representative of objects one out of the other. But
that is a different thing from giving us the perception directly.
Undoubtedly we recognise difference of place in the objects which affect
our senses, whenever we are aware that those objects affect different
parts of our organism. But when we are aware of this, we already have
the notion of Place. We must be aware of the different parts of our body
as one out of another, before we can use this knowledge as a means of
cognising a similar fact in regard to other material objects. This Sir
W. Hamilton admits; and what, therefore, he is bound to prove is, that
the very first time we received an impression of touch, or of any other
sense, affecting more than one nervous filament, we were conscious of
being affected in a plurality of places. This he does not even attempt
to do; and direct proof is palpably unattainable. As a matter of
indirect evidence, we may oppose to this theory Mr. Bain’s, according to
which, apart from association, we should not have any impression of
xthisx kind, and should in general be conscious only of a greater mass
or “volume”[*] of sensation when we were affected in two places, than
when only in one; like the more massive sensation of heat which we feel
when our bodies are immersed in a warm bath, compared with that which we
feel when heat of the same, or even of greater intensity, is applied
only to our hands or feet. Mr. Bain’s doctrine, being as consistent
Edition: current; Page: [236] with the admitted facts of the case as Sir
W. Hamilton’s, has a good claim, on his own law of Parcimony, to be
preferred to it. But, besides, there are recorded facts which agree with
Mr. Bain’s theory, and are quite irreconcilable with Sir W. Hamilton’s;
and to find such we need not travel beyond Sir W. Hamilton’s own pages.

One of them is the very case we have already had before us, that
recorded by Platner. The facts of this case are quite inconsistent with
the opinion, that we have a direct perception of extension when an
object touches us in more than one place, including the extremities of
more than one nervous filament. Platner expressly says that his patient,
when an object touched a considerable part of the surface of his body,
but without exciting more than one kind of sensation, was conscious of
no local difference—no “outness” of one part of the sensation in
relation to another part—but only (we may presume) of a greater quantity
of sensation; as Mr. Bain would call it, a greater yvolumey. As Platner
expresses it, “if objects and the parts of his body touched by them, did
not make different kinds of impression on his nerves of sensation, he
would take everything external for one and the same. In his own body, he
absolutely did not discriminate head and foot at all by their distance,
but merely by the difference of the feelings.”[*] Such an experiment,
reported by a competent observer, is of itself almost enough to
overthrow Sir W. Hamilton’s theory.

In like manner, the patient in Cheselden’s celebrated case, after his
second eye was couched, described himself as seeing objects twice as
large with both eyes as with one only;[†] that is, he had a double
quantity, or double volume of sensation, which suggested to his mind the
idea of a double size.*

Edition: current; Page: [237]
Another case, for the knowledge of which I am also indebted to Sir W.
Hamilton—who knew it through an abstract given by M. Maine de Biran[*]
of the original report “by M. Rey Régis, a medical observer, in his
Histoire naturelle de l’âme”[†]—is as incompatible with Sir W.
Hamilton’s theory as Platner’s case. It is the case of a patient who
lost the power of movement in one-half of his body, apparently from
temporary paralysis of the motory nerves, while the functions of the
sensory nerves seemed unimpaired. This patient, it was found, had lost
the power of localizing his sensations.

Experiments, various and repeated, were made to ascertain with accuracy,
whether the loss of motive faculty had occasioned any alteration in the
capacity of feeling; and it was found that the patient, though as
acutely alive as ever to the sense of pain, felt, when this was secretly
inflicted, as by compression of his hand under the bedclothes, a
sensation of suffering or uneasiness, by which, when the pressure became
strong, he was compelled lustily to cry out; but a sensation merely
general, he being altogether unable to localize the feeling, or to say
whence the pain proceeded. . . . The patient, as he gradually recovered
the use of his limbs, gradually also recovered the power of localizing
his sensations.*

It would be premature to establish a scientific inference upon a single
experiment: but if confirmed by repetition, this is an experimentum
crucis.[‡] So far as one experiment can avail, ita proves, that
sensation without motion does not give the perception of difference of
place in our bodily organs (not to speak of outward objects), and that
this perception is even now entirely an inference, dependent on the
muscular feelings.†

Edition: current; Page: [238]
It gives a very favourable idea of Sir W. Hamilton’s sincerity and
devotion to truth, that he should have drawn from their obscurity, and
made generally known, two cases which make such havoc with his own
opinions as this and Platner’s; for though he did not believe the cases
to be really inconsistent with his theory, he can hardly have been
entirely unaware that they could be used against it.

The only other point in Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrines respecting the
Primary Qualities which it is of importance to notice, is one, I
believe, peculiar to himself, and certainly not common to him with any
of his eminent predecessors in the same school of thought. It is the
doctrine, that those qualities are not perceived—are not directly and
immediately cognized—in things external to our bodies, but only in our
bodies themselves. “A Perception,” he says,

of the Primary Qualities does not, originally, and in itself, reveal to
us the existence, and qualitative existence, of aught beyond the
organism, apprehended by us as extended, figured, divided, &c. The
primary qualities of things external to our organism we do not perceive,
i.e. immediately know. For these we only learn to infer, from the
affections which we come to find that they determine in our
organs;—affections which, yielding us a perception of organic extension,
we at length discover, by observation and induction, to imply a
corresponding extension in the extra-organic agents.

Neither, according to him, do we perceive, or immediately know,
“extension in its true and absolute magnitude;” our perceptions giving
different impressions of magnitude from the same object, when placed in
contact with different parts of our body.

As perceived extension is only the recognition of one organic affection
in its outness from another; as a minimum of extension is thus, to
perception, the smallest extent of organism in which sensations can be
discriminated as plural; and as in one part of the organism this
smallest extent is perhaps some million, certainly some myriad, times
smaller than in others; it follows that, to perception, the same real
extension will appear, in this place of the body, some million or myriad
times greater than in that. Nor does this difference subsist only as
between sense and sense; for in the same sense, and even in that sense
which has very commonly been held exclusively to afford a knowledge of
absolute extension, I mean Touch proper, the minimum, at one part of the
body, is some fifty times greater than it is at another.*

Thus, according to Sir W. Hamilton, all our cognitions of extension and
figure in anything except our own body, and of the real amount of
extension even in that, are not perceptions, or states of direct
consciousness, but Edition: current; Page: [239] “inferences,” and even
inferences “by observation and induction” from our experience. Now, we
know how contemptuous he is of Brown, and other “Cosmothetic Idealists,”
for maintaining that the existence of extension or extended objects
otherwise than as an affection of our own minds, is not a direct
perception but an inference. We know how he reproaches this opinion with
being subversive of our Natural Beliefs; how often he repeats that the
testimony of consciousness must be accepted entire, or not accepted at
all; how earnestly and in how many places he maintains

that we have not merely a notion, a conception, an imagination, a
subjective representation of Extension, for example, called up or
suggested in some incomprehensible manner to the mind, on the occasion
of an extended object being presented to the sense; but that in the
perception of such an object we have, as by nature we believe we have,
an immediate knowledge or consciousness of that external object as
extended. In a word, that in sensitive perception, the extension as
known, and the extension as existing, are convertible; known because
existing, and existing, since known.*

All this, it appears, is only true of the extension of our own bodies.
The extension of any other body is not known immediately or by
perception, but as an inference from the former. I ask any one, whether
this opinion does not contradict our “natural beliefs” as much as any
opinion of the Cosmothetic Idealists can do; whether to the natural, or
non-metaphysical man, it is not as great a paradox to affirm that we do
not perceive extension in anything external to our bodies, as that we do
not perceive extension in anything external to our minds; and whether,
if the natural man can be brought to assent to the former, he will find
any additional strangeness or apparent absurdity in the latter. This is
only one of the many instances in which the philosopher who so
vehemently accuses other thinkers of affirming the absolute authority of
Consciousness when it is on their own side, and rejecting it when it is
not, lays himself open to a similar charge. The truth is, it is a charge
from which no psychologist, not Reid himself, is exempt. No person of
competent understanding has ever applied himself to the study of the
human mind, and not discovered that some of the common opinions of
mankind respecting their mental consciousness are false, and that some
notions, apparently intuitive, are really acquired. Every psychologist
draws the line where he thinks it can be drawn most truly. Of course it
is possible that Sir W. Hamilton has drawn it in the right place, and
Brown in the wrong. Sir W. Hamilton would say that the common opinions
which he contests are not Natural Beliefs, though mistaken for such. And
Brown thinks exactly the same of those which are repugnant to his own
doctrine. Neither of bthemb can justify himself but by pointing out a
mode Edition: current; Page: [240] in which the apparent perceptions,
supposed to be original, may have been acquired; and neither can charge
the other with anything worse than having made a mistake in this
extremely delicate process of psychological analysis. Neither of them
has a right to give to a mistake in such a matter, the name of a
rejection of the testimony of consciousness, and attempt to bring down
the other by an argument which is of no possible value except ad
invidiam, and which in its invidious sense is applicable to them both,
and to all psychologists deserving the name.


cNOTE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER

A host of critics, headed by Dr. M‘Cosh, Mr. Mahaffy, and the writer in
Blackwood [W. H. Smith], have directed their shafts against this
chapter; but Professor Fraser, himself a host, is on my side. [See
“Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,” pp. 202, 218n.] The essential point in
the controversy being the analysis of Extension, I shall confine my
notice to the arguments bearing upon that point.

The principal objection is the same which was made to the two preceding
chapters: that the explanation given of Extension presupposes Extension:
that the notion itself is surreptitiously introduced, to account for its
own origin. The case of the objectors is most compactly stated by Mr.
Mahaffy, in the following extract:

The briefest way of criticizing the long passage [quoted from Mr. Bain]
will be to enumerate its fallacies in general heads. (α) A knowledge of
our organism as extended must not be begged, when we are going to
explain extension; hence, such expressions as the “range of a limb” or
“sweep of a limb,” must either be carefully confined to the mere
succession of feelings in moving it, or they beg the question: and
indeed, as suggesting extension in the very statement, they should be
avoided when we are describing the phenomena from which extension is to
be derived. (β) Any mention or postulating of direction cannot be for a
moment allowed; for what possible meaning can direction have except in
space? In particular, lineal (by which I suppose Mr. Bain principally
means rectilinear) direction would be only given with great difficulty
by the moving of limbs, and we should be brought back to the old Greek
notion of circular motion being the most natural. This difficulty, as
well as a host of others, are urged with great acuteness by Mr. Abbott.
([Thomas Kingsmill Abbott,] Sight and Touch [(London: Longman, Green,
Longman, Roberts, and Green, 1864)], Chap. v [pp. 60ff.].) More
especially he states, from E. H. Weber, that touch cannot give us the
idea of a right line at all, and consequently not the slightest idea of
direction. [Abbott, p. 70, referring to Ernst Heinrich Weber, “Der
Tastsinn und das Gemeingefühl,” in Rudolph Wagner, Handwörterbuch der
Physiologie, 4 vols. (Braunschweig: Bieweg, 1842-53), Vol. III, pp.
481-588.] (γ) No such notion as velocity or rapidity can be admitted,
far less such a notion as the comparison of quicker and slower motions.
In fact, the idea of motion requires Edition: current; Page: [241] as
its logical antecedent both space and time, and is not identical with
pure succession. Suppose we had nothing but the series of our thoughts
to analyse, we could never get beyond the idea of a series, nor could we
ever by any chance get the notion of acceleration or retardation in it.
For what is quicker or slower? Nothing but more space traversed in less
time, and vice versâ. Motion cannot be apprehended without something
fixed, which is only given us by relations of space, as Kant has well
shown. The motion of our thoughts, then, is in the first place, only an
analogical expression; and secondly, could never have been felt without
something in space whereby not only to measure the increased or
diminished velocity of our thinking, but even to learn that there is any
velocity at all in the matter. The evidence of dreaming seems to
corroborate this view. Why is it, that, the intuitions of velocity
afforded us by space being removed, the current of thoughts is found by
itself completely incompetent to suggest or estimate speed at all? (δ)
What we necessarily use to measure extension must not for that reason
have originally suggested it. And yet all that the association school
ever attempt to prove is only this: that all the measures of extension
can be traced to series of muscular feelings in time. The knowledge of
extension is one thing, and primitive; the measure of extension is
another, and empirical; and we should not accept Mr. Bain’s confusion of
them together (perhaps identification of them), without some further
proof than his bare statement.

Upon all these assumptions, however, the theory of Mr. Bain is based,
and the intelligent reader will find them scattered over the very
surface of the argument. I would call particular attention to the
passage . . . “We must learn to feel that a slow motion for a long time
is the same as a quicker motion with less duration, which we can easily
do by seeing that they both produce the same effect in exhausting the
full range of the limb.” Surely it is clear that without space we could
never get the idea of motion, which involves space as much as time—in
fact, a series in time only changes, it does not move; and even granting
we had the idea, we could never discriminate whether that motion was
quicker or slower, except the notion of something permanent in space,
and motion in space, were given. The same petitio principii is made by
Mr. Mill.*

This orderly and succinct mode of setting forth the objection is a great
convenience for answering it. I shall take Mr. Mahaffy’s points in his
own order.

(α) The phraseology employed to express the data common to both parties
must, at least in the commencement, be that which common language
affords; since no other would enable the reader to understand, without a
laborious process, on a subject already so difficult, what are the facts
meant. But the phraseology, of course, must not be so used as to assume
anything which either the theory itself, or the theory opposed to it,
does not admit. As Mr. Mahaffy observes, “such expressions as the range
of a limb, or the sweep of a limb,” must “be carefully confined to the
mere succession of feelings in moving it.” And if the reader turns back
to the first Edition: current; Page: [242] of the quoted passages, he
will find that Mr. Bain has been most industrious in directing attention
to the feelings involved in the motion of a limb, as the point to be
attended to, in contradistinction to the motion itself, and in showing
that his expressions are to be understood of the former, and not of the
latter.

(β) Direction, Mr. Mahaffy maintains, must not be mentioned or referred
to in the analysis of extension, because direction means space, and
space must not be called in to account for itself. It would have been
nearer the truth if, instead of saying that direction means space, he
had said that space means direction. Space is the aggregate of
directions, as Time is of successions. To postulate direction,
therefore, is to postulate, not space, but the element which the notion
of space is made of. Mr. Bain, however, does not postulate direction. He
postulates the distinctive sensations which, from the first, accompany
the motions of a limb in what we, with our acquired perceptions, call
variety of directions. There are such distinctive sensations, otherwise
we should not even now know, when our eyes are shut, in what direction
our arm is moving. According to Mr. Bain, the difference in the
sensations depends on the difference in the muscles exerted. “All
directions that call forth the play of the same muscles, are similar
directions as respects the body: different muscles mean different
directions.”* These sensations, shading, as they do, gradually into one
another, without abruptness or break, are well fitted to give rise to
the feeling of continuity, which unites all our different notions of
different directions into one notion of space.†

Edition: current; Page: [243]
(γ) Velocity or rapidity, comparison of quicker and slower motions, must
not, Mr. Mahaffy says, be postulated, because quicker or slower have no
meaning but with reference to the greater or smaller space traversed in
a given time. It is true that the two motions derive their name from
space; but are the motions themselves therefore undistinguishable? A saw
and a hatchet are so called on account of the different kind of work
they do; but can we not also distinguish the two objects when we see
them? Again I say, what is postulated is not the space traversed, but
the greater or less energy of the muscular sensation. It only remains to
be explained how we learn that a more energetic sensation lasting a
shorter time, is equivalent to a less energy continued for a longer
time. Mr. Bain thinks we learn this by their both producing the same
effect in “exhausting the full range of the limb;” by which he means,
attaining the extreme limit of the sensation which accompanies
protension—the point beyond which no further addition to it can be made.
Where is the petitio principii here? I think that the solution is an
admissible one—that we may fairly be supposed to take the entire series
of the sensations which accompany the stretching out of the limb, as a
unit of measurement, divisible into an ascending scale of degrees, which
may be passed through in a shorter or a longer time, but the sum of
which is always equal to itself. I have myself pointed out another road
by which we might arrive at the same equivalence. We have two
simultaneous sensations of touch with our two hands. We then move the
right hand until it joins the left, and touches the same object. It need
not be supposed that we yet know them as our hands, or the object as a
body, or know of our right hand as moving through space. But the two
simultaneous sensations of touch, either of which we may prolong or
repeat at pleasure, have given us the notion of a permanent element in
touch, and of two such permanent elements as coexisting. We have now had
the two sensations of touch with a single hand, but separated by a
series of the sensations accompanying muscular movement: and we find
that to get from one of the tactual sensations to the other requires a
shorter time, in proportion to the energy of the intervening muscular
sensations. In this mental process time is postulated, but not space:
and it is contended that the shorter time, or its equivalent, the
greater energy, required to get from one object of touch to another
already recognised as simultaneous, is the measure, in the last resort,
of their distance in space. The eye then comes in, and with its greater
powers of simultaneous sensation, it gathers up, by its acquired
perceptions, a host of such measurements in one apparent intuition.

Edition: current; Page: [244]
(δ) “What we necessarily use to measure extension” need not, as Mr.
Mahaffy justly observes, have originally suggested it: but if all the
facts of consciousness involved in what we call extension can be
accounted for on the supposition that the measure is the thing itself,
no other evidence needs be required.* The apparent testimony of
consciousness to a difference between them, is perfectly explicable by
the totally altered aspect which, as I have shown in the text, our
cognizance of Extension puts on when the sense of sight has assumed the
lead of it. When a larger collection of carefully observed facts
respecting persons blind from birth, shall have been subjected to an
acuter and more discriminating analysis, the additional insight which we
may hope to obtain into the psychology of such persons, will probably
dissipate the remains of obscurity which still hang over some of the
details of the subject.

Dr. M‘Cosh [Examination, pp. 101-72,] and the writer in Blackwood are
constructive thinkers as well as critics, and endeavour to prove, in a
direct manner, that the notion of extension is not acquired through our
muscular sensations. The evidence on which they chiefly insist is that,
antecedently to experience, we localize our sensations at different
points of our body: according to Dr. M‘Cosh, at the extremities of the
nerve-fibres; every sensation being, by nature, felt at the point where
the nerve terminates. The writer in Blackwood says, “We do not commence
our sentient life with sensations felt nowhere—we certainly have no
memory of pains that were not felt somewhere—in that arena, in fact,
which we come to call our body.” The absence of remembrance of what took
place soon after birth being, as I have so often observed, no proof that
it did not happen, the proof offered is,

that no ingenuity whatever will get our pains into our bodies, or give
us knowledge of these bodies, unless we commence with the admission that
certain pains and pleasures of a physical order are, as soon as they
attain to any distinctness, felt in different parts of a certain arena,
thus localizing each other. . . . Many writers describe this
localization as an acquired perception. Now, no one doubts for a moment
that the accurate localization of our sensations is acquired by
experience; but that experience, we maintain, would not be possible were
there not some vague localization given us at once, by simultaneous
sensations felt in different parts of our system. How else do we get our
first idea of space or position?†

Edition: current; Page: [245]
To this last question I have already endeavoured to give an answer.*
With regard to the localization, so far as it regards our external
sensations, I see no difficulty in believing that it takes place
altogether by the process to which, as the writer admits, we are
indebted for our power of “accurate localization.” I am bit by an
animal, or my skin is irritated at some point, and I am at first unable,
as occasionally happens even now, to fix the exact place of the
sensation. I move my hand along the surface until I find the place where
the friction of the hand relieves the irritation, or where its contact
increases the smart. I am now expressing these facts in the ordinary
language of mankind, but I have sufficiently explained the sense which
that language bears in my own doctrine. The view I have taken of the
manner in which we obtain our cognition of place, does not rest on any
previous localization, even vague, of our sensations. Nor does the
localizing of a sensation, say in one of our limbs, amount to anything
but attributing to the sensation an uniform and close conjunction,
either synchronous or by immediate succession, with the group of
sensations of various kinds which constitute my perception of the limb.
In general we probably first discover that the sensation is connected
with the limb, by perceiving that the exciting cause of the sensation is
connected with it. Mr. Bain states the matter as follows:

I can associate one pain with the sight of my finger, another pain with
the sight of my toe, and a third with the position of my arm that
determines the crown of my head. An infant at the outset knows not where
to look for the cause of an irritation when anything touches it; by and
by the child observes a coincidence between a feeling and a pressure
operating on some one part; whence a feeling in the hand is associated
with the sight of the hand, and so for other members.—When the feeling
is more internal, as in the interior of the trunk, we have greater
difficulty in tracing the precise seat, often we are quite at a loss on
the point. In this case we have to trust to some indications that come
to the surface, or to the effect of superficial pressure on the deep
parts. By getting a blow on the ribs we come to connect feelings in the
chest with the place in our map of the body: we can thus make
experiments on the deep-seated organs and learn the meaning of their
indications. But the more inaccessible the parts, the more uncertainty
is there in assigning the locality of their sensations.†

Edition: current; Page: [246]
There are some difficulties, not yet completely resolved, respecting the
localization of our internal pains, for the solution of which we need
more careful and intelligent observation of infants. But I think enough
is known to show that the localization of our sensations is not the
starting point of our knowledge of place and position, but follows it.
It is true that (as Dr. M‘Cosh observes) “if a child is wounded in the
arm, it will not hold out its foot.”* But, before it has given evidence
of having “any acquired perceptions,” will it hold out its arm either?
On the theory that the localization is an acquired perception, it should
do neither the one nor the other.†

Dr. M‘Cosh has another argument to prove that we have an original power
of localizing our sensations, and, strange to say, it is the very one
which is usually thought to be the strongest proof that the power is
acquired: viz., the persistence of the association which makes us refer
sensations to a limb, after the limb has been cut off. “Müller,” says
Dr. M‘Cosh, “has collected a number of such cases,” of which one will be
a sufficient sample: “a student named Schmidts, from Aix, had his arm
amputated above the elbow thirteen years ago; he has never ceased to
have sensations as if in the fingers.”‡ It is a singular oversight in
Dr. M‘Cosh to adduce these facts as proof that we localize the sensation
at the extremities of the nerves. He forgets that after the arm was cut
off, the extremity of the nerve was in the stump, and that it is there,
and not in the fingers, that, if his theory were true, the sensation
ought to have been felt. The reference of it to the limb which was gone
could only be a case of irresistible association. It does not directly
negative the existence of an instinctive localization; but it proves
that, if there be any such, an acquired association can overpower it. So
in respect to the following fact, also quoted from Müller: “When, in the
restoration of a nose, a flap of skin is turned down from the forehead
and made to unite with the stump of the nose, the new nose thus formed
has, as long as the isthmus of skin by which it maintains its original
connexions remains undivided, the same sensations as if it were still on
the forehead; in other words, when the nose is touched, the patient
feels the impression in Edition: current; Page: [247] the forehead.”*
But the nerve that conveys the impression no longer terminates in the
forehead; it terminates in the new nose; and according to Dr. M‘Cosh’s
theory the sensation should be felt there, exactly as it is after the
“isthmus of skin” has been divided, the old nervous connexion cut off,
and a new one gradually formed. Dr. M‘Cosh’s facts well nigh destroy his
own theory; but they are such as, on the association theory, would
certainly happen. The last, especially, is of great value to that
theory, because it is one of the strongest instances which show that
there is a distinctive “Quale” (as one of Dr. M‘Cosh’s German
authorities calls it)[*] belonging to the sensation conveyed by each one
of the nerves, which hinders it from being confounded with the sensation
conveyed by any other nerve, and enables it to form associations special
to itself with the part of the body it serves, which, as we see, persist
even after it has been taken away to serve another part.

dDr. M‘Cosh, in his reply, denies that his facts conflict with his
theory, for his theory is, that we intuitively localize our sensations,
not where the nerves really terminate, but where they “normally”
terminate; that is, not where the termination is, but where it ought to
be. [“Mill’s Reply,” p. 350.] In other words, we, naturally and
intuitively, feel our sensations in a place which, in the case of an
amputated limb, is not only outside our body, but may be at a distance
of one or two feet from it: and this seat of sensation in the space
outside our bodies follows us wherever we go. This is what Dr. M‘Cosh
would rather believe, than that the reference of the feeling to such a
place is an illusion produced by association. In support of his opinion
he refers to a case mentioned by Professor Valentin (along with three
others of a similar character) in which a girl whose left hand was
congenitally imperfect, said she had the internal sensation of a palm of
the hand and five fingers (which she did not possess) as perfectly in
her left hand as in her right.[†] But what does this prove, except that
she had the same sensations in the nerves of her left hand as in those
of her right, which of course, therefore, carried the same association.
Dr. M‘Cosh should show a case in which sensations were referred to
non-existent fingers when there were no real fingers to suggest the
notion.

Edition: current; Page: [248]
According to Dr. M‘Cosh, the reference of sensations to a lost limb
contradicts not his but the association theory; since the lapse of years
after the loss of the limb would be sufficient to destroy the old
association. [Ibid., p. 351.] And this, in the great majority of cases,
it probably does. But it is a frequent experience that a sensation
exactly like one we have formerly felt, and like nothing else, revives
even after many years a long forgotten remembrance. Again, Dr. M‘Cosh
says that in the case of the new nose, the affection, according to the
association theory, “should have been felt in the forehead, not till the
isthmus was cut, but till the old association was gone; and this,”
according to me, “might not have been for twenty years.” [Ibid.] This
overlooks an important feature in the case. When not only the old
nervous connexion has been cut off, but a new one formed, between the
new nose and the nervous trunk which connected the old nose with the
brain, the sensations become identical with those which were referred to
the old nose when it existed; and the reference of them to the nose is
thus supported by as old and strong an association as the previous
reference of them to the forehead: with the difference that while every
day helps to dissolve the one association, every day strengthens and
rivets the other.

The only further case referred to by Dr. M‘Cosh, is one mentioned by
Schopenhauer on the authority of Frorieps; that of “Eva Lauk, an
Esthonian girl, fourteen years old, born without arms or legs, but who,
according to her mother, had developed herself intellectually quite as
rapidly as her brothers and sisters, and without the use of limbs had
reached a correct judgment concerning the magnitude and distance of
visible objects, quite as quickly as they.”* This, unfortunately, is all
the information which Schopenhauer gives on this interesting case. In
Dr. M‘Cosh’s judgment, it entirely disproves the opinion “that a sweep
of the arm or leg, considered merely as a group of sensations without
extension,” could give the idea of extension. [Ibid., p. 352.] He means,
probably, that it proves that the idea can be acquired without any use
of arms or legs. But we do not know of what nature the girl’s idea of
extension was. What we are told is, that she had notions of magnitude
and distance, which she applied to objects with the same correctness as
other people. But her notion of distance may have been only such as
could be formed by the time expended in being carried to the spot; and
her notion of magnitude may have been acquired when objects were in
contact with her body—perhaps still by means of muscular Edition:
current; Page: [249] feelings of pressure and motion. Above all, it must
be remembered that the girl was surrounded by people possessing legs and
arms, and had their aid in associating the discriminating sensations of
sight with the facts, of touch and of the muscles, to which they
correspond. Such assistance is a great help even to children who have
the ordinary complement of legs and arms; they all must acquire the
association much more quickly through the help given them by the acts
and words of other people. It may be confidently assumed that Eva Lauk
had this help, probably in more than usual measure, and did not find out
wholly by herself that a greater mass of visual sensation indicated a
greater mass of tactual sensation answering to it.d

I believe I have noticed every plausible objection to Mr. Bain’s and my
own analysis of Extension, which has a sufficiently individual character
to require an answer by itself. The subject is in need of further study
before all its obscure corners will be completely lighted up; but this
it can hardly fail to receive, now that highly competent thinkers are
engaged in extending our knowledge of the Mind by the application of the
Psychological Method, grounded on the Laws of Association.c

Edition: current; Page: [250]


CHAPTER XIV: How Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Mansel Dispose of the Law of Inseparable Association

it has been obvious in the preceding discussions, and is known to all
who have studied the best masters of what I have called the
Psychological, in opposition to the merely Introspective method of
metaphysical enquiry, that the principal instrument employed by them for
unlocking the deeper mysteries of mental science, is the Law of
Inseparable Association. This law, which it would seem specially
incumbent on the Intuitive school of metaphysicians to take into serious
consideration, because it is the basis of the rival theory which they
have to encounter at every point, and which it is necessary for them to
refute first, as the condition of establishing their own, is not so much
rejected as ignored by them. Reid and Stewart, who had met with it only
in Hartley, thought it needless to take the trouble of understanding it.
The best informed German and French philosophers are barely aware, if
even aware, of its existence.* And in this country and age, in which it
has been employed by thinkers of the highest order as the most potent of
all instruments of psychological analysis, the opposite school usually
dismiss it with a few sentences, so smoothly gliding over the surface of
the subject, as to prove that they have never, even for an instant,
brought the powers of their minds into real and effective contact with
it.

Sir W. Hamilton has written a rather elaborate Dissertation on the Laws
Edition: current; Page: [251] of Association; and the more elementary of
them had engaged a considerable share of his attention.* But he nowhere
shows that he had the smallest suspicion of this, the least familiar and
most imperfectly understood of these laws. I find in all his writings
only two or three passages in which he touches, even cursorily, on this
mode of explaining mental phænomena. The first and longest of these
occurs in the treatment, not of any of the greater problems of mental
philosophy, but of a very minor question; whether, in the perception of
outward objects, our cognition of wholes precedes that of their
component parts, or the bcontrary.b More fully; Edition: current; Page:
[252] “whether, in Perception, do we first obtain a general knowledge of
the complex wholes presented to us by sense, and then, by analysis and
limited attention, obtain a special knowledge of their several parts; or
do we not first obtain a particular knowledge of the smallest parts to
which sense is competent, and then, by synthesis, collect them into
greater and greater wholes?”* Sir W. Hamilton declares for the first
theory, and quotes as supporters of the second, Stewart and James Mill;
to the latter of whom, more than to any other thinker, mankind are
indebted for recalling the attention of philosophers to the law of
Inseparable Association, and pointing out the important applications of
which it is susceptible. Through the conflict with Mr. Mill on the very
subordinate question which he is discussing, Sir W. Hamilton is led to
quote a part of that philosopher’s exposition of Inseparable
Association; and it is a sign how little he was aware of the importance
of the subject, that a theory of so wide a scope and such large
consequences should receive the only recognition he ever gives it in a
bye corner of his work, incidentally to one of the smallest questions
therein discussed. I shall extract the very passages which he quotes
from Mr. Mill, because, in a small space, they state and illustrate very
happily the two most characteristic properties of our closest
associations: that the suggestions they produce are, for the time,
irresistible; and that the suggested ideas (at least when the
association is of the synchronous kind as distinguished from the
successive) become so blended together, that the compound result
appears, to our consciousness, simple.

“Where two or more ideas,” says Mr. Mill,

have been often repeated together, and the association has become very
strong, they sometimes spring up in such close combination as not to be
distinguishable. Some cases of sensation are analogous. For example,
when a wheel, on the seven parts of which the seven prismatic colours
are respectively painted, is made to revolve rapidly, it appears not of
seven colours, but of one uniform colour, white. By the rapidity of the
succession, the several sensations cease to be distinguishable; they
run, as it were, together, and a new sensation, compounded of all the
seven, but apparently a single one, is the result. Ideas, also, which
have been so often conjoined, that whenever one exists in the mind, the
others immediately exist along with it, seem to run into one another, to
coalesce, as it were, and out of many to form one idea; which idea,
however in reality complex, appears to be no less simple than any one of
those of which it is compounded. . . .

It is to this great law of association that we trace the formation of
our ideas of what we call external objects; that is, the ideas of a
certain number of sensations received together so frequently that they
coalesce, as it were, and are spoken of under the idea of unity. Hence
what we call the idea of a tree, the idea of a stone, the idea of a
horse, the idea of a man.

In using the names, tree, horse, man, the names of what I call objects,
I am referring, and can be referring, only to my own sensations; in
fact, therefore, only Edition: current; Page: [253] naming a certain
number of sensations, regarded as in a particular state of combination;
that is, of concomitance. Particular sensations of sight, of touch, of
the muscles, are the sensations, to the ideas of which, colour,
extension, roughness, hardness, smoothness, taste, smell, so coalescing
as to appear one idea, I give the name idea of a tree.

To this case of high association, this blending together of many ideas,
in so close a combination that they appear not many ideas, but one idea,
we owe, as I shall afterwards more fully explain, the power of
classification, and all the advantages of language. It is obviously,
therefore, of the greatest moment, that this important phænomenon should
be well understood.

Some ideas are by frequency and strength of association so closely
combined that they cannot be separated. If one exists, the other exists
along with it, in spite of whatever effort we may make to disjoin them.

For example; it is not in our power to think of colour, without thinking
of extension; or of solidity, without figure. We have seen colour
constantly in combination with extension, spread, as it were, upon a
surface. We have never seen it except in this connexion. Colour and
extension have been invariably conjoined. The idea of colour, therefore,
uniformly comes into the mind, bringing that of extension along with it;
and so close is the association, that it is not in our power to dissolve
it. We cannot, if we will, think of colour, but in combination with
extension. The one idea calls up the other, and retains it, so long as
the other is retained.

This great law of our nature is illustrated in a manner equally striking
by the connexion between the ideas of solidity and figure. We never have
the sensations from which the idea of solidity is derived, but in
conjunction with the sensations whence the idea of figure is derived. If
we handle anything solid it is always either round, square, or of some
other form. The ideas correspond with the sensations. If the idea of
solidity rises, that of figure rises along with it. The idea of figure
which rises is, of course, more obscure than that of extension; because,
figures being innumerable, the general idea is exceedingly complex, and
hence, of necessity, obscure. But such as it is, the idea of figure is
always present when that of solidity is present; nor can we, by any
effort, think of the one without thinking of the other at the same
time.*

Other illustrations follow, concluding with these words: “The following
of one idea after another idea, or after a sensation, so certainly that
we cannot prevent the combination, nor avoid having the consequent
feeling as often as we have the antecedent, is a law of association, the
operation of which we shall afterwards find to be extensive, and bearing
a principal part in some of the most important phænomena of the human
mind.”† And the promise of this sentence is amply redeemed in the sequel
cofc the treatise.

The only remark which this highly philosophical exposition suggests to
Sir W. Hamilton, is a disparaging reflection on Mr. Mill’s philosophy in
general. He says that Mr. Mill, in his “ingenious” treatise, “has pushed
the Edition: current; Page: [254] principle of Association to an extreme
which refutes its own exaggeration,—analysing not only our belief in the
relation of effect and cause into that principle, but even the primary
logical laws,” so that it is no wonder he should “account for our
knowledge of complex wholes in perception, by the same universal
principle.”[*] Having, on the strength of this previous verdict of
exaggeration, dispensed with enquiring how much the law of Inseparable
Association can really accomplish, he makes no use of its most obvious
applications, even while transcribing them into his own pages. One of
the psychological facts stated in the passage quoted, the impossibility,
to us, of separating the idea of extension and that of colour, is a
truth strongly insisted on by Sir W. Hamilton himself. In the very next
Lecture but one to that from which I have been quoting, he strenuously
maintains, that we can neither conceive colour without extension, nor
extension without colour. Even the born blind, he thinks, have the
sensation of darkness, that is, of black colour, and mentally clothe all
extended objects with it.* Except the last position, which has no
evidence and no probability,† the doctrine is undoubtedly true, and the
fact is so obviously a case of the law of association, that even
Stewart, little partial as he was to that mode of explaining mental
phænomena, does not dream of attributing it to anything else. “In
consequence,” says Stewart, “of our always perceiving extension at the
same time at which the sensation of colour is excited in the mind, we
find it impossible to think of that sensation without conceiving
extension along with it.” He gives this as one of the instances “of very
intimate associations formed between two ideas which have no necessary
connexion with one another.”[†] A mental analysis by way of association
which was sufficiently obvious to recommend itself to Stewart, will
scarcely be charged with “pushing the principle to an extreme.” In fact,
if an association can ever Edition: current; Page: [255] become
inseparable by dint of repetition, how could the association between
colour and extension fail of being so? The two facts never exist but in
immediate conjunction, and the experience of that conjunction is
repeated at every moment of life which is not spent in darkness. Yet
after transcribing this explanation both from Stewart and from Mill, Sir
W. Hamilton remains as insensible to it as if it had never been given;
and without a word of refutation, composedly registers the
inseparableness of the two ideas as an ultimate mental fact proving them
both to be original perceptions of the same organ, the eye. Sir W.
Hamilton’s authority can have little weight against the doctrine which
accounts for the more complex parts of our mental constitution by the
laws of association, when it is so evident that he rejected that
doctrine not because he had examined it and found it wanting, but
without examining it; having taken for granted that it did not deserve
examination.*

Edition: current; Page: [256]
How imperfect was his acquaintance with the secondary laws, the axiomata
media[*] of association, is plainly seen in his argument against Stewart
and Mill on the comparatively insignificant question with which he
started. The thesis he is asserting is, that “in place of ascending
upwards, from the minimum of perception to its maxima, we descend from
masses to details.”

“If the opposite doctrine” (says Sir W. Hamilton)

were correct, what would it involve? It would involve as a primary
inference, that, as we know the whole through the parts, we should know
the parts better than the whole. Thus, for example, it is supposed that
we know the face of a friend, through the multitude of perceptions which
we have of the different points of which it is made up; in other words,
that we should know the whole countenance less vividly than we know the
forehead and eyes, the nose and mouth, &c., and that we should know each
of these more feebly than we know the various ultimate points, in fact,
unconscious minima of perception, which go to constitute them. According
to the doctrine in question, we perceive only one of these ultimate
points at the same instant, the others by memory incessantly renewed.
Now let us take the face out of perception into memory altogether. Let
us close our eyes, and let us represent in imagination the countenance
of our friend. This we can do with the utmost vivacity; or, if we see a
picture of it, we can determine with a consciousness of the most perfect
accuracy, that the portrait is like or unlike. It cannot, therefore, be
denied that we have the fullest knowledge of the face as a whole, that
we are familiar with its expression, with the general result of its
parts. On the hypothesis, then, of Stewart and Mill, how accurate should
be our knowledge of these parts themselves. But make the experiment. You
will find, that unless you have analysed,—unless you have descended from
a conspectus of the whole face to a detailed examination of its
parts,—with the most vivid impression of the constituted whole, you are
almost totally ignorant of the constituent parts. You may probably be
unable to say what is the colour of the eyes, and if you attempt to
delineate the mouth or nose, you will inevitably fail. Or look at the
portrait. You may find it unlike, but unless, as I said, you have
analysed the countenance, unless you have looked at it with the analytic
scrutiny of a painter’s eye, you will assuredly be unable to say in what
respect the artist has failed,—you will be unable to specify what
constituent he has altered, though you are fully conscious of the fact
and effect of the alteration. What we have shown from this example may
equally be done from any other—a house, a tree, a landscape, a concert
of music, &c.*

Edition: current; Page: [257]
I have already made mention of a very important part of the Laws of
Association, which may be termed the Laws of Obliviscence.[*] If Sir W.
Hamilton had sufficiently attended to those laws, he never could have
maintained, that if we knew the parts before the whole, we must continue
to know the parts better than the whole. It is one of the principal Laws
of Obliviscence, that when a number of ideas suggest one another by
association with such certainty and rapidity as to coalesce together in
a group, all those members of the group which remain long without being
specially attended to, have a tendency to drop out of consciousness. Our
consciousness of them becomes more and more faint and evanescent, until
no effort of attention can recall it into distinctness, or at last
recall it at all. Any one who observes his own mental operations will
find this fact exemplified in every day of his life. Now the law of
attention is admitted to be, that we attend only to that which, either
on its own or on some other account, interests us. In consequence, what
interests us only momentarily we only attend to momentarily; and do not
go on attending to it, when that, for the sake of which alone it
interested us, has been attained. Sir W. Hamilton would have found these
several laws clearly set forth, and abundantly exemplified, in the work
of Mr. Mill which he had before him. It is there shown how large a
proportion of all our states of feeling pass off without having been
attended to, and in many cases so habitually that we become finally
incapable of attending to them. This subject was also extremely well
understood by Reid, who, little as he had reflected on the principle of
Association, was much better acquainted with the laws of Obliviscence
than his more recent followers, and has excellently illustrated and
exemplified some of them.* Among those which he has illustrated the most
successfully, one is, that the very great number of our states of
feeling which, being themselves neither painful nor pleasurable, are
important to us only as signs of something else, and which by repetition
have come to do their work as signs with a rapidity which to our
feelings is instantaneous, cease altogether to be attended to; and
through that inattention our consciousness of them either ceases
altogether, or becomes so fleeting and indistinct as to leave no
revivable trace in the memory. This happens, even when the impressions
which serve the purpose of signs are not mere ideas, or reminiscences,
of sensation, but actual sensations. After reading a chapter of a book,
when we lay down the volume do we remember to have been individually
conscious of the printed letters and syllables which have passed before
us? Could we recall, by any effort of mind, the visible aspect presented
by them, unless some unusual circumstance has fixed our attention
Edition: current; Page: [258] upon it during the perusal? Yet each of
these letters and syllables must have been present to us as a sensation
for at least a passing moment, or the sense could not have been conveyed
to us. But the sense being the only thing in which we are interested—or,
in exceptional cases, the sense and a few of the words or sentences—we
retain no impression of the separate letters and syllables. This
instance is the more instructive, inasmuch as, the whole process taking
place within our means of observation, we know that our knowledge began
with the parts, and not with the whole. We know that we perceived and
distinguished letters and syllables before we learnt to understand words
and sentences; and the perceptions could not, at that time, have passed
unattended to; on the contrary, the effort of attention of which those
letters and syllables must have been the object, was probably, while it
lasted, equal in intensity to any which we have been called upon to
exercise in after life. Were Sir W. Hamilton’s argument valid, one of
two things would follow. Either we have even now, when we read in a
book, a more vivid consciousness of the letters and syllables than of
the words and sentences, d(and by parity of reason a more vivid
consciousness of the words and sentences than of the general purport of
the discourse):d or else, we could read sentences off hand at first, and
only by subsequent analysis discovered the letters and syllables. If
ever there was a reductio ad absurdum, this is one.

The facts on which Sir W. Hamilton’s argument rests, are obviously
accounted for by the laws which he ignores. In our perceptions of
objects, it is generally the wholes, and the wholes alone, that interest
us. In his example, that of a friend’s countenance, it is (special
motives apart) only the friend himself that we are interested about; we
care about the features only as signs that it is our friend whom we see,
and not another person. Unless therefore the face commands our attention
by its beauty or strangeness, or unless we stamp the features on our
memory by acts of attention directed upon them separately, they pass
before us, and do their work as signs, with so little consciousness that
no distinct trace may be left in the memory. We forget the details even
of objects which we see every day, if we have no motive for attending to
the parts as distinguished from the wholes, and have cultivated no habit
of doing so. That this is consistent with having known the parts earlier
than the wholes, is proved not only by the case of reading, but by that
of playing on a musical instrument, and a hundred other familiar
instances; by everything, in fact, which we learn to do. When the wholes
alone are interesting to us, we soon forget our knowledge of the
component parts, unless we purposely keep it alive by conscious
comparison and analysis.

Edition: current; Page: [259]
This is not the only fallacy in Sir W. Hamilton’s argument. Considered
as a reply to Mr. Mill’s explanation of the origin of our ideas of
objects, it entirely misses the mark. If the argument and examples had
proved their point, which it has been seen that they do not, they would
have proved that we perceive and know, to some extent or other, the
object as a whole, before knowing its integrant parts. But it is not of
integrant parts that Mr. Mill was speaking; and he might have admitted
all that Sir W. Hamilton contends for, without surrendering his own
opinion. The question does not relate to parts in extension. It does not
concern Mr. Mill’s theory whether we know, or do not know, a man as
such, before we distinguish, in thought or in perception, his head from
his feet. What Mr. Mill said was, that our idea of an object, whether it
be of the man, or of his head, or of his feet, is compounded by
association from our ideas of the colour, the shape, the resistance,
&c., which belong to those objects.[*] These are what philosophers have
called the metaphysical parts, not the integrant parts, of the total
impression. Now I have never heard of any philosopher who maintained
that these parts were not known until after the objects which they
characterize; that we perceive the body first, and its colour, shape,
form, &c., only afterwards. Our senses, which on all theories are at
least the avenues through which our knowledge of bodies comes to us, are
not adapted by nature to let in the perception of the whole object at
once. They only open to let pass single attributes at a time. And this
is as much Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion as any one’s else, except where he
is sustaining an argument which makes him blind to it.

As is often the case with our author, the conclusion he is maintaining
is worth more than his argument to prove it, and though not the whole
truth, has truth in it. That we perceive the whole before the parts will
not stand examination as a general law, but is very often true as a
particular fact: our first impression is often that of a confused mass,
of which all the parts seem blended, and our subsequent progress
consists in elaborating this into distinctness. It was well to point out
this fact: but if our author had paid more attention to its limits, he
might have been able to give us a complete theory of it, instead of
leaving it, as he has done, an empirical observation, which waits for
some one to raise it into a scientific law.

The same want of comprehension of the power of an inseparable
association, which was shown by Sir W. Hamilton in the case of Colour
and Extension, is exhibited in the only other case in which he adduces
any argument to prove that an idea was not produced by association. The
case is that of causality, and the argument is the ordinary one of
metaphysicians of his school. “The necessity of so thinking cannot be
derived from a Edition: current; Page: [260] custom of so thinking. The
force of custom, influential as it may be, is still always limited to
the customary; and the customary never reaches, never even approaches to
the necessary.”* eIf this were so, not only could an inseparable
association generate no necessity of belief, but there could be no such
thing as inseparable association; no entirely irresistible conjunction
between two mental states.e The paviourf, however,f who cannot use his
rammer without the accustomed cry, the orator who had so often while
speaking twirled a string in his hand that he became unable to speak
when he accidentally dropped it, are, it seems to me, examples of a
“customary” which did approach to, and even reach, the “necessary.”
“Association may explain a strong and special, but it can never explain
a universal and absolutely irresistible belief.”[*] Not when the
conjunction of facts which engenders the association, is itself
universal and irresistible? “What I cannot but think, must be à priori,
or original to thought: it cannot be engendered by experience upon
custom.”† As if experience, that is to say, association, were not
perpetually engendering both inabilities to think, and inabilities not
to think. “We can think away each and every part of the knowledge we
have derived from experience.”‡ Associations derived from experience are
doubtless separable by a sufficient amount of contrary experience; but,
in the cases we are considering, no contrary experience is to be had. On
the theory that the belief in causality results from association, “when
association is recent, the causal judgment should be weak, and rise only
gradually to full force, as custom becomes inveterate.”§ And how do we
know that it does not? The whole process of acquiring our belief in
causation takes place at an age of which we have no remembrance, and
which precludes the possibility of testing the matter by experiment: and
all theories agree that our first type of causation is our own power of
moving our limbs; which is as complete as it can be, and has formed as
strong associations as it is capable of forming, long before the child
can observe or communicate its mental operations.

It is strange that almost all the opponents of the Association
psychology should found their main or sole argument in refutation of it
upon the feeling of necessity; for if there be any one feeling in our
nature which the laws of association are obviously equal to producing,
one would say it is that. Necessary, according to Kant’s definition,[†]
and there is none better, is Edition: current; Page: [261] that of which
the negation is impossible. If we find it impossible, by any trial, to
separate two ideas, we have all the feeling of necessity which the mind
is capable of. Those, therefore, who deny that association can generate
a necessity of thought, must be willing to affirm that two ideas are
never so knit together by association as to be practically inseparable.
But to affirm this is to contradict the most familiar experience of
life. Many persons who have been frightened in childhood can never be
alone in the dark without irrepressible terrors. Many a person is unable
to revisit a particular place, or to think of a particular event,
without recalling acute feelings of grief or reminiscences of suffering.
If the facts which created these strong associations in individual
minds, had been common to all mankind from their earliest infancy, and
had, when the associations were fully formed, been forgotten, we should
have had a Necessity of Thought—one of the necessities which are
supposed to prove an objective law, and an à priori mental connexion
between ideas.* Now, in all the supposed natural beliefs and necessary
conceptions which the principle of Inseparable Association is employed
to explain, the generating causes of the association did begin nearly at
the beginning of life, and are common either to all, or to a very large
portion of mankind.†

Edition: current; Page: [262]
The beggarly account now exhibited, is, I believe, all that Sir W.
Hamilton has anywhere written against the Association psychology. But it
is not all that has been said against that psychology from Sir W.
Hamilton’s point of view. In this as in various other cases, to supply
what Sir W. Hamilton has omitted, recourse may advantageously be had to
Mr. Mansel.

Mr. Mansel, though in some sense a pupil of Sir W. Hamilton, is a pupil
who may be usefully consulted even after his master. Besides that he now
and then sees things which his master did not see, he very often fights
a better battle against adversaries. Moreover, as I before remarked,[*]
he has a decided taste for clear statements and definite issues; and
this is no small advantage when the object is, not victory, but to
understand the subject.

Mr. Mansel joins a distinct issue with the Association psychology, and
brings the question to the proper test. “It has been already observed,”
he says, in his Prolegomena Logica,

that whatever truths we are compelled to admit as everywhere and at all
times necessary, must have their origin, not without, in the laws of the
sensible world, but within, in the constitution of the mind itself.
Sundry attempts have, indeed, been made to derive them from sensible
experience and constant association of ideas; but this explanation is
refuted by a criterion decisive of the fate of all hypotheses: it does
not account for the phænomena. It does not account for the fact that
other associations, as frequent and as uniform, are incapable of
producing a higher conviction than that of a relative and physical
necessity only.*

This is coming to the point, and evinces a correct apprehension of the
conditions of scientific proof. If other associations, as close and as
habitual as those existing in the cases in question, do not produce a
similar feeling of necessity of thought, the sufficiency of the alleged
cause is disproved, and the theory must fall. Mr. Mansel is within the
true conditions of the Psychological Method.

Edition: current; Page: [263]
But hwhat areh these cases of uniform and intimate association, which do
not give rise to a feeling of mental necessity? The following is Mr.
Mansel’s first example of them:

I may imagine the sun rising and setting as now for a hundred years, and
afterwards remaining continually fixed in the meridian. Yet my
experiences of the alternations of day and night have been at least as
invariable as of the geometrical properties of bodies. I can imagine the
same stone sinking ninety-nine times in the water, and floating the
hundredth, but my experience invariably repeats the former phænomenon
only.*

The alternation of day and night is invariable in our experience; but is
the phænomenon day so closely linked in our experience with the
phænomenon night, that we never perceive the one, without, at the same
or the immediately succeeding moment, perceiving the other? That is a
condition present in the inseparable associations which generate
necessities of thought. Uniformities of sequence in which the phænomena
succeed one another only at a certain interval, do not give rise to
inseparable associations.† There are also mental conditions, as well as
physical, which are required to create such an association. Let us take
Mr. Mansel’s other instance, a stone sinking in the water.[*] We have
never seen it float, yet we have no difficulty in conceiving it
floating. But, in the first place, we have not been seeing stones
sinking in water from the first dawn of consciousness, and in nearly
every subsequent moment of our lives, as we have been seeing two and two
making four, intersecting straight lines diverging instead of enclosing
a space, causes followed by effects and effects preceded by causes. But
there is a still more radical distinction than this. No frequency of
conjunction between two phænomena will create an inseparable
association, if counter-associations are being created all the while. If
we sometimes saw stones floating as well as sinking, however often we
might have seen them sink, nobody supposes that we should have formed an
inseparable association between them and sinking. We have not seen a
stone float, but we are in the constant habit of seeing either stones or
other Edition: current; Page: [264] things which have the same tendency
to sink, remaining in a position which they would otherwise quit, being
maintained in it by an unseen force. The sinking of a stone is but a
case of gravitation, and we are abundantly accustomed to see the force
of gravity counteracted. Every fact of that nature which we ever saw or
heard of, is pro tanto an obstacle to the formation of the inseparable
association which would make a violation of the law of gravity
inconceivable to us. Resemblance is a principle of association, as well
as contiguity: and however contradictory a supposition may be to our
experience in hâc materiâ, if our experience in aliâ materiâ furnishes
us with types even distantly resembling what the supposed phænomenon
would be if realized, the associations thus formed will generally
prevent the specific association from becoming so intense and
irresistible, as to disable our imaginative faculty from embodying the
supposition in a form moulded on one or other of those types.*

Edition: current; Page: [265]
Again, says Mr. Mansel, “experience has uniformly presented to me a
horse’s body in conjunction with a horse’s head, and a man’s head with a
man’s body; just as experience has uniformly presented to me space
inclosed within a pair of curved lines and not within a pair of straight
lines:” yet I have no difficulty in imagining a centaur, but cannot
imagine a space inclosed by two straight lines.

Why do I, in the former case, consider the results of my experience as
contingent only and transgressible, confined to the actual phænomena of
a limited field, and possessing no value beyond it; while in the latter
I am compelled to regard them as necessary and universal? Why can I give
in imagination to a quadruped body what experience assures me is
possessed by bipeds only? And why can I not, in like manner, invest
straight lines with an attribute which experience has uniformly
presented in curves?*

I answer:—Because our experience furnishes us with a thousand models on
which to frame the conception of a centaur, and with none on which to
frame that of two straight lines inclosing a space. Nature, as known in
our experience, is uniform in its laws, but extremely varied in its
combinations. The combination of a horse’s body with a human head has
nothing, primâ facie, to make any wide distinction between it and any of
the numberless varieties which we find in animated nature. To a common,
even if not to a scientific mind, it is within the limits of the
variations in our experience. Every similar variation which we have seen
or heard of, is a help towards conceiving this particular one; and tends
to form an association, not of fixity but of variability, which
frustrates the formation of an inseparable association between a human
head and a human body exclusively. We know of so many different heads,
united to so many different bodies, that we have little difficulty in
imagining any head in combination with any body. Nay, the mere mobility
of objects in space is a fact so universal in our experience, that we
easily conceive any object whatever occupying the place of any other; we
imagine without difficulty a horse with his head removed, and a human
head put in its place. But what model does our experience afford on
which to frame, or what elements from which to construct, the conception
of two straight lines inclosing a space? There are no
counter-associations in that case, and consequently the primary
association, being founded on an experience beginning from birth, and
never for many minutes intermitted in our waking hours, easily becomes
inseparable. Edition: current; Page: [266] Had but experience afforded a
case of ipersistenti illusion, in which two straight lines after
intersecting had appeared again to approach, the counter-association
formed might have been sufficient to render such a supposition
imaginable, and defeat the supposed necessity of thought. In the case of
parallel lines, the laws of perspective do present such an illusion:
they do, to the eye, appear to meet in both directions, and consequently
to inclose a space: and by supposing that we had no access to the
evidence which proves that they do not really meet, an ingenious
thinker, whom I formerly quoted, was able to give the idea of a
constitution of nature in which all mankind might have believed that two
straight lines could inclose a space.[*] That we are unable to believe
or imagine it in our present circumstances, needs no other explanation
than the laws of association afford: for the case unites all the
elements of the closest, intensest, and most inseparable association,
with the greatest freedom from conflicting counter-associations which
can be found within the conditions of human life.*

In all the instances of phænomena invariably conjoined which fail to
create necessities of thought, I am satisfied it would be found that the
case is wanting in some of the conditions required by the Association
psychology, as essential to the formation of an association really
inseparable. It is the more to be wondered at that Mr. Mansel should not
have perceived the easy answer which could be given to his argument,
since he himself comes very near to giving the same explanation of many
impossibilities of thought, which is given by the Association theory.
“We can only,” he says, “conceive in thought what we have experienced in
presentation;”† and no other Edition: current; Page: [267] reason is
necessary for our being unable to conceive a thing, than that we have
never experienced it. He even holds that the stock example of a
necessity of thought, the belief in the uniformity of the course of
nature, can be accounted for by experience, without any objective
necessity at all. “We cannot conceive,” he says, “a course of nature
without uniform succession, as we cannot conceive a being who sees
without eyes or hears without ears; because we cannot, under existing
circumstances, experience the necessary intuition. But such things may
nevertheless exist; and under other circumstances, they might become
objects of possible conception, the laws of the process of conception
remaining unaltered.”* I am aware that when Mr. Mansel uses the words
Presentation and Intuition, he does not mean exclusively presentation by
the senses. Nevertheless, if he had only written the preceding passage,
no one would have suspected that he could have required any other cause
for our inability to conceive a bilineal figure, than the impossibility
of our perceiving one. It is sufficient, in his opinion, to constitute
any propositions necessary, that “while our constitution and
circumstances remain as they are, we cannot but think them.”† It is
superabundantly manifest that many propositions which all admit to be
grounded only on experience, are necessary under this definition. Mr.
Mansel even asserts a more complete dependence of our possibilities of
thought upon our opportunities of experience than there appears to me to
be ground for: since he affirms that “we can only conceive in thought
what we have experienced in presentation,” while in reality it is
sufficient that we should have experienced in presentation things
bearing some similarity to it.


jNOTE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER

Dr. Ward, one of the ablest living defenders of the intuitional
metaphysics, has, in the Dublin Review for October 1871, made a vigorous
attack upon the doctrines of this chapter. His arguments in part
coincide (though with a difference in the illustrations) with those
already noticed, of Mr. Mansel: several of them, however, are distinct:
and as I believe that in answering them, I am answering the best that is
likely to be said by any future champion, I will take up Dr. Ward’s
points one by one.

Dr. Ward thus expresses the test of necessary truth:

If in any case I know by my very conception of some ens, that a certain
attribute, not included in that conception, is truly predicable of that
ens, such predication is a Edition: current; Page: [268] self-evidently
necessary proposition. Take, for instance, the axiom that all trilateral
figures are triangular. If, by my very conception of a trilateral
figure, I know its triangularity . . . then I know infallibly that a
trilateral non-triangular figure is an intrinsically repugnant chimera;
that in no possible region of existence could such a figure be found;
that not even an Omnipotent Being could form one.

Consequently “the triangularity of all trilateral figures is cognizable
as a self-evidently necessary truth;” not grounded on, nor deriving its
evidence from, experience.[*]

It is not denied, nor deniable, that there are properties of things
which we know to be true (as Dr. Ward expresses it) by our “very
conception” of the thing. But this is no argument against our knowing
them solely by experience, for (as is truly and aptly said by Professor
Bain in his Logic) these are cases in which in the very process of
forming the conception, we have experience of the fact.[†] It is not
likely that Dr. Ward has returned to the notion (so long abandoned and
even forgotten by intuitionists) of ideas literally innate, and thinks
that we bring with us into the world the conception of a trilateral
figure ready made. He doubtless believes that it is at least suggested
by observation of objects. Now, the fact of three sides and that of
three angles are so intimately linked together in external nature, that
it is impossible for the conception of a three-sided figure to get into
the mind without carrying into the mind with it the conception of three
angles. Therefore, when we have once got the conception of a trilateral,
we have no need of further experience to prove triangularity. The
conception itself, which represents all our previous experience,
suffices. And if the Association theory be true, it must follow from it,
that whenever any property of external things is in the relation to the
things which is required for the formation of an inseparable
association, that property will get into the conception, and be believed
without further proof. Dr. Ward will say that triangularity is not
included in the conception of a trilateral. But this is only true in the
sense that triangularity is not in the connotation of the name. Many
attributes not included in the definition are included in the
conception. Dr. Ward cannot but see that on the experience hypothesis,
this not only may, but must be the case.*

Edition: current; Page: [269]
Dr. Ward goes on to deny that uniformity of experience can produce the
belief that the truth thus uniformly experienced is necessary. If it
could, he says, the fact itself of the uniformity of nature—the fact
that phænomena succeed each other according to uniform laws—resting on a
broader basis of experience than any particular law of nature, has all
the conditions for being regarded as a necessary truth, and must produce
“a practical necessity of fancying that in every possible region of
existence phænomena succeed each other by uniform laws;”* now, we are
under no such necessity, as I myself have strenuously maintained.[*] But
my answer to Mr. Mansel’s instances is applicable to this of Dr. Ward’s.
Is it seriously that he compares our experience of the uniformity of
nature, in point of obviousness and familiarity, with our experience of
the straightness of straight lines? The uniformity is, in the first
stages of our experience, an actual paradox; first appearances are
against it; they seem to show that some events do indeed succeed each
other with an approach, though only an approach, to uniformity, but that
a far greater number have no fixed order whatever. How can it be
maintained that we have, at that early period of our observations, such
experience of this universal truth, as to incorporate it in our
conception of every object in nature, and create an irresistible
association of uniformity of sequence with all possible events? As we
gradually learn the correct interpretation of our experience, and become
aware that uniformity of sequence is an universal truth, a powerful,
though even then, not an irresistible association, does grow up;
accordingly the law that whatever begins to exist has a cause, is
classed by most of the intuitional philosophers as a necessary truth,
though (strange to say) a necessary truth with an exception.

But Dr. Ward contends (Dr. M‘Cosh had already said the same thing)† that
there is a fallacy of ambiguity in the phrase “necessity of thought.” He
charges me with using the phrase “in two senses fundamentally different.
A necessity of thought may, no doubt, be most intelligibly understood to
mean a law of nature whereby under certain circumstances I necessarily
think this, that, and the other judgment. But it may also be understood
to mean a law of nature whereby I think as necessary this, that, and the
other judgment.” He agrees with me

that from a necessity of thought in the former sense, no legitimate
argument whatever can be deduced for a necessity of objective truth.
Supposing I felt Edition: current; Page: [270] unusually cold a few
moments ago, it is a necessity of thought that I should now remember the
circumstance. Yet that past experience was no necessary truth. It is a
necessity of thought again that I expect the sun to rise to-morrow: and
many similar instances could be adduced. The only necessity of thought
which proves the self-evident necessity of objective truth, is the
necessity of thinking that such truth is self-evidently necessary.*

Not denying the validity of this distinction, I maintain that it does
not affect the argument; because the one necessity is always proved by
the other. The evidence always given, and the only evidence which I
believe can be given, that we must think anything as necessary, is that
we necessarily think it. This, under various names, a Fundamental Law of
Belief, the Inconceivability of the Opposite, and so on, is the staple
of the Intuitionist argument. Surely, if I disprove the necessity of
thinking the thing at all, I disprove that it must be thought as
necessary. What other proof can be given of the necessity of a truth, I
confess myself ignorant. The consensus of mankind will not do, since
that is disproved by being disputed; and Dr. Ward’s argument, that a
truth must be independent of experience if it can be deduced from the
conception, has been met by showing that it is deduced from the
conception only after experience has put it there.

Dr. Ward says that “mere constant and uniform experience cannot possibly
account for the mind’s conviction of self-evident necessity.” Nor do I
pretend that it does. The experience must not only be constant and
uniform, but the juxtaposition of the facts in experience must be
immediate and close, as well as early, familiar, and so free from even
the semblance of an exception that no counter association can possibly
arise. Dr. Ward gives two contrasted examples: “I have never even once
experienced the equality of 2 + 9 to 3 + 8, and yet am convinced that
not even Omnipotence could overthrow that equality. I have most
habitually experienced the warmth-giving property of fire, and yet see
no reason for doubting that Omnipotence can at any time suspend or
remove that property. That which I have never experienced I regard as
necessary; that which I have habitually and unexceptionably experienced
I regard as contingent.”†

To the first example I answer, that if the equality of 2 + 9 and 3 + 8
does not come to us in the first instance by direct experience (though
fully ratified by it), neither does it come by direct intuition. It is
gained by a succession of steps, each resting on actual trial. True, it
may be but a mental trial; as by merely fancying myself “holding two
pebbles in one hand and nine in the other, and then transferring one
pebble from the larger to the smaller group.”[*] But the mere
imagination of this transfer would not, and Edition: current; Page:
[271] ought not to carry conviction to me, if I had not previously
observed that change of place makes no difference in the number of
objects. All reasoning from conceptions is open to, and finally rests
upon, an appeal to the sensations. With respect to the warmth-giving
property of fire, the instance is not happily chosen; for warmth is so
much the differentia of fire, the principal connotation of the word,
that what was believed not to warm would certainly not be called fire.
But (disregarding this) Dr. Ward’s illustration may be met in the same
manner in which I have met the similar illustrations of Mr. Mansel.
Fire, it is true, will always, under certain needful conditions, give
warmth; but the sight of fire is very often unattended with any
sensation of warmth. It is not concomitance of the outward facts that
creates the association, but concomitance of the sensible impressions.
The visible presence of fire and the sensation of warmth are not in that
invariable conjunction and immediate juxtaposition, which might disable
us from conceiving the one without the other, and might therefore lead
us to suppose their conjunction to be a necessary truth.

Dr. Ward’s criticisms on the view I take of the Law of Causation belong
not to the present work, but to my System of Logic. One more of his
objections, however, may be noticed here. He says, that while I account
for the “power of ascertaining axioms by mere mental experience” from
“one of the characteristic properties of geometrical forms,” viz., that
they can be painted in the imagination with a distinctness equal to
reality, I entirely leave out of account arithmetical and algebraic
axioms, though these, equally with geometrical, can be arrived at by
merely mental experimentation.* I do not leave them out of account, but
have assigned, in my Logic, another and equally conclusive reason why
they can be studied in our conceptions alone, namely, that arithmetical
and algebraic truths being true not of any particular kind of things,
but of all things whatever, any mental conceptions whatever will
adequately represent them.j[*]

Edition: current; Page: [272]


CHAPTER XV: Sir William Hamilton’s Doctrine of Unconscious Mental Modifications

the laws of obliviscence noticed in the preceding chapter, are closely
connected with a question raised by Sir W. Hamilton, and discussed at
some length in his Lectures: Whether there are unconscious states of
mind: or, as he expresses it in the eighteenth Lecture, “Whether the
mind exerts energies, and is the subject of modifications, of neither of
which it is conscious.” Our author pronounces decidedly for the
affirmative, in opposition to most English philosophers, by whom, he
says, “the supposition of an unconscious action or passion of the mind,
has been treated as something either unintelligible or absurd;”* and in
opposition, no less, to aat least one expressiona of opinion by our
author himself.†b This is one of the numerous inconsistencies in Sir W.
Hamilton’s professed opinions, which a close examination and comparison
of his speculations brings to light, and which show how far he was in
reality from being the systematic thinker which, on a first impression
of his writings, he seems to be. In one point of view, these
self-contradictions are fully as much an honour as a discredit to him;
since they frequently arise from his having acutely seized some
important psychological truth, greatly in advance of his general mode of
thought, and not having brought the remainder of his philosophy up to
it. Instead of having reasoned out a consistent scheme of thought, of
which every part fits in with the other parts, he seems to have explored
the deeper regions of the mind only at the points which had some direct
connexion with the conclusions he had adopted on a few special questions
of Edition: current; Page: [273] philosophy: and from his different
explorations he occasionally, as in the present case, brought back
different results. But, in the place where he treats directly of this
particular question, he decides unequivocally for the existence of
latent mental modifications. The subject is in itself not unimportant,
and his treatment of it will serve as an example by which to estimate
his powers of thought in the province of pure psychology.

Sir W. Hamilton recognises three different kinds, or, as he calls them,
degrees, of mental latency. Two of these will be seen, on examination,
to be entirely irrelevant.

The first kind of latency, is that which belongs to all the parts of our
knowledge which we are not thinking of at the very moment. “I know a
science, or language, not merely while I make a temporary use of it, but
inasmuch as I can apply it when and how I will. Thus the infinitely
greater part of our spiritual treasures lies always beyond the sphere of
consciousness, hid in the obscure recesses of the mind.”* But this
stored-up knowledge, I submit, is not an “unconscious action or passion
of the mind.” It is not a mental state, but a capability of being put
into a mental state. When I am not thinking of a thing, it is not
present to my mind at all. It may become present when something happens
to recall it; but it is not latently present now; no more than any
physical thing which I may have hoarded up. I may have a stock of food
with which to nourish myself hereafter; but my body is not in a state of
latent nourishment by the food which is in store. I have the power to
walk across the room, though I am sitting in my chair; but we should
hardly call this power a latent act of walking. What required to be
shown was, not that I may possess knowledge without recalling it, but
that it can be recalled to my mind, I remaining unconscious of it all
the time.†

Edition: current; Page: [274]
The second degree of latency exists when the mind contains systems of
knowledge, or certain habits of action, which it is wholly unconscious
of possessing in its ordinary state, but which are revealed to
consciousness in certain extraordinary exaltations of its powers. The
evidence on this point shows that the mind frequently contains whole
systems of knowledge, which, though in our normal state they have faded
into absolute oblivion, may, in certain abnormal states, as madness,
febrile delirium, somnambulism, catalepsy, &c., flash out into luminous
consciousness, and even throw into the shade of unconsciousness those
other systems by which they had, for a long period, been eclipsed and
even extinguished.

He then cites from various authors some of the curious recorded cases
“in which the extinct memory of whole languages was suddenly restored,
and, what is even still more remarkable, in which the faculty was
exhibited of actually repeating, in known or unknown tongues, passages
which were never within the grasp of conscious memory in the normal
state.”* These, however, are not cases of latent states of mind, but of
a very different thing—of latent memory. It is not the mental
impressions that are latent, but the power of reproducing them. Every
one admits, without any apparatus of proof, that we may have powers and
susceptibilities of which we are not conscious; but these are
capabilities of being affected, not actual affections. I have the
susceptibility of being poisoned by prussic acid, but this
susceptibility is not a present phænomenon, constantly taking place in
my body without my perceiving it. The capability of being poisoned is
not a present modification of my body; nor is the capability I perhaps
have of recollecting, should I become delirious, something which I have
forgotten while sane, a present modification of my mind. These are
future contingent Edition: current; Page: [275] states, not present
actual ones. The real question is, can I undergo a present actual mental
modification without being aware of it?

We come, therefore, to the third case, which is the only one really in
point, and enquire, whether there are, in our ordinary mental life,
“mental modifications, i.e. mental activities and passivities, of which
we are unconscious, but which manifest their existence by effects of
which we are conscious?” Sir W. Hamilton decides that there are: and
even “that what we are conscious of is constructed out of what we are
not conscious of;” that “the sphere of our conscious modifications is
only a small circle in the centre of a far wider sphere of action and
passion, of which we are only conscious through its effects.”*

His first example is taken from the perception of external objects. The
facts which he adduces are these. 1st. Every minimum visibile is
composed of still smaller parts, which are not separately capable of
being objects of vision; “they are, severally and apart, to
consciousness as zero.” Yet every one of these parts “must by itself
have produced in us a certain modification, real though unperceived,”†
since the effect of the whole can only be the sum of the separate
effects of the parts. 2nd. “When we look at a distant forest, we
perceive a certain expanse of green. Of this, as an affection of our
organism, we are clearly and distinctly conscious. Now, the expanse of
which we are conscious is evidently made up of parts of which we are not
conscious. No leaf, perhaps no tree, may be separately visible. But the
greenness of the forest is made up of the greenness of the leaves; that
is, the total impression of which we are conscious, is made up of an
infinitude of small impressions of which we are not conscious.” 3rd. Our
sense of hearing tells the same tale. There is a minimum audibile; the
faintest sound capable of being heard. This sound, however, must be made
up of parts, each of which must affect us in some manner, otherwise the
whole which they compose could not affect us. When we hear the distant
murmur of the sea,

this murmur is a sum made up of parts, and the sum would be as zero if
the parts did not count as something. . . . If the noise of each wave
made no impression on our sense, the noise of the sea, as the result of
these impressions, could not be realized. But the noise of each several
wave, at the distance we suppose, is inaudible; we must, however, admit
that they produce a certain modification beyond consciousness, on the
percipient subject; for this is necessarily involved in the reality of
their result.‡

It is a curious question how Sir W. Hamilton failed to perceive that an
unauthorized assumption has slipped into his argument. Because the
Edition: current; Page: [276] minimum visibile consists of parts (as we
know through the microscope), and because the minimum visibile produces
an impression on our sense of sight, he jumps to the conclusion that
each one of the parts does so too. But it is a supposition consistent
with what we know of nature, that a certain quantity of the cause may be
a necessary condition to the production of any of the effect. The
minimum visibile would on that supposition be this certain quantity; and
the two halves into which we can conceive it divided, though each
contributing its half to the formation of that which produces vision,
would not each separately produce half of the vision, the concurrence of
both being necessary to produce any vision whatever. And so of the
distant murmur of the sea: the agency which produces it is made up of
the rolling of many different waves, each of which, if sufficiently
near, would affect us with a perceptible sound; but at the distance at
which they are, it may require the rolling of many waves to excite an
amount of vibration in the air sufficient, when enfeebled by extension,
to produce any effect whatever on our auditory nerves, and, through
them, on our mind. The supposition that each wave affects the mind
separately because their aggregate affects it, is therefore, to say the
least, an unproved hypothesis.

The counter-hypothesis, that in order to the production of any quantity
whatever of the effect, there is needed a certain minimum quantity of
the cause, it is the more extraordinary that Sir W. Hamilton should have
overlooked, since he has not only himself adopted a similar supposition
in some other cases,* but it is a necessary part of his theory in this
very case. He will not admit as possible, that less than a certain
quantity of the external agent, produces no mental modification; but he
himself supposes that less than a certain quantity of mental
modification produces no consciousness. Yet if his à priori argument is
valid for the one sequence, it is valid for the other. If the effect of
a whole must be the sum of similar effects produced by all its parts,
and if every state of consciousness is the effect of a modification of
mind which is made up of an infinitude of small parts, the state of
consciousness also must be made up of an infinitude of small states of
consciousness, produced by these infinitely small mental modifications
respectively. We are not at liberty to adopt the one theory for the
first link in the double succession, and the other theory for the other
link. Having shown no reason why either theory should be preferred, our
author would have acted more philosophically in not deciding between
them. But to Edition: current; Page: [277] accommodate half the fact to
one theory and half to the other, without assigning any reason for the
difference, is to exceed all rational license of scientific hypothesis.

After these examples from Perception, our author passes to cases of
Association: and as he here states some important mental phænomena well
and clearly, I shall quote him at some length.

It sometimes happens, that we find one thought rising immediately after
another in consciousness, but whose consecution we can reduce to no law
of association. Now in these cases we can generally discover by an
attentive observation, that these two thoughts, though not themselves
associated, are each associated with certain other thoughts; so that the
whole consecution would have been regular, had these intermediate
thoughts come into consciousness, between the two which are not
immediately associated. Suppose, for instance, that A, B, C, are three
thoughts,—that A and C cannot immediately suggest each other, but that
each is associated with B, so that A will naturally suggest B, and B
naturally suggest C. Now it may happen, that we are conscious of A, and
immediately thereafter of C. How is the anomaly to be explained? It can
only be explained on the principle of latent modifications. A suggests
C, not immediately, but through B; but as B, like the half of the
minimum visibile or minimum audibile, does not rise into consciousness,
we are apt to consider it as non-existent. You are probably aware of the
following fact in mechanics. If a number of billiard balls be placed in
a straight row and touching each other, and if a ball be made to strike,
in the line of the row, the ball at one end of the series, what will
happen? The motion of the impinging ball is not divided among the whole
row; this, which we might à priori have expected, does not happen, but
the impetus is transmitted through the intermediate balls which remain
each in its place, to the ball at the opposite end of the series, and
this ball alone is impelled on. Something like this seems often to occur
in the train of thought. One idea mediately suggests another into
consciousness,—the suggestion passing through one or more ideas which do
not themselves rise into consciousness. The awakening and awakened ideas
here correspond to the ball striking and the ball struck off; while the
intermediate ideas of which we are unconscious, but which carry on the
suggestion, resemble the intermediate balls which remain moveless, but
communicate the impulse. An instance of this occurs to me with which I
was recently struck. Thinking of Ben Lomond, this thought was
immediately followed by the thought of the Prussian system of education.
Now conceivable connexion between these two ideas in themselves, there
was none. A little reflection, however, explained the anomaly. On my
last visit to the mountain, I had met upon its summit a German
gentleman, and though I had no consciousness of the intermediate and
unawakened links between Ben Lomond and the Prussian schools, they were
undoubtedly these,—the German,—Germany,—Prussia,—and, these media being
admitted, the connexion between the extremes was manifest.*

Though our author says that the facts here described can only be
explained on the supposition that the intervening ideas never came into
consciousness at all, he is aware that another explanation is
conceivable, namely that they were momentarily in consciousness, but
were forgotten, Edition: current; Page: [278] agreeably to the law of
Obliviscence already spoken of: which, in fact, is the explanation given
by Stewart. The same two explanations may be given of his final example,
drawn from a class of phænomena also governed by laws of association,
“our acquired dexterities and habits.”* When we learn any manual
operation, suppose that of playing on the pianoforte, the operation is
at first a series of conscious volitions, followed by movements of the
fingers: but when, by sufficient repetition, a certain facility has been
acquired, the motions take place without our being able to recognise
afterwards that we have been conscious of the volitions which preceded
them. In this case, we may either hold with Sir W. Hamilton, that the
volitions (to which cmustc be added the feelings of muscular
contraction, and of the contact of our fingers with the keys) are not,
in the practised performer, present to consciousness at all; or, with
Stewart, that he is conscious of them, but for so brief an interval,
that he has no remembrance of them afterwards.[*] The motions, in this
case, are said by Hartley to have become secondarily automatic,[†] which
our author supposes to be a third opinion, but dthe difference, if
difference it was, between this and Stewart’s theory, is not material to
the present enquiryd.

Let us now consider the reasons given by Sir W. Hamilton for preferring
his explanation to Stewart’s. The first and principal of them is, that
to suppose a state of consciousness which is not remembered, “violates
the whole analogy of consciousness.” “Consciousness supposes memory; and
we are only conscious as we are able to connect and contrast one
instance of our intellectual existence with another.”† “Of
consciousness, however faint, there must be some memory, however short.
But this is at variance with the phænomenon, for the ideas A and C may
precede and follow each other without any perceptible interval, and
without any the feeblest memory of B.”‡

Here again I am obliged, not without wonder, to point out the
inconclusive character of the argument. When Sir W. Hamilton says that
consciousness implies memory, he means, as his words show, that we are
only conscious by means of change; by discriminating the present state
from a Edition: current; Page: [279] state immediately preceding.
Granting this, as with proper explanations I do, all it proves is, that
any conscious state of mind must be remembered long enough to be
compared with the mental state immediately following it. The state of
mind, therefore, which he supposes to have been latent, must, if it
passed into consciousness, have been remembered until one other mental
modification had supervened; which there is assuredly not a particle of
evidence that it was not: for our having totally forgotten it a minute
after, is no evidence, but a common consequence of the laws of
Obliviscence. It is perhaps true that all consciousness must be followed
by a memory, but I see no reason why an evanescent state of
consciousness must be followed, if by any, by a more than evanescent
memory. “It is a law of mind,” our author says further on, “that the
intensity of the present consciousness determines the vivacity of the
future memory. Vivid consciousness, long memory; faint consciousness,
short memory.”* Well, then: in the case supposed, the intensity of
consciousness is at eae minimum, therefore on his own showing the
duration of memory should be so too. If the consciousness itself is too
fleeting to fix the attention, so, à fortiori, must the remembrance of
it. In reality, the remembrance is often evanescent when the
consciousness is by no means so, but is so distinct and prolonged as to
be in no danger whatever of being supposed latent. Take the case of a
player on the pianoforte while still a learner, and before the
succession of volitions has attained the rapidity which practice
ultimately gives it. In this stage of progress there is, beyond all
doubt, a conscious volition, anterior to the playing of each particular
note. Yet has the player, when the piece is finished, the smallest
remembrance of each of these volitions, as a separate fact? In like
manner, have we, when we have finished reading a volume, the smallest
memory of our successive volitions to turn the pages? On the contrary,
we only know that we must have turned them, because, without doing so,
we could not have read to the end. Yet these volitions were not latent:
every time we turned over a leaf, we must have formed a conscious
purpose of turning; but, the purpose having been instantly fulfilled,
the attention was arrested in the process for too short a time to leave
a more than momentary remembrance of it. The sensations of sight, touch,
and the muscles, felt in turning the leaves, were as vivid at the moment
as any of our ordinary sensible impressions which are only important to
us as means to an end. But because they had no pleasurable or painful
interest in themselves; because the interest they had as means passed
away in the same instant by the attainment of the end; and because there
was nothing to associate the act of reading with these particular
sensations, rather Edition: current; Page: [280] than with other similar
sensations formerly experienced; their trace in the memory was only
momentary, unless something unusual and remarkable connected with the
particular leaves turned over, detained them in remembrance.

If sensations which are evidently in consciousness may leave so brief a
memory that they are not felt to leave any memory fwhateverf, what
wonder that the same should happen when the sensations are of so
fugitive a character, that it can be debated whether they were in
consciousness at all? However true it may be that there must be some
memory wherever there is consciousness, what argument is this against a
theory which supposes a low degree of consciousness, attended by just
the degree of memory which properly belongs to it?

Imagine an argument in physics, corresponding to this in metaphysics.
Some of my readers are probably acquainted with the important
experiments of M. Pasteur, which gappear tog have finally exploded the
ancient hypothesis of Equivocal Generation, by showing that even the
smallest microscopic animalcules are not produced in a medium from which
their still more microscopic germs have been effectually excluded. What
should we think of any one who deemed it a refutation of M. Pasteur,
that the germs are not discernible by the naked eye? who maintained that
invisible animalcules must proceed, if from germs at all, from visible
germs? This reasoning would be an exact parallel to that of Sir W.
Hamilton.

The only other argument of our author against Stewart’s doctrine, is
confined to the phænomenon of acquired habits, in which case, he says,
the supposition of real but forgotten consciousness “would constrain our
assent to the most monstrous conclusions:” since, in reading aloud, if
the matter be uninteresting, we may be carrying on a train of thought
(even of “serious meditation”) on a totally different subject, and this,
too, “without distraction or fatigue:” which, he says, would be
impossible, if we were separately conscious of, or (as he rather
gratuitously alters the idea), separately attentive to, “each least
movement in either process.”* Sir W. Hamilton here loses sight of a part
of his own philosophy, which deserves his forgetfulness the less as it
is a very valuable part. In one of the most important psychological
discussions in his Lectures,† he forcibly maintains that we are capable
of carrying on several distinct series of states of consciousness at
once; and goes so far as to contend not only that our consciousness, but
what is more than consciousness, our “concentrated consciousness, or
attention,”[*] is capable of being divided among as many Edition:
current; Page: [281] as six simultaneous impressions.* Returning to the
same subject in another place, he quotes from a modern French
philosopher, Cardaillac (in a work entitled Etudes Elémentaires de
Philosophie),[*] an excellent and conclusive passage, showing the great
multitude of states more or less conscious, which often coexist in the
mind, and help to determine the subsequent trains of thought or feeling;
and illustrating the causes that determine which of these shall in any
particular case predominate over the rest.† Our consciousness,
therefore, according to Sir W. Hamilton, ought not to have much
difficulty in finding room for the two simultaneous series of states
which he quarrels with Stewart’s hypothesis for requiring: and we are
not bound, under the penalty of “monstrous conclusions,” to consider one
of these series as latent. Sir W. Hamilton indeed says truly, that “the
greater the number of objects to which our consciousness is
simultaneously extended, the smaller is the intensity with which it is
able to consider each;”‡ but the intensity of consciousness necessary
for reading aloud with correctness in a language familiar to us, not
being very considerable, a great part of our power of attention is
disposable for “the train of serious meditation”[†] which is supposed to
be passing through our minds at the same time. For all this, I would not
advise any person (unless one with the peculiar gift ascribed to Julius
Cæsar)[‡] to stake anything on the substantial value of a train of
thought carried on by him while reading aloud a book on another subject.
Such thoughts, I imagine, are always the better for being revised when
the mind has nothing else to do than to consider them.

It is strange, but characteristic, that Sir W. Hamilton cannot be
depended on for remembering, in one part of his speculations, the best
things which he has said in another; not even the truths into which he
has thrown so Edition: current; Page: [282] much of the powers of his
mind, as to have made them, in an especial manner, his own.

Notwithstanding the failure of Sir W. Hamilton to adduce a single valid
reason for preferring his hypothesis to that of Stewart, it does not
follow that he is not, at least in certain cases, in the right. The
difference between the two opinions being beyond the reach of
experiment, and both being equally consistent with the facts which
present themselves spontaneously, it is not easy to obtain sure grounds
for deciding between them. The essential part of the phænomenon is, that
we have, or once had, many sensations, and that many ideas do, or once
did, enter into our trains of thought, which sensations and ideas we
afterwards, in the words of James Mill, are “under an acquired
incapacity of attending to:”* and that when our incapacity of attending
to them has become complete, it is, to our subsequent consciousness,
exactly as if we did not have them at all: we are incapable, by any
self-examination, of being aware of them. We know that these lost
sensations and ideas, for lost they appear to be, leave traces of having
existed; they continue to be operative in introducing other ideas by
association. Either, therefore, they have been consciously present long
enough to call up associations, but not long enough to be remembered a
few moments later; or they have been, as Sir W. Hamilton supposes,
unconsciously present; or they have not been present at all, but
something instead of them, capable of producing the same effects. I am
myself inclined to agree with Sir W. Hamilton, and to admit his
unconscious mental modifications, in the only shape in which I can
attach any very distinct meaning to them, namely, unconscious
modifications of the nerves. There are much stronger facts in support of
this hypothesis than those to which Sir W. Hamilton appeals—facts which
it is far more difficult to reconcile with the doctrine that the
sensations are felt, but felt too momentarily to leave a recognisable
impression in memory. In the case, for instance, of a soldier who
receives a wound in battle, but in the excitement of the moment is not
aware of the fact, it is difficult not to believe that if the wound had
been accompanied by the usual sensation, so vivid a feeling would have
forced itself to be attended to and remembered. The supposition which
seems most probable is, that the nerves of the particular part were
affected as they would have been by the same cause in any other
circumstances, but that, the nervous centres being intensely occupied
with other impressions, the affection of the local nerves did not reach
them, and no sensation was excited. In like manner, if we admit (what
physiology is rendering more and more probable) that our mental
feelings, as well as our sensations, have for their physical antecedents
particular states of the nerves; it may well be Edition: current; Page:
[283] believed that the apparently suppressed links in a chain of
association, those which Sir W. Hamilton considers as latent, really are
so; that they are not, even momentarily, felt; the chain of causation
being continued only physically, by one organic state of the nerves
succeeding another so rapidly that the state of mental consciousness
appropriate to each is not produced. We have only to suppose, either
that a nervous modification of too short duration does not produce any
sensation or mental feeling at all, or that the rapid succession of
different nervous modifications makes the feelings produced by them
interfere with each other, and become confounded in one mass. The former
of these suppositions is extremely probable, while of the truth of the
latter we have positive proof. An example of it is the experiment which
Sir W. Hamilton quoted from Mr. Mill, and which had been noticed before
either of them by Hartley.[*] It is known that the seven prismatic
colours, combined in certain proportions, produce the white light of the
solar ray. Now, if the seven colours are painted on spaces bearing the
same proportion to one another as in the solar spectrum, and the
coloured surface so produced is passed rapidly before the eyes, as by
the turning of a wheel, the whole is seen as white. The physiological
explanation of this phænomenon may be deduced from another common
experiment. If a lighted torch, or a bar heated to luminousness, is
waved rapidly before the eye, the appearance produced is that of a
ribbon of light; which is universally understood to prove that the
visual sensation persists for a certain short time after its cause has
ceased. Now, if this happens with a single colour, it will happen with a
series of colours: and if the wheel on which the prismatic colours have
been painted, is turned with the same rapidity with which the torch was
waved, each of the seven sensations of colour will last long enough to
be contemporaneous with all the others, and they will naturally produce
by their combination the same colour as if they had, from the beginning,
been excited simultaneously. If anything similar to this obtains in our
consciousness generally (and that it obtains in many cases of
consciousness there can be no doubt) it will follow that whenever the
organic modifications of our nervous fibres succeed one another at an
interval shorter than the duration of the sensations or other feelings
corresponding to them, those sensations or feelings will, so to speak,
overlap one another, and becoming simultaneous instead of successive,
will blend into a state of feeling, probably as unlike the elements out
of which it is engendered, as the colour white is unlike the prismatic
colours. And this may be the source of many of those states of internal
or mental feeling which we cannot distinctly refer to a prototype in
experience, our experience Edition: current; Page: [284] only supplying
the elements from which, by this kind of mental chemistry, they are
composed. The elementary feelings may then be said to be latently
present, or to be present but not in consciousness. The truth, however,
is that the feelings themselves are not present, consciously or
latently, but that the nervous modifications which are their usual
antecedents have been present, while the consequents have been
frustrated, and another consequent has been produced instead.*

Edition: current; Page: [285] Edition: current; Page: [286]


CHAPTER XVI: Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Causation

sir w. hamilton commences his treatment of the question of Causation, by
warning the reader against “some philosophers who, instead of
accommodating their solutions to the problem, have accommodated the
problem to their solutions.”[*] It might almost have been supposed that
this expression had been invented to be applied to Sir W. Hamilton
himself. He has defined the problem in a manner in which it ahada been
defined by no one else, for no visible reason but to adapt it to a
solution which no one else had thought of.*

“When we are aware,” he says,

of something which begins to exist, we are, by the necessity of our
intelligence, constrained to believe that it has a Cause. But what does
this expression, that it has a cause, signify? If we analyse our
thought, we shall find that it simply means, that as we cannot conceive
any new existence to commence, therefore, all that now is seen to arise
under a new appearance, had previously an existence under a prior form.
We are utterly unable to realize in thought, the possibility of the
complement of existence being either increased or diminished. We are
unable, on the one hand, to conceive nothing becoming something, or, on
the other, something becoming nothing. When God is said to create out of
nothing, we construe this to thought by supposing that he evolves
existence out of himself; we view the Creator as the cause of the
universe. “Ex nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reverti,”[†] expresses,
in its purest form, the whole intellectual phænomenon of causality.

There is thus conceived an absolute tautology between the effect and its
causes. We think the causes to contain all that is contained in the
effect, the effect to contain nothing which was not contained in the
causes. Take as example: A neutral salt is an effect of the conjunction
of an acid and alkali. Here we do not, and here we cannot, conceive
that, in effect, any new existence has been added, nor can we conceive
Edition: current; Page: [287] that any has been taken away. Put another
example: Gunpowder is the effect of a mixture of sulphur, charcoal, and
nitre, and those three substances are again the effect,—result, of
simpler constituents, either known or conceived to exist. Now, in all
this series of compositions, we cannot conceive that aught begins to
exist. The gunpowder, the last compound, we are compelled to think,
contains precisely the same quantum of existence that its ultimate
elements contained prior to their combination. Well, we explode the
powder. Can we conceive that existence has been diminished by the
annihilation of a single element previously in being, or increased by
the addition of a single element which was not heretofore in nature?
“Omnia mutantur; nihil interit,”[*] is what we think—what we must think.
This then is the mental phænomenon of causality,—that we necessarily
deny in thought that the object which appears to begin to be, really so
begins; and that we necessarily identify its present with its past
existence.*

This being Sir W. Hamilton’s idea of what Causality means, he thinks it
unnecessary to suppose, with most of the philosophers of the intuitive
school, a special principle of our nature to account for our believing
that every phænomenon must have a cause. The belief is accounted for,
“not from a power, but from an impotence of mind,”† namely, from the Law
of the Conditioned; or in other words, from the incapacity of the human
mind to conceive the Absolute. We are unable to conceive and construe to
ourselves an absolute commencement. Whatever we think, we cannot help
thinking as existing; and whatever we think as existing, we are
compelled to think as having existed through all past, and as destined
to exist through all future, time. It does not at all follow that this
is really the fact, for there are many things inconceivable to us, which
not only may, but must, be true. Accordingly it may be true that there
is an absolute commencement; it may not be true that every phænomenon
has a cause. Human volitions in particular may come into existence
uncaused, and, in Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, they do so. But to us a
beginning and an end of existence are both inconceivable.

We are unable to construe in thought, that there can be an atom
absolutely added to, or an atom absolutely taken away from, existence in
general. Make the experiment. Form to yourselves a notion of the
universe; now, can you conceive that the quantity of existence, of which
the universe is the sum, is either amplified or diminished? You can
conceive the creation of the world as lightly as you can conceive the
creation of an atom. But what is creation? It is not the springing of
nothing into something. Far from it: it is conceived, and is by us
conceivable, merely as the evolution of a new form of existence, by the
fiat of the Deity. Let us suppose the very crisis of creation. Can we
realize it to ourselves, in thought, that the moment after the universe
came into manifested being, there was a larger complement of existence
in the universe and its Author together, than there was the Edition:
current; Page: [288] moment before, in the Deity himself alone? This we
cannot imagine. What I have now said of our conceptions of creation,
holds true of our conceptions of annihilation. We can conceive no real
annihilation—no absolute sinking of something into nothing. But, as
creation is cogitable by us only as an exertion of divine power, so
annihilation is only to be conceived by us as a withdrawal of the divine
support. All that there is now actually of existence in the universe, we
conceive as having virtually existed, prior to creation, in the Creator;
and in imagining the universe to be annihilated by its Author, we can
only imagine this as the retractation of an outward energy into power.*

Had this extraordinary view of Causation proceeded from a thinker of
less ability and authority than Sir W. Hamilton, I think there are few
readers, who, on reaching the sentence which I have marked by italics,
would not have set down the entire speculation as a mauvaise
plaisanterie.

But since any opinion, however strange, of Sir W. Hamilton, must be
believed to be serious, and no serious opinion of such a man ought to be
dismissed unexamined, I shall proceed to enquire, whether the problem of
which he propounds this solution, is the problem of Causation, and
whether the solution is a true one. To take the last question first; is
it a fact that we cannot conceive a beginning of existence? Is it true
that whenever we conceive a thing as existing, we are incapable of
conceiving a time when it did not exist, or a time when it will exist no
longer?

If, by incapacity to conceive an absolute commencement, were only meant
that we cannot imagine a time when nothing existed; and if our
incapacity of conceiving annihilation, only means that we cannot
represent to ourselves an universe devoid of existence; I do not deny
it. Whatever else we may suppose removed, there always remains the
conception of empty space: and Sir W. Hamilton is probably right in his
opinion, that we cannot imagine even empty space without clothing it
mentally with some sort of colour or figure. Whoever admits the
possibility of Inseparable Association, can scarcely avoid thinking that
these are cases of it; and that we are unable to imagine any object but
as occupying space, or to imagine it removed without leaving that space
either vacant, or filled by something else. But we can conceive both a
beginning and an end to all physical existence. As a mere hypothesis,
the notion that matter cannot be annihilated arose early; but as a
settled belief, it is the tardy result of scientific enquiry. All that
is necessary for imagining matter annihilated is presented in our daily
experience. We see apparent annihilation whenever water dries up, or
fuel is consumed without a visible residuum. The fact could not offer
itself to our immediate perceptions in a more palpable shape, if the
annihilation were real. Having an exact type on which to frame the
conception of matter annihilated, the vulgar of all countries easily and
perfectly conceive Edition: current; Page: [289] it. Those to whom, if
to anybody, it is inconceivable, are philosophers and men of science,
who having formed their familiar conception of the universe on the
opposite theory, have acquired an inseparable association of their own,
which they cannot overcome. To them the vapour which has succeeded to
the water dried up by the sun, the gases which replace the fuel
transformed by combustion, have become irrevocably a part of their
conception of the entire phænomenon. But the ignorant, who never heard
of these things, are not in the least incommoded by the want of them;
and if they were not told the contrary, would live and die without
suspecting that the water, and the wood or bcoalb, were not destroyed.

All this is not denied by Sir W. Hamilton; but his answer to it is, that
if the universe were to perish it would still remain capable of
existing, which, it seems, amounts to the same thing. We conceive it as
having “virtually existed before it was created,” and as virtually
existing after it is destroyed. We cannot conceive that there was, at
the moment after creation, “a larger complement of existence in the
universe and its Author together, than there was the moment before in
the Deity himself alone.” Creation is to us merely the conversion of
power into outward existence; annihilation only “the retractation of an
outward energy into power.” So that potential existence is exactly the
same thing as actual existence; the difference is formal only. Not only
is power a real entity, but the power to create an universe is the
universe: all created things are but a part of its substance, and can be
reabsorbed into it. And this is presented to us, not as a recondite
ontological theory, forced upon philosophers as an escape from an
otherwise insuperable difficulty, but as a statement of what we all
think, and cannot but think, from the very constitution of our thinking
faculty. Is this the fact? Does any one, except Sir W. Hamilton, think
that in computing the sum total of existence, worlds which God might
have created but did not, count for exactly as much as they would if he
had really created them? There is a corollary from this doctrine which
also deserves attention. If the sum of potential and actual existence is
always the same, then with every increase of actual existence, there
must be a diminution of power: for if there was once the power without
the universe, and is now the same quantity of power and also the
universe, what our author nautically terms the “complement of
existence”[*] has been increased: which is contrary to the theory. By
every exercise, therefore, of creative power, God is less powerful: he
has less power now, by a whole universe, than before his power of
creating the universe had been transmuted into act; and were he to
“retract” the actual existence into potential, he would be more powerful
than he now Edition: current; Page: [290] is, by that exact amount. Is
this what all mankind think, and are under an original necessity of
thinking? Is this the mode in which, by the “law of the Conditioned,”[*]
every one of us is absolutely necessitated to construe the idea of
Creation? Sir W. Hamilton says it is.

By a desperate attempt to put an intelligible meaning into the theory,
somebody may interpret it to mean that before the universe existed in
fact, it existed as a thought in the Divine Mind; and that the idea of
an universe, complete in all its details, is equivalent in the
“complement of existence” to an actual universe. This is not, perhaps,
incapable of being maintained; but it affords no escape from the
difficulty. For, this idea in the Divine Mind—is the Divine Mind now
denuded of it? Has the Deity forgotten the universe, from the time when
the divine conception was reduced into act? If not, there are now both
the universe and the idea of the universe; that is, a double “complement
of existence” instead of a single.*

But were it ever so true that we are incapable of conceiving a
commencement of anything, and are necessitated to believe that whatever
now exists must have existed in the same or another shape through all
past time:—that Sir W. Hamilton should imagine this to be the law of
Cause and Effect, must be accounted one of the most singular
hallucinations to be found in the writings of any eminent thinker.
According to Sir W. Hamilton, when we say that everything must have a
cause, we mean that nothing begins to exist, but everything has always
existed. I ask any one, either philosopher or common man, whether he
does not mean the exact reverse; whether it is not because things do
begin to exist, that a cause must be supposed for their existence. The
very words in which the axiom of Causation is commonly stated, and which
our author, in the first words of his exposition, adopts, are, that
everything which begins to exist must have a cause. Is it possible that
this axiom can be grounded on the fact that we Edition: current; Page:
[291] never suppose anything to begin to exist? Does not he who takes
away a beginning of existence, take away all causation, and all need of
a cause? Sir W. Hamilton entirely mistakes what it is, which causation
is called in to explain. The Matter composing the universe, whatever
philosophical theory we hold concerning it, we know by experience to be
constant in quantity; never beginning or ending, only changing its
cformsc. But its forms have a beginning and ending: and it is its forms,
or rather its changes of form—the end of one form and beginning of
another—which alone we seek a cause for, and believe to have a cause. It
is events, that is to say, changes, not substances, that are subject to
the law of Causation. The question for the psychologist is not why we
believe that a substance, but why we believe that a change in the form
of a substance, must have a cause. Sir W. Hamilton, in a tardy defence
of his theory against objections,* is forced, in a sort of way, to admit
this, and virtually to acknowledge that all which we really consider as
caused, we consider as beginning to exist. Nothing is caused but events:
and it will hardly be said that we conceive an event as having never had
a beginning, but been in existence as an event just as much before it
happened as when it did happen. An event then being the only thing which
suggests the belief or the idea of having or requiring a cause, Sir W.
Hamilton may be charged with the scientific blunder which he imputes,
far less justly, to Brown: he “professes to explain the phænomenon of
causality, but previously to explanation, evacuates the phænomenon of
all that desiderates explanation.”†

Sir W. Hamilton was familiar with the teaching of the Aristotelian
schools concerning the four Causes—or rather the four meanings of the
word Cause, for synonymy and homonymy were, in their classifications,
very often confounded: 1, Materia. 2, Forma. 3, Efficiens. 4, Finis:
Efficiens being the only one of these which answers either to the
common, or to the modern philosophical notion of Cause. Sir W. Hamilton
confounds Materia with Efficiens; or rather ignores Efficiens
altogether, and imagines that when the rest of the world are speaking of
Efficiens, they mean Materia. It is the very thing which they
pre-eminently do not mean. Sir W. Hamilton may choose to call nothing
Existence except the permanent element in phænomena; but it is the
changeable element, and no other, which is referred to a cause, or which
could ever have given the notion of causation.

Sir W. Hamilton says that the total cause—that the “concurring or
co-efficient causes, in fact, constitute the effect.”‡ And again, “an
effect” is Edition: current; Page: [292] “nothing more than the sum or
complement of all the partial causes, the concurrence of which
constitutes its existence.”* “An effect is nothing but the actual union
of its constituent entities;” “causes always continue actually to exist
in their effects.”† Because the original matter continues to exist in
the matter transformed, the Efficiens which transformed it continues to
exist in the fact of the change! Of course he takes as his example a
case in which the material is the prominent thing, that of a salt,
compounded of an acid and an alkali.

Considering the salt as an effect, what are the concurrent causes,—the
co-efficients,—which constitute it what it is? There are, first, the
acid, with its affinity to the alkali; secondly, the alkali, with its
affinity to the acid; and thirdly, the translating force (perhaps the
human hand) which made their affinities available, by bringing the two
bodies within the sphere of mutual attraction. Each of these three
concurrents must be considered as a partial cause; for abstract any one,
and the effect is not produced.‡

Strange that even this first degree of analysis should not have opened
his eyes to the fact, that the moment he admits into causa efficiens
anything more than materia, his theory is at an end. For he will indeed
find in the salt, two of his three “co-efficients,” the acid and the
alkali, with their daffinityd; but where will he find in it “the
translating force, perhaps the human hand?” This essential “concause”
does not embarrass him at all; it costs him nothing to make away with it
altogether. “This last,” he says, “as a transitory condition and not
always the same, we shall throw out of account.”§ If we throw out of
account all that is transitory, we have no difficulty in proving that
all that is left is permanent. But the transitory conditions are as much
a part of the cause as the permanent conditions. Our author has just
before said that he takes the term causes “as synonymous for all without
which the effect would not be;” and if the effect is “the sum or
complement” of all the causes, the transitory as well as the permanent
elements must be found in it. To exclude all the transitory part of the
cause, is to exclude the whole cause, except the materials. Suppose the
effect to be St. Paul’s: in assigning its causes, the will of the
government, the mind of the architect, and the labour of the builders,
are all cast out, for they are all transitory, and only the stones and
mortar remain.¶

Edition: current; Page: [293]
It will have been remarked, that in propounding this theory of the
belief in Causation, Sir W. Hamilton gives up Causation as a necessary
law of the universe; maintaining that a fact is not to be supposed
impossible to Nature because we are impotent to conceive it, and indeed
regarding the free acts of an intelligent being as an exception to the
universality of the law of Cause and Effect. But while in one place he
pays this homage to his own principles, in another he entirely takes
leave of them, and glides back into the beaten path of the school of
thought which, erecting human capacities of conception into the measure
of the universe, maintains that causes must be, because we are incapable
of conceiving phænomena without them. After describing the process of
ascending from cause to cause, quite gratuitously, as a progress towards
unity, Sir W. Hamilton says,

Philosophy thus, as the knowledge of effects in their causes,
necessarily tends, not towards a plurality of ultimate or first causes,
but towards one alone. This first cause, the Creator, it can indeed
never reach, as an object of immediate knowledge; but, as the
convergence towards unity in the ascending series is manifest in so far
as that series is within our view [here he confounds convergence from
many to few with convergence towards one] and as it is even impossible
for the mind to suppose the convergence not continuous and complete, it
follows, unless all analogy be rejected—unless our intelligence be
declared a lie, that we must, philosophically, believe in that ultimate
or primary unity which, in our present existence, we are not destined in
itself to apprehend.*

A deliverance more radically at variance with the author’s own canons,
could scarcely have been made. For, first, one of the principal of them
is, that our inability to conceive a thing as possible, is no argument
whatever against its being true. In the second place, the alleged
impossibility of Edition: current; Page: [294] conceiving any of the
phænomena of the universe to be uncaused, applies equally, on his own
showing, to the First Cause itself. For, though he here talks only of
one inconceivability, we are, if his theory be correct, under the
pressure of two counter-inconceivabilities—being equally unable to
conceive an uncaused beginning, or an infinite regress from effect to
cause: it is equally inconceivable to us that there should, as that
there should not, be a First Cause. In this difficulty, by what right
does he (I mean merely as a philosopher, and on his own principles)
select one of the rival inconceivabilities as the real interpreter of
Nature, in preference to the other? And, having selected it, why apply
it up to a certain point, and there stop? Why must all the phænomena of
experience be referred to a single Cause, because we cannot conceive
anything uncaused, and that single Cause be proclaimed uncaused,
notwithstanding the same impossibility? An argument by Sir W. Hamilton
would not be complete unless it wound up with his tiresome final appeal,
“unless our intelligence be declared a lie.” It is time to understand,
once for all, what this means. Does it mean that if our intelligence
cannot conceive one thing apart from another, the one thing cannot exist
without the other? If yes, what becomes of the Philosophy of the
Conditioned? If no, what becomes of the present argument?*

Sir W. Hamilton makes a far better figure when arguing against other
theories of Causation, than when maintaining his own. He is usually
acute in finding the weak points in other people’s philosophies; and he
brings this talent into play, effectively enough, on the present
subject. He is not, indeed, at all successful in combating the doctrine
(substantially that of Hume and Brown) that it is experience which
proves the fact of causation, Edition: current; Page: [295] and
association which generates the idea: for against this he only has to
say, that experience and association cannot account for necessity. Now,
as to real necessity, we do not know that it exists in the case. Sir W.
Hamilton himself is of opinion that it does not, and that there are
phænomena (the volitions of rational intelligences) which do not depend
on causes. And as for the feeling of necessity, or what is termed a
necessity of thought, it is (as I have already observed),[*] of all
mental phænomena positively the one which an inseparable association is
the most evidently competent to generate. I cannot, therefore, attribute
any value to Sir W. Hamilton’s discussion of this point; but in his
refutation of some of the theories of causation which have originated in
his own hemisphere of the intellectual world, he is very felicitous.
Take, for example, the doctrine of Wolf and the Leibnitzians (though not
of Leibnitz), which “attempts to establish the principle of Causality
upon the principle of Contradiction.”[†] “Listen,” says our author,

to the pretended demonstration:—Whatever is produced without a cause, is
produced by nothing; in other words, has nothing for its cause. But
nothing can no more be a cause than it can be something. The same
intuition which makes us aware, that nothing is not something, shows us
that everything must have a real cause of its existence.—To this it is
sufficient to say, that the existence of causes being the point in
question, the existence of causes must not be taken for granted, in the
very reasoning which attempts to prove their reality. In excluding
causes, we exclude all causes; and consequently we exclude Nothing,
considered as a cause; it is not, therefore, allowable, contrary to that
exclusion, to suppose Nothing as a cause, and then from the absurdity of
that supposition to infer the absurdity of the exclusion itself. If
everything must have a cause, it follows that, upon the exclusion of
other causes, we must accept of Nothing as a cause. But it is the very
point at issue, whether everything must have a cause or not; and
therefore it violates the first principles of reasoning to take this
quæsitum itself as granted. This opinion, [adds our author,] is now
universally abandoned.*

But there is another theory of Causation which is not abandoned, but has
formed for some time past the stronghold of the Intuitive school. This
is, that we acquire both our notion of Causation, and our belief in it,
from an internal consciousness of power exerted by ourselves, in our
voluntary actions: that is, in the motions of our bodies, for our will
has no other direct action on the outward world. This relation of the
act of will to the bodily movement, it is maintained, is “not a simple
relation of succession. The will is not for us a pure act without
efficiency; it is a productive energy; so that in volition there is
given to us the notion of cause; and this notion we subsequently
transport,—project out from our internal activities, into the changes of
the external world.”

Edition: current; Page: [296]
To this doctrine Sir W. Hamilton gives the following conclusive answer.

This reasoning, in so far as regards the mere empirical fact of our
consciousness of causality, in the relation of our will as moving and of
our limbs as moved, is refuted by the consideration, that between the
overt fact of corporeal movement of which we are cognisant, and the
internal act of mental determination of which we are also cognisant,
there intervenes a numerous series of intermediate agencies of which we
have no knowledge; and consequently, that we can have no consciousness
of any causal connexion between the extreme links of this chain,—the
volition to move and the limb moving, as this hypothesis asserts. No one
is immediately conscious, for example, of moving his arm through his
volition. Previously to this ultimate movement, muscles, nerves, a
multitude of solid and fluid parts must be set in motion by the will,
but of this motion we know, from consciousness, actually nothing. A
person struck with paralysis is conscious of no inability in his limb,
to fulfil the determination of his will; and it is only after having
willed, and finding that his limbs do not obey his volition, that he
learns by this experience, that the external movement does not follow
the internal act. But as the paralytic learns after the volition that
his limbs do not obey his mind; so it is only after the volition that
the man in health learns that his limbs do obey the mandates of his
will.*

With this reasoning, borrowed as our author admits from Hume, I entirely
agree; and I wonder that it did not prove to Sir W. Hamilton how little
the objection to a doctrine, that it is opposed to our natural beliefs,
deserves the exaggerated value he sets upon it; for if there is a
natural belief belonging to us, I should suppose it to be, that we are
directly conscious of ability to move our limbs. It is, nevertheless,
our author’s opinion that the belief is groundless, and that we learn
even a fact so closely connected with us, in the way in which any
bystander learns it; by outward observation.†

Edition: current; Page: [297]
Mr. Mansel, who agrees with Sir W. Hamilton in so many of his opinions,
separates from him here, and adopts a modified form of the Volitional
Theory. He acknowledges the validity of Hume’s and Sir W. Hamilton’s
argument, and does not derive the idea of Power or Causation from mind
acting upon body—from my will producing my bodily motions—but from
myself producing my will. “In every act of volition, I am fully
conscious that it is in my power to form the resolution or to abstain;
and this constitutes the presentative consciousness of free will and of
power.”* And the sole notion we have of causation in the outward
universe, as anything more than invariable antecedence and consequence,
“is that of a relation between two objects, similar to that which exists
between ourselves and our volitions.”† Thus interpreted, continues Mr.
Mansel, it is

an interesting illustration of the universal tendency of men to
identify, as far as may be, other agents with themselves, even when the
identification tends to the destruction of all clear
thinking:—furnishing a psychological explanation of a form of speech
which has prevailed and will continue to prevail among all people in all
times, but not properly to be called a necessary truth, nor capable of
any scientific application; inasmuch as, in any such application, it may
be true or false, without our being able to determine which, as the
object of which it treats never comes within the reach of our faculties.
What is meant by power in a fire to melt wax? How and when is it
exerted, and in what manner does it come under our cognizance? Supposing
such power to be suspended by an act of Omnipotence, the Supreme Being
at the same time producing the succession of phænomena by the immediate
interposition of his own will,—could we in any way detect the change? Or
suppose the course of nature to be governed by a pre-established
harmony, which ordained that at a certain moment fire and wax should be
in the neighbourhood of each other, that, at the same moment, fire by
itself should burn, and wax by its own laws should melt, neither
affecting the other,—would not all the perceptible phænomena be
precisely the same as at present? These suppositions may be extravagant,
though they are supported by some of the most eminent names in
philosophy; but the mere possibility of making them shows that the rival
hypothesis is not a necessary truth; the various principles being
opposed, only like the vortices of Descartes and the gravitation of
Newton, as more or less plausible methods of accounting for the same
physical phænomena.‡

Mr. Mansel recognises the possibility that in some other portion of the
universe, phænomena may succeed one another at random, without laws of
causation, or by laws which are continually changing. We cannot, he
says, Edition: current; Page: [298] fconceivef this state of things, but
we can gsupposeg it; and this very inability to conceive a phænomenon as
taking place without a cause—in other words, this subjective necessity
of the law of cause and effect—results, in his opinion, merely from the
conditions of our experience. If we were asked, why a physical change
must have a cause.

we should probably reply—Because matter cannot change of itself. But why
cannot we think of matter as changing itself? Because power, and the
origination of change, or self-determination, have never been given to
us, save in one form, that of the actions of the conscious self. What I
am to conceive as taking place, I must conceive as taking place in the
only manner of taking place in which it has ever been presented to me.
[Here Mr. Mansel exaggerates one of the consequences of the law of
Inseparable Association, through his having reached the consequence only
empirically, and not analysed it by hmeans ofh the law.] This reduces
the law of Causality, in one sense indeed to an empirical principle, but
to an empirical principle of a very peculiar character; one namely, in
which it is psychologically impossible that experience should testify in
more than one way. Such principles, however empirical in their origin,
are co-extensive in their application with the whole domain of thought.*

And further on,

To call the Principle of Causality as thus explained a Law of Thought,
would be incorrect. We cannot think the contrary, not because the laws
of thought forbid us, but because the material for thought is wanting.
Thought is subject to two different modes of restriction: firstly, from
its own laws, by which it is restricted as to its form; and secondly,
from the laws of intuition, by which it is restricted as to its matter.
The restriction, in the present instance, is of the latter kind. We
cannot conceive a course of nature without uniform succession, as we
cannot conceive a being who sees without eyes or hears without ears;
because we cannot, under existing circumstances, experience the
necessary intuition. But such things may, notwithstanding, exist; and
under other circumstances, they might become objects of possible
conception, the laws of the process of conception remaining unaltered.†

In this exposition, which, I do not hesitate to say, contains more sound
philosophy than is to be found on the same subject in all Sir W.
Hamilton’s writings, I must, nevertheless, take exception to the main
doctrine—that the type on which we frame our notion of Power or
Causation in general, is the power, not of our volitions over matter,
but of our Self over our volitions. In common with one half of the
psychological world, I am wholly ignorant of my possessing any such
power. I can indeed influence my own volitions, but only as other people
can influence my volitions, by the employment of appropriate means.
Direct power over my volitions I am Edition: current; Page: [299]
conscious of none. However possible it may be that I possess this power
without knowing it, a fact of consciousness contestable and contested
cannot well be the source and prototype of an idea common to all
mankind. I agree, however, with Mr. Mansel[*] in the opinion which he
shares with Comte, James Mill, and many others who see nothing in
causation but invariable antecedence; that we naturally, and
unavoidably, form our first conception of all the agencies in the
universe from the analogy of human volitions. The obvious reason is,
that nearly everything which is interesting to us, comes, in our
earliest infancy, either from our own voluntary motions, or (a
consideration too much neglected) from the voluntary motions of others;
and, among the few sequences of phænomena which at that time fall within
the scope of our perceptions, scarcely any others afford us the
spectacle of an apparently absolute commencement; of one thing setting
others in motion without being in motion itself—or originating changes
in other things, while not itself undergoing any visible change. But as
I do not believe, any more than Sir W. Hamilton or Mr. Mansel, that the
state of mind called volition carries with it a prophetic anticipation,
which can inform us prior to experience that volition will be followed
by an effect; I conceive that, no more in this than in any other case of
causation, have we evidence of anything more than what experience
informs us of: and it informs us of nothing except immediate,
invariable, and unconditional sequence.

It is allowed on all hands that part, at least, of our idea of power, is
the expectation we feel, that when the cause exists, we shall perceive
the effect; but Hume himself admits that in the common notion of power
there is an additional element, an animal nisus, as he calls it,[†]
which would be more properly termed a conception of effort. That this
idea of effort enters into our notion of Power, is to my mind one of the
strongest proofs that this notion is not derived from the relation of
ourselves to our volitions, but from that of our volitions to our
actions. The idea of Effort is essentially a notion derived from the
action of our muscles, or from that combined with affections of our
brain and nerves. Every one of our muscular movements has to contend
against resistance, either that of an outward object, or the mere
friction and weight of the moving organ; every voluntary motion is
consequently attended by the muscular sensation of resistance, and if
sufficiently prolonged, by the additional muscular sensation of fatigue.
Effort, considered as an accompaniment of action upon the outward world,
means nothing, to us, but those muscular sensations. Since we experience
Edition: current; Page: [300] them whenever we voluntarily move an
object, we by a mere act of natural generalization, the unconscious
result of association, on beholding the same object moved by the wind or
by any other agent, conceive the wind as overcoming the same obstacle,
and figure it to ourselves as putting forth the same effort. Children
and savages sincerely mistake it for a conscious effort. We outgrow that
belief; but it is not conformable to the mode of action of the human
intellect that it should pass uno saltu, from a complete assimilation of
the two phænomena, to conceiving them as totally different. The “natural
tendency of men” so justly characterized by Mr. Mansel, “to identify, as
far as may be, other agents with themselves,”[*] does not admit itself
baffled and give up the attempt after the first failure. The consequents
being the same, when the mind is no longer able to suppose an exact
parity in the antecedents, it still thinks that there must be something
in common between them: and when obliged to admit that there is volition
in one case, and a mere unconscious object in the other, it interposes
between the antecedent and the consequent an abstract entity, to express
what is supposed common to the animate and the inanimate agency—through
which they both work, and in the absence of which nothing would be
effected. This purely subjective notion, the product of generalization
and abstraction acting on the real feeling of muscular or nervous
effort, is Power. And this, I conceive, is the psychological rationale
of Comte’s great historical generalization, that the metaphysical
conception (as he terms it) of the universe succeeds by a natural law to
the Fetish conception, and becomes the agent by which the Fetish theory
is transformed into Polytheism, this into Monotheism, and Monotheism
itself is frittered away into energies and attributes of Nature, and
other subordinate abstractions.[†]

Thus much respecting Causation as a conception of the mind. The law of
Cause and Effect in its objective aspect, as the fundamental principle
in the order of the universe, the basis of most of our knowledge, and
the guide of all our action, has been so fully treated in its numerous
bearings in my System of Logic, that it is needless for me to speak
further of it here.[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [301]


CHAPTER XVII: The Doctrine of Concepts, or General Notions

we now arrive at the questions which form the transition from Psychology
to Logic—from the analysis and laws of the mental operations, to the
theory of the ascertainment of objective truth: the natural link between
the two being the theory of the particular mental operations whereby
truth is ascertained or authenticated. According to the common
classification, from which Sir W. Hamilton does not deviate, these
operations are three: Conception, or the formation of General Notions;
Judgment; and Reasoning. We begin with the first.

On this subject two questions present themselves: first, whether there
are such things as General Notions, and secondly, what they are. If
there are General Notions, they must be the notions which are expressed
by general terms; and concerning general terms, all who have the most
elementary knowledge of the history of metaphysics are aware that there
are, or once were, three different opinions.

The first is that of the Realists, who maintained that General Names are
the names of General Things. Besides individual things, they recognised
another kind of Things, not individual, which they technically called
Second Substances, or Universals a parte rei. Over and above all
individual men and women, there was an entity called Man—Man in general,
which inhered in the individual men and women, and communicated to them
its essence. These Universal Substances they considered to be a much
more dignified kind of beings than individual substances, and the only
ones the cognizance of which deserved the names of Science and
Knowledge. Individual existences were fleeting and perishable, but the
beings called Genera and Species were immortal and unchangeable.

This, the most prevalent philosophical doctrine of the middle ages, is
now universally abandoned, but remains a fact of great significance in
the history of philosophy; being one of the most striking examples of
the tendency of the human mind to infer difference of things from
difference of names,—to suppose that every different class of names
implied a corresponding class of real entities to be denoted by them.
Having two such Edition: current; Page: [302] different names as “man”
and “Socrates,” these inquirers thought it quite out of the question
that man should only be a name for Socrates, and others like him,
regarded in a particular light. Man, being a name common to many, must
be the name of a substance common to many, and in mystic union with the
individual substances, Socrates and the rest.

In the later middle ages there grew up a rival school of metaphysicians,
termed Nominalists, who repudiating Universal Substances, held that
there is nothing general except names. A name, they said, is general, if
it is applied in the same acceptation to a plurality of things; but
every one of the things is individual. The dispute between these two
sects of philosophers was very bitter, and assumed the character of a
religious quarrel: authority, too, interfered in it, and as usual on the
wrong side. The Realist theory was represented as the orthodox doctrine,
and belief in it was imposed as a religious duty. It could not, however,
permanently resist philosophical criticism, and it perished. But it did
not leave Nominalism in possession of the field. A third doctrine arose,
which endeavoured to steer between the two. According to this, which is
known by the name of Conceptualism, generality is not an attribute
solely of names, but also of thoughts. External objects indeed are all
individual, but to every general name corresponds a General Notion, or
Conception, called by Locke[*] and others an Abstract Idea. General
Names are the names of these Abstract Ideas.

Realism being no longer extant, nor likely to be revived, the contest at
present is between Nominalism and Conceptualism; each of which counts
illustrious names among its modern adherents. Sir W. Hamilton professes
allegiance to both, affirming “that the opposing parties are really at
one.”* But his general mode of thought, and habitual phraseology, are
purely Conceptualist. This is already apparent in the passage I shall
first quote, which contains his statement of the fact to be explained.
It is preceded by a remark on Abstraction which is perfectly just, and
throws great light on the processes of human thought. Abstraction, he
says, is simply the concentration of our attention on a particular
object, or a particular quality of an object, and diversion of it from
everything else. There may be abstraction, therefore, without
generalization. “The notion of the figure of the desk before me is an
abstract idea,—an idea that makes part of the total notion of that body,
and on which I have concentrated my attention, in order to consider it
exclusively. This idea is abstract, but it is at the same time
individual; it represents the figure of this particular desk, and not
the figure of any other body.”†

Edition: current; Page: [303]
There are, therefore, “individual abstract notions;” but there are also
“Abstract General Notions.” These are formed

when, comparing a number of objects, we seize on their resemblances;
when we concentrate our attention on these points of similarity, thus
abstracting the mind from a consideration of their differences; and when
we give a name to our notion of that circumstance in which they all
agree. The general notion is thus one which makes us know a quality,
property, power, notion, relation; in short, any point of view under
which we recognise a plurality of objects as a unity. It makes us aware
of a quality, a point of view, common to many things. It is a notion of
resemblance; hence the reason why general names or terms, the signs of
general notions, have been called terms of resemblance (termini
similitudinis). In this process of generalization, we do not stop short
at a first generalization. By a first generalization we have obtained a
number of classes of resembling individuals. But these classes we can
compare together, observe their similarities, abstract from their
differences, and bestow on their common circumstance a common name. On
these second classes we can again perform the same operation, and thus
ascending the scale of general notions, throwing out of view always a
greater number of differences, and seizing always on fewer similarities
in the formation of our classes, we arrive at length at the limit of our
ascent in the notion of being or existence. Thus placed on the summit of
the scale of classes, we descend by a process the reverse of that by
which we have ascended; we divide and subdivide the classes, by
introducing always more and more characters, and laying always fewer
differences aside; the notions become more and more composite, until we
at length arrive at the individual.

I may here notice that there is a twofold quantity to be considered in
notions. It is evident that, in proportion as the class is high, it
will, in the first place, contain under it a greater number of classes,
and in the second, will include the smallest complement of attributes.
Thus being or existence contains under it every class; and yet when we
say that a thing exists, we say the very least of it that is possible.
On the other hand, an individual, though it contain nothing but itself,
involves the largest amount of predication. For example, when I say—this
is Richard, I not only affirm of the subject every class from existence
down to man, but likewise a number of circumstances proper to Richard as
an individual. Now, the former of these quantities, the external, is
called the Extension of a notion; the latter, the internal quantity, is
called its Comprehension or Intension. . . . The internal and external
quantities are in the inverse ratio of each other. The greater the
extension, the less the comprehension; the greater the comprehension,
the less the extension.*

As a popular account of Classification, for learners, to be followed by
a more scientific exposition, this fully answers its purpose; but it is
expressed in the common language of Conceptualists, and we should
naturally conclude from it that the author was a Conceptualist. He
however asserts the doctrine of the Nominalists, that there are no
general notions, and that the notion suggested by a general name is
always singular or individual, to be “not only true but self-evident.”
And he quotes as “irrefragable”† the Edition: current; Page: [304]
argument of Berkeley, directed against the very possibility of Abstract
Ideas. The passage from Berkeley is in the Introduction to his
Principles of Human Knowledge, and is as follows:

It is agreed, on all hands, that the qualities or modes of things, do
never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from all
others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several in the
same object. But, we are told, the mind, being able to consider each
quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with which it
is united, does by that means frame to itself abstract ideas. For
example, there is perceived by sight an object extended, coloured, and
moved; this mixed or compound idea the mind resolving into its simple
constituent parts, and viewing each by itself, exclusive of the rest,
does frame the abstract ideas of extension, colour, and motion. Not that
it is possible for colour or motion to exist without extension; but only
that the mind can frame to itself by abstraction the idea of colour
exclusive of extension, and of motion exclusive of both colour and
extension.

Again, the mind having observed that in the particular extensions
perceived by sense, there is something common and alike in all, and some
other things peculiar, as this or that figure or magnitude, which
distinguish them one from another; it considers apart or singles out by
itself that which is common, making thereof a most abstract idea of
extension, which is neither line, surface, nor solid, nor has any figure
or magnitude, but is an idea entirely prescinded from all these. So,
likewise, the mind, by leaving out of the particular colours perceived
by sense, that which distinguishes them one from another, and retaining
that only which is common to all, makes an idea of colour in abstract,
which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate
colour. And, in like manner, by considering motion abstractedly not only
from the body moved, but likewise from the figure it describes, and all
particular directions and velocities, the abstract idea of motion is
framed; which equally corresponds to all particular motions whatever
that may be perceived by sense.

Whether others have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas,
they best can tell: for myself I find, indeed, I have a faculty of
imagining, or representing to myself the ideas of those particular
things I have perceived, and of variously compounding and dividing them.
I can imagine a man with two heads, or the upper part of a man joined to
the body of a horse. I can consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by
itself abstracted or separated from the rest of the body. But then
whatever hand or eye I imagine, it must have some particular shape and
colour. Likewise the idea of man that I frame to myself, must be either
of a white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or
a low, or a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive
the abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me
to form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and
which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the
like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. To be
plain, I am myself able to abstract in one sense, as when I consider
some particular parts or qualities separated from others, with which
though they are united in some object, yet it is possible they may
really exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract one from
another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible
should exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion by
abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid. Which two last are
the proper acceptations of abstraction. Edition: current; Page: [305]
And there are grounds to think most men will acknowledge themselves to
be in my case.*

It is evident, indeed, that the existence of Abstract Ideas—the
conception of the class-qualities by themselves, and not as embodied in
an individual—is effectually precluded by the law of Inseparable
Association.

In what manner Sir W. Hamilton manages to combine two theories, which in
words are, and in substance have always been believed to be, directly
contradictory of one another, we learn only from his Lectures on Logic.
The hearers of those on Metaphysics, unless the Professor supplied oral
elucidations which do not appear in the text, must have been
considerably puzzled by finding the task of reconciling the two
doctrines thrown entirely on themselves. In the Lectures on Logic,
however, an attempt is made to perform it for them. It is there stated,
that the General Notion, which Sir W. Hamilton terms a Concept, and
which is the notion we form of some “point of similarity”[*] between
individual objects,

is not cognizable in itself, that is, it affords no absolute or
irrespective object of Knowledge, but can only be realized in
consciousness by applying it as a term of relation, to one or more of
the objects, which agree in the point or points of resemblance which it
expresses. . . . The moment we attempt to represent to ourselves any of
these concepts, any of these abstract generalities, as absolute objects,
by themselves, and out of relation to any concrete or individual
realities, their relative nature at once reappears; for we find it
altogether impossible to represent any of the qualities expressed by a
concept, except as attached to some individual and determinate object,
and their whole generality consists in this, that though we must realize
them in thought under some singular of the class, we may do it under
any. Thus, for example, we cannot actually represent the bundle of
attributes contained in the concept man as an absolute object by itself,
and apart from all that reduces it from a general cognition to an
individual representation. We cannot figure in imagination any object
adequate to the general notion or term man; for the man to be here
imagined must be neither tall nor short, neither fat nor lean, neither
black nor white, neither man nor woman, neither young nor old, but all
and yet none of these at once. The relativity of our concepts is thus
shown in the contradiction and absurdity of the opposite hypothesis.†

This is sound doctrine, but it is pure Nominalism; as the passage first
quoted from our author was pure Conceptualism. It is very necessary that
I should quote the additional elucidations given in the succeeding
Lecture. A Concept or (General) Notion, he there says, is in this
distinguished from a “Presentation of Perception, or Representation of
Phantasy,” that

Edition: current; Page: [306]
our knowledge through either of the latter is a direct, immediate,
irrespective, determinate, individual, and adequate cognition; that is,
a singular or individual object is known in itself, by itself, through
all its attributes, and without reference to aught but itself. A
concept, on the contrary, is an indirect, mediate, indeterminate, and
partial cognition of any one of a number of objects, but not an actual
representation either of them all, or of the whole attributes of any one
object. . . .*

Formed by comparison, [concepts] express only a relation. They cannot,
therefore, be held up as an absolute object to consciousness—they cannot
be represented as universals, in imagination. They can only be thought
of in relation to some one of the individual objects they classify, and
when viewed in relation to it, they can be represented in imagination;
but then, as actually represented, they no longer constitute general
attributions, they fall back into mere special determinations of the
individual object in which they are represented. Thus it is, that the
generality or universality of concepts is potential, not actual. They
are only generals, inasmuch as they may be applied to any of the various
objects they contain; but while they cannot be actually elicited into
consciousness, except in application to some one or other of these, so
they cannot be so applied without losing, pro tanto, their universality.
Take, for example, the concept horse. In so far as by horse we merely
think of the word, that is, of the combination formed by the letters h,
o, r, s, e,—this is not a concept at all, as it is a mere representation
of certain individual objects. This I only state and eliminate, in order
that no possible ambiguity should be allowed to lurk. By horse, then,
meaning not merely a representation of the word, but a concept relative
to certain objects classed under it,—the concept horse, I say, cannot,
if it remain a concept, that is, a universal attribution, be represented
in imagination; but, except it be represented in imagination, it cannot
be applied to any object, and, except it be so applied, it cannot be
realized in thought at all. You may try to escape the horns of the
dilemma, but you cannot. You cannot realize in thought an absolute or
irrespective concept, corresponding in universality to the application
of the word; for the supposition of this involves numerous
contradictions. An existent horse is not a relation, but an extended
object possessed of a determinate figure, colour, size, &c.; horse, in
general, cannot, therefore, be represented, except by an image of
something extended, and of a determinate figure, colour, size, &c. Here
now emerges the contradiction. If, on the one hand, you do not represent
something extended and of a determinate figure, colour, and size, ayou
have no representation of any horse. There is, therefore, in this
alternative, nothing which can be called the actual concept or image of
a horse at all. If, on the other hand, you do represent something
extended, and of a determinate figure, colour, and size,a then you have,
indeed, the image of an individual horse, but not a universal concept
coadequate with horse in general. For how is it possible to have an
actual representation of a figure, which is not a determinate figure?
but if of a determinate figure, it must be that of some one of the many
different figures under which horses appear; but then, if it be only of
one of these, it cannot be the general concept of the others, which it
does not represent. In like manner, how is it possible to have the
actual representation of a thing coloured, which is not the
representation of a determinate colour, that is, either white, or black,
or grey, or brown, &c.? but if it be any one of these, it can only
represent a horse of this or that particular colour, Edition: current;
Page: [307] and cannot be the general concept of horses of every colour.
The same result is given by the other attributes; and what I originally
stated is thus manifest—that concepts have only a potential, not an
actual, universality, that is, they are only universal, inasmuch as they
may be applied to any of a certain class of objects, but as actually
applied, they are no longer general attributions, but only special
attributes.*

But if, as our author says, concepts are “incapable of being realized in
thought at all,” except as representations of individual objects, how
are they, even potentially, universal? Being mere mental creations, they
are nothing except what they can be thought as being; and they cannot be
thought as being universal, but only as being part of the thought of an
individual object, though the individual object needs not always be the
same. This is not a potential universality, though it is an universal
potentiality. If, then, the Nominalists are thus completely right, how
can it be that the Conceptualists are not wrong?

Our author thinks that the apparent difference between them is a mere
case of verbal ambiguity; arising from the “employment of the same terms
to express the representations of Imagination, and the notions or
concepts of the Understanding.” “A relation,” he says,

cannot be represented in imagination. The two terms,—the two relative
objects, can be severally imaged in the sensible phantasy, but not the
relation itself. This is the object of the Comparative Faculty, or of
Intelligence Proper. To objects so different as the images of sense and
the unpicturable notions of intelligence, different names ought to be
given.†

In Germany the question of nominalism and conceptualism has not been
agitated, and why? Simply because the German language supplies terms by
which concepts (or notions of thought proper) have been
contradistinguished from the presentations and representations of the
subsidiary faculties.‡

We are therefore to understand that although Imagination cannot figure
to itself anything general or universal, Thought Proper, or the
Comparative Faculty, or the Understanding, can. But I do not believe
that Berkeley, whose argument our author declares “irrefragable,” or any
other of the great Nominalist thinkers whom he enumerates, would have
accepted this distinction. They would, I apprehend, have denied that the
attributes included in the so-called General Notion can be bthoughtb
separately, any more than they can be imaged separately. But why do I
talk of Berkeley? Sir W. Hamilton has himself negatived the distinction
in the very passage Edition: current; Page: [308] just quoted, when he
says, “the concept horse cannot, if it remain a concept, that is, a
universal attribution, be represented in imagination; but, except it be
represented in imagination, it cannot be applied to any object, and
except it be so applied, it cannot be realized in thought.” The simple
question is, Can the attributes of horse as a class be objects of
thought, except as part of a representation of some individual horse? If
the Concept cannot exist in the mind except enveloped in the
miscellaneous attributes of an individual—which is the truth, and fully
recognised as such in the passages quoted from Sir W. Hamilton,—then it
can no more be thought separately by the intellect than depicted
separately in the imagination.

This notion of a Concept as something which can be thought, but “cannot
in itself be depicted to sense or imagination,”* is supported, as we
saw, by calling it a relation. “As the result of a comparison,” a
concept “necessarily expresses a relation:”† and “a relation cannot be
represented in imagination.”[*] If a concept is a relation, what
relation is it, and between what? “As the result of a comparison,” it
must be a relation of resemblance among the things compared. I might
observe that a concept, which is defined by our author himself “a bundle
of attributes,”[†] does not signify the mere fact of resemblance between
objects; it signifies our mental representation of that in which they
resemble; of the “common circumstance”[‡] which Sir W. Hamilton spoke of
in his exposition of Classification. The attributes are not the
relation, they are the fundamentum relationis. This objection, however,
I can afford to wave. However inappropriate the expression, let us admit
that a concept is a relation. But if a relation cannot be represented in
imagination, our author has just said that “the two terms, the two
relative objects,”[§] can. The relation, according to him, though it
cannot be imagined, can be thought. But can a relation be thought
without thinking the related objects between which it exists? Assuredly,
no: and this impossibility can the less be denied by Sir W. Hamilton, as
it is the basis on which he founds his theory of Consciousness—of the
direct apprehension of the Ego and the Non-ego. Consequently, when we
think a relation, we must think it as existing between some particular
objects which we think along with it: and a Concept, even if it be the
apprehending of a relation, can only be thought as individual, not as
general.

Edition: current; Page: [309]
The true theory of Concepts needs not, I think, be sought farther off
than in our author’s own account of their origin. “In the formation,” he
says,

of a concept or notion, the process may be analysed into four momenta.
In the first place, we must have a plurality of objects presented or
represented by the subsidiary faculties. These faculties must furnish
the rude material for elaboration. In the second place, the objects thus
applied are, by an act of the Understanding, compared together, and
their several qualities judged to be similar or dissimilar. In the third
place, an act of volition, called Attention, concentrates consciousness
on the qualities thus recognised as similar; and that concentration, by
attention, on them, involves an abstraction of consciousness from those
which have been recognised and thrown aside as dissimilar; for the power
of consciousness is limited, and it is clear or vivid precisely in
proportion to the simplicity or oneness of the object. Attention and
Abstraction are the two poles of the same act of thought: they are like
the opposite scales in a balance, the one must go up as the other goes
down. In the fourth place, the qualities, which by comparison are judged
similar, and by attention are constituted into an exclusive object of
thought,—these are already, by this process, identified in
consciousness; for they are only judged similar, inasmuch as they
produce in us indiscernible effects. Their synthesis in consciousness
may, however, for precision’s sake, be stated as a fourth step in the
process. But it must be remembered, that at least the three latter steps
are not, in reality, distinct and independent acts, but are only so
distinguished and stated, in order to enable us to comprehend and speak
about the indivisible operation in the different aspects in which we may
consider it.*

Let me remark, in passing, the fresh crecognitionc in the last sentence,
of an important principle, already several times adverted to, in the
theory of Naming.

The formation, therefore, of a Concept, does not consist in separating
the attributes which are said to compose it, from all other attributes
of the same object, and enabling us to conceive those attributes,
disjoined from any others. We neither conceive them, nor think them, nor
cognise them in any way, as a thing apart, but solely as forming, in
combination with numerous other attributes, the idea of an individual
object. But, though thinking them only as part of a larger
agglomeration, we have the power of fixing our attention on them, to the
neglect of the other attributes with which we think them combined. While
the concentration of attention actually lasts, if it is sufficiently
intense, we may be temporarily unconscious of any of the other
attributes, and may really, for a brief interval, have nothing present
to our mind but the attributes constituent of the concept. In general,
however, the attention is not so completely exclusive as this; it leaves
room in consciousness for other elements of the concrete idea: though of
these the consciousness is faint, in proportion to the energy of the
concentrative effort; and the moment the attention relaxes, if the same
concrete idea continues to be contemplated, its other constituents
Edition: current; Page: [310] come out into consciousness. General
concepts, therefore, we have, properly speaking, none; we have only
complex ideas of objects in the concrete: but we are able to attend
exclusively to certain parts of the concrete idea: and by that exclusive
attention, we enable those parts to determine exclusively the course of
our thoughts as subsequently called up by association; and are in a
condition to carry on a train of meditation or reasoning relating to
those parts only, exactly as if we were able to conceive them separately
from the rest.

What principally enables us to do this is the employment of signs, and
particularly the most efficient and familiar kind of signs, viz. Names.
This is a point which Sir W. Hamilton puts well and strongly, and there
are many reasons for stating it in his own language.

The concept thus formed by an abstraction of the resembling from the
nonresembling qualities of objects, would again fall back into the
confusion and infinitude from which it has been called out, were it not
rendered permanent for consciousness, by being fixed and ratified in a
verbal sign. Considered in general, thought and language are
reciprocally dependent; each bears all the imperfections and perfections
of the other; but without language there could be no knowledge realized
of the essential properties of things, and of the connexion of their
accidental states.*

The rationale of this is, that when we wish to be able to think of
objects in respect of certain of their attributes—to recall no objects
but such as are invested with those attributes, and to recall them with
our attention directed to those attributes exclusively—we effect this by
giving to that combination of attributes, or to the class of objects
which possess them, a specific Name. We create an artificial association
between those attributes and a certain combination of articulate sounds,
which guarantees to us that when we hear the sound, or see the written
characters corresponding to it, there will be raised in the mind an idea
of some object possessing those attributes, in which idea those
attributes alone will be suggested vividly to the mind, our
consciousness of the remainder of the concrete idea being faint. As the
name has been directly associated only with those attributes, it is as
likely, in itself, to recall them in any one concrete combination as in
any other. What combination it shall recall in the particular case,
depends on recency of experience, accidents of memory, or the influence
of other thoughts which have been passing, or are even then passing,
through the mind: accordingly, the combination is far from being always
the same, and seldom gets itself strongly associated with the name which
suggests it; while the association of the name with the attributes that
form its conventional signification, is constantly becoming stronger.
The association of that particular set of attributes with a given word,
is what keeps them Edition: current; Page: [311] together in the mind by
a stronger tie than that with which they are associated with the
remainder of the concrete image. To express the meaning in Sir W.
Hamilton’s phraseology, this association gives them an unity* in our
consciousness. It is only when this has been accomplished, that we
possess what Sir W. Hamilton terms a Concept; and this is the whole of
the mental phænomenon involved in the matter. We have a concrete
representation, certain of the component elements of which are
distinguished by a mark, designating them for special attention; and
this attention, in cases of exceptional intensity, excludes all
consciousness of the others.

Sir W. Hamilton thinks, however, that we can form, though scarcely
preserve, concepts without the aid of signs. “Language,” he says, “is
the attribution of signs to our cognitions of things. But as a cognition
must have been already there, before it could receive a sign;
consequently, that knowledge which is denoted by the formation and
application of a word, must have preceded the symbol which denotes it.”
A sign, however, he continues, in one of his happiest specimens of
illustration,

is necessary to give stability to our intellectual progress,—to
establish each step in our advance as a new starting point for our
advance to another beyond. A country may be overrun by an armed host,
but it is only conquered by the establishment of fortresses. Words are
the fortresses of thought. They enable us to realize our dominion over
what we have already overrun in thought; to make every intellectual
conquest the basis of operations for others still beyond. Or another
illustration: You have all heard of the process of tunnelling—of
tunnelling through a sand-bank. In this operation it is impossible to
succeed, unless every foot, nay almost every inch in our progress, be
secured by an arch of masonry, before we attempt the excavation of
another. Now, language is to the mind precisely what the arch is to the
tunnel. The power of thinking and the power of excavation are not
dependent on the word in the one case, on the mason-work in the other;
but without these subsidiaries, neither process could be carried on
beyond its rudimentary commencement. Though, therefore, we allow that
every movement forward in language must be determined by an antecedent
movement forward in thought; still, unless thought be accompanied at
each point of its evolution, by a corresponding evolution of Edition:
current; Page: [312] language, its further development is arrested. . .
. Admitting even that the mind is capable of certain elementary concepts
without the fixation and signature of language, still these are but
sparks which would twinkle only to expire, and it requires words to give
them prominence, and by enabling us to collect and elaborate them into
new concepts, to raise out of what would otherwise be only scattered and
transitory scintillations, a vivid and enduring light.*

Mr. Mansel, who agrees with Sir W. Hamilton in the essentials of his
doctrine of Concepts, goes beyond him on this point, being of opinion
that without signs we could not form concepts at all.[*] The objection,
that we must have had the concept before we could have given it a name,
he meets by the suggestion that names when first used are names only of
individual objects, but being extended from one object to another under
the law of Association by Resemblance, they become specially associated
with the points of Resemblance, and thus generate the Concept. In Mr.
Mansel’s opinion, no one, “without the aid of symbols,” can advance

beyond the individual objects of sense or imagination. In the presence
of several individuals of the same species, the eye may observe points
of similarity between them; and in this no symbol is needed; but every
feature thus observed is the distinct attribute of a distinct
individual, and however similar, cannot be regarded as identical. For
example: I see lying on the table before me a number of shillings of the
same coinage. Examined severally, the image and superscription of each
is undistinguishable from that of its fellow; but in viewing them side
by side, space is a necessary condition of my perception, and the
difference of locality is sufficient to make them distinct, though
similar individuals. The same is the case with any representative image,
whether in a mirror, in a painting, or in the imagination, waking or
dreaming. It can only be depicted as occupying a certain place; and thus
as an individual, and the representative of an individual. It is true
that I cannot say that it represents this particular coin rather than
that; and consequently it may be considered as the representative of
all, successively but not simultaneously. To find a representative which
shall embrace all at once, I must divest it of the condition of
occupying space; and this, experience assures us can only be done by
means of symbols, verbal or other, by which the concept is fixed in the
understanding. Such, for example, is a verbal description of the coin in
question, which contains a collection of attributes freed from the
condition of locality, and hence from all resemblance to an object of
sense. If we substitute Time for Space, the same remarks will be equally
applicable to the objects of our internal consciousness. Every appetite
and desire, every affection and volition, as presented, is an individual
state of consciousness, distinguished from every other by its relation
to a different period of time. States in other respects exactly similar
may succeed one another at regular intervals; but the hunger which I
feel to-day is an individual feeling as numerically distinct from that
which I felt yesterday or that which I shall feel to-morrow, as a
shilling lying in my pocket is from a similar shilling lying at the
bank. Whereas my notion of hunger, or fear, or volition, is a general
concept, having no relation to one period of time rather than to
another, and, as such, requires, like other concepts, a representative
sign. Language, taking the word in its Edition: current; Page: [313]
widest sense, is thus indispensable, not merely to the communication,
but to the formation of Thought.*

This is a step in advance of Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine, but is open to
the same criticism, namely, that after showing all Concepts to be
concrete and individual, it endeavours to make out by an indirect
process, a sort of abstract existence for them. According to Mr. Mansel,
signs are necessary to concepts, because signs alone can give this
abstract existence. Signs are wanted, to emancipate our mental
apprehension from the conditions of space and time which are in all our
concrete representations. The other miscellaneous attributes which have
to be cast out, do not, he seems to think, embarrass the formation of
the Concept; but it is hampered by the conditions of space and time, and
only by means of a sign can we get rid of these. But do we get rid of
them by employing signs? To take Mr. Mansel’s own instance: When we
establish our concept of a shilling by a verbal description of the coin,
does the description enable us to conceive a shilling as not occupying
any space? When we think of a shilling, either by name or anonymously,
is not the circumstance of occupying space called up as an inevitable
part of the mental representation? Not, indeed, the circumstance of
occupying a given part of space; but if that is what Mr. Mansel means,
it would follow that we need signs to enable us to form a mental
representation even of an individual object, provided it be moveable:
for the same object does not always occupy the same part of space. The
truth is, that the condition of space cannot be excluded; it is an
essential part of the concept of Body, and of every kind of bodies. But
any given space, or any given time, is not a part of the concept, any
more than any of the slight peculiarities in which one shilling differs
from another are part of the concept of a shilling. Some space and time,
and some individual peculiarities, are always thought along with the
concept, and make up the whole, of which it can only be thought as a
part: but these are not directly recalled by the class-name, and the
attributes composing the concept are. Mr. Mansel, therefore, has not, I
conceive, hit the mark: but in the passages which follow, there is real
power of metaphysical discrimination.

Observe what actually takes place in the formation of language and
thought among ourselves. To the child learning to speak, words are not
the signs of thoughts, but of intuitions:† the words man and horse do
not represent a collection of attributes, but are only the name of the
individual now before him. It is not until the name has been
successively appropriated to various individuals, that reflection begins
to inquire into the common features of the class. Language, therefore,
as Edition: current; Page: [314] taught to the infant, is
chronologically prior to thought and posterior to sensation. In
inquiring how far the same process can account for the invention of
language, which now takes place in the learning it, the real question at
issue is simply this. Is the act of giving names to individual objects
of sense, a thing so completely beyond the power of a man created in the
full maturity of his faculties, that we must suppose a Divine Instructor
performing precisely the same office as is now performed for the infant
by his mother or his nurse; teaching him, that is, to associate this
sound with this sight? . . . All concepts are formed by means of signs
which have previously been representative of individual objects only. .
. . Similarities are noticed earlier than differences: and our first
abstractions may be said to be performed for us, as we learn to give the
same name to individuals presented to us under slight, and at first
unnoticed, circumstances of distinction. The same name is thus applied
to different objects, long before we learn to analyse the growing powers
of speech and thought, to ask what we mean by each several instance of
its application, to correct and fix the signification of words used at
first vaguely and obscurely. To point out each successive stage of the
process by which signs of intuition become gradually signs of thought,
is as impossible as to point out the several moments at which the
growing child receives each successive increase of his stature.*

These remarks of Mr. Mansel remove, as it seems to me, the only real
argument for the supposition that Concepts, or what are called General
Notions, are formed without the aid of signs. But the counter-doctrine
must be received with an important reservation. Signs are necessary, but
the signs need not be artificial; there are such things as natural
signs. The only reality there is in the Concept is, that we are somehow
enabled and led, not once or accidentally, but in the common course of
our thoughts, to attend specially, and more or less exclusively, to
certain parts of the presentation of sense or representation of
imagination which we are conscious of. Now, what is there to make us do
this? There must be something which, as often as it recurs either to our
senses or to our thoughts, directs our attention to those particular
elements in the perception or in the idea: and whatever performs this
office is virtually a sign; but it needs not be a word; the process
certainly takes place, to a limited extent, in the inferior animals; and
even with human beings who have but a small vocabulary, many processes
of thought take place habitually by other symbols than words. It is a
doctrine of one of the most fertile thinkers of modern times, Auguste
Comte, that besides the logic of signs, there is a logic of images, and
a logic of feelings.[*] In many of the familiar processes of thought,
and especially in uncultured minds, a visual image serves instead of a
word. Our visual sensations—perhaps only because they are almost always
present along with the impressions of our other senses—have a facility
of becoming associated with them. Hence, the characteristic visual
appearance of an Edition: current; Page: [315] object easily gathers
round it, by association, the ideas of all other peculiarities which
have, in frequent experience, coexisted with that appearance: and,
summoning up these with a strength and certainty far surpassing that of
the merely casual associations which it may also raise, it concentrates
the attention on them. This is an image serving for a sign—the logic of
images. The same function may be fulfilled by a feeling. Any strong and
highly interesting feeling, connected with one attribute of a group,
spontaneously classifies all objects according as they possess or do not
possess that attribute. We may be tolerably certain that the things
capable of satisfying hunger form a perfectly distinct class in the mind
of any of the more intelligent animals; quite as much so as if they were
able to use or understand the word food. We here see in a strong light
the important truth, that hardly anything universal can be affirmed in
psychology except the laws of association. As almost all general
propositions which can be laid down respecting Mind, are consequences of
these laws, so do these ultimate laws, in varying cases, generate
different derivative laws; and are continually raising up exceptions to
the empirical generalizations yielded by direct psychical observation,
which, so far as true, being mere cases of the wider laws, are always
limited by them.

We have now attained a theory of Classification, of Class Notions, and
of Class Names, which is clear, free from difficulties, and, in its
essential elements, understood and assented to by Sir W. Hamilton. With
the exception of a few minor matters, I find no fault in his theory. It
is where his theory ends and his practice begins, that I am obliged to
diverge from him. His theory is a complete condemnation of his practice.
His theory is that of Nominalism; but he affirms, in opposition to every
Conceptualist, that Nominalism and Conceptualism are the same, and on
this justification expounds all the operations of the intellect in the
language, and on the assumptions, of Conceptualism. If a Concept does
not exist as a separate or independent object of thought, but is always
a mere part of a concrete image, and has nothing that discriminates it
from the other parts except a special share of attention, guaranteed to
it by special association with a name; what is meant by the paramount
place assigned to Concepts in all the intellectual processes? Can it be
right to found the whole of Logic, the entire theory of Judgment and
Reasoning, upon a thing which has merely a fictitious or constructive
existence? Is it correct to say that we think by means of Concepts?
Would it not convey both a clearer and a truer meaning, to say that we
think by means of ideas of concrete phænomena, such as are presented in
experience or represented in imagination, and by means of names, which
being in a peculiar manner associated with certain elements of the
concrete images, arrest our attention on those elements? Sir W. Hamilton
has told us that a concept cannot, as such, be “realized in Edition:
current; Page: [316] thought,” or “elicited into consciousness.”[*] Can
it be, that we think and reason by means of that which cannot be
thought, of which we cannot become conscious? Of course Sir W. Hamilton
did not mean, nor do I, that we cannot think or be conscious of the
attributes which are said to compose the concept; but we can only be
conscious of them as forming a representation jointly with other
attributes which do not enter into the concept. And the difference
between the parts of the same representation which are inside and those
which are outside what is called the concept, is not that the former are
attended to and the latter not, for neither of these is always true. It
is, that foreseeing that we shall frequently or occasionally desire to
attend only to the former, we have made for ourselves, or have received
from our predecessors, a contrivance for being reminded of them, which
also serves for fixing our exclusive attention upon them when called to
mind. To say, therefore, that we think by means of concepts, is only a
circuitous and obscure way of saying that we think by means of general
or class names.*d To give an intelligible idea of the fact, we always
need to translate it out of the former language into the latter. It is
possible, no doubt, so to define the terms that both expressions shall
mean the same thing. But the less appropriate language has the immense
disadvantage, that it cannot be used without tacitly assuming that these
mere parts of our complex concrete perceptions and ideas have a separate
mental existence, which is admitted not to belong to them. No one, more
fully than Sir W. Hamilton, recognises the true theory; but the
acknowledgment only serves him as an excuse for Edition: current; Page:
[317] delivering himself up unreservedly to all the logical consequences
of the false theory. To read the account which he and Mr. Mansel, in
common with the great majority of modern logicians, give of our
intellectual processes—which they always make to consist essentially of
some operation practised upon concepts—no one would ever imagine that
concepts were not complete, rounded off, distinct and separate
possessions of the mind, habitually dealt with by it quite apart from
anything else; and this, in the general opinion of Conceptualists, they
are: but according to Sir W. Hamilton and Mr. Mansel, they are secretly,
all the while, incapable of being thought except as parts of something
else which has always to be dealt with along with them, but which these
philosophers, in their expositions, suppress as completely, as if they
had forgotten that its necessary presence is part of their theory. For
these and other reasons, I fthink that the words Concept, General
Notion, and other phrases of like import, convenient as they are for the
lighter and every-day uses of philosophical discussion, should be
abstained from where precision is requiredf. Above all, I hold that
nothing but confusion ever results from introducing the term Concept
into Logic, and that instead of the Concept of a class, we should always
speak of the signification of a class name.*

The signification of a class name has two aspects, corresponding to the
distinction to which Sir W. Hamilton attaches so much importance,
between the Extension and the Comprehension of a concept; which is
merely a bad expression for the distinction between the two modes of
signification of a concrete general name. Most names are still, what
according to Mr. Mansel they all were originally, names of objects;[*]
and do not cease to be so by becoming class names; but, though names of
objects, they become expressive of certain attributes of those objects,
and when predicated of an Edition: current; Page: [318] object, they
affirm of it those attributes. The name is said, in the language of
logicians, to denote the objects and connote the attributes. White
denotes chalk and other white substances, and connotes the particular
colour which is common to them. Bird denotes eagles, sparrows, crows,
geese, and so forth, and connotes life, the possession of wings, and the
other properties by which we are guided in applying the name. The
various objects denoted by the class name are what is meant by the
Extension of the concept, while the attributes connoted are its
Comprehension. It must be remarked, however, that the Extension is not
anything intrinsic to the concept; it is the sum of all the objects, in
our concrete images of which, the concept is included: but the
Comprehension is the very concept itself, for the concept means nothing
but our mental representation of the sum of the attributes composing it.

And here it is important to take notice of a psychological truth, which
forms an additional reason for preferring the expression that we think
by general names, to that of thinking by concepts. Since the concept
only exists as a part of a concrete mental state; if we say that we
think by means of it, and not by the whole which it is a part of, it
ought at least to be the part by which we think. Since that is the only
distinction between it and the remainder of the presentation or
representation in which it is embedded, at least that distinction should
be real: all which enters into the concept ought to be operative in
thought. So far is this from being true, that in our processes of
thought, seldom more than a part, sometimes a very small part, of what
is comprehended in the concept, is attended to, or comes into play. This
is forcibly stated, though in Conceptualist phraseology, by Mr. Mansel.
“We can,” he says,

and in the majority of cases do, employ concepts as instruments of
thought, without submitting them to the test of even possible
individualization. . . . I cannot conceive a triangle which is neither
equilateral, nor isosceles, nor scalene; but I can judge and reason
about a triangle without at the moment trying to conceive it at all.
This is one of the consequences of the representation of concepts by
language. The sign is substituted for the notion signified; a step which
considerably facilitates the performance of complex operations of
thought; but in the same proportion endangers the logical accuracy of
each successive step, as we do not, in each, stop to verify our signs.
Words, as thus employed, resemble algebraical symbols, which, during the
process of a long calculation, we combine in various relations to each
other, without at the moment thinking of the original signification
assigned to each.*

The attempt to stand at once on two incompatible theories, leads to
strange freaks of expression. Mr. Mansel describes us as thinking by
means of concepts which we are incapable of forming, and do not even
attempt to form, but use the signs instead. Yet he will not consent to
call this thinking by the signs, but insists that it is the concepts
which are even in this case the Edition: current; Page: [319]
“instruments of thought.” It is surely a very twisted logical position
which, when he is so entirely right in what he has to say, compels him
to use so strangely contorted a mode of saying it.

The same important psychological fact is excellently illustrated by Sir
W. Hamilton in one of the very best chapters of his works, the Tenth
Lecture on Logic, in which it is stated as follows:

As a notion or concept is the fictitious whole or unity made up of a
plurality of attributes,—a whole, too, often of a very complex
multiplicity; and as this multiplicity is only mentally held together,
inasmuch as the concept is fixed and ratified in a sign or word; it
frequently happens that, in its employment, the word does not suggest
the whole amount of thought for which it is the adequate expression,
but, on the contrary, we frequently give and take the sign, either with
an obscure or indistinct consciousness of its meaning, or even without
an actual consciousness of its signification at all.*

The word does not always serve the purpose of fixing our attention on
the whole of the attributes which it connotes; some of them may be only
recalled to mind faintly, others possibly not at all: a phænomenon
heasilyh to be accounted for by the laws of Obliviscence. But the part
of the attributes signified which the word does recal, may be all that
it is necessary for us to think of, at the time and for the purpose in
hand; it may be a sufficient part to set going all the associations by
means of which we proceed through that thought to ulterior thoughts.
Indeed, it is because part of the attributes have generally sufficed for
that purpose, that the habit is acquired of not attending to the
remainder. When the attributes not attended to are really of no
importance for the end in view, and if attended to would not have
altered the results of the mental process, there is no harm done: much
of our valid thinking is carried on in this manner, and it is to this
that our thinking processes owe, in a great measure, their proverbial
rapidity. This kind of thinking was called, by Leibnitz, Symbolical. A
passage of one of the early writings of that eminent thinker, in which
it is brought to notice with his accustomed clearness, is translated by
Sir W. Hamilton, from whom I re-quote it.

For the most part, especially in an analysis of any length, we do not
view at once (non simul intuemur) the whole characters or attributes of
the thing, but in place of these we employ signs, the explication of
which into what they signify we are wont, at the moment of actual
thought, to omit, knowing or believing that we have this explication
always in our power. Thus, when I think a chiliagon (or polygon of a
thousand sides) I do not always consider the various attributes of the
side, of the equality, and of the number or thousand, but use these
words (whose meaning is obscurely and imperfectly presented to the mind)
in lieu of the notions which I have of them, because I remember, that I
possess the signification of these words, though Edition: current; Page:
[320] their application and explication I do not at present deem to be
necessary:—this mode of thinking, I am used to call blind or symbolical:
we employ it in Algebra and in Arithmetic, but in fact universally. And
certainly when the notion is very complex, we cannot think at once all
the ingredient notions: but where this is possible,—at least, inasmuch
as it is possible,—I call the cognition intuitive. Of the primary
elements of our notions, there is given no other knowledge than the
intuitive: as of our composite notions there is, for the most part,
possible only a symbolical.*

Yet the elements which are thus habitually left out, and of which in the
case of a composite notion, if Leibnitz is right, some must be left out,
are really parts of the signification of the name, and if the word
Concept has any meaning, are parts of the concept. Leibnitz accordingly
knew better than to say, as Mr. Mansel says[*] and Sir W. Hamilton
implies, that even in these cases we think by means of the concept.
According to him we sometimes think entirely without the concept,
generally only by a part of it, which may be the wrong part, or an
insufficient part, but which may be, and in all sound thinking is,
sufficient. On this point, therefore, a false apprehension of the facts
of thought is conveyed by the doctrine which speaks of Concepts as its
instrument. Leibnitz would perhaps have said, that the name is the
instrument in one of the two kinds of thinking, and the concept in the
other. The more reasonable doctrine surely is, that the name is the
instrument in both; the difference being, that in one case it does the
whole, and in the other only a part, perhaps the minimum, of the work
for which it is intended and fitted, that of reminding us of the
portions of our concrete mental representations which we expect that we
shall have need of attending to.

Edition: current; Page: [321]
In summary; if the doctrine, that we think by concepts, means that a
concept is the only thing present to the mind along with the individual
object which (to use Sir W. Hamilton’s language) we think under the
concept, this is not true: since there is always present a concrete idea
or image, of which the attributes comprehended in the concept are only,
and cannot be conceived as anything but, a part. Again, if it be meant
that the concept, though only a part of what is present to the mind, is
the part which is operative in the act of thought, neither is this true:
for what is operative is, in a great majority of cases, much less than
the entire concept, being that portion only which we have retained the
habit of distinctly attending to. In neither of these senses, therefore,
do we think by means of the concept: and all that is true is, that when
we refer any object or set of objects to a class, some at least of the
attributes included in the concept are present to the mind; being
recalled to consciousness and fixed in attention, through their
association with the class-name.

Before leaving this part of the subject, it seems necessary to remark,
that Sir W. Hamilton is by no means consistent in the extension which he
gives to the signification of the word Concept. In most cases in which
he uses it, he makes it synonymous with General Notion, and allows
concepts of classes only, not of individuals.* It is thus that he
expressly defines the term. “A Concept,” he says, “is the cognition or
idea of the general character or characters, point or points, in which a
plurality of objects coincide.”† “Concept,” he says again, “is
convertible with general notion, or more correctly, notion simply.”‡ He
speaks of the extending of the term to our direct knowledge of
individuals, as an “abusive employment” of it.§ He also says, “Notions
and Concepts are sometimes designated by the style of general
notions,—general conceptions. This is superfluous, for in propriety of
speech, notions and concepts are, in their very nature, general.”¶ In
certain places, however, he speaks of concepts of individuals. “If I
think of Socrates as son of Sophroniscus, as Athenian, as philosopher,
as pugnosed, these are only so many characters, limitations, or
determinations which I predicate of Socrates, which distinguish him from
all other men, and together make up my notion or concept of him.”∥ And
again, “When the Extension of a concept becomes a minimum, that is, when
it contains no other notions under it, it is called an individual.”**
And further on,

It is evident that the more distinctive characters the concept contains,
the more minutely it will distinguish and determine, and that if it
contain a plenum of distinctive characters, it must contain the
distinctive, the determining characters of Edition: current; Page: [322]
some individual object. How do the two quantities now stand? In regard
to the comprehension or depth, it is evident that it is here at its
maximum, the concept being a complement of the whole attributes of an
individual object, which, by these attributes, it thinks and
discriminates from every other. On the contrary, the extension or
breadth of the concept is here at its minimum; for, as the extension is
great in proportion to the number of objects to which the concept can be
applied, and as the object here is only an individual one, it is evident
that it could not be less without ceasing to exist at all.*

But, in the sequel of the same exposition, he again seems to surrender
this use of the word Concept as an improper one, saying, “If a concept
be an individual, that is, only a bundle of individual qualities, it is
. . . not a proper abstract concept at all, but only a concrete
representation of Imagination.”† And indeed, no other doctrine is
consistent with the proposition elsewhere laid down by our author
(though founded, as I think, on an error), that the “words Conception,
Concept, Notion, should be limited to the thought of what cannot be
represented in imagination, as the thought suggested by a general
term.”‡

Mr. Mansel, on the contrary, justifies the phrase, concept of an
individual, maintaining that “the subjects of all logical judgments are
concepts.”§ “The man,” he says,

as an individual existing at some past time, cannot become immediately
an object of thought, and hence is not, properly speaking, the subject
of any logical proposition. If I say, Cæsar was the conqueror of Pompey,
the immediate object of my thought is not Cæsar as an individual
existing two thousand years ago, but a concept now present in my mind,
comprising certain attributes which I believe to have coexisted in a
certain man. I may historically know that these attributes existed in
one individual only; and hence my concept, virtually universal, is
actually singular, from the accident of its being predicable of that
individual only. But there is no logical objection to the theory that
the whole history of mankind may be repeated at recurring intervals, and
that the name and actions of Cæsar may be successively found in various
individuals at corresponding periods of every cycle.¶

If this be so, one of two things follows. Either, if I met with a person
who exactly corresponded to the concept I have formed of Cæsar, I must
suppose that this person actually is Cæsar, and lived in the century
preceding the birth of Christ; or else, I cannot think of Cæsar as
Cæsar, but only as a Cæsar; and all those which are mistakenly called
proper names are general names, the names of virtual classes, signifying
a set of attributes which carry the name with them, wherever they are
found. Either theory Edition: current; Page: [323] seems to be
sufficiently refuted by stating it. Surely the true doctrine is that of
Sir W. Hamilton, that what is called my concept of Cæsar is the
presentation in imagination of the individual Cæsar as such. Mr. Mansel
might have learnt better from Reid, who says “Most words (indeed all
general words) are the signs of ideas: but proper names are not; they
signify individual things, and not ideas.”* And again, soon after:

The same proper name is never applied to several individuals on account
of their similitude, because the very intention of a proper name is to
distinguish one individual from all others; and hence it is a maxim in
grammar that proper names have no plural number. A proper name signifies
nothing but the individual whose name it is; and when we apply it to the
individual, we neither affirm nor deny anything concerning him.†

The whole of Reid’s doctrine respecting names and general notions is not
only far more clear, but nearer to the true doctrine of the connotation
of names, than Sir W. Hamilton’s or Mr. Mansel’s.‡

Edition: current; Page: [324]


CHAPTER XVIII: Of Judgment

though, as has appeared in the last chapter, the proposition that we
think by concepts is, if not positively untrue, at least an unprecise
and misleading expression of the truth, it is not, however, to be
concluded that Sir W. Hamilton’s view of Logic, being wholly grounded on
that proposition, must be destitute of value. Many writers have given
good and valuable expositions of the principles and rules of Logic, from
the Conceptualist point of view. The doctrines which they have laid down
respecting Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, have been capable of
being rendered into equivalent statements respecting Terms,
Propositions, and Arguments; these, indeed, were what the writers really
had in their thoughts, and there was little amiss except a mode of
expression which attempted to be more philosophical than it knew how to
be. To say nothing of less illustrious examples, this is true of all the
properly logical part of Locke’s Essay. His admirable Third Book
requires hardly any other alteration to bring it up to the scientific
level of the present time, than to be corrected by blotting out
everywhere the words Abstract Idea, and replacing them by “the
connotation of the class-name.”[*]

We shall, accordingly, proceed to examine the explanation of Judgment,
and of Reasoning, which Sir W. Hamilton has built on the foundation of
the doctrine of Concepts.

“To judge,” he says, “is to recognise the relation of congruence or of
confliction in which two concepts, two individual things, or a concept
and an individual, compared together, stand to each other. This
recognition, considered as an internal consciousness, is called a
Judgment; considered as expressed in language, it is called a
Proposition or Predication.”*

To be certain of understanding this, we must inquire what is meant by a
relation of congruence or of confliction between concepts. To consult
Sir W. Hamilton’s definitions of words is, as we have seen, not a sure
way of ascertaining the sense in which he practically uses them; but it
is one of the ways, and we are bound to employ it in the first instance.
A few pages Edition: current; Page: [325] before, he has given a sort of
definition of these terms. “Concepts, in relation to each other, are
said to be either Congruent or Agreeing, inasmuch as they may be
connected in thought; or Conflictive, inasmuch as they cannot. The
confliction constitutes the Opposition of notions.” This Opposition is
twofold. “1°. Immediate or Contradictory Opposition, called likewise
Repugnance; and 2°. Mediate or Contrary Opposition. The former emerges
when one concept abolishes directly, or by simple negation, what another
establishes; the latter, when one concept does this not directly, or by
simple negation, but through the affirmation of something else.”*

Congruent Concepts, therefore, adoesa not mean concepts which coincide,
either wholly or in any of their parts, but such as are mutually
compatible; capable of being predicated of the same individual; of being
combined in the same presentation of sense or representation of
imagination. This is more clearly expressed in a passage from Krug,
which our author adopts as part of his own exposition.

Identity is not to be confounded with Agreement or Congruence, nor
Diversity with Confliction. All identical concepts are, indeed,
congruent, but all congruent notions are not identical. Thus learning
and virtue, beauty and riches, magnanimity and stature, are congruent
notions, inasmuch as, in thinking a thing, they can easily be combined
in the notion we form of it, although themselves very different from
each other. In like manner, all conflicting notions are diverse or
different notions, for unless different, they could not be mutually
conflictive; but, on the other hand, all different concepts are not
conflictive; but those only whose difference is so great that each
involves the negation of the other; as for example, virtue and vice,
beauty and deformity, wealth and poverty.†

Thus interpreted, our author’s doctrine is, that to judge, is to
recognise whether two concepts, two things, or a concept and a thing,
are capable of coexisting as parts of the same mental representation.
This I will call Sir W. Hamilton’s first theory of Judgment; I will
venture to add, his best.

But he soon after proceeds to say,

When two or more thoughts are given in consciousness, there is in
general an endeavour on our part to discover in them, and to develop, a
relation of congruence or of confliction; that is, we endeavour to find
out whether these thoughts will or will not coincide—may or may not be
blended into one. If they coincide, we judge, we enounce, their
congruence or compatibility: if they do not coincide, we judge, we
enounce, their confliction or incompatibility. Thus, if we compare the
thoughts, water, iron, and rusting, find them congruent, and connect
them into a single thought, thus—water rusts iron—in that case we form a
judgment.

But if two notions be judged congruent, in other words, be conceived as
one, this Edition: current; Page: [326] their unity can only be realized
in consciousness, inasmuch as one of these notions is viewed as an
attribute or determination of the other. For, on the one hand, it is
impossible for us to think as one two attributes, that is, two things
viewed as determining, and yet neither determining or qualifying the
other; nor, on the other hand, two subjects, that is, two things thought
as determined, and yet neither of them determined or qualified by the
other.*

In this regress from ignotum to ignotius, the next thing to be
ascertained is, what relation between one thought and another is
signified by the verb “to determine.” Such explanation as our author
deemed it necessary to give, may be found a few pages further back. He
there stated, that by determining a notion, he means adding on more
characters, by each of which “we limit or determine more and more the
abstract vagueness or extension of the notion; until at last, if every
attribute be annexed, the sum of attributes contained in the notion
becomes convertible with the sum of attributes of which some concrete
individual or reality is the complement.”† Substituting, then, the
definition for what it defines, we find our author’s opinion to be, that
two notions can only be congruent, that is, capable of being blended
into one, if we conceive one of them as adding on additional attributes
to the other. This is not yet very clear. We must have recourse to his
illustration. “For example, we cannot think the two attributes
electrical and polar as a single notion, unless we convert the one of
these attributes into a subject, to be determined or qualified by the
other.” Do we ever think the two attributes electrical and polar as a
single notion? We think them as distinct parts of the same notion, that
is, as attributes which are constantly combined. “But if we do,—if we
say, what is electrical is polar, we at once reduce the duality to
unity; we judge that polar is one of the constituent characters of the
notion electrical, or that what is electrical is contained under the
class of things, marked out by the common character of polarity.”‡ The
last italics are mine, intended to mark the place where an intelligible
meaning first emerges. “We may, therefore, articulately define a
judgment or proposition to be the product of that act in which we
pronounce that of two notions, thought as subject and as predicate, the
one does or does not constitute a part of the other, either in the
quantity of Extension, or in the quantity of Comprehension.”§

This is Sir W. Hamilton’s second theory of Judgment, enunciated at a
distance of exactly three pages from the first, without the smallest
suspicion on his part that they are not one and the same. Yet they
differ by the whole interval which separates a part of from along with.
According to the Edition: current; Page: [327] first theory, concepts
are recognised as congruent whenever they are not mutually repugnant;
when they are capable of being objectively realized along with one
another; when the attributes comprehended in both of them can be
simultaneously possessed by the same object. According to the second
theory, they are only congruent when the one concept is actually a part
of the other. The only circumstance in which the two theories resemble
is, that both of them are unfolded out of the vague expression “capable
of being connected in thought.”[*] They are, in fact, two different and
conflicting interpretations of that expression. How irreconcilable they
are, is apparent when we descend to particulars. Krug’s examples,
learning and virtue, beauty and riches, &c., are congruent in the first
sense, since they are attributes which can be thought as existing
together in the same subject. But is the concept learning a part of the
concept virtue, the concept beauty a part of the concept riches, or vice
versâ? Sir W. Hamilton would scarcely affirm that they are in a relation
of part and whole in Comprehension; and such relation as they have in
Extension is not a relation between the concepts, but between the
aggregates of real things of which they are predicable. One of those
aggregates might be part of the other, though it is not; but one of the
concepts can never be part of the other. No one can ever find the notion
beauty in the notion riches, nor conversely.

Our author having thus gently slid back into the common Conceptualist
theory of judgment, that it consists in recognising the identity or
non-identity of two notions, adheres to it thenceforward with as much
consistency as we need ever expect to find in him. We may consider as
his final theory of Judgment, on which his subsequent logical
speculations are built, that a judgment is a recognition in thought, a
proposition a statement in words, that one notion is or is not a part of
another. He makes use of the word notion b(doubtless)b to include the
case in which either of the terms of the proposition is singular. The
two notions, one of which is recognised as being or not being a part of
the other, may be either Concepts, that is, General Notions, or one of
them may be a mental representation of an individual object.

The first objection which, I think, must occur to any one, on the
contemplation of this definition, is that it omits the main and
characteristic element of a judgment and of a proposition. Do we never
judge or assert anything but our mere notions of things? Do we not make
judgments and assert propositions respecting actual things? A Concept is
a mere creation of the mind: it is the mental representation formed
within us of a phænomenon; or rather, it is a part of that mental
representation, marked off by a sign, for a Edition: current; Page:
[328] particular purpose. But when we judge or assert, there is
introduced a new element, that of objective reality, and a new mental
fact, Belief. Our judgments, and the assertions which express them, do
not enunciate our mere mode of mentally conceiving things, but our
conviction or persuasion that the facts as conceived actually exist: and
a theory of Judgments and Propositions which does not take account of
this, cannot be the true theory. In the words of Reid, “I give the name
of Judgment to every determination of the mind concerning what is true
or what is false. This, I think, is what logicians, from the days of
Aristotle, have called judgment.”* And this is the very element which
Sir W. Hamilton’s definition omits from it.

I am aware that Sir W. Hamilton would have an apparent answer to this.
He would, I suppose, reply, that the belief of actual reality, implied
in assent to a proposition, is not left out of account, but brought to
account in another place. The belief, he would say, is not inherent in
the judgment, but in the notions which are the subject and predicate of
the judgment; these being either mental representations of real objects,
which if represented in the mind at all, must be represented as real, or
Concepts formed by a comparison of real objects, which therefore exist
in the mind as concepts of realities. Accordingly, when we judge and
make assertions respecting objects known to be imaginary, the judgments
are accompanied with no belief in any real existence except that of the
mental images; what our author calls the “presentations of phantasy.”[*]
When, indeed, a judgment is formed or an assertion is made respecting
something imaginary which is supposed to be real, as for instance
concerning a ghost, there is a belief in the real existence of more than
the mental image; but this belief is not anything superadded to the
comparison of concepts; it already existed in the concepts; a ghost was
thought as something having a real existence.

This, at least, is what might be said in behalf of Sir W. Hamilton,
though he has not himself said it. But though it cescapes fromc the
objection dagainstd omitting the element Belief from the definition of
Judgment, it does so by an entire inversion of the logical process of
definition. The element of Belief, or Reality, may indeed be in the
concepts; but it never could have got into the concepts, if it had not
first been in the judgments by which the concepts were constructed. If
the belief of reality had been absent from those judgments originally,
it never could have come round to them through the concepts. Belief is
an essential element in a judgment; it may be either present or absent
in a concept. Our author, and those who Edition: current; Page: [329]
agree with him, postpone this part of the subject until they are
treating of the distinction between True and False Propositions. They
then say, that if the relation which is judged to exist between the
notions, exists between the corresponding realities, the proposition is
true, and if not, false. But if the operation of forming a judgment or a
proposition includes anything at all, it includes judging that the
judgment or the proposition is true. The recognition of it as true is
not only an essential part, but the essential element of it as a
judgment; leave that out, and there remains a mere play of thought, in
which no judgment is passed. It is impossible to separate the idea of
Judgment from the idea of the truth of a judgment; for every judgment
consists in judging something to be true. The element Belief, instead of
being an accident which can be passed in silence, and admitted only by
implication, constitutes the very difference between a judgment and any
other intellectual fact, and it is contrary to all the laws of
Definition to define Judgment by anything else. The very meaning of a
judgment, or a proposition, is something which is capable of being
believed or disbelieved; which can be true or false; to which it is
possible to say yes or no. And though it cannot be believed until it has
been conceived, or (in plain terms) understood, the real object of
belief is not the concept, or any relation of the concept, but the fact
conceived. That fact need not be an outward fact; it may be a fact of
internal or mental experience. But even then the fact is one thing, the
concept of it is another, and the judgment is concerning the fact, not
the concept. The fact may be purely subjective, as that I dreamed
something last night; but the judgment is not the cognition of a
relation between the presentation I and the concept having dreamed, but
the cognition of the real memory of a real event.

This first, and insuperable objection, the force of which will be seen
more and more the further we proceed, is applicable to the Conceptualist
doctrine of Judgment, howsoever expressed, and to Sir W. Hamilton’s as
one of the modes of expressing that doctrine. There are other objections
special to Sir W. Hamilton’s form of it.

In what I have called Sir W. Hamilton’s first theory of judgment, we
found him saying that the comparison, ending in a recognition of
congruence or confliction, may be between “individual things”[*] as well
as between concepts. But in his second theory, one at least of the terms
of comparison must be a concept. For a judgment, according to this
theory, is “the product of that act in which we pronounce that of two
notions, thought as subject and predicate, the one does or does not
constitute a part of the other.”[†] Now a concept, that is, a bundle of
attributes, may be a part of another concept, and may be a part of our
mental image of an individual Edition: current; Page: [330] object; but
one notion of an individual object cannot be a part of another notion of
an individual object. One object may be an integrant part of another,
but it cannot be a part in Comprehension or in Extension, as these words
are understood of a Concept. St. Paul’s is an integrant part of London,
but neither an attribute of it, nor an object of which it is predicable.

Since, therefore, a judgment, in Sir W. Hamilton’s second theory, is the
recognition of the relation of part and whole, either between two
concepts, or between a concept and an individual presentation; the
theory supposes that the mind furnishes itself with concepts, or general
notions, before it begins to judge. Now this is not only evidently
false, but the contrary is asserted, in the most decisive terms, by Sir
W. Hamilton himself. He affirms, and it is denied by nobody, that every
Concept is built up by a succession of judgments. We conceive an object
mentally as having such and such an attribute, because we have first
judged that it has that attribute in reality. Let us see what our author
says on this point in his Lectures on Metaphysics. He says that there is
a judgment involved in every mental act.

The fourth condition of consciousness, which may be assumed as very
generally acknowledged, is that it involves judgment. A judgment is the
mental act by which one thing is affirmed or denied of another. It may
to some seem strange that consciousness, the simple and primary act of
intelligence, should be a judgment, which philosophers in general
[including Sir W. Hamilton in his second theory] have viewed as a
compound and derivative operation. This is, however, altogether a
mistake. A judgment is, as I shall hereafter show you, a simple act of
mind, for every act of mind implies a judgment. Do we perceive or
imagine without affirming, in the act, the external or internal
existence of the object? Now these fundamental affirmations are the
affirmations,—in other words, the judgments,—of consciousness.*

And in a subsequent part of his Course:

You will recollect that, when treating of Consciousness in general, I
stated to you that consciousness necessarily involves a judgment; and as
every act of mind is an act of consciousness, every act of mind,
consequently, involves a judgment. A consciousness is necessarily the
consciousness of a determinate something, and we cannot be conscious of
anything without virtually affirming its existence, that is, judging it
to be. Consciousness is thus primarily a judgment or affirmation of
existence. Again, consciousness is not merely the affirmation of naked
existence, but the affirmation of a certain qualified or determinate
existence. We are conscious that we exist, only in and through our
consciousness that we exist in this or that particular state—that we are
so and so affected,—so and so active: and we are only conscious of this
or that particular state of existence, inasmuch as we discriminate it as
different from some other state of existence, of which we have been
previously conscious and are now reminiscent; but such a discrimination
supposes, in consciousness, the affirmation of the existence of one
state of a specific character, and Edition: current; Page: [331] the
negation of another. On this ground it was that I maintained, that
consciousness necessarily involves, besides recollection, or rather a
certain continuity of representation, also judgment and comparison; and
consequently, that, so far from comparison or judgment being a process
always subsequent to the acquisition of knowledge through perception and
self-consciousness, it is involved as a condition of the acquisitive
process.*

But if judgment is a comparison of two concepts, or of a concept and an
individual object, and a recognition that one of them is a part of (or
even merely congruent with) the other, it must be a process “always
subsequent to the acquisition of knowledge,” or, in other words, to the
formation of Concepts. The theory of Judgment in the third volume of the
Lectures, belongs to a different mode of thinking altogether from the
theory of Consciousness in the first and second; and when Sir W.
Hamilton was occupied with either of them, he must have temporarily
forgotten the other.

But in the third volume itself the same inconsistency is obtruded on us
still more openly. We are there told in plain words,

Both concepts and reasonings may be reduced to judgments: for the act of
judging, that is, the act of affirming or denying one thing of another
in thought, is that in which the Understanding or Faculty of comparison
is essentially expressed. A concept is a judgment: for, on the one hand,
it is nothing but the result of a foregone judgment, or series of
judgments fixed and recorded in a word, a sign, and it is only amplified
by the annexation of a new attribute, through a continuance of the same
process. On the other hand, as a concept is thus the synthesis or
complexion, and the record, I may add, of one or more prior acts of
judgment, it can, it is evident, be analysed into these again; every
concept is, in fact, a judgment or a fasciculus of judgments,—these
judgments only not explicitly developed in thought, and not formally
expressed in terms.†

That the same philosopher should have written these words, and a little
more than a hundred pages after should have defined a judgment as the
result of a comparison of concepts, either between themselves, or with
individual objects, is, I think, the very crown of the
self-contradictions which we have found to be sown so thickly in Sir W.
Hamilton’s speculations. Coming from a thinker of such ability, it
almost makes one despair of one’s own intellect and that of mankind, and
feel as if the attainment of truth on any of the more complicated
subjects of thought were impossible.

It is necessary to renounce one of these theories or the other. Either a
concept is not the “synthesis and record of one or more prior acts of
judgment,” or a judgment is not, at least in all cases, the recognition
of a relation of which one or both of the terms are Concepts. The least
that could be required of Sir W. Hamilton would be so to modify his
doctrine as to admit two kinds of judgment: the one kind, that by which
concepts are Edition: current; Page: [332] formed, the other that which
succeeds their formation. When concepts have been formed, and we
subsequently proceed to analyse them, then, he might say, we form
judgments which recognise one concept as a whole, of which another is a
part. But the judgments by which we constructed the concepts, and every
subsequent judgment by which, to use his own words, we amplify them by
the addition of a new attribute, have nothing to do with comparison of
concepts: it is the Anschauungen, the intuitions, the presentations of
experience, which we in this case compare and judge.*

Take, for instance, Sir W. Hamilton’s own example of a judgment, “Water
rusts iron:”[*] and let us suppose this truth to be new to us. Is it not
like a mockery to say with our author, that we know this truth by
comparing “the thoughts, water, iron, and rusting”? Ought he not to have
said the facts, water, iron, and rusting? and even then, is comparing
the proper name for the mental operation? We do not examine whether
three thoughts agree, but whether three outward facts coexist. If we
lived till doomsday we should never find the proposition that water
rusts iron in our concepts, if we had not first found it in the outward
phænomena. The proposition expresses a sequence, and what we call a
causation, not between our concepts, but between the two sensible
presentations of moistened iron Edition: current; Page: [333] and rust.
When we have already judged this sequence to exist outside us, that is,
independently of our intellectual combinations, we know it, and once
known, it may find its way into our concepts. But we cannot elicit out
of a concept any judgment which we have not first put into it; which we
have not consciously assented to, in the act of forming the concept.
Whenever, therefore, we form a new judgment—judge a truth new to us—the
judgment is not a recognition of a relation between concepts, but of a
succession, a coexistence, or a similitude, between facts.

This is the smallest sacrifice on the part of Sir W. Hamilton’s theory
of Judgment, which would satisfy his theory of Consciousness. But when
thus reconciled with a part of his system with which it now conflicts,
it would not be the better founded. It might still be chased from point
to point, unable to make a stand anywhere. For let us next suppose, that
the judgment is not new; that the truth, Water rusts iron, is known to
us of old. When we again think of it, and think it as a truth, and
assent to it, should we even then give a correct account of what passes
in our mind, by calling this act of judgment a comparison of our
thoughts—our concepts—our notions—of water, rust, and iron? We do not
compare our artificial mental constructions, but consult our direct
remembrance of facts. We call to mind that we have seen, or learned from
credible testimony, that when iron is long in contact with water, it
rusts. The question is not one of notions, but of beliefs; belief of
past and expectation of future presentations of sense. Of course it is
psychologically true that when I believe, I have a notion of that which
I believe; but the ultimate appeal is not to the notion, but to the
presentation or intuition. If I am in any doubt, what is the question I
ask myself? Is it—Do I think of, or figure to myself, water as rusting
iron? or is it—Did I ever perceive, and have other people perceived,
that water rusts iron? There are persons, no doubt, whose criterion of
judgment is the relation between their own concepts, but these are not
the persons whose judgments the world has usually found worth adopting.
If the question between Copernicus and Ptolemy had depended on whether
we conceive the earth moving and the sun at rest, or the sun moving and
the earth at rest, I am afraid the victory would have been with Ptolemy.

But, again, even if judging were entirely a notional operation,
consisting of the recognition of some relation between concepts, it
remains to be proved that the relation is that of Whole and Part. Could
it, even then, be said, that every judgment in which I predicate one
thing of another, on the faith of previous judgments recorded, as our
author says, in the concepts, consists in recognising that one of the
concepts includes the other as a part of itself? When I judge that
Socrates is mortal, or that all men are mortal, does the judgment
consist in being conscious that my concept mortal is part of my
representation of Socrates, or of my concept man?

This doctrine ignores the famous distinction, admitted, I suppose, in
Edition: current; Page: [334] some shape or other, by all philosophers,
but most familiar to modern metaphysics in the form in which it is
stated by Kant—the distinction between Analytical and Synthetical
judgments. Analytical judgments are supposed to unfold the contents of a
concept; affirming explicitly of a class, attributes which were already
part of the corresponding concept, and may be brought out into distinct
consciousness by mere analysis of it. Synthetical judgments, on the
contrary, affirm of a class, attributes which are not in the concept,
and which we therefore do not and cannot judge to be a part of the
concept, but only to be conjoined in fact with the attributes composing
the concept. This distinction, though obtruded upon our author by many
of the writers with whom he was familiar, has so little in common with
his mode of thought, that he only slightly refers to it, in a very few
passages of his works: in one of these, however,* he speaks of it as of
something very important, eexpresses his preference for the terms
Explicative and Ampliative as names for ite, and discusses, not the
distinction itself, but its history; apparently unconscious that his own
theory entirely does away with it. According to that, all judgments are
analytical, or, fas he prefers to sayf, explicative. Even giving up so
much of his theory as contradicts his own doctrine on the formation of
concepts, the part remaining would compel him to maintain that all
judgments which are not new are analytical, and that synthetical
judgments are limited to truths, or supposed truths, which we learn for
the first time.g

This discrepancy between our author and almost all philosophers, even of
his own general way of thinking, (including, among the rest, Mr.
Mansel), arises from the fact, that he understands by concept something
different from what they have usually understood by it. The concept of a
class, in Sir W. Hamilton’s acceptation of the term, includes all the
attributes which we have judged, and still judge, to be common to the
whole class. It means, in short, our entire knowledge of the class. But,
with philosophers in general, the concept of the class as such,—my
concept of man, for example, as distinguished from my mental
representation of an individual man,—includes, not all the attributes
which I ascribe to man, but such of them only as the classification is
grounded on, and as are implied in the meaning of the name. Man is a
living being, or Man is rational, they would call analytical judgments,
because the attributes hofh life and rationality are of the number of
those which are already given in the concept Man: but Edition: current;
Page: [335] Man is mortal, they would account synthetical, because,
familiar as the fact is, it is not already affirmed in the very name
Man, but has to be superadded in the predicate.

It is quite lawful for a philosopher (though seldom prudent) to alter
the meaning of a word, provided he gives fair notice of his intention;
but he is bound, if he does so, to remain consistent with himself in the
new meaning, and not to transfer to it propositions which are only true
in the old. This condition Sir W. Hamilton does not observe. It often
happens that different opinions of his belong to different and
inconsistent systems of thought, apparently through his retaining from
former writers some doctrine, the grounds of which he has, by another
doctrine, subverted. His whole theory of Concepts being infected by an
inconsequence of this description, the retention of all the
Conceptualist conclusions along with Nominalist premises, it is no
wonder if further oversights of the same kind meet us in every part of
the details. The following is one of the most palpable. As we just
mentioned, the concept of a class in our author’s sense, includes all
the attributes of the class, so far as the thinker is acquainted with
them; the whole of the thinker’s knowledge of the class. This is Sir W.
Hamilton’s own doctrine; but along with it he retains a doctrine
belonging to the other meaning of Concept, which I have contrasted with
his. “The exposition of the Comprehension of a notion is called its
Definition:”* and again “Definition is the analysis of a complex concept
into its component parts or attributes.”† But a thing is not analysed
into its component parts if any of the parts are left out. The two
opinions taken together lead, therefore, to the remarkable consequence,
that the definition of a class ought to include the whole of what is
known of the class. Those who mean by the concept not all known
attributes of the class, but such only as are included in the
connotation of the name, may be permitted to say of a Definition that it
is the analysis of the concept: but to Sir W. Hamilton this was not
permissible. To crown the inconsistency, he still presents the stock
example, Man is a rational animal, as a good definition, and a typical
specimen of what a Definition is;‡ as if the notions animal and rational
exhausted the whole of the concept Man, according to his meaning of
Concept—the entire sum of the attributes common to the class. It would
hardly be believed, prior to a minute examination of his writings, how
much vagueness of thought, leading to the unsuspecting admission of
opposite doctrines in the same breath, lurks under the specious
appearance of philosophical precision which distinguishes him.§

Edition: current; Page: [336]
To return, from Sir W. Hamilton’s self-contradictions, to the merits of
the question itself; the word Judgment, by universal consent, is
coextensive with the word Proposition: a Judgment must be so defined
that a Proposition shall be the expression of it in words. Now, if a
Judgment expresses a relation between Concepts (which for the purpose of
the present discussion I have conceded) the corresponding Proposition
represents that same relation by means of names: the names, therefore,
must be signs of the concepts, and the concepts must be the meaning of
the names. To make this tenable, the Concept must be so construed as to
consist of those attributes only which are connoted by the name.
Corporeity, life, rationality, and any other attributes of man which are
part of the meaning of the word, insomuch that where those attributes
were not, we should withhold the name of man—these are part of the
concept. But mortality, and all the other human attributes which are the
subject of treatises either on the human body or on human nature, are
not in the concept, because we do not affirm them of any individual by
merely calling him a man; they are so much additional knowledge. The
concept Man is not the sum of all the attributes of a man, but only of
the essential attributes—of those which constitute him a man; in other
words, those on which the class Man is grounded, and which are connoted
by the name—what used to be called the essence of Man, that without
which Man cannot be, or in other words, would not be what he is called.
Without mortality, or without thirty-two teeth, he would still be called
a man: we should not say, This is not a man; we should say, This man is
not mortal, or has fewer than thirty-two teeth.

Instead, therefore, of saying with Sir W. Hamilton, that the attributes
Edition: current; Page: [337] composing the concept of the predicate are
part of those which compose the concept of the subject, we ought to say,
they are either a part, or are invariably conjoined with them, not in
our conception, but in fact. Propositions in which the concept of the
predicate is part of the concept of the subject, or, to express
ourselves more philosophically, in which the attributes connoted by the
predicate are part of those connoted by the subject, are a kind of
Identical Propositions: they convey no information, but at most remind
us of what, if we understood the word which is the subject of the
proposition, we knew as soon as the word was pronounced. Propositions of
this kind are either definitions, or parts of definitions. These
judgments are analytical: they analyse the connotation of the
subject-name, and predicate separately the different attributes which
the name asserts collectively. All other affirmative judgments are
synthetical, and affirm that some attribute or set of attributes is, not
a part of those connoted by the subject-name, but an invariable
accompaniment of them.*

Edition: current; Page: [338]
There remains something to be said on another very prominent feature in
Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of Judgment. Having said, that in every
judgment we compare “two notions, thought as subject and predicate,” and
pronounce that “the one does or does not constitute a part of the
other,” he adds, “either in the quantity of Extension, or in the
quantity of Comprehension.”* He developes this distinction as follows:

If the Subject or determined notion be viewed as the containing whole,
we have an Intensive or Comprehensive proposition; if the Predicate or
determining notion be viewed as the containing whole, we have an
Extensive proposition. . . . The relation of subject and predicate is
contained within that of whole and part, for we can always view either
the determining or the determined notion as the whole which contains the
other. The whole, however, which the subject constitutes, and the whole
which the predicate constitutes, are different, being severally
determined by the opposite quantities of comprehension and of extension;
and as subject and predicate necessarily stand to each other in the
relation of these inverse quantities, it is manifestly a matter of
indifference, in so far as the meaning is concerned, whether we view the
subject as the whole of comprehension which contains the predicate, or
the predicate as the whole of extension which contains the subject. In
point of fact, in single propositions it is rarely apparent which of the
two wholes is meant; for the copula is, est, &c., equally denotes the
one form of the relation or the other. Thus, in the proposition man is
two-legged,—the copula here is convertible with comprehends or contains
in it, for the proposition means man contains in it two-legged, that is,
the subject man as an intensive whole or complex notion, comprehends as
a part the predicate two-legged. Again, in the proposition, man is a
biped, the copula corresponds to contained under, for this proposition
is tantamount to man is contained under biped,—that is, the predicate
biped, as an extensive whole or class, contains under it as a part the
subject man. But in point of fact, neither of the two propositions
unambiguously shows whether it is to be viewed as of an intensive or of
an extensive purport; nor in a single proposition is this of any moment.
All that can be said is that the one form of expression is better
accommodated to express the one kind of proposition, the other better
accommodated to express the other. It is only when propositions are
connected into syllogisms, that it becomes evident whether the subject
or the predicate be the whole in or under which the other is contained;
and it is only as thus constituting two different—two contrasted, forms
of reasoning—forms the most general, as under each of these every other
is included,—that the distinction becomes necessary in regard to
concepts and propositions.†

Edition: current; Page: [339]
I shall not insist on such of the objections to this passage as have
been sufficiently stated; the impropriety, for instance, of saying that
the notion Man contains the predicate two-legged, when that attribute is
evidently not part of the signification of the word; or that the meaning
of a proposition is, that an attribute is part of a notion: which, the
first time it is observed, it cannot possibly be, and at no time is this
the thing asserted by a proposition, unless by those which are avowedly
definitions. All these considerations I at present forego: and I will
even give our author’s theory its necessary correction, by restoring to
Propositions the alternative meaning which belongs to them, namely, that
a certain attribute is either part of a given set of attributes, or
invariably coexists with them. Having thus dissociated the doctrine in
the quotation from all errors which are incidental and not essential to
it, we may state it as follows:—Every proposition is capable of being
understood in two meanings, which involve one another, inasmuch as if
either of them is true the other is so, but which are nevertheless
different; of which only one may be, and commonly is, in the mind; and
the words used do not always show which. Thus, All men are bipeds, may
either mean, that the objects called men are all of them numbered among
the objects called bipeds, which is interpreting the proposition in
Extension; or that the attribute of having two feet is one of, or
coexists with, the attributes which compose the notion Man: which is
interpreting the proposition in Comprehension.

I maintain, that these two supposed meanings of the proposition are not
two matters of fact or of thought, reciprocally inferrible from one
another, but one and the same fact, written in different ways; that the
supposed meaning in Extension is not a meaning at all, until interpreted
by the meaning in Comprehension; that all concepts and general names
which enter into Propositions, require to be construed in Comprehension,
and that their Comprehension is the whole of their meaning.

That the meaning in Extension follows if the meaning in Comprehension is
granted, is a point which both sides are agreed in. If the attribute
signified by biped is either one of, or always conjoined with, the
attributes signified by man, we are entitled to assert that the class
Man is included in, is a part of, the class Biped. But my position is,
that this second assertion is not a conclusion from, but a mere
repetition of, the first. For what is the second assertion, if we leave
out of it all reference to the attributes? It can then only mean, that
we have ascertained the fact independently of the attributes—that is,
that we have examined the aggregate whole “all men,” and the still
greater aggregate whole “all bipeds,” and that all the former were found
among the latter. Now, do we assert this? or would it be true? Assuredly
no one of us ever represented and contemplated, even with his mind’s
eye, either of these wholes: still less did we ever compare them as
realities, and ascertain that the fact is as stated. Neither could this
be done, by anything Edition: current; Page: [340] short of infinite
power: for all men and all bipeds, except a comparatively few, have
either ceased to exist, or have not yet come into existence. What, then,
do we mean by making an assertion concerning all men? The phrase does
not mean, all and each of a certain great number of objects, known or
represented individually. It means, all and each of an unascertained and
indefinite number, mostly not known or represented at all, but which if
they came within our opportunities of knowledge, might be recognised by
the possession of a certain set of attributes, namely, those forming the
connotation of the wordk. “All men,” and “the class man,” are
expressions which point to nothing but attributes; they cannot be
interpreted except in comprehension. To say, all men are bipeds, is
merely to say, given the attributes of man, that of being a biped will
be found along with them; which is the meaning in Comprehension. If the
proposition has nothing to do with the concept Man except as to its
comprehension, still less has it with the concept Biped. When I say, All
men are bipeds, what has my assertion to do with the class biped as to
its Extension? Have I any concern with the remainder of the class, after
Man is subtracted from it? Am I necessarily aware even whether there is
any remainder at all? I am thinking of no such matter, but only of the
attribute two-footed, and am intending to predicate that. I am thinking
of it as an attribute of man, but of what else it may happen to be an
attribute does not concern me. Thus, all propositions into which general
names enter, and consequently all reasonings, are in Comprehension only.
Propositions and Reasonings may be written in Extension, but they are
always understood in Comprehension. The only exception is in the case of
propositions which have no meaning in Comprehension, and have nothing to
do with Concepts—those of which both the subject and the predicate are
proper names; such as, Tully is Cicero, or, St. Peter is not St. Paul.
These words connote nothing, and the only meaning they have is the
individual whom they denote. But where a meaning in Comprehension, or,
in other words, in Connotation, is possible, that is always the one
intended. And Sir W. Hamilton’s distinction (though he lays great stress
on it) between Reasoning in Comprehension and Reasoning in Extension,
will be found (as we shall see hereafter)[*] to be a mere superfetation
on Logic.

It is worth while to add, that even could it be admitted that general
propositions have a meaning in Extension capable of being conceived as
different from their meaning in Comprehension, Sir W. Hamilton would
still be wrong in deeming that the recognition of this meaning depends
on, or can possibly result from, a comparison of the Concepts. The
Extension Edition: current; Page: [341] of a concept, as I have before
remarked, is not, like the Comprehension, intrinsic and essential to the
concept; it is an external and wholly accidental relation of the
concept, and no contemplation or analysis of the concept itself will
tell us anything about it. It is an abstract name for the aggregate of
objects possessing the attributes included in the concept: and whether
that aggregate is greater or smaller does not depend on any properties
of the concept, but on the boundless productive powers of Nature.

Edition: current; Page: [342]


CHAPTER XIX: Of Reasoning

in common with the majority of modern writers on Logic, whose language
is generally that of the Conceptualist school, Sir W. Hamilton considers
Reasoning, as he considers Judgment, to consist in a comparison of
Notions: either of Concepts with one another, or of Concepts with the
mental representations of individual objects. Only, in simple Judgment,
two notions are compared immediately; in Reasoning, mediately. Reasoning
is the comparison of two notions by means of a third. As thus:
“Reasoning is an act of mediate Comparison or Judgment; for to reason is
to recognise that two notions stand to each other in the relation of a
whole and its parts, through a recognition that these notions severally
stand in the same relation to a third.”* The foundation, therefore, of
all Reasoning is “the self-evident principle that a part of the part is
a part of the whole.”† “Without reasoning we should have been limited to
a knowledge of what is given by immediate intuition; we should have been
unable to draw any inference from this knowledge, and have been shut out
from the discovery of that countless multitude of truths, which, though
of high, of paramount importance, are not self-evident.”‡ This
recognition that we discover a “countless multitude of truths,”
composing a vast proportion of all our real knowledge, by mere
reasoning, will be found to jar considerably with our author’s theory of
the reasoning process, and with his whole view of the nature and
functions of Logic, the science of Reasoning: but this inconsistency is
common to him with nearly all the writers on Logic, because, like him,
they teach a theory of the science too small and narrow to contain their
own facts.

Notwithstanding the great number of philosophers who have considered the
definition cited above to be a correct account of Reasoning, the
objections to it are so manifest, that until after much meditation on
the subject, one can scarcely prevail on oneself to utter them: so
impossible does it seem that difficulties so obvious should always be
passed over unnoticed, unless they admitted of an easy answer.
Reasoning, we are told, is a mode of ascertaining that one notion is a
part of another; and the use of reasoning Edition: current; Page: [343]
is to enable us to discover truths which are not self-evident. But how
is it possible that a truth, which consists in one notion being part of
another, should not be self-evident? The notions, by supposition, are
both of them in our mind. To perceive what parts they are composed of,
nothing surely can be necessary but to fix our attention on them. We
cannot surely concentrate our consciousness on two ideas in our own
mind, without knowing with certainty whether one of them as a whole
includes the other as a part. If we have the notion biped and the notion
man, and know what they are, we must know whether the notion of a biped
is part of the notion we form to ourselves of a man. In this case the
simply Introspective method is in its place. We cannot need to go beyond
our consciousness of the notions themselves.

Moreover, if it were really the case that we can compare two notions and
fail to discover whether one of them is a part of the other, it is
impossible to understand how we could be enabled to accomplish this by
comparing each of them with a third. A, B, and C, are three concepts, of
which we are supposed to know that A is a part of B, and B of C, but
until we put these two propositions together we do not know that A is a
part of C. We have perceived B in C intuitively, by direct comparison:
but what is B? By supposition it is, and is perceived to be, A and
something more. We have therefore, by direct intuition, perceived that A
and something more is a part of C, without perceiving that A is a part
of C. Surely there is here a great psychological difficulty to be got
over, to which logicians of the Conceptualist school have been
surprisingly blind.

Endeavouring, not to understand what they say, for they never face the
question, but to imagine what they might say, to relieve this apparent
absurdity, two things occur to athe minda. It may be said, that when a
notion is in our consciousness, but we do not know whether something is
or is not a part of it, the reason is that we have forgotten some of its
parts. We possess the notion, but are only conscious of part of it, and
it does its work in our trains of thought only symbolically. Or, again,
it may be said that all the parts of the notion are in our
consciousness, but are in our consciousness indistinctly. The meaning of
having a distinct notion, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is that we can
discriminate the characters or attributes of which it is composed. The
admitted fact, therefore, that we can have indistinct notions, may be
adduced as proof that we can possess a notion, and not be able to say
positively what is included in it. These are the best, or rather the
only presentable arguments I am able to invent, in support of the
paradox involved in the Conceptualist theory of Reasoning.

It is a great deal easier to refute these arguments than it was to
discover Edition: current; Page: [344] them. The refutation, like the
original difficulty, is two deep. To begin; a notion, part of which has
been forgotten, is to that extent a lost notion, and is as if we had
never had it. The parts which we can no longer discern in it are not in
it, and cannot therefore be proved to be in it, by reasoning, any more
than by intuition. We may be able to discover by reasoning that they
ought to be there, and may, in consequence, put them there; but that is
not recognising them to be there already. As a notion in part forgotten
is a partially lost notion, so an indistinct notion is a notion not yet
formed, but in process of formation. We have an indistinct notion of a
class when we perceive in a general way that certain objects differ from
others, but do not as yet perceive in what; or perceive some of the
points of difference, but have not yet perceived, or have not yet
generalized, the others. In this case our notion is not yet a completed
notion, and the parts which we cannot discern in it, are undiscernible
because they are not yet there. As in the former case, the result of
reasoning may be to put them there; but it certainly does not effect
this by proving them to be there already.

But even if these explanations had solved the mystery of our being
conscious of a whole and unable to be directly conscious of its part,
they would yet fail to make intelligible how, not having this knowledge
directly, we are able to acquire it through a third notion. By
hypothesis we have forgotten that A is a part of C, until we again
become aware of it through the relation of each of them to B. We
therefore had not forgotten that A is a part of B, nor that B is a part
of C. When we conceived B, we conceived A as a part of it; when we
conceived C, we conceived B as a part of it. In the mere fact,
therefore, of conceiving C, we were conscious of B in it, and
consciousness of A is a necessary part of that consciousness of B, and
yet our consciousness of C did not enable us to find in it our
consciousness of A, though it was really there, and though they both
were distinctly present. If any one can believe this, no contradiction
and no impossibility in any theory of Consciousness need stagger him.
Let us now substitute for the hypothesis of forgetfulness, the
hypothesis of indistinctness. We had a notion of C, which was so
indistinct that we could not discriminate A from the other parts of the
notion. But it was not too indistinct to enable us to discriminate B,
otherwise the reasoning would break down as well as the intuition. The
notion of B, again, indistinct as it may have been in other respects,
must have been such that we could with assurance discriminate A as
contained in it. Here then returns the same absurdity: A is distinctly
present in B, which is distinctly present in C, therefore A, if there be
any force in reasoning, is distinctly present in C; yet A cannot be
discriminated or perceived in the consciousness in which it is
distinctly present: so that, before our reasoning commenced, we were at
once distinctly conscious of Edition: current; Page: [345] A, and
entirely unconscious of it. There is no such thing as a reduction to
absurdity if this is not one.

The reason why a judgment which is not intuitively evident, can be
arrived at through the medium of premises, is that judgments which are
not intuitively evident do not consist in recognising that one notion is
part of another. When that is the case, the conclusion is as well known
to us ab initio as the premises; which is really the case in analytical
judgments. When reasoning really leads to the “countless multitudes of
truths” not self-evident, which our author speaks of—that is, when the
judgments are synthetical—we learn, not that A is part of C, because A
is part of B and B of C, but that A is conjoined with C, because A is
conjoined with B, and B with C. The principle of the reasoning is not, a
part of the part is a part of the whole, but, a mark of the mark is a
mark of the thing marked, Nota notæ est nota rei ipsius.[*] It means,
that two things which constantly coexist with the same third thing,
constantly coexist with one another; the things meant not being our
concepts, but the facts of experience on which our concepts ought to be
grounded.

This theory of reasoning is free from the objections which are fatal to
the Conceptualist theory. We cannot discover that A is a part of C
through its being a part of B, since if it really is so, the one truth
must be as much a matter of direct consciousness as the other. But we
can discover that A is conjoined with C through its being conjoined with
B; since our knowledge that it is conjoined with B, may have been
obtained by a series of observations in which C was not perceptible. C,
we must remember, stands for an attribute, that is, not an actual
presentation of sense, but a power of producing such presentations: and
that a power may have been present without being apparent, is in the
common course of things, implying nothing more than that the conditions
necessary to determine it into act were not all present. This power or
potentiality, C, may in like manner have been ascertained to be
conjoined with B, by another set of observations, in which it was A’s
turn to be dormant, or perhaps to be active, but not attended to. By
combining the two sets of observations, we are enabled to discover what
was not contained in either of them, namely, a constancy of conjunction
between C and A, such that one of them comes to be a mark of the other:
though, in neither of the two sets of observations, nor in any others,
may C and A have been actually observed together; or, if observed, not
with the frequency, or under the experimental conditions, which would
Edition: current; Page: [346] warrant us in generalizing the fact. This
is the process by which we do, in reality, acquire the greater part of
our knowledge; all of it (as our author says) which is not “given by
immediate intuition.”[*] But no part of this process is at all like the
operation of recognising parts and a whole; or of recognising any
relation whatever between Concepts; which have nothing to do with the
matter, more than is implied in the fact, that we cannot reason about
things without conceiving them, or representing them to the mind.

The theory which supposes Judgment and Reasoning to be the comparison of
concepts, is obliged to make the term concept stand for, not the
thinker’s or reasoner’s own notion of a thing, but a sort of normal
notion, which is understood as being owned by everybody, though
everybody does not always use it; and it is this tacit substitution of a
concept floating in the air for the very concept I have in my own mind,
which makes it possible to fancy that we can, by reasoning, find out
something to be in a concept, which we are not able to discover in it by
consciousness, because, in truth, that concept is not in bourb
consciousness. But a concept of a thing, which is not that whereby I
conceive it, is to me as much an external fact, as a presentation of the
senses can be: it is another person’s concept, not mine. It may be the
conventional concept of the world at large—that which it has been
tacitly agreed to associate with the class; in other words, it may be
the connotation of the class-name; and if so, it may very possibly
contain elements which I cannot directly recognise in it, but may have
to learn from external evidence: but this is because I do not know the
signification of the word, the attributes which determine its
application—and what I have to do is to learn them: when I have done
this, I shall have no difficulty in directly recognising as a part of
them, anything which really is so. But with regard to all attributes not
included in the signification of the name, not only I do not find them
in the concept, but they do not even become part of it after I have
learnt them by experience; unless we understand by the concept, not,
with philosophers in general, only the essence of the class, but with
Sir W. Hamilton, all its known attributes. Even in Sir W. Hamilton’s
sense, they are not found in the concept, but added to it; and not until
we have already assented to them as objective facts—subsequently,
therefore, to the reasoning by which they were ascertained.

Take such a case as this. Here are two properties of circles. One is,
that a circle is bounded by a line, every point of which is equally
distant from a certain point within the circle. This attribute is
connoted by the name, and is, on both theories, a part of the concept.
Another property of the circle is, that the length of its circumference
is to that of its diameter in the approximate Edition: current; Page:
[347] ratio of 3·14159 to 1. This attribute was discovered, and is now
known, as a result of reasoning. Now, is there any sense, consistent
with the meaning of the terms, in which it can be said that this
recondite property formed part of the concept circle, before it had been
discovered by mathematicians? Even in Sir W. Hamilton’s meaning of
concept, it is in nobody’s but a mathematician’s concept even now: and
if we concede that mathematicians are to determine the normal concept of
a circle for mankind at large, mathematicians themselves did not find
the ratio of the diameter to the circumference in the concept, but put
it there; and could not have done so until the long train of difficult
reasoning which culminated in the discovery was complete.

It is impossible, therefore, rationally to hold both the opinions
professed simultaneously by Sir W. Hamilton—that Reasoning is the
comparison of two notions through the medium of a third, and that
Reasoning is a source from which we derive new truths. And the truth of
the latter proposition being indisputable, it is the former which must
give way. The theory of Reasoning which attempts to unite them both, has
the same defect which we have shown to vitiate the corresponding theory
of Judgment: it makes the process consist in eliciting something out of
a concept which never was in the concept, and if it ever finds its way
there, does so after the process, and as a consequence of its having
taken place.

Edition: current; Page: [348]


CHAPTER XX: On Sir William Hamilton’s Conception of Logic as a Science. Is Logic the Science of the Laws, or Forms, of Thought?

having discussed the nature of the three psychological processes which,
together, constitute the operations of the Intellect, and having
considered Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of each, we are in a condition to
examine the general view which he takes of the Science or Art, whose
purpose it is to direct our intellectual operations into their proper
course, and to protect them against error.

Sir W. Hamilton defines Logic “the Science of the Laws of Thought as
Thought.”* He proceeds to justify each of the component parts of this
definition. And first, is Logic a Science?

Archbishop Whately says that it is both a Science and an Art.[*] He says
this in an intelligible sense. He means that Logic both determines what
is, and prescribes what should be. It investigates the nature of the
process which takes place in Reasoning, and lays down rules to enable
that process to be conducted as it ought. For this distinction, Sir W.
Hamilton is very severe on Archbishop Whately. In the Archbishop’s sense
of the words, he says, it never has been, and never could have been,
disputed that Logic is both a Science and an Art. But

the discrimination of art and science is wrong. Dr. Whately considers
science to be any knowledge viewed absolutely, and not in relation to
practice,—a signification in which every art would, in its doctrinal
part, be a science; and he defines art to be the application of
knowledge to practice, in which sense Ethics, Politics, and all
practical sciences, would be arts. The distinction of arts and sciences
is thus wrong. But . . . were the distinction correct it would be of no
value, for it would distinguish nothing, since art and science would
mark out no real difference between the various branches of knowledge,
but only different points of view under which the same branch might be
contemplated by us,—each being in different relations at once a science
and an art. In fact, Dr. Whately confuses the distinction of science
theoretical and science practical with the distinction of science and
art.†

Edition: current; Page: [349]
But if the difference between science and art is not the same as that
between knowledge theoretical and practical, we are entitled to ask,
what is it? If Archbishop Whately has placed the distinction where it is
not, does his rather peremptory critic and censor tell us where it is?
He declines the problem. “I am well aware that it would be no easy
matter to give a general definition of science as contradistinguished
from art, and of art as contradistinguished from science; but if the
words themselves cannot validly be discriminated, it would be absurd to
attempt to discriminate anything by them.”[*] In the only other part of
his Lectures where the distinction between Art and Science is touched
on,* he says that the “apparently vague and capricious manner in which
the terms art and science are applied,” is not “the result of some
accidental and forgotten usage,” but is founded on a “rational principle
which we are able to trace.”[†] But when the reader is expecting a
statement of this rational principle, Sir W. Hamilton puts him off with
a merely historical explanation. Without stating what the usage actually
is, he derives it from a distinction drawn by Aristotle between “a habit
productive,” and “a habit practical,” which he admits to be “not perhaps
beyond the reach of criticism:” which he does not undertake to
“vindicate,” and which he confesses to have been lost sight of by the
moderns ever since they ceased to think “mechanical” arts “beneath their
notice,”[‡] all these being called arts without any reference to
Aristotle’s supposed criterion.† So that Sir W. Hamilton cannot claim
even accordance Edition: current; Page: [350] with usage for the
distinction which he seems, but does not distinctly profess, to
patronize. Yet the principal fault he finds with Archbishop Whately’s
distinction, is that it does not agree with usage. According to it, he
says, “ethics, politics, religion, and all other practical sciences
would be arts:”* and he speaks of the “incongruity we feel in talking of
the art of Ethics, the art of Religion, &c., though these are eminently
practical sciences.”†

Religion may abe herea placed out of the question, for if there be
incongruity with common feelings in calling Religion an art, there is
quite as much in calling it a science, and especially a practical
science, as if the theoretical doctrines of religion were no part of
religion. If religion is either a science or an art, it must be both,
and it is commonly understood to consist preeminently in things
different from either, namely, a state of the feelings, and a
disposition of the will. As for Ethics and Politics, the one and the
other are, like Logic, both sciences and arts. Ethics, so far as it
consists of the theory of the moral sentiments, and the investigation of
those conditions of human well-being, disclosed by experience, which the
practical part of Ethics has for its object to secure, is, in all senses
of the word, a science. The rules or precepts of morals are an art. If
there is any reluctance felt to speak of an art of morals, it is not
because people prefer calling morals a science, but because most people
are unwilling to look upon it as scientific at all, but prefer to regard
it as a matter of instinct, bor of religious belief,b or as depending
solely on the state of the will and the affections. In the case of
Politics there is not, even to the vulgarest apprehension, any
incongruity in the use of the word art: on the contrary, “the art of
government” is the vernacular expression, and “science of government” a
sort of speculative refinement. Philosophic writers on politics have
generally preferred to call their subject a science, in order to
indicate that it is a fit subject for speculative thinkers, the word art
being apt to suggest to modern ears (it did not to the ancients)
something which is the proper business only of practitioners. In reality
Politics includes both a science and an art. The Science of Politics
treats of the laws of political phænomena; it is the Edition: current;
Page: [351] science of human nature under social conditions. The Art of
Politics consists (or would consist if it existed) of rules, founded on
the science, for the right guidance and government of the affairs of
society.

But, says Sir W. Hamilton, if the difference between Science and Art
were merely that between affirmations and precepts, the distinction
would be of no value, since it would “mark out no real difference
between the various branches of knowledge, but only different points of
view under which the same branch might be contemplated by us,—each being
in different relations at once a science and an art.” Was it from Sir W.
Hamilton we should have expected to hear that a distinction is of no
value, because it does not mark a difference between two things, but a
difference in the cpointsc of view in which we may regard the same
thing? How often has he told us, of many of the most important
distinctions in philosophy, that they are precisely of this character!
The remark, moreover, in the particular case, is so extremely
superficial, that, coming from an author of whom it was by no means the
habit to look only at the surface of things, it is one of the strongest
of the many proofs which appear in his works, how little thought he had
bestowed upon the sciences or arts, beyond his own speciality. The
reason why systems of precepts require to be distinguished from systems
of truths, is, that an entirely different classification is required for
the purposes of theoretical knowledge, and for those of its practical
application. Take the art of navigation, for example: where is the
single science corresponding to this art, or which could with any
propriety be included under the same name with it? Navigation is an art
dependent on nearly the whole circle of the physical sciences: on
astronomy, for the marks by which it determines the ship’s place on the
ocean; on optics, for the construction and use of its instruments; on
abstract mechanics, to understand and regulate the ship’s movements; on
pneumatics, for the laws of winds; on hydrostatics, for the tides and
currents, and the waves as influenced by dwindsd; on meteorology, for
the weather; on electricity, for thunderstorms; on magnetism, for the
use of the compass; on physical geography, and so on nearly to the end
of the list. Not only has each one of all these sciences furnished its
contingent towards the rules composing the one art of navigation, but
many single rules could only have been framed by the union of
considerations drawn from several different sciences. For the purposes
of the art, the rules by themselves are sufficient, wherever it has been
found practicable to make them sufficiently precise. But if the learner,
not content with knowing and practising the rules, wishes to understand
their reasons, and so possess science as well as art, he finds no one
science corresponding in its object-matter with the art; he must extract
from many Edition: current; Page: [352] sciences those truths of each
which have been turned to practical account for the furtherance of
navigation. All this is obvious to any one (not to say a person of Sir
W. Hamilton’s sagacity), who has sufficiently reflected on the sciences
and arts, to be aware of the relation between them. Archbishop Whately’s
distinction, therefore, in no way merits the contemptuous treatment
which it receives in the Lectures, and still more in the Discussions.[*]
It is eminently practical, it conforms to the natural and logical order
of thought, and accords better with the ends and even with the custom of
language, than any other mode in which Arts can be distinguished from
Sciences. Sir W. Hamilton, though he condemns it, has not ventured to
set up any competing distinction in its place, but (as we have seen)
almost intimates that no satisfactory one can be found.

Next after the question whether Logic is a science, comes the
consideration of its object-matter as a science, namely, “the Laws of
Thought as Thought.”[†] “The consideration of this head,” says our
author, “divides itself into three questions—1. What is Thought? 2. What
is Thought as Thought? 3. What are the Laws of Thought as Thought?”*
These three questions are successively discussed.

To the question, “What is Thought?” Sir W. Hamilton answers—It is not
the direct perception of an object, nor its representation in memory or
imagination, nor its mere suggestion by association, but is a product of
intelligence. Intelligence acts only by comparison.

All thought is a comparison, a recognition of similarity or difference,
a conjunction or disjunction, in other words a synthesis or analysis of
its objects. In Conception, that is, in the formation of Concepts (or
general notions) it compares, disjoins or conjoins, attributes; in an
act of Judgment, it compares, disjoins or conjoins, concepts; in
Reasoning, it compares, disjoins or conjoins, judgments. In each step of
this process there is one essential element; to think, to compare, to
conjoin or disjoin, it is necessary to recognise one thing through or
under another, and therefore, in defining Thought proper, we may either
define it as an act of Comparison, or as a recognition of one notion as
in or under another. It is in performing this act of thinking a thing
under a general notion, that we are said to understand or comprehend it.
For example: An object is presented, say a book: this object determines
an impression, and I am even conscious of the impression, but without
recognising to myself what the thing is; in that case, there is only a
perception, and not properly a thought. But suppose I do recognise it
for what it is, in other words, compare it with and reduce it under a
certain concept, class, or complement of attributes, which I call book;
in that case, there is more than a perception,—there is a thought.†

Further on, he again defines an act of thought as “the recognition of a
Edition: current; Page: [353] thing as coming under a concept; in other
words, the marking an object by an attribute or attributes previously
known as common to sundry objects, and to which we have accordingly
given a general name.”* And subsequently, as “the comprehension of a
thing under a general notion or attribute;”† and again, “the cognition
of any mental object by another in which it is considered as included;
in other words, thought is the knowledge of things under conceptions.”‡
And again, “Thought is the Knowledge of a thing through a concept or
general notion, or of one notion through another.”§

From these different expressions we may infer, that the author confines
the name Thought to cases where there is a judgment; and, it would seem,
a judgment affirming more than mere existence. We think an object, or
make anything an object of thought, when we are able to predicate
something of it; to affirm that it is something in particular; that it
is a certain sort of thing; that it belongs to a class—has something
which is (or may be) common to it with a number of other things; that it
has, in short, a certain attribute, or attributes. This is intelligible,
and unobjectionable: but our author’s technical expressions, instead of
facilitating the understanding of it, tend, on the contrary, very much
to confuse it. Like the transcendental metaphysicians generally, Sir W.
Hamilton, when he attempts to state the nature of a mental phænomenon
with peculiar precision, does it by a peculiarly unprecise employment of
the common prepositions. What light is thrown upon the simple process of
referring objects to a class, by calling it the recognition of one thing
through, or in, or under, another? What distinct signification is
conveyed by the phrases, “thinking a thing under a general notion,”
“reducing it under a concept,” “knowing things under, or through,
conceptions?” To find the meaning of the explanation we have to resort
to the thing explained. The only passage in which the author speaks
distinctly, is that in which he paraphrases these expressions by the
following: “the marking an object by an attribute or attributes
previously known as common to sundry objects, and to which we have
accordingly given a general name.” To think of an object, then, is to
mark it by an attribute or set of attributes, which has received a name,
or (what is much more essential) which gives a name to the object. It
gives to the object the concrete name, to which its own abstract name,
if it has an abstract name, corresponds: but it is not indispensable
that the attribute should have received a name, provided it gives one to
the object possessing it. An animal is called a bull, in sign of its
possessing certain attributes, but there does not exist an abstract word
Edition: current; Page: [354] bullness. Having, then, in Sir W.
Hamilton’s language, thought the object, by marking it with a name
derived from an attribute, it is perhaps an allowable, though an
obscure, expression, to say that we know the thing through the
attribute, or through the notion of the attribute: but what is meant by
saying that we know it, or think it under the attribute? We know it and
think it, simply as possessing the attribute. The other phrase, while
seeming to mean more, means less. Again, when we are asserted to “know
one notion through another;” when, for example, we think, or judge, that
men, meaning all men, are mortal; is this to know the notion Man through
the notion Mortal? The knowledge we really have, is that the objects Men
have the attribute mortality; in other words, that the outward facts by
which we distinguish men, exist along with subjection to the outward
fact, death. If there is a recommendation I would inculcate on every one
who commences the study of metaphysics, it is, to be always sure what he
means by his particles. A large portion of all that perplexes and
confuses metaphysical thought, comes from a vague use of those small
words.

After this definition of Thought, our author proceeds to explain what he
means by Thought as Thought. He means, “that Logic is conversant with
the form of thought, to the exclusion of the matter.”* We have here
arrived at one of the cardinal points in Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy of
Logic. However he may vary on other doctrines, to this he is constant,
that the province of Logic is the form, not the matter, of thought. It
is a pity that the only terms he can find to denote the distinction, are
a pair of the obscurest and most confusing expressions in the whole
range of metaphysics. Still more unfortunate eit ise, that, thinking it
necessary to employ such terms, he has never, in unambiguous language,
explained their meaning. When Archbishop Whately, in somewhat similar
phraseology, tells us that Logic has to do with the form of the
reasoning process, but not with its matter, we know what he means.[*] It
is, that Logic is not concerned with the actual truth either of the
conclusion or of the premises, but considers only whether the one
follows from the other; whether the conclusion must be true if the
premises are true. Sir W. Hamilton is not content to mean only this. He
means much more; but if we wish to know what, the only information he
here gives us is a quotation from a German philosopher, Esser.

We are able, by abstraction, to distinguish from each other,—1°. The
object thought of; and 2°. The kind and manner of thinking it. Let us,
employing the old established technical expressions, call the first of
these the matter, the second the form, of the thought. For example, when
I think that the book before me is a folio, the matter of the thought is
book and folio, the form of it is a judgment.[†]

Edition: current; Page: [355]
Thus far Esser. The Form, therefore, of Thought, with which alone Logic
is conversant, is not the object thought of, but “the kind and manner of
thinking it.” It is not necessary to show that this explanation is
insufficient. But to find any other, we must have recourse, not to Sir
W. Hamilton, but to Mr. Mansel. One of the chapters of Mr. Mansel’s
Prolegomena Logica is entitled “On the Matter and Form of Thought.” It
commences as follows:

The distinction between Matter and Form in common language relatively to
works of Art, will serve to illustrate the character of the
corresponding distinction in Thought. The term Matter is usually applied
to whatever is given to the artist, and consequently, as given, does not
come within the province of the art itself to supply. The Form is that
which is given in and through the proper operation of the art. In
Sculpture, for example, the Matter is the marble in its rough state as
given to the sculptor; the Form is that which the sculptor in the
exercise of his art communicates to it.

Let me here ask, had the block of marble no form at all when it came out
of the quarry?

The distinction between Matter and Form in any mental operation is
analogous to this. The former includes all that is given to, the latter
all that is given by, the operation. In the division of notions, for
example, whether performed by an act of pure thinking or not, the
generic notion is that given to be divided; the addition of the
difference in the act of division constitutes the species. And
accordingly, Genus is frequently designated by logicians the material,
Difference the formal, part of the Species. [An illustration which,
whatever else it may do, does not illustrate.] So likewise in any
operation of pure thinking, the Matter will include all that is given to
and out of the thought; the Form is what is conveyed in and by the
thinking act itself.*

This is a fair account of the meaning of Matter and Form in the Kantian
philosophy, and the philosophies which descend genealogically from the
Kantian. But this meaning must always be taken with, and interpreted by,
the characteristic doctrine of the Kantian metaphysics, that the mind
does not perceive, but itself creates, all the most general attributes
which, by a natural illusion, we ascribe to outward things; which
attributes, consequently, are called, by that philosophy, Forms.
Extension and Duration, for example, it calls forms of our sensitive
faculty; Substance, Causality, Quantity, forms of our Understanding,
which is our faculty of thought. These, however, are not what Sir W.
Hamilton and Mr. Mansel[*] mean, when they say that Logic is the science
of the fformsf of thought. They do not mean that it is the science of
Substance, Causality, and Quantity. The truth is, that as soon as the
word Form is stretched beyond its proper signification of bodily figure,
it becomes entirely vague: every thinker uses Edition: current; Page:
[356] it in a sense of his own. The only bond connecting its various
meanings, is the negative one of opposition to Matter. Whenever anything
is called Form, there is something which, relatively to it, is regarded
as Matter: and whenever anything is called Matter, there is something
capable of being superinduced upon it, which when superinduced will be
styled its Form. How completely the notion of Form accompanies that of
Matter as its relative opposite, we have an illustrious example in
Aristotle, when he defines the Soul as the Form of the Body;[*] so, at
least, Sir W. Hamiltong, very freely,g translates ἐντελέχεια.* It would
be quite warranted by the practice of metaphysicians, to call any
compound the form of its component elements; water, for instance, the
form of hydrogen and oxygen. And since there is nothing that may not be
regarded as matter relatively to something which can be constructed out
of it, and which is form relatively to it, but matter relatively to some
other thing, we have form within form, like a nest of boxes. Kant
actually calls the conclusion of a syllogism the form of it, the
premises being its matter: so that in every train of reasoning, the
successive conclusions pass over one by one from Form to Matter.[†]
Without going this length, Sir W. Hamilton,† after Krug, considers the
propositions and terms as the matter of the syllogism, and the mode in
which they are connected as its form. Yet propositions and terms (i.e.
concepts) are classed by him as Forms of Thought. Thus it is impossible
to draw any line between the Matter of Thought and its Form, or to
convey any distinct conception of the province of a science by saying
that it is conversant with the one and not with the other. We may,
however, in a general way, understand Sir W. Hamilton to mean, that
Logic is not concerned with the actual contents of our knowledge—with
the particular objects, or truths, which we know—but only with our mode
of knowing them: with what the mind does when it knows, or thinks,
irrespectively of the particular things which it thinks about: with the
theory of the act or fact of thinking, so far as that fact is the same
in all our thought, or can be reduced to universal principles.

Edition: current; Page: [357]
But the fact of thinking is a psychological phænomenon; and Logic is a
different thing from Psychology. It is for the purpose of marking this
difference that Sir W. Hamilton adds a third point to his definition of
Logic, calling it the science not simply of Thought as Thought, but of
the Laws of Thought as Thought. For Psychology also treats of thought,
considered merely as thought; and professes to give an acount of Thought
as a mental operation. In what, then, consists the difference between
the two? I cannot venture to state it in any but our author’s own words.

The phænomena of the formal, or subjective phases of thought, are of two
kinds. They are either such as are contingent, that is, such as may or
may not appear; or they are such as are necessary, that is, such as
cannot but appear. These two classes of phænomena are, however, only
manifested in conjunction; they are not discriminated in the actual
operations of thought; and it requires a speculative analysis to
separate them into their several classes. In so far as these phænomena
are considered merely as phænomena, that is, in so far as philosophy is
merely observant of them as manifestations in general, they belong to
the science of Empirical or Historical Psychology. But when philosophy,
by a reflective abstraction, analyses the necessary from the contingent
forms of thought, there results a science, which is distinguished from
all others by taking for its object-matter the former of these classes;
and this science is Logic. Logic, therefore, is at last fully and
finally defined as the science of the necessary forms of thought.*

If language has any meaning, this passage must be understood to say,
that the “laws” or “forms” which are the province of Logic, are certain
“phænomena” of thought, distinguished from its other phænomena by being
necessarily present in it,—“such as cannot but appear,”—while the
remaining phænomena “may or may not appear.” If this be meant, we are
landed in a strange conclusion. There is a science, Psychology, which is
the science of all mental phænomena, and among others, of the phænomena
of Thought, and yet another science, Logic, is required to teach us its
necessary phænomena. There is a portion of the properties of Thought
which are expressly excluded from the science which treats of Thought,
to be reserved as the matter of another science, and these are precisely
its Necessary hqualitiesh. Those which are merely contingent, “such as
may or may not appear”—the properties which are not common to all
thought, or do not belong to it at all times—these, it seems to be said,
Psychology knows something about: but the Necessary properties, “such as
cannot but appear”—the properties which all thoughts possess, which
thought must possess, without the possession of which it would not be
thought—these Psychology knows not of, and it is the office of a
different science to investigate them. We may next expect to be told,
that the science of dynamics knows nothing of the laws of motion, the
composition of forces, Edition: current; Page: [358] the theory of
continuous and accelerating force, the doctrines of Momentum and Vis
Viva, &c.; it only knows of wind power and water power, steam power and
animal power, and the accidents by flood and field which accompany them
and disturb their operation.

This, however, supposes that our author means what he expressly says. It
assumes that by the “Laws of Thought,” and the “Necessary Forms of
Thought,” he means the modes in which, and the conditions subject to
which, by the constitution of our nature, we cannot but think. But when
we turn over a few pages, to the place where he is preparing to treat of
those laws or necessary forms one by one, it appears that this is an
entire mistake. Laws now no longer mean necessities of nature; they are
laws in a totally different sense; they mean precepts: and the
“necessary forms of thought” are not attributes which it must, but only
which it ought to possess.

When I speak of laws, and of their absolute necessity in relation to
thought, you must not suppose that these laws and that necessity are the
same in the world of mind as in the world of matter. For free
intelligences, a law is an ideal necessity given in the form of a
precept, which we ought to follow, but which we may also violate if we
please; whereas, for the existences which constitute the universe of
nature, a law is only another name for those causes which operate
blindly and universally in producing certain inevitable results. By law
of thought, or by logical necessity, we do not, therefore, mean a
physical law, such as the law of gravitation, but a general precept
which we are able certainly to violate, but which if we do not obey, our
whole process of thinking is suicidal, or absolutely null. These laws
are, consequently, the primary conditions of the possibility of valid
thought; and . . . the whole of Pure Logic is only an articulate
development of the various modes in which they are applied.*

Edition: current; Page: [359]
So that, after all, the real theory of Thought—the laws, in the
scientific sense of the term, of Thought as Thought—do not belong to
Logic, but to Psychology: and it is only the validity of thought which
Logic takes cognisance of. It is not with Thought as Thought, but only
as Valid thought, that Logic is concerned. There is nothing to prevent
us from thinking contrary to the laws of Logic: only, if we do, we shall
not think rightly, or well, or conformably to the ends of thinking, but
falsely, or inconsistently, or confusedly. This doctrine is at complete
variance with the saying of our author in his controversy with Whately,
that Logic is, and never could have been doubted to be, in Whately’s
sense of the terms, both a Science and an Art. For the present
definition reduces it to the narrowest conception of an Art—that of a
mere system of rules. It leaves Science to Psychology, and represents
Logic as merely offering to thinkers a collection of precepts, which
they are enjoined to observe, not in order that they may think, but that
they may think correctly, or validly.

It appears to me, however, that our author, though inconsistent with
himself, is much nearer the mark in this mode of regarding Logic than in
the previous one. I conceive it to be true that Logic is not the theory
of Thought as Thought, but of valid Thought; not of thinking, but of
correct thinking. It is not a Science distinct from, and coordinate
with, Psychology. So far as it is a science at all, it is a part, or
branch, of Psychology; differing from it, on the one hand as a part
differs from the whole, and on the other, as an Art differs from a
Science. Its theoretic grounds are wholly borrowed from Psychology, and
include as much of that science as is required to justify the rules of
the art. Logic has no need to know more of the Science of Thinking, than
the difference between good thinking and bad. A consequence of this is,
that the Necessary Laws of Thought, those which our author in his first
doctrine reserved especially to Logic, are precisely those with which
Logic has least to do, and which belong the most exclusively to
Psychology. What is common to all thought, whether good or bad, and
inseparable from it, is irrelevant to Logic, unless by the light it may
indirectly throw on something besides itself. The properties of Thought
which concern Logic, are some of its contingent properties; those,
namely, on the presence of which depends good thinking, as distinguished
from bad.

I therefore accept our author’s second view of the province of Logic,
which makes it a collection of precepts or rules for thinking, grounded
on a Edition: current; Page: [360] scientific investigation of the
requisites of valid thought. It is this doctrine which governs his
treatment of the details of Logic, and it is by this that we must
interpret the assertion that Logic has for its only subject the Form of
Thought. By the Form of Thought we must understand Thinking itself; the
whole work of the Intellect. The Matter of Thought is the sensations,
perceptions, or other presentations (intuitions, as Mr. Mansel calls
them),[*] in which the intellect has no share; which are supplied to it,
independently of any action of its own. What the mind adds to these, or
puts into them, is Forms of Thought. Logic, therefore, is concerned only
with Forms, since, being rules for thinking, it can have no authority
but over that which depends on thought. Logic and Thinking are
coextensive; it is the art of Thinking, of all Thinking, and of nothing
but Thinking. And since every distinguishable variety of thinking act is
called a Form of Thought, the Forms of Thought compose the whole
province of Logic; though it would be hardly possible to invent a worse
phrase for expressing so simple a fact.

But what are the Forms of Thought? Kant, as already observed, gives to
that expression a very wide extent. He holds that every ifundamentali
attribute which we ascribe to external objects is a Form of Thought,
being created, not simply discerned, by our thinking faculty.[†] Neither
Sir W. Hamilton nor Mr. Mansel goes this length; and at all events they
do not consider the theory of the various attributes of bodies to be a
part of Logic. It was incumbent on them, therefore, to state clearly
what are the Forms of Thought with which Logic is concerned, and for
which it supplies precepts. This question is never put, in an express
form, by Sir W. Hamilton: but the answer which he rather leaves to be
picked up than directly presents, may be gathered from his
classification of our intellectual operations. These he reduces to
three, Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. He must have recognised,
therefore, that number of general Forms of Thought. The Forms of Thought
are Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning: Logic is the Science of the
Laws (meaning the rules) of these three operations. If, however, we
rigorously hold our author to this short list, we shall perpetually
mistake his meaning: for (as already observed) the mode in which the
word Form is used, allows of form within form to an unlimited extent.
Every concept, judgment, or reasoning, after having received its form
from the mind, may again be contemplated as the Matter of some further
mental act; and the product of that further act (according to Kant),[‡]
or the relation of the product to the matter (according to Sir W.
Hamilton and Mr. Edition: current; Page: [361] Mansel), is again a Form
of Thought; as we find, to our confusion, when we proceed further, and
the more profusely, the further we proceed. We have, first, however, to
consider a proposition of Sir W. Hamilton, which qualifies his
definition of the province of Logic. He says:

“Logic considers Thought, not as the operation of thinking, but as its
product; it does not treat of Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, but
of Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings.”*

Let me begin by saying that I give my entire adhesion to this
distinction, and propose to reform the definition of Logic accordingly.
It does not, as we now see, relate to the Laws of Thought as Thought,
but to those of the Products of Thought. Instead of the Laws of
Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, we must speak of the Laws of
Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings. This would be mere nonsense in the
scientific sense of the word law: for a product, as such, can have no
laws but those of the operation which produces it. But understanding by
laws, as it seems we are intended to do, Precepts, Logic becomes the
science of the precepts for the formation of concepts, judgments, and
reasonings: or rather (a science of precepts being an improper
expression) the science of the conditions on which right concepts,
judgments, and reasonings depend. Thus, Logic is the Art of Thinking,
which means of correct thinking, and the Science of the Conditions of
correct thinking. This seems to me a sufficiently accurate definition of
it. But, in attempting a deeper metaphysical analysis of the distinction
he has just drawn, our author raises fresh difficulties. He says:

The form of thought may be viewed on two sides, or in two relations. It
holds, as has been said, a relation both to its subject and to its
object, and it may accordingly be viewed either in the one of these
relations or in the other. In so far as the form of thought is
considered in reference to the thinking mind,—to the mind by which it is
exerted,—it is considered as an act, or operation, or energy; and in
this relation it belongs to Phænomenal Psychology. Whereas, in so far as
this form is considered in reference to what thought is about, it is
considered as the product of such an act, and in this relation it
belongs to Logic. Thus Phænomenal Psychology treats of thought proper as
conception, judgment, reasoning: Logic, or the Nomology of the
Understanding, treats of thought proper as a concept, as a judgment, as
a reasoning.†

Just when the puzzled reader fancied that he had at last arrived at
something clear, comes an explanation which throws all back into
darkness. The learner who had been wandering in the mazes of “Thought as
Thought,” laws which are not laws, and “Forms of Thought” in which Form
stands for something which he never before heard of in connexion with
that word, at last descried what seemed to be firm ground: he was told
that Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning are acts of the mind, that
Concepts, Edition: current; Page: [362] Judgments, and Reasonings are
products of those acts, and that Psychology is conversant with the
former and Logic with the latter. And now it turns out that the products
are the acts. The two series of things are one and the same series. They
are both of them only “Thought proper.” The product is another word for
the act itself, considered in one of its aspects—“in reference to what
thought is about.” It is curious that this should occur only a few pages
after Whately has been rebuked for reducing a distinction to inutility,
by making it coincide with a difference not between things, but between
the aspects in which the same thing is regarded.

Sir W. Hamilton therefore is of opinion that the thinking act, though
verbally, is not psychologically different from the thought itself. He
does not hold, with Berkeley, that an Idea is a concrete object distinct
from the mind, and contained in it, like furniture in a house; nor with
Locke (if that was Locke’s opinion), that it is a modification of the
mind, but a modification distinct from the mind’s act in cognising it;
but with Brown, that a sensation is only myself feeling, and a thought
only myself thinking. Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, are only acts
of conceiving, judging, and reasoning; acts of thought, considered not
in their relation to the thinking mind, but to their object, to “what
thought is about.”* But what is thought about? Not about Concepts, for
all our thoughts are not about the thinking act. It must be about the
objective presentation, the Anschauung, or Intuition, which the Concept
represents, or from which it has been abstracted. According, therefore,
to the doctrine here distinctly laid down by Sir W. Hamilton, there are
but two things present in any of our intellectual operations; on one
hand, the mind itself thinking (that is, conceiving, judging, or
reasoning), and, on the other, a mental presentation or representation
of the phænomenal Reality which it conceives, or concerning which it
judges or reasons. I can understand that the thinking act, or in other
words, the mind in a thinking state, may be contemplated in its relation
to the Reality thought of, and may receive a name which connotes
Edition: current; Page: [363] that Reality; but how does this entitle us
to call it a product of thought? How can the act of thought, or the mind
thinking, be looked upon, even hypothetically, as a product of thinking?
How can Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings be regarded as products of
thought, jifj they are the thought itself? Can they be both the act and
something resulting from the act? Are they results and products of
themselves?

I conceive that there is a way out of this difficulty; a sense in which
the two assertions can be reconciled, though it has not been pointed out
by Sir W. Hamilton, and is hardly compatible with some of his opinions.
There is a difference between what can properly be called Acts of the
mind, and the other mental phænomena which may be termed its passive
States. And I know but one way of conceiving the distinction, in which
it can possibly be upheld, namely, by considering as Acts only those
mental phænomena which are results of Volition. Now, the first formation
of a Concept, and generally (though not always) any fresh operation of
judgment or reasoning, requires a mental effort, a concentration of
consciousness upon certain definite objects, which concentration depends
on the will, and is called Attention. When this takes place, the mind is
properly said to be active. But after frequent repetition of this act of
will, the associations to which it has given rise are sufficiently
riveted to do their work spontaneously; the effort of attention, after
becoming less and less, is finally null, and the operation, originally
voluntary, becomes, in Hartley’s language, secondarily automatic.[*]
When this transition has been completed, what remains of the mental
phænomenon has lost the character of an Act, and become numbered among
passive States. It is now either a mere mental representation of an
object, differing from those copied directly from sense, only in having
certain of its parts artificially made intense and prominent; or it is a
fasciculus of representations of imagination, held together by the tie
of an association artificially produced. When the mental phænomenon has
assumed this passive character, it comes to be termed a Concept, or,
more familiarly and vaguely, an Idea, and to be felt as if it were, not
the mind modified, but something in the mind: and in this ultimate
phasis of its existence we may properly consider it, not as an act, but
as the product of a previous act; since it now takes place without any
conscious activity, and becomes a subject on which fresh activity may be
exercised, by an act of voluntary attention concentrating consciousness
on it, or on some particular part of it. This explanation, which I leave
for the consideration of philosophers, would not have suited Sir W.
Hamilton, since it would have required him to limit the extent which he
habitually gave to the expression Edition: current; Page: [364] “mental
act.”k Every phænomenon of mind, down to the mere reception of a
sensation, he regards as an act: therein differing from Kant, and
annihilating the need and use of the word, the sole function of which is
to distinguish what the mind originates, from what something else
originates in the mind.

To return to the definition of Logic, as the science of the Forms of
Thought, considered in relation, not to the thinking act itself, but, so
far as they are distinguishable from it, to the products of thought. The
products of thought are Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, and the
Forms of Thought are Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. Logic is the
science of those Forms, so far as concerns the rules for the right
formation of the products: or, as our author elsewhere phrases it, the
science of the “formal conditions” of valid thinking.[*] These modes of
expression have a rare power of darkening the subject, but I am
endeavouring to give them an intelligible interpretation, by means of
that which they profess to explain. If, then, all thinking consists in
adding, to given matter, a Form derived from the mind itself, what shall
we say of the division, on which so much stress is laid, of Thinking
itself into two kinds, Formal and Material Thinking, the first of which
alone belongs to Logic, or at all events to pure Logic? Mr. Mansel has
written a volume for the express purpose of showing that Logic is only
concerned with Formal Thinking; and Sir W. Hamilton’s division of Logic
into Pure and Modified, agrees with Mr. Mansel’s distinction.[†] Yet,
according to the definition we have just considered, all thinking
whatever is Formal Thinking: since all thinking is either conceiving,
judging, or reasoning, and these are the Forms of Thought. If Logic
investigates the conditions requisite for the right formation of
concepts, of judgments, and of reasonings, it investigates all the
conditions of right thought, for there are no other kinds of thought
than these; and if it does all this, what is left for the so-called
Material Thinking which Logic is said not to be concerned with?

The answer to this question affords an additional specimen of the
incurable confusion, in which the processes of thought are involved by
the unhappy misapplication to them of the metaphorical word Form. Though
Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, are said to be the forms of
thought, and the only forms which thought takes, or rather gives; the
metaphysicians who deal in Forms are in the habit of using phrases which
signify that Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, though themselves
Forms, have also, in themselves, a formal part and a material. Different
concepts, Edition: current; Page: [365] judgments, and reasonings, have
different matter, according to what it is that the conception, the
judgment, or the reasoning, is about: and as whatever part of anything
is not its Matter, is always styled its Form, whatever is common to all
Concepts, or whatever belongs to them irrespectively of all differences
in their matter, is said to be their Form; and so of Judgments and of
Reasonings. Thus, the difference between an affirmative and a negative
judgment is a difference of form, because a judgment may be either
affirmative or negative whatever be the matter to which it relates. The
difference between a categorical and an hypothetical syllogism is a
difference of form, because it neither depends on, nor is it at all
affected by, any differences in the matter. Logic, according to Mr.
Mansel[*]—pure Logic, according to Sir W. Hamilton—is conversant only
with the Forms of Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, not with their
Matter. Not only is it concerned exclusively with the Forms of thought,
but exclusively with the Forms of those Forms. And here I fairly
renounce any further attempt to deduce Sir W. Hamilton’s or Mr. Mansel’s
lconceptionl of Logic from their definitions of it. I collect it from
the general evidence of their treatises, and I proceed to show why I
consider it to be wrong.

Logic, Sir W. Hamilton has told us, lays down the laws or precepts
indispensable to Valid Thought; the conditions to which thought is bound
to conform, under the penalty of being invalid, ineffectual, not
accomplishing its end. And what is, peculiarly and emphatically, the end
of Thinking? Surely it is the attainment of Truth. Surely, if not the
sole, at all events the first and most essential constituent of valid
thought, is that its results should be true. Concepts, Judgments, and
Reasonings, should agree with the reality of things, meaning by things
the Phænomena or sensible presentations, to which those mental products
have reference. A concept, to be rightly framed, must be a concept of
something real, and must agree with the real fact which it endeavours to
represent, that is, the collection of attributes composing the concept
must really exist in the objects marked by the class-name, and in no
others. A judgment, to be rightly framed, must be a true judgment, that
is, the objects judged of must really possess the attributes predicated
of them. A reasoning, to be rightly framed, must conduct to a true
conclusion, since the only purpose of reasoning is to make known to us
truths which we cannot learn by direct intuition. Even those who take
the most limited view of Logic, allow that the conclusion must be true
conditionally—provided that the premises are true. The most important,
then, and at bottom the only important quality of a thought being its
truth, the laws or precepts provided for the guidance of thought must
surely have for their principal purpose that the products of thinking
shall be true. Edition: current; Page: [366] Yet with this, according to
Mr. Mansel, Logic has no concern;[*] and Sir W. Hamilton reserves it for
a sort of appendix to the science, under the title of Modified Logic.
Questions of truth and falsity, according to both writers, regard only
Material Thinking, while Formal Thinking is the province of Logic. The
only precepts for thinking with which Logic concerns itself, are those
which have some other purpose than the conformity of our thoughts to the
fact. Yet every possible precept for thought, if it be an honest one,
must have this for at least its ultimate object. What, then, is excluded
from Logic, and what is left in it, by the doctrine that it is only
concerned with Formal Thinking? What is excluded is the whole of the
evidences of the validity of thought. What is included is part of the
evidences of its invalidity.

In no case can thinking be valid unless the concepts, judgments, and
conclusions resulting from it are conformable to fact. And in no case
can we satisfy ourselves that they are so, by looking merely at the
relations of one part of the train of thought to another. We must ascend
to the original sources, the presentations of experience, and examine
the train of thought in its relation to these. But we can sometimes
discover, without ascending to the sources, that the process of thought
is not valid; having been so conducted that it cannot possibly avail for
obtaining concepts, judgments, or conclusions in accordance with fact.
This, for example, is the case, if we have allowed ourselves to travel
from premises to a conclusion through an ambiguous term. The process
then gives no ground at all for believing the conclusion to be true: it
is perhaps true, but we have no more reason to believe so than we had
before. Or again, the concept, the judgment, or the reasoning may
involve a contradiction, and so cannot possibly correspond to any real
state of facts. It is with this part of the subject only, in the opinion
of these philosophers, that Logic concerns itself. According to Mr.
Mansel, Logic “accepts, as logically valid, all such concepts,
judgments, and reasonings, as do not, directly or indirectly, imply
contradictions; pronouncing them thus far to be legitimate as thoughts,
that they do not in ultimate analysis destroy themselves . . . leaving
to this or that branch of material science to determine how far the same
products of thought are guaranteed by the testimony of this or that
special experience.”* Mr. Mansel has not here conceived his own view of
the subject with his usual precision. He narrows the field of Logic more
than he intends. That to which he confines the name of Logic, accepts as
valid all concepts and judgments that do not imply contradictions, but
by no means all reasonings. It rejects these not only when
self-contradictory, but when simply inconclusive. It condemns a
reasoning not only if it draws a conclusion inconsistent Edition:
current; Page: [367] with the premises, but if it draws one which the
premises do not warrant; not only if the conclusion must, but if it may,
be false though the premises be true. For the notion of true and false
will force its way even into Formal Logic, whatever pains Sir W.
Hamilton and Mr. Mansel give themselves to make the notions of
consistent and inconsistent, or of thinkable and unthinkable, do duty
instead of it. The ideas of truth and falsity cannot be eliminated from
reasoning. We may abstract from actual truth, but the validity of
reasoning is always a question of conditional truth—whether one
proposition must be true if others are true, or whether one proposition
can be true if others are true. When Judgments or Reasonings are in
question, “the conditions of the thinkable” are simply the conditions of
the believable.

What Mr. Mansel and Sir W. Hamilton really mean, is to segregate from
the remainder of the theory of the investigation of truth, as much of it
as does not require any reference to the original sufficiency of the
groundwork of facts, or the correctness of their interpretation, and
call this exclusively Logic, or Pure Logic. They assume that concepts
have been formed and judgments made somehow; and if there is nothing
within the four corners of the concept or the judgment which proves it
absurd, that is, no self-contradiction, they do not question it further.
Whether it is grounded on fact or on mere supposition, and if on fact,
whether the fact is represented correctly, they do not ask; but think
only of the conditions necessary for preventing errors from getting into
the process of thought, which were not in the notions or the premises
from whence it started. The theory of these conditions (of which the
doctrine of the Syllogism is the principal part) Mr. Mansel calls Logic,
and Sir W. Hamilton Pure Logic. The expression “Formal Logic,” which is
sometimes applied to it, is perhaps as distinctive and as little
misleading as any other, and is that which, for want of a better, I am
content to use. That this part of Logic should be distinguished and
named, and made an object of consideration separately from the rest, is
perfectly natural. What I protest against, is the doctrine of Sir W.
Hamilton, Mr. Mansel, and many other thinkers, that this part is the
whole; that there is no other Logic, or Pure Logic, at all; that
whatever is more than this, belongs not to a general science and art of
Thinking, but (in the words of Mr. Mansel) to this or that material
science.[*]

This doctrine assumes, that with the exception of the rules of Formal,
that is, of Syllogistic Logic, no other rules can be framed which are
applicable to thought generally, abstractedly from particular matter:
That a general theory is possible respecting the relations which the
parts of a process of thought should bear to one another, but not
respecting the Edition: current; Page: [368] proper relations of all
thought to its matter: That the problem which Bacon set before himself,
and led the way towards resolving, is an impossible one: That there is
not, and cannot be, any general Theory of Evidence: That when we have
taken care that our notions and propositions concerning Things shall be
consistent with themselves and with one another, and have drawn no
inferences from them but such the falsity of which would be inconsistent
with assertions already made, we have done all that a philosophy of
Thought can do—and the agreement and disagreement of our beliefs with
the laws of the thing itself, is in each case a special question,
belonging to the science of that thing in particular: That the study of
nature, the search for objective truth, does not admit of any rules, nor
its attainment, of any general test. For if there are such rules, if
there is such a test, and the consideration of it does not belong to
Logic, to what science or study does it belong? There is no other
science, which, irrespectively of particular matter, professes to direct
the intellect in the application of its powers to any matter on which
knowledge is possible. These philosophers must therefore think that
there can be no such rules, or that if there are, they can only be of
the vaguest possible description. Sir W. Hamilton says as much.

If we abstract from the specialities of particular objects and sciences,
and consider only the rules which ought to govern our procedure in
reference to the object-matter of the sciences in general,—and this is
all that a universal Logic can propose,—these rules are few in number,
and their applications simple and evident. A Material or Objective
Logic, except in special subordination to the circumstances of
particular sciences, is therefore of very narrow limits, and all that it
can tell us is soon told.*

It is very true that all Sir W. Hamilton can tell us of it is soon told.
Nothing can be more meagre, trite, and indefinite than the little which
he finds to say respecting what he calls Modified Logic. And no wonder,
when we consider the following extraordinary deliverance, which I quote
from the conclusion of his Thirtieth Lecture on Logic. Speaking of
Physical Science generally, Sir W. Hamilton thus expresses himself:

In this department of Knowledge there is chiefly demanded a patient
habit of attention to details, in order to detect phænomena; and, these
discovered, their generalization is usually so easy that there is little
exercise afforded to the higher energies of Judgment and Reasoning. It
was Bacon’s boast that Induction, as applied to nature, would equalize
all talents, level the aristocracy of genius, accomplish marvels by
co-operation and method, and leave little to be done by the force of
individual intellects. This boast has been fulfilled; Science has, by
the Inductive Process, been brought down to minds, who previously would
have been incompetent for its cultivation, and physical knowledge now
usefully occupies many who would otherwise have been without any
rational pursuit.†

Edition: current; Page: [369]
Sir W. Hamilton had good reason for confining his own logical
speculations to a minor and subordinate department of the Science and
Art of Thinking, when he was so destitute as this passage proves, of the
preliminary knowledge required for making any proficiency in the other
and higher branch. Every one who has obtained any knowledge of the
physical sciences from really scientific study, knows that the questions
of evidence presented, and the powers of abstraction required, in the
speculations on which their greater generalizations depend, are such as
to task the very highest capacities of the human intellect: and a
thinker, however able, who is too little acquainted with the processes
actually followed in the investigation of objective truth, to be aware
of this fact, is entitled to no authority when he denies the possibility
of a Philosophy of Evidence and of the Investigation of Nature; inasmuch
as his own macquirementsm do not furnish him with the means of judging
whether it is possible or not.*

If any general theory of the sufficiency of Evidence and the legitimacy
of Generalization be possible, this must be Logic κατ’ ἐξοχήν, and
anything else called by the name can only be ancillary to it. For the
Logic called Edition: current; Page: [370] Formal only aims at removing
one of the obstacles to the attainment of truth, by preventing such
mistakes as render our thoughts inconsistent with themselves or with one
another: and it is of no importance whether we think consistently or
not, if we think wrongly. It is only as a means to material truth, that
the formal, or to speak more clearly, the conditional, validity of an
operation of thought is of any value; and even that value is only
negative: we have not made the smallest positive advance towards right
thinking, by merely keeping ourselves consistent in what is, perhaps,
systematic error. This by no means implies that Formal Logic, even in
its narrowest sense, is not of very great, though purely negative,
value. On the contrary, I subscribe heartily to all that is said of its
importance by Sir W. Hamilton and Mr. Mansel. It is good to have our
path clearly marked out, and a parapet put up at all the dangerous
points, whether the path leads us to the place we desire to reach, or to
another place altogether. But to call this alone Logic, or this alone
Pure Logic, as if all the rest of the Philosophy of Thought and Evidence
were merely an adaptation of this to something else, is to ignore the
end to which all rules laid down for our thinking operations are meant
to be subservient. The purpose of them all, is to enable us to decide
whether anything, and what, is proved true. Formal Logic conduces
indirectly to this end, by enabling us to perceive, either that the
process which has been performed is one which could not possibly prove
anything, or that it is one which will prove something to be true,
unless the premises happen to be false. This indirect aid is of the
greatest importance; but it is important because the end, the
ascertainment of truth, is important; and it is important only as
complementary to a still more fundamental part of the operation, in
which Formal Logic affords no help.

I do not deny the scientific convenience of considering this limited
portion of Logic apart from the rest—the doctrine of the Syllogism, for
instance, apart from the theory of Induction; and of teaching it in an
earlier stage of intellectual education. It can be taught earlier, since
it does not, like the inductive logic, presuppose a practical
acquaintance with the processes of scientific investigation; and the
greatest service to be derived from it, that of keeping the mind clear,
can be best rendered before a habit of confused thinking has been
acquired. Not only, however, is it indispensable that the larger Logic,
which embraces all the general conditions of the ascertainment of truth,
should be studied in addition to the smaller Logic, which only concerns
itself with the conditions of consistency; but the smaller Logic ought
to be, at least finally, studied as part of the greater—as a portion of
the means to the same end; and its relation to the other parts—to the
other means—should be distinctly displayed. If thought be anything more
than a sportive exercise of the mind, its purpose is to enable us to
know what can be known respecting the facts of the universe: its
Edition: current; Page: [371] judgments and conclusions express, or are
intended to express, some of those facts: and the connexion which Formal
Logic, by its analysis of the reasoning process, points out between one
proposition and another, exists only because there is a connexion
between one objective truth and another, which makes it possible for us
to know objective truths which have never been observed, in virtue of
others which have. This possibility is an eternal mystery and
stumbling-block to Formal Logic. The bare idea that any new truth can be
brought out of a Concept—that analysis can ever find in it anything
which synthesis has not first put in—is absurd on the face of it: yet
this is all the explanation that Formal Logic, as viewed by Sir W.
Hamilton, is able to give of the phænomenon; and Mr. Mansel expressly
limits the province of Logic to analytic judgments—to such as are merely
identical. But what the Logic of mere consistency cannot do, the Logic
of the ascertainment of truth, the Philosophy of Evidence in its larger
acceptation, can. It can explain the function of the Ratiocinative
process as an instrument of the human intellect in the discovery of
truth, and can place it in its true correlation with the other
instruments. It is therefore alone competent to furnish a philosophical
theory of Reasoning. Such partial account as can be given of the process
by looking at it solely by itself, however useful and even necessary to
accurate thought, does not dispense with, but points out in a more
emphatic manner the need of, the more comprehensive Logic of which it
should form a part, and which alone can give a meaning or a reason of
existence to the Logic styled Formal, or to the reasoning process
itself.

Edition: current; Page: [372]


CHAPTER XXI: The Fundamental Laws of Thought According to Sir William Hamilton

having marked out, as the sole province of Logic, the “Laws of Thought,”
Sir W. Hamilton naturally proceeds to specify what these are. The
“Fundamental Laws of Thought,” of which all other laws that can be laid
down for thought are but particular applications, are, according to our
author, three in number: the Law of Identity; the Law of Contradiction;
and the Law of Excluded Middle. In his Lectures he recognised a fourth,
“the Law of Reason and Consequent,” which seems to be compounded of the
Law of Causation, and the Leibnitzian “Principle of Sufficient
Reason.”[*] But as, in his later speculations, he no longer considered
this as an ultimate law, it needs not be further spoken of.

These three laws he otherwise denominates “The Conditions of the
Thinkable:”* from which it might have been supposed that he regarded
them as Laws of Thought in the scientific sense of the word law;
conditions to which thought cannot but conform, and apart from which it
is impossible. One would have said, à priori, that he could not mean
anything but this: since otherwise the expression “Conditions of the
Thinkable” is perverted from its meaning. Nevertheless, this is not what
he means, at least in this place. It is on this very occasion that he
disclaims, as applicable to laws of thought, the scientific meaning of
the term, and declares them to be (like the laws made by Parliament)
general precepts; not necessities of the thinking act, but instructions
for right thinking. Yet it would not have been claiming too much for
these three laws, to have regarded them as laws in the more peremptory
sense; as actual necessities of thought. Our author could hardly have
meant that we are able to disbelieve that a thing is itself, or to
Edition: current; Page: [373] believe that a thing is, and at the same
time that it is not. He not only, like other people, constantly assumes
this to be an impossibility, but makes that impossibility the ground of
some of his leading philosophical doctrines; as when he says that it is
impossible for us to doubt the actual facts of consciousness “because
the doubt implies a contradiction.”* It is true that a person may, in
one sense, believe contradictory propositions, that is, he may believe
the affirmative at some times and the negative at others, alternately
forgetting the two beliefs. It is also true that he may yield a passive
assent to two forms of words, which, had he been fully conscious of
their meaning, he would have known to be, either wholly or in part, an
affirmation and a denial of the same fact. But when once he is made to
see that there is a contradiction, it is totally impossible for him to
believe it.

Now, to compel people to see a contradiction where a contradiction is,
constitutes the entire office of Logic in the limited sense in which Sir
W. Hamilton conceives it: and he is quite right in regarding the whole
of Logic, in that narrow sense, as resting on the three laws specified
by him. To call them the fundamental laws of Thought is aa misnomer; but
they are the laws of Consistency. All inconsistency is a violation of
some one of these laws; an unconscious violation, for knowingly to
violate them is impossible.

Something remains to be said respecting the three Laws considered
singly, as well as respecting our author’s mode of regarding them.

The Law or Principle of Identity (Principium Identitatis) is no other
than the time-honoured axiom, “Whatever is, is,” or, in another
phraseology, “A thing is the same as itself:” the proposition which
Locke, in his chapter on Maxims, treated with so much disrespect.[*] Sir
W. Hamilton, probably finding it difficult to establish the “principle
of all logical affirmation” on such a basis as this, presents the axiom†
in a modified shape, as an assertion of the identity between a whole and
its parts; or rather between a whole Concept, and its parts in
Comprehension—the attributes which compose it; for Logic, as conceived
by him, has nothing to do with any wholes but Concepts, abstracting
altogether (as he asserts) from the reality of the things conceived.‡

Edition: current; Page: [374]
Although our author still so far defers to the old version of the
Principle of Identity, as to say that it is “expressed in the formula A
is A, or A = A,”[*] I must admit that while paying this tribute of
respect to our ancient friend, he has taken a very substantial and
useful liberty with him, and has made him mean much more than he ever
meant before. The only fault that can be found (but that is a serious
one) is, that if we accept this view of the maxim, we shall require many
“principles of logical affirmation” instead of one. For if we are to
make a separate principle for every mode in which we have occasion to
re-affirm the same thing in different words, we need a large number of
them. If we require a special principle to entitle us, when we have
affirmed a set of attributes jointly, to affirm over again the same
attributes severally, we require also a long list of such principles as
these: When one thing is before another, the other is after. When one
thing is after another, the other is before. When one thing is along
with another, the other is along with the first. When one thing is like,
or unlike, another, the other is like (or unlike) the first: in short,
as many fundamental principles as there are kinds of relation. For we
have need of all these changes of expression in our processes of thought
and reasoning. What is at the bottom of them all is, that Logic (to
borrow a phrase from our author)[†] postulates to be allowed to assert
the same meaning in any words which will, consistently with their
signification, express it. The use and meaning of a Fundamental Law of
Thought is, that it asserts in general terms the right to do something,
which the mind needs to do in cases as they arise. It is in this sense
that the Dictum de Omni et Nullo is called the fundamental law of the
Syllogism. But, for this purpose, it is necessary that the Law or
Postulate should be stated in so comprehensive and universal a manner as
to cover every case in which the act authorized by it requires to be
done. Looked at in this light, the Principle of Identity ought to have
been expressed thus: Whatever is true in one form of words, is true in
every other form of words which conveys the same meaning. Thus worded,
it fulfils the requirements of a First Principle of Thought; for it is
the widest possible expression of an act of thought which is always
legitimate, and continually has to be done.*

Edition: current; Page: [375]
Understood in this sense, the Principle of Identity absorbs into itself
a Postulate of Logic on which Sir W. Hamilton lays great stress, and
which he did good service in making prominent, though we shall hereafter
find that he sometimes misapplies it. He expresses it as follows: “The
only Postulate of Logic which requires an articulate enouncement is the
demand, that before dealing with a judgment or reasoning expressed in
language, the import of its terms should be fully understood; in other
words, Logic postulates to be allowed to state explicitly in language,
all that is implicitly contained in the thought.”* There cannot be a
more just demand: but let us carefully note the terms in which our
author enunciates it, that he may be held to them afterwards. Everything
may be stated explicitly in language, which is “implicitly contained in
the thought,” that is (according to his own interpretation) in the
“import of the terms” used. In other words, we have a right to bexpressb
explicitly, what has already been asserted in terms which really mean,
though they do not explicitly declare it. Observe, what has been already
asserted; not what can be inferred from something that has been
asserted. One proposition may imply another, but unless the implication
is in the very meaning of the terms, it avails nothing. It may be
impossible that the one proposition should be true without the other
being true also, and yet Logic cannot “postulate” to be allowed to
affirm this last; she must be required to prove it. Interpreted in this,
its true sense, Sir W. Hamilton’s postulate is legitimate, but is only a
particular case of the Principle of Identity in its most generalized
shape. It is a case of postulating to be allowed to express a given
meaning in another form of words.

As already mentioned, Sir W. Hamilton represents the Principle of
Identity to be “the principle of all logical affirmation.” This I can by
no means admit, whether the Principle in question is taken in Sir W.
Hamilton’s narrower, or in my own wider sense. The reaffirmation in new
language of what has already been asserted—or (descending to particulars
and adopting our author’s phraseology) the thinking of a Concept through
an attribute which is a part of itself—can, as I formerly observed, be
admitted as a correct account of the nature of affirmation, only in the
case of Analytical Judgments. In a Synthetical Judgment, the attribute
predicated is thought not as part of, but as existing in a common
subject along with, the group of attributes composing the Concept: and
of this operation of thought it is plain that no principle of Identity
can give any account, since Edition: current; Page: [376] there is a new
element introduced, which is not identical with any part of what
pre-existed in thought. This is clearly seen by Mr. Mansel, who
expressly limits the dominion of the Law of Identity to analytical
judgments;* and, with perfect consistency, regards these as the only
judgments with which Logic, as such, is concerned. If, then, the Law of
Identity is to be upheld as the principle “of all logical affirmation,”
we must understand that logical affirmation does not mean all
affirmation, but only affirmations which communicate no fact, and merely
assert that what is called by a name, is what the name declares it to
be.

If our author had stated the Law of Identity to be the principle not of
“logical affirmation,” but of affirmative Reasoning, he would have said
something far more plausible, and which had been maintained by many of
his predecessors. The truth is, however, that as far as that law is a
principle of reasoning at all, it is as much a principle of negative, as
of affirmative reasoning. In proving a negative, as much as in proving
an affirmative, we require the liberty of exchanging a proposition for
any other that is æquipollent with it, and of predicating separately of
any subject, all attributes which have been predicated of it jointly.
These liberties the mind rightfully claims in all its intellectual
operations. The Principle of Identity is not the peculiar groundwork of
any special kind of thinking, but an indispensable postulate in all
thinking.

The second of the “Fundamental Laws” is the Law or Principle of
Contradiction (Principium Contradictionis); that two assertions, one of
which denies what the other affirms, cannot be thought together. Most
people would have said, cannot be believed together; but our author
resolutely refuses to recognise belief as any element in the scientific
analysis of a proposition. “This law,” he says, “is the principle of all
logical negation and distinction,”† and “is logically expressed in the
formula, What is contradictory is unthinkable.” To this he subjoins, as
an equivalent mathematical formula, “A = not A = o, or A - A = o:”‡ a
misapplication and perversion of algebraical symbols, not to be omitted
among other evidences how little familiar he was with mathematical modes
of thought.

Concerning the name of this law, Sir W. Hamilton observes that “as it
enjoins the absence of contradiction as the indispensable condition of
thought, it ought to be called, not the Law of Contradiction, but the
Law of Non-Contradiction, or of non-repugnantia.”§ It seems that no
extent and accuracy of knowledge concerning the opinions of
predecessors, can preserve a thinker from giving an erroneous
interpretation of their meaning by Edition: current; Page: [377]
antedating a confusion of ideas which exists in his own mind. The Law of
Contradiction does not “enjoin the absence of contradiction;” it is not
an injunction at all. If those who wrote before Sir W. Hamilton of the
Law or Principle of Contradiction, had meant by those terms what he did,
namely, a rule or precept, it would have been, no doubt, absurd in them
to have given the name Law of Contradiction, to a Precept of
Non-Contradiction. But I venture to assert that when they spoke of the
Law of Contradiction (which most of them, I believe, never did, but
called it the Principle) they were no more dreaming of enjoining
anything, than when they spoke of the Law or Principle of Identity they
intended to enjoin identity. They used those terms in their proper
scientific, and not, as Sir W. Hamilton does, in their moral or
legislative sense. By the Law of Identity they meant one of the
properties of identity, namely, that a proposition which is identical
must be true. And by the Law of Contradiction they meant one of the
properties of contradiction, namely, that what is contradictory cannot
be true. We should express their meaning better if instead of the word
Law, we used the expressions, Doctrine of Identity, and Doctrine of
Contradiction. This is what they had in their minds, and even expressed
by their words; for the word Principle, with them, meant a particular
kind of Doctrine, namely, one which is the groundwork, and justifying
authority, of a whole class of operations of the mind. If the word Law
is to be retained, Principium Contradictionis would be better
translated, not Law of Contradiction but Law of Contradictory
Propositions; were it not for the consideration, that the principle of
Excluded Middle is also a law of contradictory propositions.

The Law of Contradiction, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is the
“principle of all logical negation.”* I do not see how it can be the
principle of any negation except the denial that a thing is the
contradictory of itself. That a sight is not a taste is a negation, and
it must be a very narrow use of the term which refuses it the title of a
logical negation. But there is no contradiction between a sight and a
taste. That blue is not green, involves no logical contradiction. We
could believe that a green thing may be blue, as easily as we believe
that a round thing may be blue, if experience did not teach us the
incompatibility of the former attributes, and the compatibility of the
latter. The negative judgment, that a man is not a horse, may indeed be
said to be grounded on the Principle of Contradiction, inasmuch as the
opposite assertion, that a man is a horse, is in certain of its parts
contradictory, though in others only false. The word man cmay bec
understood as signifying (in precise logical language, connoting) among
dthed other properties, Edition: current; Page: [378] that of having
exactly two legs—the word horse, that of having four; and in respect of
this particular part of the meaning of the terms, the subject and the
predicate are contradictory, the one affirming and the other denying the
extra number of legs. But suppose the subject and predicate of the
judgment to be names of classes constituted by positive attributes
without negative, as mathematician and moralist, or merchant and
philosopher. An affirmation uniting them may then be false, but cannot
possibly be self-contradictory. The Law of Contradiction cannot be the
ground on which it is asserted that a mathematician is not a moralist,
for the two Concepts are only different, not contradictory, nor even
repugnant.

Others have said, that the Law or Doctrine of Contradiction is the
principle of Negative Reasoning. But the obvious truth is, that it is
the principle of all Reasoning, so far as reasoning can be regarded
apart from objective truth or falsehood. For, abstractedly from that
consideration, the only meaning of validity in reasoning is that it
neither involves a contradiction, nor infers anything the denial of
which would not contradict the premises. Valid reasoning, from the point
of view of merely Formal Logic, is a negative conception; it means,
reasoning which is not self-destructive; which cannot be discovered to
be worthless from its own data. It would be absurd to suppose that the
validity of the reasoning process itself, either affirmative or
negative, could be proved from the Doctrine of Contradiction; for though
a given syllogism may be proved valid by showing that the falsity of the
conclusion, combined with the truth of one premise, would contradict the
truth of the other, this can only be done by another syllogism, so that
the validity of Reasoning would be taken for granted in the attempt to
prove it. The Law of Contradiction is a principle of reasoning in the
same sense, and in the same sense only, as the Law of Identity is. It is
the generalization of a mental act which is of continual occurrence, and
which cannot be dispensed with in reasoning. As we require the liberty
of substituting for a given assertion, the same assertion in different
words, so we require the liberty of substituting, for any assertion, the
denial of its contradictory. The affirmation of the one and the denial
of the other are logical equivalents, which it is allowable and
indispensable to make use of as mutually convertible.

The third “Fundamental Law” is the law or principle of Excluded Middle
(principium Exclusi Medii vel Tertii), of which the purport is, that, of
two directly contradictory propositions, one or the other must be true.
I am now expressing the axiom in my own language, for the tortuous
phraseology* by which our author eescapes frome recognising the ideas of
truth and falsity, having already been sufficiently exemplified, may
here be disregarded. Edition: current; Page: [379] This axiom is the
other half of the doctrine of Contradictory Propositions. By the law of
Contradiction, contradictory propositions cannot both be true; by the
law of Excluded Middle, they cannot both be false. Or, to state the
meaning in other language, by the law of Contradiction a proposition
cannot be both true and false; by the law of Excluded Middle it must be
either true or false—there is no third possibility.

Sir W. Hamilton says that this law is “the principle of disjunctive
judgments.”* By disjunctive judgments, logicians have always meant,
judgments in this form: Either this is true or that is true. The law of
Excluded Middle cannot be the principle of any disjunctive judgment but
those in which the subject of both the members is the same, and one of
the predicates a simple negation of the other: as, A is either B or not
B. That indeed rests on the principle of Excluded Middle, or rather, is
the very formula of that principle. It is here to be remarked that Sir
W. Hamilton, after Krug, but by a very unaccountable departure from the
common usage of logicians, confines the name of Disjunctive Judgments to
those in which all the alternative propositions have the same subject:
“D is either B, or C, or A.”† This is not only an arbitrary change in
the meaning of words, but renders the classification of propositions
incomplete, leaving two kinds of disjunctive propositions (Either B, C,
or D, is A, and Either A is B or C is D) unrecognised and without a
name. But even in our author’s restricted sense of the word Disjunctive,
I cannot see how the Law of Excluded Middle can be said to be the
principle of all disjunctive judgments. The judgment that A is either B
or not B, is warranted and its truth certified by the Law of Excluded
Middle: but the judgment that A is either B or C, both B and C being
positive, requires some other voucher than the law that one or other of
two contradictories must be true. Thus, “X is either a man or a brute,”
is not a judgment grounded on the principle of Excluded Middle, since
brute is not a bare negation of man, but includes the positive attribute
of being an animal, which X may possibly not be.

It might be said, with more plausibility, that the Law of Excluded
Middle is the principle of Disjunctive Reasoning. Thus, in the last
example, “X is either a man or a brute” may be a conclusion from two
premises, that X is an animal, and that every animal is either a man or
a brute: the latter of which is a disjunctive judgment grounded on the
Law of Excluded Middle. But it is not the fact that all disjunctive
conclusions are inferred from premises of this nature. Having been told
that A has lost a son, I conclude that either B, C, or D (A having no
other sons) is dead: what kind of reasoning is this? Disjunctive,
surely: it has a disjunctive premise, and leads to a disjunctive
conclusion. But the disjunctive premise (Every son of A is either B, C,
or Edition: current; Page: [380] D) does not rest on the Law of Excluded
Middle, or on any necessity of thought; it rests on my knowledge of the
individual fact.

The third Law, however, like the two others, is one of the principles of
all reasonings, being the generalization of a process which is liable to
be required in all of them. As the Doctrine of Contradiction authorizes
us to substitute for the assertion of either of two contradictory
propositions, the denial of the other, so the doctrine of Excluded
Middle empowers us to substitute for the denial of either of two
contradictory propositions, the assertion of the other. Thus all the
three principles which our author terms the Fundamental Laws of Thought,
are universal postulates of Reasoning; and as such, are entitled to the
conspicuous position which our author assigns to them in Logic: though
it is evident that they ought not to be placed at the very beginning of
the subject, but at the earliest, in its Second Part, the theory of
Judgments, or Propositions: since they essentially involve the ideas of
Truth and Falsity, which are attributes only of judgments, not of names,
or concepts.

It is another question altogether, what we ought to think of these three
principles, considered not as general expressions of legitimate
intellectual processes, but as themselves speculative truths. Sir W.
Hamilton considers them to be such in a very universal sense indeed,
since he thinks we are bound to regard them as true beyond the sphere of
either real or imaginable phænomenal experience—to be true of Things in
Themselves—of Noumena. “Whatever,” he says,

violates the laws, whether of Identity, of Contradiction, or of Excluded
Middle, we feel to be absolutely impossible, not only in thought, but in
existence. Thus we cannot attribute even to Omnipotence the power of
making a thing different from itself, of making a thing at once to be
and not to be, of making a thing neither to be nor not to be. These
three laws thus determine to us the sphere of possibility and of
impossibility: and this not merely in thought but in reality, not only
logically but metaphysically.*

And in another place: “If the true character of objective validity be
universality, the laws of Logic are really of that character, for those
laws constrain us, by their own authority, to regard them as the
universal laws not only of human thought, but of universal reason.”† A
few pages before, our author took pains to impress upon us that we were
not to regard these laws as necessities of thought, but as general
precepts “which we are able to violate:”[*] but they now appear to be
necessities of thought and something more.

I readily admit that these three general propositions are universally
true Edition: current; Page: [381] of all phænomena. I also admit that
if there are any inherent necessities of thought, these are such. I
express myself in this qualified manner, because whoever is aware how
artificial, modifiable, the creatures of circumstances, and alterable by
circumstances, most of the supposed necessities of thought are (though
real necessities to a given person at a given time), will hesitate to
affirm of any such necessities that they are an original part of our
mental constitution. Whether the three so-called Fundamental Laws are
laws of our thoughts by the native structure of the mind, or merely
because we perceive them to be universally true of observed phænomena, I
will not positively decide: but they are laws of our thoughts now, and
invincibly so. They may or may not be capable of alteration by
experience, but the conditions of our existence deny to us the
experience which would be required to alter them. Any assertion,
therefore, which conflicts with one of these laws—any proposition, for
instance, which asserts a contradiction, though it were on a subject
wholly removed from the sphere of our experience, is to us unbelievable.
The belief in such a proposition is, in the present constitution of
nature, impossible as a mental fact.*

But Sir W. Hamilton goes beyond this: he thinks that the obstacle to
belief does not lie solely in an incapacity of our believing faculty,
but in objective incapacities of existence; that the “Fundamental Laws
of Thought” are laws of Existence too, and may be known to be true not
only of Phænomena but also of Noumena. Of this, however, as of all else
relating to Noumena, the verdict of philosophy, I apprehend, must be
that we are entirely ignorant. The distinction itself is but an idle
one; for since Noumena, if they exist, are wholly unknowable by us,
except phænomenally, through their effects on us; and since all
attributes which exist for us, even in our fancy, are but phænomena,
there is nothing for us either to affirm or deny of a Noumenon except
phænomenal attributes: existence Edition: current; Page: [382] itself,
as we conceive it, being merely the power of producing phænomena. Now in
respect to phænomenal attributes, no one denies the three “Fundamental
Laws” to be universally true. Since then they are laws of all Phænomena,
and since Existence has to us no meaning but one which has relation to
Phænomena, we are quite safe in looking upon them as laws of Existence.
This is sufficient for those who hold the doctrine of the Relativity of
human knowledge. But Sir W. Hamilton, as has been seen, does not hold
that doctrine, though he holds a verbal truism which he chooses to call
by the same name. His opinion is that we do know something more than
phænomena: that we know the Primary Qualities of Bodies as existing in
the Noumena, in the things themselves, and not as mere powers of
affecting us. Sir W. Hamilton, therefore, needs another kind of argument
to establish the doctrine that the Laws of Identity, Contradiction, and
Excluded Middle, are laws of all existence: and here we have it:

To deny the universal application of the three laws, is, in fact, to
subvert the reality of thought; and as this subversion is itself an act
of thought, it in fact annihilates itself. When, for example, I say that
A is, and then say that A is not, by the second assertion I sublate or
take away what, by the first assertion, I posited or laid down; thought,
in the one case, undoing by negation what, in the other, it had by
affirmation done.

This proves only that a contradiction is unthinkable, not that it is
impossible in point of fact. But what follows goes more directly to the
mark.

But when it is asserted that A existing and A non-existing are at once
true, what does fitf imply? It implies that negation and affirmation
correspond to nothing out of the mind,—that there is no agreement, no
disagreement between thought and its objects; and this is tantamount to
saying that truth and falsehood are merely empty sounds. For if we only
think by affirmation and negation, and if these are only as they are
exclusive of each other, it follows, that unless existence and
non-existence be opposed objectively in the same manner as affirmation
and negation are opposed subjectively, all our thought is a mere
illusion. Thus it is that those who would assert the possibility of
contradictions being at once true, in fact annihilate the possibility of
truth itself, and the whole significance of thought.*

Of this favourite style of argument with our author we have already had
many specimens, and have said so much about them, that we can afford to
be brief in the present instance. Assuming it to be true that “to deny
the universal application of the three laws” as laws of existence “is to
subvert the reality of thought:” is anything added to the force of this
consideration by saying that “this subversion is itself an act of
thought?” If the reality of thought can be subverted, is there any
peculiar enormity in doing it by means of thought itself? In what other
way can we imagine it to be done? Edition: current; Page: [383] And if
it were true that thought is an invalid process, what better proof of
this could be given than that we could, by thinking, arrive at the
conclusion that our thoughts are not to be trusted? Sir W. Hamilton
always seems to suppose that the imaginary sceptic, who doubts the
validity of thought altogether, is obliged to claim a greater validity
for his subversive thoughts than he allows to the thoughts they subvert.
But it is enough for him to claim the same validity, so that all
opinions are thrown into equal uncertainty.* Sir W. Hamilton, of all
men, ought to know this, for when he is himself on the sceptical side of
any question, as when speaking of the Absolute, or anything else which
he deems inaccessible to the human faculties, this is the very line of
argument he employs. He proves the invalidity, as regards those
subjects, of the thinking process, by showing that it lands us in
contradictions.†

But it is entirely inadmissible that to suppose that a law of thought
need not necessarily be a law of existence, invalidates the thinking
process. If, indeed, there were any law necessitating us to think a
relation between phænomena which does not in fact exist between the
phænomena, then certainly the thinking process would be proved invalid,
because we should be compelled by it to think true something which would
really be false. But Edition: current; Page: [384] if the mind is
incapable of thinking anything respecting Noumena except the Phænomena
which it considers as proceeding from them, and to which it can appeal
to test its thoughts; and if we are under no necessity of thinking these
otherwise than in conformity to what they really are; we may refuse to
believe that our generalizations from the Phænomenal attributes of
Noumena can be applied to Noumena in any other aspect, without in the
least invalidating the operation of thought in regard to anything to
which thought is applicable. We may say to Sir W. Hamilton what he says
himself in another case: “I only say that thought is limited; but,
within its limits, I do not deny, I do not subvert, its truth.”* As he
elsewhere observes, translating from Esser, truth consists “solely in
the correspondence of our thoughts with their objects.”† If the only
real objects of thought, even when we are nominally speaking of Noumena,
are Phænomena, our thoughts are true when they are made to correspond
with Phænomena: and, the possibility of this being denied by no one, the
thinking process is valid whether our laws of thought are laws of
absolute existence or not.

Edition: current; Page: [482]


CHAPTER XXII: Of Sir William Hamilton’s Supposed Improvements in Formal Logic

of all Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophical achievements, there is none,
except perhaps his “Philosophy of the Conditioned,” on account of which
so much merit has been claimed for him, as the additions and corrections
which he is supposed to have contributed to the doctrine of the
Syllogism. These may be summed up in two principal theories, with their
numerous corollaries and applications; the recognition of two kinds of
Syllogism, Syllogisms in Extension and Syllogisms in Comprehension; and
the doctrine of the Quantification of the Predicate. To the former of
these, Sir W. Hamilton ascribed great importance. According to him, all
previous logicians, “with the doubtful exception of Aristotle,” “have
altogether overlooked the reasoning in Comprehension”—“have marvellously
overlooked one, and that the simplest and most natural of these
descriptions of reasoning,—the reasoning in the quantity of
comprehension:” and he claims, in directing attention to it, to have
“relieved a radical defect and vital inconsistency in the present
logical system.”* For the other theory, that of the Quantification of
the Predicate, still loftier claims are advanced both by himself and by
others. Mr. Baynes, with an enthusiasm natural and not ungraceful in a
pupil, concludes his Essay on the subject (which still remains the
clearest exposition of his master’s doctrine) with the following words:

We cannot, however, close without expressing the true joy we feel
(though, were the feeling less strong, we might shrink from the
intrusion), that in our own country, and in our time, this discovery has
been made. We rejoice to know that one has at length arisen, able to
recognise and complete the plan of the mighty builder, Aristotle,—to lay
the top-stone on that fabric, the foundations of which were laid more
than two thousand years ago, by the master-hand of the Stagirite, which,
after the labours of many generations of workmen, who have from time to
time built up one part here and taken down another there—remains
substantially as he left it; but which, when finished, shall be seen to
be an edifice of wondrous beauty, harmony, and completeness.†

Edition: current; Page: [386]
Previous to discussing these additions to the Syllogistic Theory, it is
necessary to revert to a doctrine which has been briefly stated in a
former chapter,[*] but did not then receive all the elucidation it
requires, and which has a most important bearing on both of Sir W.
Hamilton’s supposed discoveries. This is, that all Judgments (except
where both the terms are proper names) are really judgments in
Comprehension; though it is customary, and the natural tendency of the
mind, to express most of them in terms of Extension. In other words, we
never really predicate anything but attributes, though, in the usage of
language, we commonly predicate them by means of words which are names
of concrete objects.

When, for example, I say, The sky is blue; my meaning, and my whole
meaning, is that the sky has that particular colour. I am not thinking
of the class blue, as regards extension, at all. I am not caring, nor
necessarily knowing, what blue things there are, or if there is any blue
thing except the sky. I am thinking only of the sensation of blue, and
am judging that the sky produces this sensation in my sensitive faculty;
or (to express the meaning in technical language) that the quality
answering to the sensation of blue, or the power of exciting the
sensation of blue, is an attribute of the sky. When again I say, All
oxen ruminate, I have nothing to do with the predicate, considered in
extension. I may know, or be ignorant, that there are other ruminating
animals besides oxen. Whether I do or do not know it, it does not,
unless by mere accident, pass through my mind. In judging that oxen
ruminate, I do not, unless accidentally, think under the notion ruminate
(to borrow Sir W. Hamilton’s phraseology) any other notion than that of
an ox. The Comprehension of the predicate—the attribute or set of
attributes signified by it—are all that I have in my mind; and the
relation of this attribute or these attributes to the subject, is the
entire matter of the judgment.

In one of the examples above given, the predicate is an adjective, and
in the other a verb, which, in a logical point of view, is classed with
adjectives: but its being a noun substantive makes no difference. For
reasons easily shown, a substantive is more strongly associated with the
ideas of the concrete objects denoted by it, than an adjective or a verb
is. But when we predicate a substantive—when we say, Philip is a man,
or, A aherringa is a fish—do the words man and fish signify anything to
us but the bundles of attributes connoted by them? Do the propositions
mean anything except Edition: current; Page: [387] that Philip has the
human attributes, and a bherringb the piscine ones? Assuredly not. Any
notion of a multitude of other men, among whom Philip is ranked, or a
variety of fishes besides cherringsc, is foreign to the proposition. The
proposition does not decide whether there is this additional quantity or
no. It affirms the attributes of its own particular subject, and of no
other.

Passing now from the predicate to the subject, we shall find that the
subject also, if a general term or notion, is always construed in
Comprehension, that is, by the attributes which constitute it, and has
no other meaning in thought. When I judge that all oxen ruminate, what
do I mean by all oxen? I have no image in my mind of all oxen. I do not,
nor ever shall, know all of them, and I am not thinking even of all
those I do know. “All oxen,” in my thoughts, does not mean particular
animals—it means the objects, whatever they may be, that have the
attributes by which oxen are recognised, and which compose the notion of
an ox. Wherever these attributes shall be found, there, as I judge, the
attribute of ruminating will be found also: that is the entire purport
of the judgment. Its meaning is a meaning in attributes, and nothing
else. It supposes subjects, but merely as all attributes suppose them.

But there is another mode of interpreting the same proposition, by
considering it as dad part of the statement of a classification and
mental co-ordination of the objects which exist in nature. The
proposition is then looked upon as an assertion respecting given
objects; affirming what other individual objects they are classed among
by the general scheme of human language. Thus interpreted, the
proposition “all oxen ruminate” may be read as follows: If all creatures
that ruminate were collected in a vast plain, and I were required to
search the world and point out all oxen, they would all be found among
the crowd on that plain, and none anywhere else. Moreover, this would
have been the case in all past time, and will at any future, while the
present order of nature lasts. This is the proposition “All oxen
ruminate” interpreted in Extension. Will any one say that a process of
thought like this passes in the mind of whoever makes the affirmation?
It is a point of view in which the proposition may be regarded; it is
one of the aspects of the fact asserted in the proposition. But it is
not the aspect in which the proposition presents it to the mind.

It will, however, very naturally be objected—If the meaning in our mind
is that the bovine attributes are always accompanied by the attribute of
ruminating, why do we, except for the purposes of abstract logic or
metaphysics, never say this, but always say “All oxen ruminate?” The
Edition: current; Page: [388] reason is, that we have no other
convenient and compact mode of speaking. Most attributes, and nearly all
large “bundles of attributes,” have no names of their own. We can only
name them by a circumlocution. We are accustomed to speak of attributes
not by names given to themselves, but by means of the names which they
give to the objects they are attributes of. We do not talk of the
phænomena which accompany piscinity; we talk of the phænomena of fishes.
We do not frame a definition of piscinity, but a definition of a fish.
The definition, however, of a fish is exactly the same which the
definition of piscinity would be; it is an enumeration of the same
attributes. Language is constructed upon the principle of naming
concrete objects first: it does not always name abstractions at all, and
when it does, the names are almost always derived from those of concrete
objects. The reasons are obvious. Objects—even classes of objects—being
conceivable by a much less effort of abstraction than attributes, are in
the necessary order of things conceived and named earlier, and remain
always more familiar to the mind: attributes, even when they come to be
conceived, cannot be conceived in a detached state, but are always (as
may be said by an adaptation of the Hamiltonian phraseology) thought
through objects of some sort. Consequently all familiar propositions are
expressed in the language which denotes objects, and not in that which
denotes attributes. Nor is this all. What is primarily important to us
in our sensations and impressions, is their permanent groups. In our
particular and passing sensations (unless in cases of exceptional
intensity) the important thing to us is, not the sensation itself, but
to what group it belongs; what concrete object, what Permanent
Possibility of Sensation, it indicates the presence of. The mind
consequently hurries on from the sensible impressions that proceed from
an outward object, to the object itself, and its subsequent thoughts
revolve round that. It is on the concrete object indicated, that the
expectation of future sensations depends; and the concrete object,
consequently, in most cases, exclusively engages our thoughts, and
stimulates us to mark it by a name. The name, to answer its purpose,
must remind ourselves, and inform others, of the sensations we or they
have to expect: that is, it must connote an attribute, or set of
attributes. And men did not at first name attributes in any other than
this indirect manner. They gave no direct names to attributes, because
they did not conceive attributes as having any separate existence. As
they began by naming only concrete objects, so the first names by which
they expressed even the results of abstraction, were not names of
attributes in the abstract, regarded apart from their objects, but names
of concrete objects signifying the presence of the attributes. Men
talked of blue, or of blue things, before they talked of blueness. Even
when they did talk of blueness, it was originally not as the Edition:
current; Page: [389] attribute, but as an imaginary cause of the
attribute, which cause they figured to themselves as itself a concrete
thing, residing in the object.

It thus appears that though all judgments consist in ascribing
attributes, the original and natural mode of expressing them was by
general names denoting concrete objects, and only connoting attributes;
and by the structure of language this remains the only concise mode, and
the only one which, addressing itself to familiar associations, conveys
the meaning at once, to minds not exercised in metaphysical abstraction.
But this does not alter the obvious truth, that concrete objects are
only known by attributes, are only distinguished by attributes, and that
the concrete names by which we speak of them mean nothing but
attributes, or “bundles of attributes.” Our representation in thought of
a concrete object is but a representation of attributes, and our concept
of a class of concrete objects is but a certain portion of those
attributes, not, indeed, separately conceived or imaged, but exclusively
attended to. There is, therefore, nothing in our mind when we affirm a
general proposition, but attributes, and their coexistence or
repugnance: and the position is made out, that all judgments, expressed
by means of general terms, are judgments in Comprehension, though
always, unless for some special purpose, expressed in Extension.

If this be the true doctrine of Judgments, what is meant by saying that
there are two sorts of Judgment, one in Extension, the other in
Comprehension, and two kinds of reasoning corresponding to these, one of
which, that in Comprehension, had been overlooked by all logicians,
except possibly Aristotle, up to the time of Sir W. Hamilton? All our
ordinary judgments are in Comprehension only, Extension not being
thought of. But we may, if we please, make the Extension of our general
terms an express object of thought, and this may be called thinking in
Extension, though it is rather thinking about Extension. When I judge
that all oxen ruminate, I have nothing in my thoughts but the attributes
and their coexistence. But when, by reflection, I perceive what the
proposition implies, I remark, that other things may ruminate besides
oxen; and that the unknown multitude of things which ruminate form a
mass, with which the unknown multitude of things having the attributes
of oxen is either identical, or is wholly comprised in it. Which of
these two is the truth I may not know, and if I did, took no notice of
it when I assented to the proposition “all oxen ruminate.” But I
perceive, on consideration, that one or other of them must be true.
Though I had not this in my mind when I affirmed that all oxen ruminate,
I can have it now; I can make the concrete objects denoted by each of
the two names an object of thought, as a collective though indefinite
aggregate; in other words, I can make the Extension of the names (or
notions) an object of direct consciousness. When I do this, I perceive
that this operation Edition: current; Page: [390] introduces no new
fact, but is only a different mode of contemplating the very fact which
I had previously expressed by the words “all oxen ruminate.” The fact is
the same, but the mode of contemplating it is different: the mental
operation, the act of thought, is not only a distinct act, but an act of
a different kind.

There is thus, in all propositions (save those in which both terms are
Proper, that is, in significant, names) a judgment concerning attributes
(called by Sir W. Hamilton a judgment in Comprehension), which we make
as a matter of course, and a possible judgment in or concerning
Extension, which we may make, and which will be true if the former is
true. Nevertheless (as has just been shown), the conditions of primitive
thought, and subsequent convenience, cause us generally to enunciate our
propositions in terms appropriate to the derivative judgment which we
seldom make, rather than to the primitive judgment which we always make.
And this explains why, though the meaning of all propositions in which
general terms are used is in Comprehension, writers on logic always
explain the rules of the Syllogism in reference to Extension alone. It
is because the framers of the rules did not concern themselves with
propositions or reasonings as they exist in thought, but only as they
are expressed in language. And in this they were justified. For the
syllogism is not the form in which we necessarily reason, but a test of
reasoning: a form into which we may translate any reasoning, with the
effect of exposing all the points at which any unwarranted inference can
have got in. According to this view of the Syllogism—for the
justification of which I must refer to the Second Book of my System of
Logic[*]—the syllogistic theory is only concerned with providing forms
suitable to test the validity of inferences; and it was not necessary
that the forms in which reasoning was directed to be written, should be
those in which it is carried on in thought, so long as they are
practically equivalent, that is, so long as the propositions in words
are always true or false according as the judgments in thought are so.
The propositions in Extension, being, in this sense, exactly equivalent
to the judgments in Comprehension, served quite as well to ground forms
of ratiocination upon: and as the validity of the forms was more easily
and conveniently shown through the concrete conception of comparing
classes of objects, than through the abstract one of recognising
coexistence of attributes, logicians were perfectly justified in taking
the course, which, in any case, the established forms of language would
doubtless have forced upon them. They are thus deserving of no blame,
though their mode of proceeding has been attended with some practical
mischief, by diverting the attention of thinkers from what really
constitutes the meaning of Propositions. Edition: current; Page: [391]
It has also been one of the causes of the prejudice so general in the
last three centuries, against the syllogistic theory. For a doctrine
which defined one of the two great processes of the discovery of truth
as consisting in the operation of placing objects in a class and then
finding them there, can never, I think, have really satisfied any
competent thinker, however he may have acquiesced in it for want of a
better. There must always have been a dormant sense of discontent, an
obscure feeling that this was a description of the reasoning process by
one of its accidents, though an inseparable accident.*

Sir W. Hamilton distinguishes two kinds of Syllogism, Extensive and
Comprehensive.

For while every syllogism infers that the part of a part is a part of
the whole, it does this either in the quantity of Extension—the
Predicate of the two notions compared in the Question and Conclusion
being the greatest whole, and the subject the smallest part; or in the
counter quantity of Comprehension, the subject of these two notions
being the greatest whole, and the Predicate the smallest part.

He acknowledges, however, that both syllogisms are identically the same
argument; “every syllogism in the one quantity being convertible into a
Edition: current; Page: [392] syllogism absolutely equivalent in the
other quantity.”* And what is the difference in form and language
between the two syllogisms? According to our author it is merely a
difference in the order of the premises. The following,

-   

    “Every morally responsible agent is a free agent;
-   

    Man is a morally responsible agent;
-   

    Therefore man is a free agent,”†

is, according to him, a syllogism in Extension. Transpose the premises,
and write it thus,

-   

    “Man is a responsible agent;
-   

    But a responsible agent is a free agent;
-   

    Therefore, man is a free agent,”‡

and we have, according to him, a syllogism in Comprehension. Far,
however, from constituting two kinds of reasoning, this does not even
supply us with two different forms of it. He himself says elsewhere,
that “the transposition of the propositions of a syllogism affords no
modifications of form yielding more than a superficial character.”§ And
even this superficial difference he with his own hands abolishes,
saying, that any syllogism whatever “can be perspicuously expressed not
only by the normal, but by any of the five consecutions of its
propositions which deviate from the regular order,” and that “a
syllogism in Comprehension is equally susceptible of a transposition of
its propositions as a syllogism in Extension.”¶ So that the slight
distinction of form which he seemed at first to contend for, does not
exist; a Syllogism in Comprehension, and the corresponding Syllogism in
Extension, are word for word the same. Instead of “every syllogism in
the one quantity” being “convertible into a syllogism absolutely
equivalent in the other quantity,” every syllogism is already a
syllogism in both quantities.∥

The distinction, therefore, is not between two kinds, or even between
two forms, of syllogism, but between two modes of construing the meaning
of the same syllogism. And what are these two modes? Sir W. Hamilton
says, that they are distinguished by a difference in the meaning of the
copula.

Edition: current; Page: [393]
In the one process, that, to wit, in extension, the copula is, means is
contained under, whereas in the other, it means comprehends in. Thus,
the proposition God is merciful, viewed as in the one quantity,
signifies God is contained under merciful, that is, the notion God is
contained under the notion merciful; viewed as in the other, means, God
comprehends merciful, that is, the notion God comprehends in it the
notion merciful.*

I cannot admit this to be a true analysis of the meaning of the
proposition, either in Extension or in Comprehension. The statement that
God is merciful I construe as an affirmation not concerning the notion
God, but the Being God. Interpreted in Comprehension I hold it to mean,
that this Being has the attribute signified by the word merciful, or, in
our author’s language, comprehended in the concept. Interpreted in
Extension I render it thus: The Being, God, is either the only being, or
one of the beings, forming the class merciful, or, in other words,
possessing the attribute mercifulness. Thus stated, who can doubt which
of the two is the original and natural judgment, and which is a
derivative and artificial mode of restating it? The difference between
them is slight, but real, and consists in this, that the second
construction introduces the idea of other possible merciful beings, an
idea not suggested by the first construction. This suggestion gives rise
to the idea of a class merciful, and of God as a member of that class:
notions which are not present to the mind at all when it simply assents
to the proposition that God is merciful. To make a distinction between
Reasoning in Extension and in Comprehension, when the same syllogism
serves for both, could only be admissible if we employed the same words
having sometimes in our mind the meaning in Extension, sometimes that in
Comprehension: but in reality all reasoning is thought solely in
Comprehension, except when we, for a technical purpose, perform a second
act of thought upon the Extension—which in general we do not, and have
no need to, consider.

Nor is this the only objection to Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine. There is
another, less obvious, but equally fatal. The statement in Comprehension
is, that A has the attributes comprehended in B. The statement in
Extension Edition: current; Page: [394] is, that A belongs to the class
of things which have the attributes comprehended in B. These statements
are either, as I affirm them to be, one and the same assertion in
slightly different words, or they are different assertions. If they are
the same assertion, there is but one judgment, which is both in
Extension and in Comprehension, and but one kind of reasoning, which is
in both. But supposing them, for the sake of argument, to be two
different assertions, the judgment respecting Extension is a corollary
from that in Comprehension, expressing an artificial point of view in
which we may regard the natural judgment. Now, on this supposition, that
the judgment respecting Extension is not the same, but an additional
judgment, it is, like all other judgments, a judgment in Comprehension.
“A is part of class B” must be interpreted thus: The phænomenon A
possesses, or the concept A comprehends, the attribute of being included
in the class B. So that, while every judgment in Comprehension warrants,
by way of immediate inference, a corresponding judgment respecting
Extension, this very judgment respecting Extension is itself but a
particular kind of judgment in Comprehension. Even, therefore, on the
untenable doctrine that there are two different judgments in the case,
the distinction between judgments in Extension and judgments in
Comprehension is not sustainable; and the supposed addition to the
theory of the Syllogism is a mere excrescence and incumbrance on it.

How great the incumbrance is, all are able to judge, who follow our
author through the details of the syllogistic logic. He not only finds
it necessary to expound and demonstrate every one of the doctrines twice
over, as adapted to Extension and to Comprehension, but struggles to
express all the fundamental principles in a manner combining both points
of view; and is thereby compelled either to state those principles in
terms too wide and abstract for easy apprehension, in order that what is
laid down respecting wholes and their parts may be applicable to both
kinds of wholes (in Extension and in Comprehension), or else to
embarrass the learner with the necessity of carrying on two trains of
thought at once, in the attempt to apprehend a single principle. I need
not dwell on the additional error, of considering the relation of whole
and parts as the foundation of the Syllogism in both aspects. To the
point of view of Extension that relation is applicable. In every
affirmative proposition, if true, the object or class of objects denoted
by the subject is a part (when it is not the whole) of the class of
objects denoted by the predicate. But no similar relation exists between
the two “bundles of attributes” comprehended in the subject and in the
predicate, except in the case of Analytical Judgments, that is, of
merely verbal propositions. In Synthetical Judgments, that is, in all
propositions which convey information about anything except the meaning
of words, the Edition: current; Page: [395] relation between the two
sets of attributes is not a relation of Whole and Part, but a relation
of Coexistence.

I now pass to the doctrine of the Quantification of the Predicate;
examining it by the light of the same principles which we have applied
to the distinction between the supposed two kinds of Reasoning.

It will be desirable to state in Sir W. Hamilton’s own words, as first
published in 1846, the claims he prefers in behalf of this doctrine, and
the important consequences to which he considers it to lead.

The self-evident truth,—That we can only rationally deal with what we
already understand, determines the simple logical postulate,—To state
explicitly what is thought implicitly. From the consistent application
of this postulate, on which Logic ever insists, but which Logicians have
never fairly obeyed, it follows:—that, logically, we ought to take into
account the quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, and for
manifest reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but
also of the predicate of a judgment. This being done, and the necessity
of doing it will be proved against Aristotle and his repeaters, we
obtain, inter alia, the ensuing results:

1°. That the preindesignate terms of a proposition, whether subject or
predicate, are never, on that account, thought as indefinite (or
indeterminate) in quantity. The only indefinite, is particular, as
opposed to definite, quantity; and this last, as it is either of an
extensive maximum undivided, or of an extensive minimum indivisible,
constitutes quantity universal (general) and quantity singular
(individual). In fact, definite and indefinite are the only quantities
of which we ought to hear in Logic; for it is only as indefinite that
particular, it is only as definite that individual and general,
quantities have any (and the same) logical avail.

2°. The revocation of the two terms of a Proposition to their true
relation; a proposition being always an equation of its subject and its
predicate.

3°. The consequent reduction of the Conversion of Propositions from
three species to one—that of Simple Conversion.

4°. The reduction of all the General Laws of Categorical Syllogisms to a
Single Canon.

5°. The evolution from that one canon of all the species and varieties
of Syllogism.

6°. The abrogation of all the Special Laws of Syllogism.

7°. A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three Syllogistic
Figures; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final abolition of the
Fourth.

8°. A manifestation that Figure is an unessential variation in
syllogistic form; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the
syllogisms of the other figures to the first.

9°. An enouncement of one Organic Principle for each Figure.

10°. A determination of the true number of the legitimate Moods, with

11°. Their amplification in number (thirty-six);

12°. Their numerical equality under all the figures; and

13°. Their relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout every
schematic difference.

14°. That in the second and third figures, the extremes holding both the
same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the first, an
opposition and subordination Edition: current; Page: [396] between a
term major and a term minor mutually containing and contained, in the
counter wholes of Extension and Comprehension.

15°. Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is no
determinate major and minor premise, and there are two indifferent
conclusions; whereas, in the first, the premises are determinate, and
there is a single proximate conclusion.

16°. That the third, as the figure in which Comprehension is
predominant, is more appropriate to Induction.

17°. That the second, as the figure in which Extension is predominant,
is more appropriate to Deduction.

18°. That the first, as the figure in which Comprehension and Extension
are in equilibrium, is common to Induction and Deduction indifferently.*

The doctrine which leads to all these consequences, or rather, which
necessitates all these changes of expression (for they are no more), is
that the Predicate is always quantified in thought; that we always think
it either as signifying the whole, or as signifying only a part, of the
objects included in its Extension. “In reality and in thought, every
quantity is necessarily either all, or some, or none.”† The proposition,
All A is B, must mean, in thought, either All A is all B, or All A is
some B. When I judge that all oxen ruminate, it must not only be true,
but I must mean, either that All ox is all ruminating, or that All ox is
some ruminating. Logic, therefore, postulates to express in words what
is already in the thoughts, and to write alle propositions in one or
other of these forms: which makes it necessary that all the rules for
reasoning should be altered, at least in expression, and grounded on the
relation of exact equality between the terms.

But if, as I have endeavoured to show, the predicate B is present in
thought only in respect of its Comprehension; if it be an error to
suppose that it is thought of as an aggregate of objects at all; still
less is it thought of as an aggregate with a determinate quantity, as
some or all. I repeat the appeal which I have already made to every
reader’s consciousness: Does he, when he judges that all oxen ruminate,
advert even in the minutest degree to the question, whether there is
anything else which ruminates? Is this consideration at all in his
thoughts, any more than any other consideration foreign to the immediate
subject? One person may know that there are other ruminating animals,
another may think that there are none, a third may be without any
opinion on the subject: but if they all know what is Edition: current;
Page: [397] meant by ruminating, they all, when they judge that every ox
ruminates, mean exactly the same thing. The mental process they go
through, as far as that one judgment is concerned, is precisely
identical; though some of them may go on further, and add other
judgments to it.*

The fact, that the proposition “Every A is B” only means Every A is some
B, far from being always present in thought, is not at first seized
without some difficulty by the tyro in logic. It requires a certain
effort of thought to perceive that when we say, All As are Bs, we only
identify A with a hportionh of the class B. When the learner is first
told that the proposition All As are Bs can only be converted in the
form “Some Bs are As,” I apprehend that this strikes him as a new idea;
and that the truth of the statement is not quite obvious to him, until
verified by a particular example in which he already knows that the
simple converse would be false, such as, All men are animals, therefore
all animals are men. So far is it from being true that the proposition,
All As are Bs, is spontaneously quantified in thought as All A is some
B.

Edition: current; Page: [398]
The pretension, therefore, of the doctrine of a Quantified Predicate, to
be a more correct representation and analysis of the reasoning process
than the common doctrine of the syllogism, I hold to be psychologically
false. And this is fatal to the doctrine, if we admit Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory that Logic is the science of the laws according to which we must
think in order that our thought may be valid. But according to the very
different view I myself take of Formal Logic, this doctrine might still
be a valuable addition to it: since, in my view, the Syllogistic theory
altogether is not an analysis of the reasoning process, but only
furnishes a test of the validity of reasonings, by supplying forms of
expression into which all reasonings may be translated if valid, and
which, if they are invalid, will detect the hidden flaw. In this point
of view it might well be, that a form which always exhibited the
quantity of the predicate might be an improvement on the common form.
And I am not disposed to deny that for occasional use, and for purposes
of illustration, it is so. The exposition of the theory of the syllogism
is made clearer, by pointing out that All As are B only implies that All
A is some B, while No As are B excludes A from the whole of B. This, in
fact, is taught to all who learn logic in the common way, by what is
called the doctrine of Suppositio; or (in the many books which leave
this doctrine out) by the theory of Conversion, and the syllogistic
rules against Undistributed Middle, and against proceeding à non
distributo ad distributum. There is no harm, and some little good, in
giving to these essential doctrines the more explicit expression
demanded for them by Sir W. Hamilton. But to obtain any advantage from
it, we must be content with quantifying such propositions as, in their
unquantified form, are really asserted and used. To foist in any others,
overlays and confuses, instead of illuminating, the theory. “All A is
some B” is admissible, because it is the quantification really implied
in All As are B; but “All A is all B” is inadmissible, because it is not
the equivalent of any single proposition capable of being asserted in an
unquantified form. As all reasoning, except in the process of teaching
Logic, will always be carried on in the forms which men use in real
life; and as the only purpose of providing other forms, is to supply a
test for those which are really used; it is essential that the forms
provided should be forms into which the propositions expressed in common
language can be translated—that every proposition in logical form,
should be the exact equivalent of some proposition in the common form.
Now, there is no proposition capable of being expressed in the ordinary
form, which is equivalent to the proposition, All A is all B. That form
of expression combines the import of two propositions in common
language, expressive of two separate judgments, All As are Bs, and All
Bs are As.

If this had not been denied, I should have deemed it too obvious to
require either proof or illustration. But Sir W. Hamilton does deny it,
and Edition: current; Page: [399] therefore some enforcement of it is
indispensable. When we make an assertion in the cramped and unnatural
form, All man is all rational, can anything seem more evident than that
to cover the whole ground occupied by this statement, two judgments are
required; namely, first, that every man has the attribute reason; and
secondly, that nothing which is not man has that attribute, or (which is
the same thing) that every rational creature has the attributes of man?
How is it possible to make only one judgment, out of an assertion
divisible into two parts, one of which may be unknown and the other
known, one unthought of and the other thought of, one false and the
other true?*

Unless Sir W. Hamilton was prepared to maintain that whenever the
universal converse of an universal affirmative proposition would be
true, we cannot know the one without knowing the other, it is in vain
for him to contend that a form which asserts both of them at once is
only one proposition. If in judging that “All equilateral triangles are
equiangular,” we judge that all equilateral triangles are all
equiangular, in what condition of judgment is the mind of the tyro to
whom it has just been proved that all equilateral triangles are
equiangular, but who does not yet know the proof of the converse
proposition that all equiangular triangles are equilateral? If “All
equilateral triangles are all equiangular” is only one judgment, what is
the proposition that all equilateral triangles are equiangular? Is it
half a judgment?†

Edition: current; Page: [400]
This is not the only case in which Sir W. Hamilton insists upon wrapping
up two different assertions in one form of words, and demands that they
shall be considered one assertion. He strenuously contends that the form
“Some A is B,” or (in its quantified form) “Some A is some B,” ought in
logical propriety to be used and understood in the sense of “some and
some Edition: current; Page: [401] only.”* No shadow of justification is
shown for thus deviating from the practice of all writers on logic, and
of all who think and speak with any approach to precision, and adopting
into logic a mere sous-entendu of common conversation in its most
unprecise form. If I say to any one, “I saw some of your children
to-day,” he might be justified in inferring that I did not see them all,
not because the words mean it, but because, if I had seen them all, it
is most likely that I should have said so: though even this cannot be
presumed unless it is presupposed that I must have known whether the
children I saw were all or not. But to carry this colloquial mode of
interpreting a statement into Logic, is something novel. If Some A is B
is to be understood of some only, it is a double judgment, compounded of
the propositions, Some As are Bs, and Some As are not Bs. If quantified
in our author’s manner, the propositions would run thus: Some A is some
B, and Some (other) A is not any B. If two statements, one of which
affirms and the other denies a different predicate of a different
subject, are not two distinct judgments, it is impossible to say what
are so. One of the great uses of discipline in Formal Logic, is to make
us aware when something which claims to be a single proposition, really
consists of several, which, not being necessarily involved one in
another, require to be separated, and considered each by itself, before
we admit the compound assertion. This separation may be called, with
reason, stating explicitly in words what is implicitly in thought. But
it is a new postulate of Logic to state implicitly in words what is
explicitly in thought, and I do not think that Logic is at all enriched
by the acquisition.

With these compound propositions falls the whole pretension of the
quantified mode of expression to yield legitimate inferences which are
not recognised by the old Logic. Whatever can be proved from “All A is
all B,” can be proved in the old form from one or both of its elements,
All As are Bs, and All Bs are As. Whatever can be proved from “Some, and
only some, A is some (or all) B,” can be proved in the old form from its
elements, Edition: current; Page: [402] Some As are Bs, Some As are not
Bs, and (in the case last mentioned) All Bs are As. If we choose to
alter the forms of all our propositions, the forms of our syllogisms
naturally require alterations too; and there may be a greater number of
forms in which quantified conclusions can be drawn from quantified
premises, than in which unquantified conclusions can be drawn from
unquantified premises. But there is not a single instance, nor is it
possible in the nature of things that there should be an instance, in
which a conclusion that is provable from quantified premises, could not
be proved from the same premises unquantified, if we set forth all those
which are really involved. If there could be such an instance, the
quantified Syllogism would be a real addition to the theory of Logic: if
not, not.

As I have already once remarked, it does not follow, because the
quantified Syllogism is not a true expression of what is in thought,
that jthe occasionalj writing the predicate with a quantification may
not be a real help to the art of Logic. Though not a correct analysis of
the reasoning process, it may, in some cases, enable us more readily to
see whether the conclusion really follows from the premises. But without
rejecting it as an available help for this purpose, I must observe that
its use in this capacity appears to me extremely limited; for two
reasons. First; the problem is, to test the validity of a reasoning as
expressed in the language in which men ordinarily reason. We do this by
taking the propositions as they are, and measuring the extent of the
assertions made in the two premises and in the conclusion respectively,
so as to ascertain whether the former are broad enough to cover and
include the latter. This it requires some practice to do, but the task
is not avoided by quantifying the predicate; on the contrary, it must
have been actually performed before the predicate can be correctly
quantified; so that by quantifying it in expression, no trouble is
saved. My second reason is, that after the predicate has been
quantified, it is often equally or more difficult to follow the
consecution of the thought through the symbols, than as expressed in
ordinary language. Take one of the common cases of invalid inference, a
syllogism in the first figure with the major premise particular, such as
this:

-   

    Some Ms are Ps
-   

    All Ss are Ms
-   

    Therefore all Ss are Ps;

the inference fails, because the Ms which are identified with Ss may not
be the same Ms which are Ps, but other Ms. Let us now quantify the
predicates thus:

-   

    Some Ms are some Ps
-   

    All Ss are some Ms
-   

    Therefore all Ss are some Ps;

Edition: current; Page: [403]
is the invalidity of the inference at all clearer? Does it require less
exertion of thought to perceive that “some Ms” may not mean the same
some in both premises, than it did to recognise the equivalent truth as
to M in the minor, and “some M” in the major premise? On the contrary,
the quantified form is the more plausibly misleading of the two, since
the middle term, though really ambiguous, is, in that form, verbally the
same, which in the unquantified form it is not.

The general result of these considerations is, that the utility of the
new forms is by no means such as to compensate for the great additional
complication which they introduce into the syllogistic theory; a
complication which would make it at the same time difficult to learn or
remember, and intolerably tiresome both in the learning and in the
using. The sole purpose of any syllogistic forms is to afford an
available test for the process of drawing inferences in the common
language of life from premises in the same common language; and the
ordinary forms of Syllogism effect this purpose completely. The new
forms do not, in any appreciable degree, facilitate the process, while
they are chargeable, in a far greater degree than the common forms, with
diverting the mind from the true meaning of propositions (the ascription
of attributes to objects considered severally), and concentrating it
upon the highly artificial, and generally unimportant, consideration of
the relation of extent between classes of objects, considered not
severally, but as collective wholes. The new forms have thus no
practical advantage which can countervail the objection of their entire
psychological irrelevancy; and the invention and acquisition of them
have little value, except as one among many other feats of mental
gymnastic, by which students of the science may exercise and invigorate
their faculties. They should, in short, be dealt with as Sir W. Hamilton
deals with Mr. De Morgan’s forms of “numerically definite” Syllogism,
viz. “taken into account by Logic as authentic forms, but then relegated
as of little use in practice, and cumbering the science with a
superfluous mass of moods.”*

Edition: current; Page: [404]


CHAPTER XXIII: Of Some Minor Peculiarities of Doctrine in Sir William Hamilton’s View of Formal Logic

the two theories examined in the preceding chapter are the only
important novelties which Sir W. Hamilton has introduced into the
Science or Art of Logic. But he has here and there departed from the
common doctrine of logicians on subordinate points. Some of these
deviations deserve notice from their connexion with some principal part
of our author’s doctrine, others chiefly as throwing light on the
character of his mind. The one to which I shall first advert is of the
former class.

I. Almost all writers on the Syllogistic Logic have directed attention
to the fact, that though we cannot, while observing the forms of Logic,
draw a false conclusion from true premises, we may draw a true one from
false premises: in other words, the falsity of the premises does not
prove the falsity of the conclusion; nor does the truth of the
conclusion prove the truth of the premises. The warning is needed; for
it is by no means unusual to mistake a refutation of the reasons from
which a doctrine has been deduced for a disproof of the doctrine itself;
and there is no error of thought more common than the acceptance of
premises because they lead to a conclusion already assented to as true.
Not only is this caution useful, but it is relevant to Logic, even in
the restricted point of view of Formal Logic. When it is affirmed that
Formal Logic has nothing to do with Material Truth, all that ought to be
meant, is that in Logic we are not to consider whether the conclusion
supposed to be proved is true in fact. But we are to consider whether it
is true conditionally, true if the premises are true: that question is
the specific business of Formal Logic: if Formal Logic does not teach us
that, there is nothing for it to teach. The theorem, that in a valid
Syllogism the falsity of the premises does not prove the falsity of the
conclusion, is as germane to Logic as that the truth of the premises
proves the truth of the conclusion. We have therefore reason to be
surprised at finding Sir W. Hamilton delivering himself as follows:

Logic does not warrant the truth of its premises, except in so far as
these may be the formal conclusions of anterior reasonings; it only
warrants (on the hypothesis Edition: current; Page: [405] that the
premises are truly assumed) the truth of the inference. In this view the
conclusion may, as a separate proposition, be true; but if this truth be
not a necessary consequence from the premises, it is a false conclusion,
that is, in fact, no conclusion at all. Now on this point there is a
doctrine prevalent among logicians, which is not only erroneous, but if
admitted, is subversive of the distinction of Logic as a purely formal
science. The doctrine in question is in its result this,—that if the
conclusion of a syllogism be true, the premises may be either true or
false, but that if the conclusion be false, one or both of its premises
must be false: in other words, that it is possible to infer true from
false, but not false from true. As an example of this I have given the
following syllogism:

-   

    Aristotle is a Roman;
-   

    A Roman is a European;
-   

    Therefore, Aristotle is a European.

The inference, in so far as expressed, is true; but I would remark, that
the whole inference which the premises necessitate, and which the
conclusion, therefore, virtually contains, is not true,—is false. For
the premises of the preceding syllogism gave not only the conclusion,
Aristotle is a European, but also the conclusion, Aristotle is not a
Greek; for it not merely follows from the premises, that Aristotle is
conceived under the universal notion of which the concept Roman forms a
particular sphere, but likewise that he is conceived as excluded from
all the other particular spheres which are contained under that
universal notion. The consideration of the truth of the premise,
Aristotle is a Roman, is, however, more properly to be regarded as
extralogical; but if so, then the consideration of the conclusion,
Aristotle is a European, on any other view than as a mere formal
inference from certain hypothetical antecedents, is likewise
extralogical. Logic is only concerned with the formal truth,—the
technical validity,—of its syllogisms, and anything beyond the
legitimacy of the consequence it draws from certain hypothetical
antecedents, it does not profess to vindicate. Logical truth and
falsehood are thus contained in the correctness and incorrectness of
logical inference; and it was, therefore, with no impropriety that we
made a true or correct, and a false or incorrect, syllogism convertible
expressions.*

The statement that a true proposition may be correctly inferred from
false premises, or in other words, that a true opinion may be supported
by false reasons, is one of which we could hardly have expected to find
the truth disputed, whatever might be said of the connexion of Logic
with it. So unlooked-for a paradox required to be defended by the
strongest arguments: who, then, would expect such shabby, not arguments,
but hints of arguments, as the author presents us with? He stops short
in the middle of the first, as if afraid that it would break down if
relied upon, and hurries to the second, which is still more incapable of
bearing weight. “The consideration of the conclusion, Aristotle is a
European, on any other view than as a mere formal inference from certain
hypothetical antecedents, is extralogical.” Nobody proposes to consider
it as anything but a formal inference from certain hypothetical
antecedents. The gist of the whole question is Edition: current; Page:
[406] that it is such an inference, and consequently that a proposition
really true, may be a formal inference from premises wholly or partially
false: in other words, the falsity of the conclusion does not follow
from the falsity of the premises. It is as much the business of the
theory of “formal inference” to show what conclusions are not formally
legitimate, as what are. It is not the business of Formal Logic to
determine what is actually true, but it is, to tell what does or does
not follow from what. In the first unfinished part of his argument, Sir
W. Hamilton makes a faint attempt to show that the conclusion, Aristotle
is a European, is not true. He admits it to be true as far as expressed,
but says that it virtually contains something which is false, namely,
that Aristotle is not a Greek. By what analysis can he find this in the
proposition, Aristotle is a European? He does not pretend that it is in
the proposition considered in itself, but only in the proposition as
inferred from “Aristotle is a Roman.” But it is a strange doctrine that
a proposition is true or false not according to what it asserts, but
according to the mode in which the belief of it has been arrived at. It
is a very irrational mode of speaking to say that a proposition, besides
its obvious meaning, contains a meaning which the words do not convey,
which in the mouths of other people it does not bear, but which is so
essential a part of it as by its falsity to make the proposition false
which otherwise would be true. Suppose that the register of a man’s
birth having been destroyed, some one to whom the date is of importance,
proves it by a false entry in the parish books: would that make the man
not to have been born on the day he was born on? But let us concede this
point, however unreasonable, and admit that the proposition Aristotle is
a European, when inferred from the premise that he is a Roman, includes
that premise as part of its own meaning. Does it therefore contain an
implication that he is not a Greek? Suppose that I have never heard of
Greeks; or that, having heard of them, I suppose a Greek to be a kind of
Roman, or a Roman a kind of Greek. Will this ignorance or
misapprehension on my part, prevent me from concluding, that if a Roman
is a European and Aristotle a Roman, Aristotle must be a European; or
will it make the inference illegitimate, or the conclusion false? One
sentence in our quotation from Sir W. Hamilton is a singular
illustration of the length he will go to support a favourite thesis.
“The premises,” he says, “of the syllogism gave not only the conclusion,
Aristotle is a European, but also the conclusion, Aristotle is not a
Greek.” Let us try:

-   

    Aristotle is a Roman;
-   

    A Roman is a European;
-   

    Therefore, Aristotle is not a Greek.

This is Formal Logic. This is the philosopher who is so rigidly bent
upon excluding from Logic all consideration of what is true or false vi
materiæ. Edition: current; Page: [407] What shadow of connexion is
there, unless it be vi materiæ, between this conclusion, and those
premises? Nothing can explain this aberration in a thinker of Sir W.
Hamilton’s acuteness, except his dogged determination in no shape to
recognise belief as an element of judgment, or truth as in any way
concerned in Pure Logic.

Sir W. Hamilton has a salvo for all this, though it is one which would
not occur to everybody. According to him there are two kinds of truth,
or rather the word truth has two meanings, so that it is possible for a
proposition to be true although it is false. There is Formal Truth, and
Real Truth.* Real Truth is “the harmony between a thought and its
matter.”[*] Formal Truth is of two kinds, Logical, and Mathematical.
Logical Truth is “the harmony or agreement of our thoughts with
themselves as thoughts, in other words the correspondence of thought
with the universal laws of thinking.”[†] And Mathematical Truth is some
other harmony of thought, in which truth of fact is equally dispensed
with. In another place, he says that if the consequent is correctly
“evolved out of” the antecedent, the conclusion out of the premises,
this is “Logical or Formal or Subjective truth: and an inference may be
subjectively or formally true, which is objectively or really false.”†
To support his denial of the common doctrine, he has to alter the
meaning of words, and make false in the new meaning what cannot be
denied to be true in the old. But I object in toto to such an abuse of
terms as affirming a false proposition to be true, because it is in such
a relation to another false proposition, that if that false proposition
had been true it would have been true likewise. There is no fitness in
the word truth, to express this mere relation of consecution between
false propositions. No qualification by adjectives, whether “logical,”
or “formal,” or “subjective,” will make this assertion anything but a
solecism in language, claiming to be the correction of a philosophical
doctrine.

The whole theory of the difference between Formal and Real Truth is
treated as it deserves, in a passage from one of Sir W. Hamilton’s
favourite authorities, Esser, which he quotes, and, strange to say,
quotes with approbation.

One party of philosophers, [says Esser,] defining truth in general, the
absolute harmony of our thoughts and cognitions,—divide truth into a
formal or logical, and into a material or metaphysical, according as
that harmony is in consonance with the laws of formal thought, or over
and above, with the laws of real knowledge. The criterion of formal
truth they place in the principles of Contradiction and of Sufficient
Reason, enouncing that what is non-contradictory and consequent is
formally true. This criterion, which is positive and immediate of formal
truth Edition: current; Page: [408] (inasmuch as what is
non-contradictory and consequent can always be thought as possible),
they style a negative and mediate criterion of material truth: as what
is self-contradictory and logically inconsequent is in reality
impossible; at the same time, what is not self-contradictory and not
logically inconsequent, is not, however, to be regarded as having an
actual existence. But here the foundation is treacherous: the notion of
truth is false. When we speak of truth, we are not satisfied with
knowing that a thought harmonizes with a certain system of thoughts and
cognitions; but, over and above, we require to be assured that what we
think is real, and is as we think it to be. Are we satisfied on this
point, we then regard our thoughts as true; whereas if we are not
satisfied of this, we deem them false, how well soever they may quadrate
with any theory or system. It is not, therefore, in any absolute harmony
of mere thought, that truth consists, but solely in the correspondence
of our thoughts with their objects. The distinction of formal and
material truth is thus not only unsound in itself, but opposed to the
notion of truth universally held, and embodied in all languages. But if
this distinction be inept, the title of Logic, as a positive standard of
truth, must be denied; it can only be a negative criterion, being
conversant with thoughts and not with things, with the possibility and
not with the actuality of existence.*

After all the experience we have had of the facility with which Sir W.
Hamilton forgets in one part of his speculations what he has thought in
another, it remains scarcely credible that he endorses, in his third
volume, this emphatic protest against the distinction which he draws,
and the opinion which he maintains, in his second and fourth. “Two
opposite doctrines,” he says, “have sprung up, which, on opposite sides,
have overlooked the true relations of Logic;”† and one of these is the
doctrine (the “inaccuracy” our author styles it)[*] which Esser, in this
passage, protests against. And he thereupon quotes Esser’s
condemnation[†] of his (Sir W. Hamilton’s) own doctrine. Truly, if
arguments ad hominem were sufficient, a controversialist who undertakes
to refute Sir W. Hamilton would have an easy task.

II. I have already noticed one unacknowledged departure by our author
from the usage of Logicians as regards the sense of the word
Disjunctive; confining Disjunctive judgments to those in which all the
alternative propositions have the same subject: A is either B, or C, or
D. This limitation excludes two other forms of the assertion of an
alternative: that in which the propositions have different subjects but
the same predicate, “Either A, or B, or C, is D;” and that in which they
have different subjects and different predicates, “Either A is B, or C
is D.” The former is exemplified in such judgments as these, Either
Brown or Smith did this act; Either John or Thomas is dead. The latter
in such as these: Either the witness has told a falsehood, or the
prisoner has committed a murder; Either Macbeth has Edition: current;
Page: [409] killed all Macduff’s children, or Macduff has children who
were not there present.[*] While arbitrarily excluding both these kinds
of assertion from the class and denomination in which they had always
been placed, our author does not assign to them any other; so that the
effect is not a mere innovation in language, but a hiatus in his logical
system; these two kinds of judgment having no place, name, or
recognition in it. I have now to point out a second deviation from the
received doctrine of logicians in connexion with the same subject. In
respect to the class of judgments to which he restricts the name of
Disjunctive, those in which two or more predicates are disjunctively
affirmed of the same subject, he takes for granted through the whole of
his exposition,* that when we say, A is either B or C, we imply that it
cannot be both: that we may as legitimately argue, A is either B or C,
but it is B, therefore it is not C, as we may argue, A is either B or C,
but it is not B, therefore it is C. This is what enables him to affirm,
as he does, that the principle of Disjunctive Judgments is the Law of
Excluded Middle. The predicates are supposed to be either explicitly or
implicitly contradictory, so that one or other of them must be true of
the subject, but both of them cannot. I conceive this to be both an
incompleteness in his theory, and a positive error in fact. An
incompleteness, because we may judge, and legitimately judge, that a
thing is either this or that, though aware that it may possibly be both.
Sir W. Hamilton is so severe on the ordinary Logic for omitting, as he
thinks, some valid forms of thought, that it was peculiarly incumbent on
him not to commit a similar oversight in his own exposition of the
science. But Sir W. Hamilton does not merely leave unrecognised those
disjunctive judgments in which the alternative predicates are mutually
compatible; he assumes that the disjunctive form of assertion denies
their compatibility, which it assuredly does not. If we assert that a
man who has acted in some particular way, must be either a knave or a
fool, we by no means assert, or intend to assert, that he cannot be
both. Very important consequences may sometimes be drawn from our
knowledge that one or other of two perfectly compatible suppositions
must be true. Suppose such an argument as this. To make an entirely
unselfish use of despotic power a man must be either a saint or a
philosopher; but saints and philosophers are rare; therefore those are
rare, who make an entirely unselfish use of despotic power. The
conclusion follows from the premises, and is of great practical
importance. But does the disjunctive premise necessarily imply, or must
it be construed as supposing, that the same person cannot be both a
saint and a philosopher? Such a construction would be ridiculous.†

Edition: current; Page: [410]
There is a great quantity of intricate and obscure speculation, in our
author’s Lectures and their Appendices, relating to Disjunctive and
Hypothetical Propositions. But, much as he had thought on the subject,
the simple idea never seems to have occurred to him a(though he might
have found it in Archbishop Whately’s Logic)a, that every Disjunctive
judgment is compounded of two or more Hypothetical ones. “Either A is B,
or C is D,” means, If A is not B, C is D; and if C is not D, A is B.[*]
This is obvious enough to most people; but if Sir W. Hamilton had
thought of it, he probably would have denied it: its admission would not
have been in keeping with the disposition he shows in so many places, to
consider as one judgment all that it is possible to assert in one
formula. Again, though he takes much pains to determine what is the real
import of a Hypothetical Judgment, the thought never occurs to him that
it is a judgment concerning judgments. If A is B, C is D, means, The
judgment C is D follows as a consequence from the judgment A is B. Not
seeing this, Sir W. Hamilton tacitly adopts the assertion of Krug, that
the conversion of a hypothetical syllogism into a categorical “is not
always possible.”*

III. The next of Sir W. Hamilton’s minor innovations in Logic has
reference to the Sorites. It is scarcely necessary to say, that a
Sorites is an argument in the form, A is B, B is C, C is D, D is E,
therefore A is E: an abridged expression for a series of Syllogisms, but
not requiring to be decomposed into them in order to make its
conclusiveness visible. Sir W. Hamilton accuses all writers on Logic of
having overlooked the possibility of a Sorites in the second or third
Figure.† By this he does not mean, one in which the ultimate syllogism,
which sums up the argument, is in the second or third figure, for this
all logicians have admitted. For example, to the Sorites given above,
there might be added the proposition, No F is E; in which case, the
ultimate syllogism would be, A is E, but no F is E, therefore A is not
an F: a syllogism in the second figure. Or there might be added, at the
opposite end of the series, A is G; when the ultimate syllogism would be
in the third figure; A is E, but A is G, therefore some G is an E. These
are real Sorites, real chain arguments, and they conclude in the second
and third figures: we may call them, if we please, Sorites in the second
and in the third figure, the truth being that they are Sorites in which
one of the steps is in the second or third figure, all the others being
in the first. And every one who understands the laws of the second and
third figures (or even the general laws of the Syllogism) can see that
no more than one step in either of Edition: current; Page: [411] them is
admissible in a Sorites, and that it must either be the first or the
last. About this, however, Logicians have always been agreed. These are
not the kinds of Sorites which Sir W. Hamilton contends for. By a
Sorites in the second or third figure, he means one in which all the
steps are in the second, or all in the third, figure (a thing impossible
in a real Sorites) and in which, accordingly, instead of a succession of
middle terms establishing a connexion between the two extremes, there is
but one middle term altogether. His paradigm in the second figure would
be, No B is A, No C is A, No D is A, No E is A, All F is A, therefore no
B, or C, or D, or E, is F. In the third figure, it would be, A is B, A
is C, A is D, A is E, A is F, therefore some B, and C, and D, and E, are
F. One would have thought that anybody who had the smallest notion of
the meaning of a Sorites, must have seen that either of these is not a
Sorites at all. It is not a chain argument. It does not ascend to a
conclusion by a series of steps, each introducing a new premise. It does
not deduce one conclusion from a succession of premises, all necessary
to its establishment. It draws as many different conclusions as there
are syllogisms, each conclusion depending only on the two premises of
one syllogism. That no B is F, follows from No B is A, and All F is A;
not from those premises combined with No C is A, No D is A, No E is A.
That some B is F, follows from A is B and A is F; and would be proved,
though all the other premises of the pretended Sorites were rejected. If
Sir W. Hamilton had found in any other writer such a misuse of logical
language as he is here guilty of, he would have roundly accused him of
total ignorance of logical writers. Since it cannot be imputed to any
such cause in himself, I can only ascribe it to the passion which
appears to have seized him, in the later years of his life, for finding
more and more new discoveries to be made in Syllogistic Logic. If he had
transported his ardour for originality into the other departments of the
science, in which there was so great an unexhausted field for discovery,
he might have enlarged the bounds of philosophy to a much greater
extent, than I am afraid he will now be found to have done.

IV. I next turn to a singular misapplication of logical language, in
which Sir W. Hamilton departs from all good authorities, and misses one
of the most important distinctions drawn by the Aristotelian logic. I
refer to his use of the word Contrary. He confounds contrariety with
simple incompatibility. “Opposition of Notions,” he says,

is twofold: 1°. Immediate or Contradictory Opposition, called likewise
Repugnance (τὸ ἀντιφατικῶς ἀντικεῖσϑαι, ἀντίφασις, oppositio immediata
sive contradictoria, repugnantia); and 2°. Mediate or Contrary
Opposition (τὸ ἐναντίως ἀντικεῖσϑαι, ἐναντιότης, oppositio media vel
contraria). The former emerges, when one concept abolishes (tollit)
directly or by simple negation, what another Edition: current; Page:
[412] establishes, ponit; the latter, when one concept does this not
directly or by simple negation, but through the affirmation of something
else.*

The exemplification and illustration of this is not of our author’s
devising, but is a citation from Krug, who had preceded him in the
error.

To speak now of the distinction of Contradictory and Contrary
Opposition, or of Contradiction and Contrariety; of these the former,
Contradiction, is exemplified in the opposites,—yellow, not yellow;
walking, not walking. Here each notion is directly, immediately, and
absolutely, repugnant to the other,—they are reciprocal negatives. This
opposition is, therefore, properly called that of Contradiction or of
Repugnance; and the opposing notions themselves are contradictory or
repugnant notions, in a single word, contradictories. The latter, or
Contrary Opposition, is exemplified in the opposites, yellow, blue, red,
&c., walking, standing, lying, &c.†

It can hardly have been imagined by Krug or Sir W. Hamilton, that this
is the meaning of Contrariety in common discourse, or that any one ever
speaks of yellow or blue as the contrary of red, or even as the opposite
of it. The very phrase, “the contrary,” testifies that a thing cannot
have more contraries than one. Black is regarded as the contrary of
white, but no other contrariety is recognised among colours at all. Sir
W. Hamilton, versed as he was in the literature of logic, can hardly
have fancied that the world of logicians, any more than the common
world, was on his side. In the language of logicians, as in that of
life, a thing has only one contrary—its extreme opposite; the thing
farthest removed from it in the same class. Black is the contrary of
white, but neither of them is the contrary of red. Infinitely great is
the contrary of infinitely small, but is not the contrary of finite. It
is the more strange that Krug and Sir W. Hamilton should have
misunderstood or rejected this, as the definition they ignore is the
foundation of the distinction between Contradictory and Contrary
Propositions, in the famous Parallelogram of Opposition. The contrary
proposition to All A is B, is No A is B, its extreme opposite; the
assertion most widely differing from it that can be made; denying, not
it merely, but bevery part of itb. Its contradictory is merely, Some A
is not B. Sir W. Hamilton could not have imagined the distinction
between these negative propositions to be, that the one denies by simple
negation, the other through the affirmation of something else.

That the teachers of the Syllogistic Logic have taken this view, and not
Sir W. Hamilton’s, of the meaning of Contrariety, might be shown by any
number of quotations. I have only looked up the authorities nearest at
Edition: current; Page: [413] hand. I begin with Aristotle: Τὰ γὰρ
πλεῖστον ἀλλήλων διεστηκότα τῶν ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ γένει, ἐναντία ὁρίζονται.*

Aristotle again: Τὰ γὰρ ἐναντία τῶν πλεῖστον διαφερόντων περὶ τὸ αὐτό.†

Aristotle ἐν τῷ δεκάτῳ τῆς θεολογικῆς πραγματείας, as cited by Ammonius
Hermiæ: Ἐπεὶ δὲ διαφέρειν ἐνδέχεται ἀλλήλων τὰ διαφέροντα πλεῖον καὶ
ἔλαττον, ἔστι τις, καὶ μεγίστη διαφορά, καὶ ταύτην λέγω ἐναντίωσιν.[*]

Ammonius himself thereon: Ἡ τῶν ἐναντίων διαφορὰ μεγίστη τῶν ἄλλων, καὶ
οὐδὲν ἔχουσα ἐξωτέρω αὐτὴς δυνάμενον πεσεῖν.‡

My next extract shall be from a well-known treatise, which Sir W.
Hamilton particularly recommended to his pupils: Burgersdyk’s
Institutiones Logicæ.

Oppositorum species sunt quinque: Disparata, contraria, relative
opposita, privative opposita, et contradictoria.

Disparata sunt, quorum unum pluribus opponitur, eodem modo. Sic homo et
equus, album et cæruleum, sunt disparata: quia homo non equo solum, sed
etiam cani, leoni, cæterisque bestiarum speciebus, et album, non solum
cæruleo, sed etiam rubro, viridi, cæterisque coloribus mediis, opponitur
eodem modo, hoc est, eodem oppositorum genere. . . .

Contraria sunt duo absolute, quæ sub eodem genere plurimum distant.§

This passage informs us, not only that what Sir W. Hamilton terms
Contraries were not so called by the Aristotelian logicians, but also
what they were called. They were called Disparates: a term employed by
Sir W. Hamilton, but in a totally different meaning.¶

The next is from one of the ablest, and, though in a comparatively small
compass, one of the completest in essentials, of all the expositions I
have seen of Logic from the purely Aristotelian point of view:
Manuductio ad Logicam, by the Père Du Trieu, of Douai.

Contraria sunt, quæ posita sub eodem genere maxime a se invicem distant,
eidem subjecto susceptivo vicissim insunt, a quo se mutuo expellunt,
nisi alterum insit a natura; ut, album, et nigrum.

In hac definitione continentur quatuor conditiones, sive leges
contrariorum.

Prima, ut sint sub eodem genere. . . .

Edition: current; Page: [414]
Secunda conditio contrariorum est ut sub illo eodem genere maxime
distent, id est precise repugnent. . . . Hinc excluduntur disparata.*

The next is from Saunderson’s Logicæ Artis Compendium, one of the
best-known elementary treatises on Logic by British authors.

Oppositio Contraria est inter terminos contrarios. Sunt autem ea
contraria quæ posita sub eodem genere maxime inter se distant, et vim
habent expellendi se vicissim ex eodem subjecto susceptibili.†

Crackanthorp:

Contraria sunt Opposita quorum unum alteri sic opponitur ut nulli alteri
aut æque aut magis opponatur. Sic Albedo Nigredini, Homini Brutum,
Rationale Irrationali contrarium est. Nam nihil est quod æque Albedini
opponitur atque Nigredo, et sic in reliquis.

On the other hand,

Disparata sunt Opposita quorum unum uni sic opponitur, ut alteri vel
æque vel magis opponatur. Sic Liberalitas et Avaritia disparata sunt.
Nam Avaritia magis opponitur Prodigalitati quam Liberalitati. Sic Albedo
et Rubedo disparata sunt, quia Albedo æque opponitur Viriditati atque
Rubedini, et magis Nigredini quam ambobus. Nam plus inter se semper
distant extrema, quam vel media inter se, vel medium ab alterutro
extremo.‡

Brerewood:

Contraria a Dialecticis ita definiri solent: Sunt Opposita quæ sub eodem
genere posita maxime a se invicem distant, et eodem subjecto
susceptibili vicissim insunt, a quo se mutuo expellunt, nisi alterum
insit a natura. . . . Sed quoniam hæc definitio (quamvis sit præcipue in
Dialecticorum scholis authoritans) laborat et tædio, et summa
difficultate, placet ex Aristotele faciliorem adducere, et breviorem:
Contraria sunt quæ sub eodem genere posita, maxime distant.§

Samuel Smith:

Contraria sunt quæ sub eodem genere posita, maxime a se invicem distant,
et eidem susceptibili vicissim insunt, a quo se mutuo expellunt, nisi
alterum eorum insit a natura. Ad Contraria igitur tria requiruntur:
primo ut sint sub eodem genere, scilicet Qualitatis: nam solarum
qualitatum est contrarietas; secundo, ut maxime a se invicem distent in
natural positiva, id est, ut ambo extrema sint positiva.¶

Edition: current; Page: [415]
Wallis:

Contraria definiri solent, quæ sub eodem genere maxime distant. Ut
calidum et frigidum, album et nigrum: quæ contrariæ qualitatis dici
solent.*

Even Aldrich, right for once, may be added to the list of Oxford
authorities.

Contraria sub eodem genere maxime distant. Non maxime distant omnium;
magis enim distant quæ nec idem genus summum habent, magis
Contradictoria: sed maxime eorum quæ in genere conveniunt.†

Keckermann does not employ this, but another definition of Contraries;
not, however, Sir W. Hamilton’s: and all his examples of Contraries are
taken from Extreme Opposites.‡

Casparus Bartholinus:

Contraria sunt, quæ sub eodem genere maxime distant, eidemque subjecto
susceptibili a quo se mutuo expellunt, vicissim insunt, nisi alterum
insit a natura.§

Du Hamel:

Oppositio contraria est inter duo extrema positiva, quæ sub eodem genere
posita maxime distant, et ab eodem subjecto sese expellunt.¶

Grammatica Rationis, sive Institutiones Logicæ:

Contraria adversa sunt accidentia, posita sub eodem genere, quæ maxime
distant, et se mutuo pellunt ab eodem subjecto in quo vicissim insunt.∥

Familiar as Sir W. Hamilton was with the whole series of writers on
Logic, he cannot have overlooked, and can hardly have forgotten, such
passages as these. I have not had the fortune to meet with a single
passage, from a single Aristotelian writer, cwhichc can be cited in his
support. I presume, therefore, that he intentionally made (or adopted
from Krug) a change in the meaning of a scientific term, the inverse of
that which it is the proper office and common tendency of science to
make. Instead of giving a Edition: current; Page: [416] more determinate
signification to a name vaguely used, by binding it down to express a
precise specific distinction, he laid hold of a name which already
denoted a definite species, and applied it to the entire genus, which
stood in no need of a name; leaving the particular species unnamed. But
if he knowingly took this very unscientific liberty with a scientific
term, diverting it from both its scientific and its popular
meaning,—leaving the scientific vocabulary, never too rich, with one
expression the fewer, and an important scientific distinction without a
name,—he at least should not have done so without informing the reader.
He should not have led the unsuspecting learner to believe that this was
the received use of the term. Remark, too, that he embezzles not only
the English word, but its Greek and Latin equivalents, exactly as if he
agreed with the writers of the Greek and Latin treatises, and was only
explaining their meaning.

V. One of the charges brought by Sir W. Hamilton against the common mode
of stating the doctrine of the Syllogism, is that it does not obviate
the objection often made to the syllogism of being a petitio principii,
grounded on the admitted truth, that it can assert nothing in the
conclusion which has not already been asserted in the premises. This
objection, our author says, “stands hitherto unrefuted, if not
unrefutable.”* But he entertains the odd idea, that it can be got rid of
by merely writing the propositions in a different order, putting the
conclusion first. One might almost imagine that a little irony had been
intended here. Putting the conclusion first, certainly makes it
impossible any longer to say that the syllogism asserts in the
conclusion what has already been asserted in the premises; and if any
one is of opinion that the logical relation between premises and a
conclusion depends on the order in which they are pronounced, such an
objector, I must allow, is from this time silenced. But our author can
have meditated very little on the meaning of the objection of petitio
principii against the Syllogism, when he thought that such a device as
this would remove it. The difficulty, which that objection expresses,
lies in a region far below the depth to which such logic reaches; and he
was quite right in regarding the objection as unrefuted. Nor is its
refutation, I conceive, possible, on any theory but that which considers
the Syllogism not as a process of Inference, but as the mere
interpretation of the record of a previous process; the major premise as
simply a formula for making particular inferences; and the conclusions
of ratiocination as not inferences from the formula, but inferences
drawn according to the formula. This theory, and the grounds of it,
having been very fully stated in another work, need not be further
noticed here.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [417]


CHAPTER XXIV: Of Some Natural Prejudices Countenanced by Sir William Hamilton, and Some Fallacies Which He Considers Insoluble

we have concluded our review of Sir W. Hamilton as a teacher of Logic;
but there remain to be noticed a few points, not strictly belonging
either to Logic or to Psychology, but rather to what is inappropriately
termed the Philosophia Prima. It would be more properly called ultima,
since it consists of the widest generalizations respecting the laws of
Existence and Activity; generalizations which by an unfortunate, though
at first inevitable mistake, men fancied that they could reach uno
saltu, and therefore placed them at the beginning of science, though, if
they were ever legitimate, they could only be so as its tardy and final
result. Every physical science, up to the time of Bacon, consisted
mainly of such first principles as these: The ways of Nature are
perfect: Nature abhors a vacuum: Natura non habet saltum: Nothing can
come out of nothing: Like can only be produced by like: Things always
move towards their own place: Things can only be moved by something
which is itself moving; and so forth. And the Baconian revolution was
far indeed from expelling such doctrines from philosophy. On the
contrary, the Cartesian movement, which went on for a full century
simultaneously with the Baconian, threw up many more of these imaginary
axioms concerning things in general, which took a deep root in
Continental philosophy, found their way into English, and are by no
means, even now, discredited as they deserve to be. Most of these were
fully believed by the philosophers who maintained them, to be
intuitively evident truths—revelations of Nature in the depths of human
consciousness, and recognisable by the light of reason alone: while all
the time they were merely bad generalizations of the vulgarest outward
experience; rough interpretations of the appearances most familiar to
sense, and which therefore had grown into the strongest associations in
thought; never tested by the conditions of legitimate induction, not
only because those conditions were still unknown, but because these
wretched first attempts at generalization were deemed to have a higher
than inductive origin, and were erected into Edition: current; Page:
[418] general laws from which the order of the universe might be
deduced, and to which every scientific theory for the explanation of
phenomena must be required to conform. It is a material point in the
estimation of a philosopher and of his doctrines, whether he has taken
his side for or against this mode of philosophizing; whether he has
countenanced any of these spurious axioms by his adhesion. Sir W.
Hamilton cannot be acquitted of having done so, in more than one
instance.

In treating of the problem of Causality, Sir W. Hamilton had occasion to
argue, that we ought not to postulate a special mental law in order to
explain the belief that everything must have a cause, since that belief
is sufficiently accounted for by the “Law of the Conditioned,” which
makes it impossible for us to conceive an absolute commencement of
anything.[*] I do not mean to return to the discussion of this theory of
Causality; but let us ask ourselves why we are interdicted from assuming
a special law, in order to account for that which is already
sufficiently accounted for by a general one. The real ground of the
prohibition is what our author terms the Law of Parcimony; a principle
identical with the famous maxim of the Nominalists, known as Occam’s
Razor—Entia non sunt multiplicanda præter necessitatem;[†] understanding
by Entia, not merely substances but also Powers. Sir W. Hamilton,
instead of resting it on this logical injunction, grounds it on an
ontological theory. His reason is, “Nature never works by more and more
complex instruments than are necessary.”* He cites, with approbation,
the maxims of Aristotle, “that God and Nature never operate without
effect (οὐδὲν μάτην, οὐδὲν έλλειπῶς, ποιοῦσι); they never operate
superfluously (μηδὲν περίεργον—περιττῶς—ἀργῶς); but always through one
rather than through a plurality of means (καθ’ ἔν, μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ
πολλὰ):”† thus borrowing a general theory of the very kind which Bacon
exploded, to support a rule which can stand perfectly well without it.
Have we authority to declare that there is anything which God and Nature
never do? Do we know all Nature’s combinations? Were we called into
counsel in fixing its limits? By what canons of induction has this
theory ever been tried? By Edition: current; Page: [419] what
observations has it been verified? We know well that Nature, in many of
its operations, works by means which are of a complexity so extreme, as
to be an almost insuperable obstacle to our investigations. On what
evidence do we presume to say that this complexity was necessary, and
that the effect could not have been produced in a simpler manner? If we
look into the meaning of words, of what kind is the necessity which is
supposed to be binding on God and Nature—the pressure they are unable to
escape from? Is there any necessity in Nature which Nature did not make?
or if not, what did? What is this power superior to Nature and its
author, and to which Nature is compelled to adapt itself?

There is one supposition under which this doctrine has an intelligible
meaning—the hypothesis of the Two Principles. If the universe was
moulded into its present form by a Being who did not make it wholly, and
who was impeded by an obstacle which he could only partially
overcome—whether that obstacle was a rival intelligence, or, as Plato
thought, an inherent incapacity in Matter;[*] it is on that supposition
admissible, that the Demiourgos may have always worked by the simplest
possible means; the simplest, namely, which were permitted by the
opposition of the conflicting Power, or the intractableness of the
material. This is, in fact, the doctrine of Leibnitz’s Théodicée; his
famous theory that a world, made by God, must be the best of all
possible worlds, that is, the best world which could be made under the
conditions by which, as it would appear, Providence was restricted.[†]
This doctrine, commonly called Optimism, is really Manicheism, or, to
call it by aitsa more proper name, Sabæism. The word “possible” assumes
the existence of hindrances insurmountable by the divine power, and
Leibnitz was only wrong in calling a power limited by obstacles by the
name Omnipotence: for it is almost too obvious to be worth stating, that
real Omnipotence could have effected its ends totally without means, or
could have made any means sufficient. This Sabæan theory is the only one
by which the assertion, that Nature always works by the simplest means,
can be made consistent with known fact. Even so, it remains wholly
unproved; and, were it proved, would be but a speculative truth of
Theology, incapable of affording any practical guidance. We could never
be justified in rejecting an hypothesis for being too complicated; it
being beyond our power to set limits to the complication of the means
that might possibly be necessary, to evade the obstacles which Ahriman
or Matter may have perversely thrown in the Creator’s way.

Edition: current; Page: [420]
The “Law of Parcimony” needs no such support; it rests on no assumption
respecting the ways or proceedings of Nature. It is a purely logical
precept; a case of the broad practical principle, not to believe
anything of which there is no evidence. When we have no direct knowledge
of the matter of fact, and no reason for believing it except that it
would account for another matter of fact, all reason for admitting it is
at an end when the fact requiring explanation can be explained from
known causes. The assumption of a superfluous cause, is a belief without
evidence; as if we were to suppose that a man who was killed by falling
over a precipice, must have taken poison as well. The same principle
which forbids the assumption of a superfluous fact, forbids that of a
superfluous law. When Newton had shown that the same theorem would
express the conditions of the planetary motions and the conditions of
the fall of bodies to the earth, it would have been illogical to
recognise two distinct laws of nature, one for heavenly and the other
for earthly attraction; since both these laws, when stripped of the
circumstances ascertained to be irrelevant to the effect, would have had
to be expressed in the very same words. The reduction of each of the two
generalizations to the expression of only those circumstances which
influence the result, reduces both of them to the same proposition; and
to decline to do so, would be to make an assumption of difference
between the cases, for which none of the observations afforded the
smallest ground. The rule of Parcimony, therefore, whether applied to
facts or to theories, implies no theory concerning the propensities or
proceedings of Nature. If Nature’s ways and inclinations were the
reverse of what they are supposed to be, it would have been as
illegitimate as it is now, to assume a fact of Nature without any
evidence for it, or to consider the same property as two different
properties, because found in two different kinds of objects.

In another place, Sir W. Hamilton says that the Law of Parcimony, which
he terms “the most important maxim in regulation of philosophical
procedure when it is necessary to resort to an hypothesis,” has “never,
perhaps, been adequately expressed;” and he proposes the following
expression for it: “Neither more nor more onerous causes are to be
assumed, than are necessary to account for the phænomena.”* This
conception of some causes as “more onerous” to the general scheme of
things than others, is a distinction greatly requiring what our author
says it has never yet had—to be “articulately expressed.” He does not,
however, articulate it in general terms, but only in its application to
the particular question of Causality. From this we may collect,—1st.
That a “positive power” is a more onerous hypothesis than a “negative
impotence.” 2nd. That a special hypothesis, which serves to explain only
one phænomenon, is more onerous Edition: current; Page: [421] than a
general one which will explain many. 3rd. That the explanation of an
effect by a cause of which the very existence is hypothetical, is more
onerous than its hypothetical explanation by a cause otherwise known to
exist. The last two of these three canons are but particular cases of
the general rule, that we should not assume an hypothetical cause of a
phænomenon which admits of being accounted for by a cause of which there
is other evidence.* The remaining canon, that we should prefer the
hypothesis of an incapacity to that of a power, is, I apprehend, only
valid when its infringement would be a violation of one of the other two
rules.

The time-honoured, but gratuitous, assumption, respecting Nature, on
which I have now commented, is not the only generality of the
pre-Baconian type which Sir W. Hamilton has countenanced. He gives his
sanction to the old doctrine that “a thing can act only where it is.”
The dictum appears in this direct form in one of the very latest of his
writings, the notes for an intended memoir of Professor Dugald Stewart.†
He has so much faith in it as to make it the foundation of two of his
favourite theories. One is, that

the thing perceived, and the percipient organ, must meet in place, must
be contiguous. The consequence of this doctrine is a complete
simplification of the theory of perception, and a return to the most
ancient speculation on the point. All sensible cognition is, in a
certain acceptation, reduced to Touch, and this is the very conclusion
maintained by the venerable authority of Democritus. According to this
doctrine, it is erroneous to affirm that we are percipient of distant
objects.‡

Conformably to this, we have seen him not only maintaining, in
opposition to Reid,[*] that we do not see the sun—that we see only an
image of it in our eye—but also, that we directly perceive Extension,
whether by sight or touch, only in our own bodily organs: thus
preferring the à priori axiom, that a thing can only act where it is, to
the authority of those “natural beliefs” which he, in other cases, so
strenuously asserts against impugners, Edition: current; Page: [422] and
so often affirms that we ought either to accept as a whole, or never
appeal to at all.

The other theory which our author maintains on the authority of the same
dictum, is that the mind acts directly throughout the whole body, and
not through the brain only.

There is no good ground to suppose that the mind is situate solely in
the brain, or exclusively in any part of the body. On the contrary, the
supposition that it is really present wherever we are conscious that it
acts,—in a word, the Peripatetic aphorism, The soul is all in the whole,
and all in every part,—is more philosophical, and consequently, more
probable than any other opinion. . . . Even if we admit that the nervous
system is the part to which it is proximately united, still the nervous
system is itself universally ramified throughout the body; and we have
no more right to deny that the mind feels at the finger-points, as
consciousness assures us, than to assert that it thinks exclusively in
the brain.*

Sir W. Hamilton should at least have shown how this hypothesis can be
reconciled with the fact, that a slight pressure on the nerve at a place
intermediate between the finger and the brain, takes away the mind’s
power of feeling in the finger, while at any point above the ligature
the feeling is the same as before. cIf he object that the mode in which
the pressure impedes sensation need not be by interrupting the
communication between the finger and the brain, but may be by disturbing
the functions of the nerve itself, we may ask, why is this disturbance
confined to the part of the nerve which is below the point of pressure,
while above that point the functions remain unimpaired? Many other
objections might be brought against Sir W. Hamilton’s theory, if my
object were to discuss the physiological question; but my object is
onlyc to show the amount of evidence which Sir W. Hamilton will
disregard, rather than admit that one thing can act directly upon
another without immediate contact.† What he would have thought of the
application of his doctrine to the solar system, he has not told us
d(the recent developments of the doctrine of the Unity of Force being
posterior to his time)d: but it commits him to the opinion, that
gravitation acts through an intervening medium, which he must postulate,
first as existing, and secondly, as possessed of inscrutable properties;
in palpable repugnance to his own Law of Parcimony, and to all the
canons grounded thereon. Descartes postulated his vortices in obedience
to the same axiom.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [423]
What, however, is the worth of this doctrine, that things can only act
upon one another by direct contact? Mr. Carlyle says, “a thing can only
act where it is; with all my heart; only where is it?”[*] In one sense
of the word, a thing is wherever its action is: its power is there,
though not its corporeal presence. But to say that a thing can only act
where its power is, would be the idlest of mere identical propositions.
And where is the warrant for asserting that a thing cannot act when it
is not locally contiguous to the thing it acts upon? Shall we be told
that such action is inconceivable? Even if it was, this, according to
Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy, is no evidence of impossibility. But that
it is conceivable, is shown by every fairy tale, as well as by every
religion. Then, again, what is the meaning of contiguity? According to
the best physical knowledge we possess, things are never actually
contiguous: what we term contact between particles, only means that they
are in the degree of proximity at which their mutual repulsions are in
equilibrium with their attractions. If so, instead of never, things
always act on one another at some, though it may be a very small
distance. The belief that a thing can only act where it is, is a common
case of inseparable, though not ultimately indissoluble, association. It
is an unconscious generalization, of the roughest possible description,
from the most familiar cases of the mutual action of bodies,
superficially considered. The temporary difficulty found in apprehending
any action of body upon body unlike what people were accustomed to,
created a Natural Prejudice, which was long a serious impediment to the
reception of the Newtonian theory: but it was hoped that the final
triumph of that theory had extinguished it; that all educated persons
were now aware that action at a distance is intrinsically quite as
credible as action in contact, and that there is no reason, apart from
specific experience, to regard the one as in any respect less probable
than the other. That Sir W. Hamilton should be an instance to the
contrary, is an example of the obstinate vitality of these idola
tribûs,[†] and shows that we are never safe against the rejuvenescence
of the most superannuated error, if in throwing it off we have not
reformed the bad habit of thought, the wrong and unscientific tendency
of the intellect, from which the error took its rise.*

Edition: current; Page: [424]
Though but remotely connected with the preceding considerations, yet as
belonging in common with them to the subject of Fallacies, I will notice
in this place the curious partiality which our author shows to a
particular group of sophisms, the Eleatic arguments for the
impossibility of motion. He fdeemedf these arguments, though leading to
a false conclusion, to be irrefutable; as Brown thought concerning
Berkeley’s argument against the existence of matter—that as a mere play
of reasoning it was unanswerable, while it was impossible for the human
mind to admit the conclusion;[*] forgetting that if this were so it
would be a reductio ad absurdum of the reasoning faculty. There is no
philosopher to whom, I imagine, Sir W. Hamilton would have less liked to
be assimilated, than Brown; and he would probably have defended himself
against the imputation, by saying that the Eleatic arguments do not
prove motion to be impossible, but only to be inconceivable by us. Yet
if a fact which we see and feel every minute of our lives, is not
conceivable by us, what is? Our author does not enter at any length into
the question, but expresses his opinion on several occasions
incidentally. “It is,” he says, “on the inability of the mind to
conceive either the ultimate indivisibility, or the endless divisibility
of space and time, that the arguments of the Eleatic Zeno against the
possibility of motion are founded; arguments which at least show, that
motion, however certain as a fact, cannot be conceived possible, as it
involves a contradiction.”* We have been told in very emphatic terms by
Sir W. Hamilton, that the Law of Contradiction is binding not on our
conceptions merely, but on Things.[†] If, then, motion involves a
contradiction, how is it possible? and if it is possible, and a fact, as
we know it to be, how can it involve a contradiction? The appearance of
contradiction must necessarily be fallacious, even were we unable to
point out the fallacy. Our author, apparently, has attempted to resolve
it, and failed. He calls the argument “an exposition of the
contradictions involved in our notion of motion,” and says that its
“fallacy has not yet been detected.”† And, again, “The Eleatic Zeno’s
demonstration of the Edition: current; Page: [425] impossibility of
motion is not more insoluble than could be framed a proof that the
Present has no reality: for however certain we may be of both, we can
positively think neither.”* It must, one would suppose, be a great
difficulty, which could appear insoluble to Sir W. Hamilton. The
“demonstration,” at all events, cannot yet have been refuted, and
superhuman ingenuity must be needed to refute it. Yet the fallacy in it
has been pointed out again and again; and the contradictions which Sir
W. Hamilton regards it as an exposure of, do not exist.

Zeno’s reasonings against motion, as handed down by Aristotle,[*]
consist of four arguments, which are stated and criticised with
considerable prolixity by Bayle.[†] Several of these are substantially
the same argument in different forms, and if we examine the two most
plausible of them it will suffice. The first is the ingenious fallacy of
Achilles and the Tortoise. If Achilles starts a thousand yards behind
the tortoise, and runs a hundred times as fast; still, while Achilles
runs those thousand yards, the tortoise will have got on ten; while
Achilles runs those ten, the tortoise will have run a tenth of a yard;
and as this process may be continued to infinity, Achilles will never
overtake the tortoise. In our author’s opinion, this argument is
logically correct, and evolves a contradiction in our idea of motion.
But it is neither logically correct, nor evolves a contradiction in
anything. It assumes, of course, the infinite divisibility of space. But
we have no need to entangle ourselves in the metaphysical discussion
whether this assumption is warrantable. Let it be granted or not, the
argument always remains gfallacious. The fallacy lies in the assertion
that “this process may be continued to infinity.” Infinity is here
ambiguous. The conclusion drawn is that the process may be continued for
an infinite duration of time. But the premise is only true in the sense,
that it may be continued for an infinite number of divisions of time.
The argument confounds infinity and infinite divisibility. Itg assumes
that to pass through an infinitely divisible space, requires an infinite
time. But the infinite divisibility of space means the infinite
divisibility of finite space: and it is only infinite space which cannot
be passed over in less than infinite time. What the argument proves is,
that to pass over the infinitely divisible space, requires an infinitely
divisible time: but an infinitely divisible time may itself be finite;
the smallest finite time is infinitely divisible; the argument,
therefore, is consistent with the Edition: current; Page: [426]
tortoise’s being overtaken in the smallest finite time. It is a sophism
of the type Ignoratio Elenchi, or, as Archbishop Whately terms it,
Irrelevant Conclusion;[*] an argument which proves a different
proposition from that which it pretends to prove, the difference of
meaning being disguised by han ambiguityh of language.

The other plausible form of Zeno’s argument is at first sight more
favourable to Sir W. Hamilton’s theory, being a real attempt to prove
that the fact of motion involves impossible conditions. The usual mode
of stating it is this. If a body moves, it must move either in the place
where it is, or in the place where it is not: but either of these is
impossible: therefore it cannot move. First of all, this argument, even
if we were unable to refute it, does not exhibit any contradiction in
our “notion” of motion. We do not conceive a body as moving either in
the place where it is, or in the place where it is not, but from the
former to the latter: in other words, we conceive the body as in the one
place and in the other at successive instants. Where is the
“contradiction” between being in one place at this moment, and in
another at the next? As for the fallacy itself, it is strange that when
everybody sees the answer to it, a practised logician should have any
difficulty in putting that answer into logical forms. It is not
necessary that motion should be in a place. iA bodyi must be in a place;
but motion is not ja bodyj—it is a change: and that a change of place
should be either in the old place or in the new, is a real contradiction
in terms. To put the thing in another way; Place may be understood in
two senses: it may either be a divisible, or an indivisible part of
space. If it be a divisible part, as a room, or a street, it is true
that in that sense, every motion is in a place, that is, within a
limited portion of space: but in this meaning of the term the dilemma
breaks down, for the body really moves in the place where it is; the
room, the field, or the house. If, on the contrary, we are to understand
by Place an indivisible minimum of space, the proposition that motion
must be in a place is evidently false; for motion cannot be in that
which has no parts; it can only be to or from it.

A parallel sophism might easily be invented, turning upon Time instead
of Space. It might be said that sunset is impossible, since if it be
possible, it must take place either while the sun is still up, or after
it is down. The answer is obvious: it is just the change from one to the
other which is sunset. And so it is the change from one position in
space to another which is motion. The parallelism between the two cases
was evidently seen by Sir W. Hamilton, and the sophism was too hard for
him in both: and this is what he must have meant by saying that we
cannot “positively think” the Edition: current; Page: [427] Present.
That he should have missed the solution of the fallacy is strange
enough: but, as a matter of fact, the assertion that we have no positive
perception, on the one hand of Motion, on the other, of present time,
deserves notice as one of the most curious deliverances of so earnest an
asserter of “our natural beliefs.”

These paralogisms are only part of a long list of puzzles concerning
infinity, which, though by no means hard to clear up, appear to our
author insoluble. I append in a note the entire list.* Many of them are
resolved by Edition: current; Page: [428] the observations already made
their difficulty being merely that of separating the two ideas of
Infinite and Infinitely Divisible. To our author’s thinking, infinite
divisibility and the Finite contradict one another. But even allowing
(which, as was seen in a former chapter, I do not) that infinite
divisibility is inconceivable, it does not therefore involve a
contradiction. The remaining puzzles mostly result from inability to
conceive that one infinity can be greater or less than another: a
conception familiar to all mathematicians. Our author refuses to
consider that a space or a time which is infinite in one direction and
bounded in another, is necessarily less than a space or a time which is
infinite in every direction. The space between two parallels, or between
two diverging lines or surfaces, extends to infinity, but it is
necessarily less than entire space, being a part of it. Not only is one
infinity greater than another, but one infinity may be infinitely
greater than another. Mathematicians habitually assume this, and reason
from it; and the kresultk always coming out true, the assumption is
justified. But mathematicians, I must admit, seldom know exactly what
they are about when they do this. As the results always prove right,
they know empirically that the process cannot be wrong—that the premises
must be true in a sense; but in what sense, it is beyond the ingenuity
of most of them to understand. The doctrine long remained a part of that
mathematical mysticism, so mercilessly shown up by Berkeley in his
Analyst, and Defence of Freethinking in Mathematics.[*] To clear it up
required a philosophical mathematician—one who should be both a
mathematician and a metaphysician: and it found one. To complete Sir W.
Hamilton’s discomfiture, this philosophic mathematician is his old
antagonist Mr. De Morgan, whom he described as too much of a
mathematician to be anything of a philosopher.* Mr. De Morgan, however,
has proved himself, as far as this subject is concerned, a far better
metaphysician than Sir W. Hamilton. He has let the light of reason into
all the logical obscurities and paradoxes of the infinitesimal calculus.
By merely following out, more thoroughly than had been done before, the
rational conception of infinitesimal division, as Edition: current;
Page: [429] synonymous with division into as many and as small parts as
we choose, lwithout any limit,l Mr. De Morgan, in his Algebra,[*] has
fully explained and justified the conception of successive orders of
differentials, each of them infinitely less than the differential of the
preceding, and infinitely greater than that of the succeeding order.
Whoever is acquainted with this masterly specimen of analysis, will find
his way through Sir W. Hamilton’s series of riddles respecting Infinity,
without ever being at a loss for their solution. I shall therefore
trouble the reader no further with them in this place.

Edition: current; Page: [430]


CHAPTER XXV: Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Pleasure and Pain

i have now concluded my remarks on the principal department of Sir W.
Hamilton’s psychology, that which relates to the Cognitive Faculties.
The remaining two of the three portions into which he divides the
subject, are the Feelings, and what he terms the Conative Faculties,
meaning those which tend to Action. On the Conative Faculties, however,
he barely touches, in the concluding part of his last lecture; and of
the Feelings he does not treat at any length. What he propounds on the
subject, chiefly consists of a general theory of Pleasure and Pain. Not
a theory of what they are in themselves, for he is not so much the dupe
of words as to suppose that they are anything but what we feel them to
be. The speculation with which he has presented us, does not relate to
their essence, but to the causes they depend on; “the general conditions
which determine the existence of Pleasure and Pain . . . the fundamental
law by which these phænomena are governed in all their manifestations.”*

The inquiry is scientifically legitimate, and of great interest; but we
must not be very confident that it is a practicable one, or can lead to
any positive result. It is quite possible that in seeking for the law of
pleasure and pain, like Bacon in seeking for the laws of the sensible
properties of bodies, we may be looking for unity of cause, where there
is a plurality, perhaps a multitude, of different causes. Such attempts,
however, even if unsuccessful, are far from being entirely useless. They
often lead to a more careful study of the phænomenon in some of its
aspects, and to the discovery of relations between them, not previously
understood, which though not adequate to the formation of an universal
theory of the phænomenon, afford a clearer insight into some of its
forms and varieties. This merit must be allowed to Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory, in common with several others which preceded it on the same
subject. But, regarded as a theorem of the universal conditions which
are present whenever pleasure (or pain) is present, and absent whenever
it is absent, the doctrine will hardly bear Edition: current; Page:
[431] investigation. The simplest and most familiar cases are exactly
those which obstinately refuse to be reduced within it.

I shall, as usual, state Sir W. Hamilton’s theory in his own words,
though in the present case it is a questionable advantage, the terms
being so general and abstract that they are scarcely capable of being
understood, apart from the illustrations. “Pleasure,” he says, “is a
reflex of the spontaneous and unimpeded exertion of a power, of whose
energy we are conscious. Pain, a reflex of the overstrained or repressed
exertion of such a power.”* By a “reflex” he has shortly before said
that he means merely a “concomitant;”† but I think it will appear that
he means at least an effect. At all events, these are what he regards as
the ultimate conditions of pleasure and pain; the most general
expression of the circumstances in which they occur.

This theory was of course suggested by the pleasures and pains of
intellectual or physical exertion, or, as it is otherwise termed,
exercise. These are the phænomena which principally afford to it such
foundation of fact, and such plausibility in speculation, as it
possesses. As we all know, moderate exertion, either of body or mind, is
pleasurable; a greater amount is painful, except when set in motion by
an impulse which renders it, in our author’s meaning of the word,
“spontaneous:” and a felt impediment to any kind of active exertion,
when there is an impulse towards it, is painful. It at first appears as
if Sir W. Hamilton had overlooked the pains and pleasures in which the
mind and body are passive, as in most of the organic, and a large
proportion of the emotional pleasures and pains. He claims, however, to
include all these in his formula. The “powers” and “energies” whose free
action he holds to be the condition of pleasure, and their impeded or
overstrained action, of pain, include our passive susceptibilities as
well as our active energies. Accordingly he suggests a correction of his
own language, saying that “occupation” or “exercise” would perhaps be
fitter expressions than “energy.”‡

The term energy, which is equivalent to act, activity, or operation, is
here used to comprehend also all the mixed states of action and passion
of which we are conscious; for, inasmuch as we are conscious of any
modification of mind, there is necessarily more than a mere passivity of
the subject; consciousness itself implying at least a reaction. [What
has become of his doctrine that to be conscious of a feeling is only
another phrase for having the feeling?] Be this, however, as it may, the
nouns energy, act, activity, operation, with the correspondent verbs,
are to be understood to denote, indifferently and in general, all the
processes of our higher and our lower life of which we are conscious.§

Understanding the theory in this enlarged sense, let us test it by
application Edition: current; Page: [432] to one of the simplest of our
organic feelings, the pleasure of a sweet taste. This pleasure,
according to the theory, arises from the free exercise, without either
restraint or excess, of one of our powers or capacities: what capacity
shall we call it? That of tasting sweetness? This will not do; for if
the capacity of having the sensation of sweet is called into play in any
degree, great or small, the effect is a sweet taste, which is a
pleasure. Besides, instead of a sweet taste, let us suppose an acrid
taste. In this taste the capacity exercised is that of tasting acridity.
But the result of the exercise of this capacity, neither repressed nor
overstrained, which therefore, according to the theory, should be a
pleasure, is an acrid taste, which is a pain. It must, therefore, be
meant that the capacity which when freely exercised causes pleasure, and
when repressed or overstrained, pain, is some more general capacity than
that of sweet or acrid taste—say the power of taste in the abstract:
that the power of taste, the organic action of the gustatory nerves, by
its spontaneous exercise, yields pleasure, and by its repression, or its
strained exercise, produces pain. The theory thus entirely turns upon
what is meant by spontaneous; as is shown still more clearly by our
author’s comments. “It has been stated,” he observes in a recapitulation
of his doctrine,

that a feeling of pleasure is experienced, when any power is consciously
exercised in a suitable manner; that is, when we are neither, on the one
hand, conscious of any restraint upon the energy which it is disposed
spontaneously to put forth, nor, on the other, conscious of any effort
in it to put forth an amount of energy greater either in degree or in
continuance, than what it is disposed freely to exert. In other words,
we feel positive pleasure, in proportion as our powers are exercised,
but not over-exercised; we feel positive pain, in proportion as they are
compelled either not to operate, or to operate too much. All pleasure,
thus, arises from the free play of our faculties and capacities; all
pain from their compulsory repression or compulsory activity.*

All, therefore, depends upon what is meant by “free” or “spontaneous,”
and what by “compulsory,” activity. The difference cannot be that which
the words suggest, the presence or absence of will. It cannot be meant,
that pleasure accompanies the process when wholly involuntary, and that
pain begins when a voluntary element enters into the exercise of the
sensitive faculty. There is nothing voluntary in the agonies of the
rack, or of an excruciating bodily disease: while, in the case of a
pleasure, the exercise of will, in the only mode in which it can be
exercised on a feeling, namely, by voluntarily attending to it, instead
of converting it from a pleasure into a pain, often greatly heightens
the pleasure. This doctrine, therefore, would be absurd, nor is Sir W.
Hamilton chargeable with it. What he means by Edition: current; Page:
[433] “spontaneous” as applied to the exercise of our capacities of
feeling, we gather from the following passage, and others similar to it.

Every power, all conditions being supplied, and all impediments being
removed, tends, of its proper nature and without effort, to put forth a
certain determinate maximum, intensive and protensive, of free energy.
This determinate maximum of free energy, it, therefore, exerts
spontaneously: if a less amount than this be actually put forth, a
certain quantity of tendency has been forcibly repressed: whereas, if a
greater than this has been actually exerted, a certain amount of nisus
has been forcibly stimulated in the power. The term spontaneously,
therefore, provides that the exertion of the power has not been
constrained beyond the proper limit,—the natural maximum, to which, if
left to itself, it freely springs.—Again, in regard to the term
unimpeded,—this stipulates that the conditions requisite to allow this
spring have been supplied, and that all impediments to it have been
removed. This postulates, of course, the presence of an object.*

The spontaneous and unimpeded exercise of a capacity means, therefore,
it would appear, the exercise which takes place when “all conditions”
are “supplied,” and “all impediments removed.” Let us apply this to a
particular case. I taste, at different instants, two different objects;
an orange, and rhubarb. In both cases, all conditions are supplied; the
object is present and in contact with my organs; and in both cases, all
impediments are removed to the unstrained and natural action of the
object upon my gustatory organs. Yet the result is in one case a
pleasure, in the other a sensation of nauseousness. On Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory, it ought, in both cases, to have been pleasure: for in neither
does anything interfere with the free action of my sense of taste.

Sir W. Hamilton can scarcely have overlooked this objection, and the
answer which he may be supposed to make, is that in the case of the
rhubarb, the object itself was of a nature to disturb the gustative
faculty, and exact from it a greater degree of action (or less, for I
would not undertake to say which) than is exacted by the orange. But
where is the proof of this? and what, even, does the assertion mean? A
greater degree of what action? Of the action of tasting? If so, a pain
should differ from a pleasure only by being more (or perhaps less)
intense. Is the action that is meant, some occult process in the organ?
But what ground is there for affirming that there is more action of any
kind, on the part of the organ or the sense of taste, in a disagreeable
savour than in an agreeable one? It is perhaps true that more than a
certain quantity of action is always painful: every sensation
intensified beyond a certain degree may become a pain. But the converse
proposition, that wherever there is a pain there is an excess of action
(or a deficiency, for we are offered that alternative), I know of no
reason for believing. Moreover, if admitted, it would seem to involve
Edition: current; Page: [434] the consequence, that in every case of
pain, a less or a greater degree of the cause which produces it is
pleasurablea, which is certainly not true, however true it may be that
in many cases of organic pleasure (especially tastes and smells) a less
or a greater quantity of the substance which produces the pleasure is
either insipid or positively disagreeablea.

Our author is more than half aware that his theory bbreaks down when
applied to pleasures or pains that are heterogeneous to one anotherb;
for he says, “When it is required of us to explain particularly and in
detail, why the rose, for example, produces this sensation of smell,
assafœtida that other, and so forth, and to say in what peculiar action
does the perfect or pleasurable, and the imperfect or painful, activity
of an organ consist, we must at once profess our ignorance.” He lays the
responsibility of the failure, not upon his theory, but upon the general
inexplicability of ultimate facts. “But it is the same with all our
attempts at explaining any of the ultimate phænomena of creation. In
general, we may account for much; in detail, we can rarely account for
anything: for we soon remount to facts which lie beyond our powers of
analysis and observation.”*

This appears to me a great misconception, on our author’s part, of what
may rightfully be demanded from a theorist. He is not entitled to frame
a theory from one class of phænomena, extend it to another class which
it does not fit, and excuse himself by saying that if we cannot make it
fit, it is because ultimate facts are inexplicable. Newton did not
proceed in this manner with the theory of gravitation. He made it an
absolute condition of adopting the theory, that it should fit; and when,
owing to incorrect data, he could not make it fit perfectly, he
abandoned the speculation for many years. If the smell of a rose and the
smell of assafœtida are ultimate facts, be it so: but in that case, it
is useless setting up a theory to explain them. If we do propound a
theory, we are bound to prove all it asserts: and this, in the present
case, is, that in smelling a rose the organ is in “perfect” activity,
but when smelling assafœtida, in “imperfect,” which is either greater or
less than perfect. It is not philosophical to assert this, and fall back
upon the incomprehensibility of the subject as a dispensation from
proving it. What is a hindrance to proving a theory, ought to be a
hindrance to affirming it.

What meaning, in fact, can be attached to perfect and imperfect
activity, as the phrases are here used? Perfection or imperfection is
treated as a question of quantity; activity is called perfect when there
is exactly the right quantity, imperfect when there is either more or
less. But what is the test of right or wrong quantity, except the
pleasure or pain attending it? The Edition: current; Page: [435] theory
amounts to this, that pleasure or pain is felt, according as the
activity is of the amount fitted to produce the one or the other. In
this futile mode of explaining the phænomena our author had been
preceded by Aristotle, one of the greatest of recorded thinkers, but who
must have been more than human if, in the state of knowledge and
scientific cultivation in his time, he had avoided slips which hardly
any one, even now, is able completely to guard against. Aristotle’s
theory, which, as understood by our author, differs little from his own,
is presented by Sir W. Hamilton in the following words:

When a sense, for example, is in perfect health, and it is presented
with a suitable object of the most perfect kind, there is elicited the
most perfect energy, which, at every instant of its continuance, is
accompanied with pleasure. The same holds good with the function of
Imagination, Thought, &c. Pleasure is the concomitant in every case
where powers and objects are in themselves perfect, and between which
there subsists a suitable relation.*

The conditions whereon, upon this showing, pleasure depends, are the
healthiness of the sense, and the perfection of the object presented to
it. This is simply making the fact its own theory. When is a sense in
perfect health, and its object perfect? The function of a sense is
twofold; as a source of cognition, and of feeling. If the perfection
meant be in the function of cognition, the doctrine that pleasure
depends on this is manifestly erroneous: according to Sir W. Hamilton,
it is even the reverse of the truth, for he holds that the knowledge
given by an act of sense, and the feeling accompanying it, are in an
inverse proportion to one another. cThere remainsc the supposition that
the perfection, of which Aristotle spoke, was perfection not in respect
of cognition but of feeling. It cannot, however, consist in acuteness of
feeling, for our acutest feelings are pains. What then constitutes it?
Pleasurableness of feeling: and the theory only tells us, that pleasure
is the result of a pleasurable state of the sense, and a pleasure-giving
quality in the object presented to it. Aristotle and Sir W. Hamilton did
not, certainly, state the doctrine to themselves in this manner; but
they reduced it to this, by affirming pleasure or pain to depend on the
perfect or imperfect action of the sense, when there was no criterion of
imperfect or perfect action except that it produced pain or pleasure.

The theory of our author, considered as a résumé of the universal
conditions of pleasure and pain, being so manifestly inadequate, this is
not the place for sifting out the detached fragments of valuable thought
which are disseminated through it. Such stray truths may be gleaned from
every excursion through the phænomena of human nature by a person of
ability. Edition: current; Page: [436] What Sir W. Hamilton says of the
different classes of mental pleasures and pains, though brief, is very
suggestive of thought. To make a proper use of the hints he throws out
towards an explanation of the pleasures derived from sublimity and
beauty, would require much study, and a wide survey of the subject, as
well as of the speculations of other thinkers regarding it. The question
has no direct connexion with any other of those discussed in the present
volume, and but a slight one with Sir W. Hamilton’s merits as a
philosopher; since the brevity with which he treats it, gives ground for
believing that he had not bestowed on it the amount of thought which
would enable his opinion to claim the rank of a philosophic theory.

Edition: current; Page: [437]


CHAPTER XXVI: On the Freedom of the Will

the last of the three classes of mental phænomena, that of Conation, in
other words, of Desire and Will, is barely commenced upon in the last
pages of Sir W. Hamilton’s last lecture:[*] whether it be that in the
many years during which he taught the class, he never got beyond this
point, or that his teaching in the concluding part of the course was
purely oral, and has not been preserved. Nor has he, in any of his
writings, treated ex professo of this subject; though doubtless he would
have done so, had his health permitted him to complete the
“Dissertations on Reid.” We consequently know little of what his
sentiments were on any of the topics comprised in this branch of
Psychology, except the vexata quæstio of the Freedom of the Will; on
which he could not help giving indications, in various parts of his
works, both of his opinion and of the reasons on which he grounded it.
The doctrine of Free-will was indeed so fundamental with him, that it
may be regarded as the central idea of his system—the determining cause
of most of his philosophical opinions; and, in a peculiar manner, of the
two which are most completely emanations from his own mind, the Law of
the Conditioned, and his singular theory of Causation. He breaks ground
on the subject at the very opening of his Lectures, in his introductory
remarks on the utility of the study of Metaphysics. He puts in a claim
for metaphysics, grounded on the free-will doctrine, of being the only
medium “through which our unassisted reason can ascend to the knowledge
of a God.” He supports this position by a line of argument which, I
think, must be startling to the majority of believers.

“The Deity,” he says,

is not an object of immediate contemplation; as existing and in himself,
he is beyond our reach; we can know him only mediately through his
works, and are only warranted in assuming his existence as a certain
kind of cause necessary to account for a certain state of things, of
whose reality our faculties are supposed to inform us. The affirmation
of a God being thus a regressive inference, from the existence of a
special class of effects to the existence of a special character of
cause, it is evident, that the whole argument hinges on the fact,—Does a
state of things really exist, such as is only possible through the
agency of a Divine Cause? For if it can be shown Edition: current; Page:
[438] that such a state of things does not really exist, then, our
inference to the kind of cause requisite to account for it, is
necessarily null.

This being understood, I now proceed to show you that the class of
phænomena which requires that kind of cause we denominate a Deity, is
exclusively given in the phænomena of mind,—that the phænomena of
matter, taken by themselves (you will observe the qualification, taken
by themselves) so far from warranting any inference to the existence of
a God, would, on the contrary, ground even an argument to his negation;
that the study of the external world, taken with, and in subordination
to, that of the internal, not only loses its atheistic tendency, but,
under such subservience, may be rendered conducive to the great
conclusion from which, if left to itself, it would dissuade us.*

The reasoning by which he thinks that he establishes this position runs
as follows. A God is only an inference from Nature; a cause assumed, as
necessary to account for phænomena. Now, fate or necessity, without a
God, might account for the phænomena of matter. It is only as man is a
free intelligence, that to account for his existence requires the
hypothesis of a Creator who is a free intelligence. If our feeling of
liberty is an illusion; if our intelligence is only a result of material
organization; we are entitled to conclude that in the universe also, the
phænomena of intelligence and design are, in the last analysis, the
products of brute necessity. Existence in itself being unknown to us, we
can only infer its character from the particular order presented to us
within the sphere of our experience, which in the case under
consideration means observation of our own minds. If, therefore, our
intelligence is produced and bounded by a blind fate, the like may be
concluded to be true of the Divine Intelligence. If, on the contrary,
intelligence in man is a free power, independent of matter, we may
legitimately conclude the same thing of the intelligence manifested in
the universe. Again, there is properly no God at all unless there is a
moral Governor of the world.

Now, it is self-evident, in the first place, that if there be no moral
world, there can be no moral governor of such a world; and in the
second, that we have, and can have, no ground on which to believe in the
reality of a moral world, except in so far as we ourselves are moral
agents. . . . But in what does the character of man as a moral agent
consist? Man is a moral agent only as he is accountable for his
actions,—in other words, as he is the object of praise or blame; and
this he is, only inasmuch as he has prescribed to him a rule of duty,
and as he is able to act, or not to act, in conformity with its
precepts. The possibility of morality thus depends on the possibility of
liberty; for if man be not a free agent, he is not the author of his
actions, and has, therefore, no responsibility,—no moral personality at
all.†

Fully to develop all the just criticisms which might be made on this
single thesis, would require a long chapter. In the first place, the
practice of Edition: current; Page: [439] bribing the pupil to accept a
metaphysical dogma, by the promise or threat that it affords the only
valid argument for a foregone conclusion—however transcendently
important that conclusion may be thought to be—is not only repugnant to
all the rules of philosophizing, but a grave offence against the
morality of philosophic enquiry. The eager attempts of almost every
metaphysical writer to create a religious prejudice in favour of the
theory he patronizes, are a very serious grievance in philosophy. If I
could permit myself, even by way of retort, to follow so bad an example,
I might warn the defenders of religion, of the danger of sacrificing, in
turn, every one of its evidences to some other. It has been remarked,
with truth, that there is not one of the received arguments in support
either of natural religion or of revelation, a formal condemnation of
which might not be extracted from the writings of sincerely religious
thinkers. I am far from imputing this to them as matter of blame: the
rejection of what they deem bad arguments in a good cause must always be
honourable to them, when led to it by honestly following the promptings
of their reason, and not by an egotistic preference for their own
special modes of proof. But, looking at the question as one of prudence,
it would be wise in them, whatever else they give up, not to part
company with the Design argument. For, in the first place, it is the
best; and besides, it is by far the most persuasive. It would be
difficult to find a stronger argument in favour of Theism, than that the
eye must have been made by one who sees, and the ear by one who
hears.[*] If, after this, it pleases Sir W. Hamilton or any other person
to say that unless we believe in free will, the Being who by hypothesis
made the ear and the eye is no God; or that to regard the goodness of
God as the result of a necessity, which, from the very meaning of a
First Cause, can only be a necessity of his own nature, a love of Good
which is part of himself and inseparable from him, is denying him to be
a moral being; there is really nothing left for us but, with equal
positiveness, to aver the contrary: for the two parties will never be
able to agree about the meaning of terms.

This is but one specimen among many of the bad logic which pervades Sir
W. Hamilton’s attempt to show that Theism depends on the reception of
his favourite doctrine. He proceeds, throughout, on the assumption that
the falsely called Doctrine of Necessity* is the same thing with
Materialism. Edition: current; Page: [440] He treats those opinions as
precisely equivalent.* Yet no two doctrines can be more distinct. Reid,
an enemy of both, affirms that Necessity, “far from being a direct
inference,” “can receive no support from” Materialism.† It may be true,
nevertheless, that Materialists are always or generally Necessitarians;
and it is not denied that many Necessitarians are Materialists: but
nearly all the theologians of the Reformation, beginning with Luther,
and the entire series of Calvinistic divines represented by Jonathan
Edwards, are proofs that the most sincere Spiritualists may consistently
hold the doctrine of so-called Necessity. Of such Spiritualists there is
an illustrious example in Leibnitz, to say nothing of Condillac‡ or
Brown. They believe man to be a spiritual being, not dependent on
Matter, but yet, in respect of his actions as in all other respects,
subject to the law of Causation: his volitions not being self-caused,
but determined by spiritual antecedents (e.g. desires, associations of
ideas, &c., all of which are spiritual if the mind is spiritual) in such
sort that when the antecedents are the same, the volitions will always
be the same. But to confound Necessity with Materialism, though an
historical and psychological error, is indispensable to Sir W.
Hamilton’s argument, which depends for all its plausibility on the
picture he draws of a God subject to a “brute necessity” of a purely
material character.[*] For if the necessity predicated of human actions
is not a material, but a spiritual necessity; if the assertion that the
virtuous man is virtuous necessarily, only means that he is so because
he dreads a departure from virtue more than he dreads any personal
consequence; there is nothing absurd or invidious in taking a similar
view of the Deity, and believing that he is necessitated to will what is
good, by the love of good and detestation of evil which are in his own
nature.

There is also at the root of our author’s argument another logical
error—that of inferring that whatever is given by observation and
analysis as a law of human intelligence, must be supposed to be an
absolute law extending to the Divine. He says, truly, that the Divine
Intelligence is but an assumption, to account for the phænomena of the
universe; and that we can only be warranted in referring the origin of
those phænomena to an Intelligence, by Edition: current; Page: [441]
analogy to the effects of human intellect. But can this analogy be
carried up to complete identity in conditions and modes of action
between the human and the Divine intelligence? Does Sir W. Hamilton draw
this inference in any other case? On the contrary, he holds us bound to
believe that the Deity, whether as Will or as Intelligence, is
Absolute—unrestricted by any conditions; though, as such, neither
knowable nor conceivable by us. And though I do not acknowledge the
obligation of believing what can neither be known nor conceived, as
little can it be admitted, that the Divine Will cannot be free unless
ours is so; any more than that the Divine Intelligence cannot know the
truths of geometry by direct intuition, because we are obliged to mount
laboriously up to them through the twelve books of Euclid.

So much for Sir W. Hamilton’s attempt to prove that one who disbelieves
free-will, has no business to believe in a God. Let us now consider his
view of the doctrine itself, and of the evidence for it.

His view of the controversy is peculiar, but harmonizes with his
Philosophy of the Conditioned, which seems indeed to have been
principally suggested to him by the supposed requirements of this
question. He is of opinion that Free-will and Necessity are both
inconceivable. Free-will, because it supposes volitions to originate
without cause;* because it affirms an absolute commencement, which, as
we are aware, our author deems it impossible for the human mind to
conceive. On the other hand, the mind is equally unable to conceive an
infinite regress; a chain of causation going back to all eternity. Both
the one and the other theory thus involve difficulties insurmountable by
the human faculties. But, as Sir W. Hamilton has so often told us, the
inconceivability of a thing by us, is no proof that it is objectively
impossible by the laws of the universe; on the contrary, it often
happens that both sides of an alternative are alike incomprehensible to
us, Edition: current; Page: [442] while from their nature we are certain
that the one or the other must be true. Such an alternative, according
to Sir W. Hamilton, exists between the conflicting doctrines of
Free-will and Necessity. By the law of Excluded Middle, one or other of
them must be true; and inconceivability, as common to both, not
operating more against one than against the other, does not operate
against either. The balance, therefore, must turn in favour of the side
for which there is positive evidence. In favour of Free-will we have the
distinct testimony of consciousness; perhaps directly, though of this he
speaks with some appearance of doubt;* but at all events, indirectly,
freedom being implied in the consciousness of moral responsibility. As
there is no corresponding evidence in favour of the other theory, the
Free-will doctrine must prevail.

How the will can possibly be free must remain to us, under the present
limitation of our faculties, wholly incomprehensible. We cannot conceive
absolute commencement; we cannot, therefore, conceive a free volition.
But as little can we conceive the alternative on which liberty is
denied, on which necessity is affirmed. And in favour of our moral
nature, the fact that we are free is given us in the consciousness of an
uncompromising law of Duty, in the consciousness of our moral
accountability; and this fact of liberty cannot be redargued on the
ground that it is incomprehensible, for the doctrine of the Conditioned
proves, against the necessitarian, that something may, nay must, be
true, of which the mind is wholly unable to construe to itself the
possibility, whilst it shows that the objection of incomprehensibility
applies no less to the doctrine of fatalism than to the doctrine of
moral freedom.†

The inconceivability of the Free-will doctrine is maintained by our
author, not only on the general ground just stated, of our incapacity to
conceive an absolute commencement, but on the further and special
ground, that the will is determined by motives. In rewriting the
preceding passage for the Appendix to his Discussions, he made the
following addition to it:

A determination by motives cannot, to our understanding, escape from
necessitation. Nay, were we even to admit as true, what we cannot think
as possible, still the doctrine of a motiveless volition would be only
casualism; and the free acts of an indifferent, are, morally and
rationally, as worthless as the pre-ordered passions of a determined
will.‡ How, therefore, I repeat, moral liberty is possible in man or
Edition: current; Page: [443] God, we are utterly unable speculatively
to understand. But . . . the scheme of freedom is not more inconceivable
than the scheme of necessity. For whilst fatalism is a recoil from the
more obtrusive inconceivability of an absolute commencement, on the fact
of which commencement the doctrine of liberty proceeds; the fatalist is
shown to overlook the equal, but less obtrusive, inconceivability of an
infinite non-commencement, on the assertion of which non-commencement
his own doctrine of necessity must ultimately rest.*

It rests on no such thing, if he believes in a First Cause, which a
Necessitarian may. What is more, even if he does not believe in a First
Cause, he makes no “assertion of non-commencement;” he only declines to
make an assertion of commencement; band, therefore, is not in the
position of asserting what is inconceivable: which, however, as Sir W.
Hamilton is perpetually declaring, is a position perfectly tenable, and
the position he avowedly chooses for himself on this very subjectb. But
to resume the quotation: “As equally unthinkable, the two counter, the
two one-sided, schemes are thus theoretically balanced. But,
practically, our consciousness of the moral law, which, without a moral
liberty in man, would be a mendacious imperative, gives a decisive
preponderance to the doctrine of freedom over the doctrine of fate. We
are free in act, if we are accountable for our actions.”

Sir W. Hamilton is of opinion that both sides are alike unsuccessful in
repelling each other’s attacks. The arguments against both are, he
thinks, to the human faculties, irrefutable.

The champions of the opposite doctrines are at once resistless in
assault and impotent in defence. Each is hewn down, and appears to die
under the home thrusts of his adversary; but each again recovers life
from the very death of his antagonist, and, to borrow a simile, both are
like the heroes in Valhalla, ready in a moment to amuse themselves anew
in the same bloodless and interminable conflict. The doctrine of Moral
Liberty cannot be made conceivable, for we can only conceive the
determined and the relative. As already stated, all that can be done is
to show, 1°. That, for the fact of Liberty, we have immediately or
mediately, the evidence of Consciousness; and 2°. That there are among
the phænomena of mind, many facts which we must admit as actual, but of
whose possibility we are wholly unable to form any notion. I may merely
observe that the fact of Motion can be shown to be impossible, on
grounds not less strong than those on which it is attempted to disprove
the fact of Liberty.†

These “grounds no less strong” are the mere paralogisms which we
examined in a recent chapter,[*] and with regard to which our author
Edition: current; Page: [444] showed so surprising a deficiency in the
acuteness and subtlety to be expected from the general quality of his
mind.

Conformably to these views, Sir W. Hamilton, in his foot-notes on Reid,
promptly puts an extinguisher on several of that philosopher’s arguments
against the doctrine of so-called Necessity. When Reid affirms that
Motives are not causes—that they may influence to action, but do not
act, Sir W. Hamilton observes: “If Motives influence to action, they
must co-operate in producing a certain effect upon the agent; and the
determination to act, and to act in a certain manner, is that effect.
They are thus, on Reid’s own view, in this relation, causes, and
efficient causes. It is of no consequence in the argument whether
motives be said to determine a man to act, or to influence (that is, to
determine) him to determine himself to act.”* This is one of the neatest
specimens in our author’s writings of a fallacy cut clean through by a
single stroke.

Again, when Reid says that acts are often done without any motive, or
when there is no motive for preferring the means used, rather than
others by which the same end might have been attained, Sir W. Hamilton
asks, “Can we conceive any act of which there was not a sufficient cause
or concourse of causes why the man performed it and no other? If not,
call this cause, or these concauses, the motive, and there is no longer
a dispute.”†

Reid asks, “Is there no such thing as wilfulness, caprice, or obstinacy
among mankind?”[*] Sir W. Hamilton, e contra: “But are not these all
tendencies, and fatal tendencies, to act or not to act? By
contradistinguishing such tendencies from motives strictly so called, or
rational impulses, we do not advance a single step towards rendering
liberty comprehensible.”‡

According to Reid, the determination is made by the man, and not by the
motive. “But,” asks Sir W. Hamilton,

was the man determined by no motive to that determination? Was his
specific volition to this or to that without a cause? On the supposition
that the sum of influences (motives, dispositions, and tendencies) to
volition A, is equal to 12, and the sum of influences to
counter-volition B equal to 8—can we conceive that the determination of
volition A should not be necessary?—We can only conceive the volition B
to be determined by supposing that the man creates (calls from
non-existence into existence) a certain supplement of influences. But
this creation as actual, or in itself, is inconceivable, and even to
conceive the possibility of this inconceivable act, we must suppose some
cause by which the man is determined to exert it. We thus, in thought,
never escape determination and necessity. It will be observed that I do
not consider this inability to the notion, any disproof of the fact of
Free-will.§

Edition: current; Page: [445]
Nor is it: but if, as our author so strongly inculcates, “every effort
to bring the fact of liberty within the compass of our conceptions only
results in the substitution in its place of some more or less disguised
form of necessity,”* it is a strong indication that some form of
necessity is the opinion naturally suggested by our collective
experience of life.†

Sir W. Hamilton having thus, as is often the case (and it is one of the
best things he does), saved his opponents the trouble of answering his
friends, his doctrine is left resting exclusively on the supports which
he has himself provided for it. In examining them, let us place
ourselves, in the first instance, completely at his point of view, and
concede to him the coequal inconceivability of the conflicting
hypotheses, an uncaused commencement, and an infinite regress. But this
choice of inconceivabilities is not offered to us in the case of
volitions only. We are held, as he not only admits but contends, to the
same alternative in all cases of causation whatsoever. But we find our
way out of the difficulty, in other cases, in quite a different manner.
In the case of every other kind of fact, we do not elect the hypothesis
that the event took place without a cause: we accept the other
supposition, that of a regress, not indeed to infinity, but either
generally into the region of the Unknowable, or back to an Universal
Cause, regarding which, as we are only concerned with it in crespect of
attributes bearingc relation to what it preceded, and not as itself
preceded by anything, we can afford to dconsider this reference as
ultimated.

Now, what is the reason, which, in the case of all things within the
range of our knowledge except volitions, makes us choose this side of
the alternative? Why do we, without scruple, register all of them as
depending on causes, by which (to use our author’s language) they are
determined necessarily, though, in believing this, we, according to Sir
W. Hamilton, believe as utter an inconceivability as if we supposed them
to take place without a cause? Apparently it is because the causation
hypothesis, inconceivable as he may think it, possesses the advantage of
having experience on its side. And how or by what evidence does
experience testify to it? Not by disclosing any nexus between the cause
and the effect, any Sufficient Reason in the cause itself why the effect
should follow it. No philosopher Edition: current; Page: [446] now makes
this supposition, and Sir W. Hamilton positively disclaims it. What
experience makes known, is the fact of an invariable sequence between
every event and some special combination of antecedent conditions, in
such sort that wherever and whenever that union of antecedents exists,
the event does not fail to occur. Any must in the case, any necessity,
other than the unconditional universality of the fact, we know nothing
of. Still, this à posteriori “does,” though not confirmed by an à priori
“must,” decides our choice between the two inconceivables, and leads us
to the belief that every event within the phænomenal universe, except
human volitions, is determined to take place by a cause. Now, the
so-called Necessitarians demand the application of the same rule of
judgment to our volitions. They maintain that there is the same evidence
for it. They affirm, as a truth of experience, that volitions do, in
point of fact, follow determinate moral antecedents with the same
uniformity, and (when we have sufficient knowledge of the circumstances)
with the same certainty, as physical effects follow their physical
causes. These moral antecedents are desires, aversions, habits, and
dispositions, combined with outward circumstances suited to call those
internal incentives into action. All these again are effects of causes,
those of them which are mental being consequences of education, and of
other moral and physical influences. This is what Necessitarians affirm:
and they court every possible mode in which its truth can be verified.
They test it by each person’s observation of his own volitions. They
test it by each person’s observation of the voluntary actions of those
with whom he comes into contact; and by the power which every one has of
foreseeing actions, with a degree of exactness proportioned to his
previous experience and knowledge of the agents, and with a certainty
often quite equal to that with which we predict the commonest physical
events. They test it further, by the statistical results of the
observation of human beings acting in numbers sufficient to eliminate
the influences which operate only on a few, and which on a large scale
neutralize one another, leaving the total result about the same as if
the volitions of the whole mass had been affected by such only of the
determining causes as were common to them all. In cases of this
description the results are as uniform, and may be as accurately
foretold, as in any physical enquiries in which the effect depends upon
a multiplicity of causes. The cases in which volitions seem too
uncertain to admit of being confidently predicted, are those in which
our knowledge of the influences antecedently in operation is so
incomplete, that with equally imperfect data there would be the same
uncertainty in the predictions of the astronomer and the chemist. On
these grounds it is contended that our choice between the conflicting
inconceivables should be the same in the case of volitions as of all
other phænomena; we must reject equally in both cases the hypothesis of
spontaneousness, and consider them all as caused. A volition is a moral
effect, which follows the Edition: current; Page: [447] corresponding
moral causes as certainly and invariably as physical effects follow
their physical causes. Whether it must do so, I acknowledge myself to be
entirely ignorant, be the phænomenon moral or physical; and I condemn,
accordingly, the word Necessity as applied to either case. All I know
is, that it always does.*

This argument from experience Sir W. Hamilton passes unnoticed, but
urges, on the opposite side of the question, the argument from
Consciousness. We are conscious, he affirms, either of our freedom, or
at all events (it is odd that, on his theory, there should be any doubt)
of something which implies freedom. If this is true, our internal
consciousness tells us fthat we have a power, whichf the whole outward
experience of the human race tells gus that we never useg. This is
surely a very unfortunate predicament we are in, and a sore trial to the
puzzled metaphysician. Philosophy is far from having so easy a business
before her as our author thinks: the arbiter Consciousness is by no
means invoked to turn the scale between two equally balanced
difficulties; on the contrary, she has to sit in judgment between
herself and a complete induction from experience. Consciousness, it will
probably be said, is the best evidence; and so it would be, if we were
always certain what is Consciousness. But while there are so many
varying testimonies respecting this; when Sir W. Hamilton can himself
say, “many philosophers have attempted to establish, on the principles
of common sense, propositions which are not original data of
consciousness, while the original data of consciousness from which these
propositions were derived, and to which they owed all their necessity
and truth, these same philosophers were (strange to say) not disposed to
admit;”† when M. Cousin and nearly all Germany find the Infinite and the
Absolute in Consciousness, Sir W. Hamilton thinking them utterly
repugnant to it; when philosophers, for many generations, fancied that
they had Abstract Ideas—that they could conceive a triangle which was
neither equilateral, Edition: current; Page: [448] isosceles, nor
scalene,* which Sir W. Hamilton and all other people now consider to be
simply absurd; with all these conflicting opinions respecting the things
to which Consciousness testifies, what is the perplexed inquirer to
think? Does all philosophy end, as in our author’s opinion Hume believed
it to do, in a persistent contradiction between one of our mental
faculties and another?[*] We shall find, there is a solution, which
relieves the human mind from this embarrassment: namely, that the
question to which experience says yes, and that to which consciousness
says no, are different questions.

Let us cross-examine the alleged testimony of consciousness. And, first,
it is left in some uncertainty by Sir W. Hamilton whether Consciousness
makes only one deliverance on the subject, or two: whether we are
conscious only of moral responsibility, in which free-will is implied,
or are directly conscious of free-will. In his Lectures, Sir W. Hamilton
speaks only of the first. In the notes on Reid, which were written
subsequently, he seems to affirm both, but the latter of the two in a
doubtful and hesitating manner:[†] so difficult, in reality, does he
find it to ascertain with certainty what it is that Consciousness
certifies. But as there are many who maintain with a confidence far
greater than his, that we are directly conscious of free-will,† it is
necessary to examine that question.

Edition: current; Page: [449]
To be conscious of free-will, must mean, to be conscious, before I have
decided, that I am able to decide either way. Exception may be taken in
limine to the use of the word consciousness in such an application.
Consciousness tells me what I do or feel. But what I am able to do, is
not a subject of consciousness. Consciousness is not prophetic; we are
conscious of what is, not of what will or can be. We never know that we
are able to do a thing, except from having done it, or something equal
and similar to it. We should not know that we were capable of action at
all, if we had never acted. Having acted, we know, as far as that
experience reaches, how we are able to act; and this knowledge, when it
has become familiar, is often confounded with, and called by the name
of, consciousness. But it does not derive any increase of authority from
being misnamed; its truth is not supreme over, but depends on,
experience. If our so-called consciousness of what we are able to do is
not borne out by experience, it is a delusion. It has no title to
credence but as an interpretation of experience, and if it is a false
interpretation, it must give way.*

Edition: current; Page: [450]
But this conviction, whether termed consciousness or only belief, that
our will is free—what is it? Of what are we convinced? I am told that
whether I decide to do or to abstain, I feel that I could have decided
the other way. I ask my consciousness what I do feel, and I find,
indeed, that I feel (or am convinced) that I couldh, and even should,h
have chosen the other course iif I had preferred it, that is, if I had
liked it betteri; but not that I could have chosen one course while I
preferred the other. When I say Edition: current; Page: [451] preferred,
I of course include with the thing itself, all that accompanies it. I
know that I can, because I know that I often do, elect to do one thing,
when I should have preferred another in itself, apart from its
consequences, or from a moral law which it violates. And this preference
for a thing in itself, abstractedly from its accompaniments, is often
loosely described as preference for the thing. It is this unprecise mode
of speech which makes it not seem absurd to say that I act in opposition
to my preference; that I do one thing when I would rather do another;
that my conscience prevails over my desires—as if conscience were not
itself a desire—the desire to do right. Take any alternative: say to
murder or not to murder. I am told, that if I elect to murder, I am
conscious that I could have elected to abstain: but am I conscious that
I could have abstained if my aversion to the crime, and my dread of its
consequences, had been weaker than the temptation? If I elect to
abstain: in what sense am I conscious that I could have elected to
commit the crime? Only if I had desired to commit it with a desire
stronger than my horror of murder; not with one less strong. When we
think of ourselves hypothetically as having acted otherwise than we did,
we always suppose a difference in the antecedents: we picture ourselves
as having known something that we did not know, or not known something
that we did know; which is a difference in the external jinducementsj;
or as having desired something, or disliked something, more or less than
we did; which is a difference in the internal kinducementsk.*

lIn refutation of this it is said, that in resisting a desire, I am
conscious of making an effort; that after I have resisted, I have the
remembrance of having made an effort; that “if the temptation was long
continued, or if I have been resisting the strong will of another, I am
as sensibly exhausted by Edition: current; Page: [452] that effort, as
after any physical exertion I ever made:” and it is added, “If my
volition is wholly determined by the strongest present desire, it will
be decided without any effort. . . . When the greater weight goes down,
and the lesser up, no effort is needed on the part of the scales.”* It
is implied in this argument, that in a battle between contrary impulses,
the victory must always be decided in a moment; that the force which is
really the strongest, and prevails ultimately, must prevail
instantaneously. The fact is not quite thus even in inanimate nature:
the hurricane does not level the house or blow down the tree without
resistance; even the balance trembles, and the scales oscillate for a
short time, when the difference of the weights is not considerable. Far
less does victory come without a contest to the strongest of two moral,
or even two vital forces, whose nature it is to be never fixed, but
always flowing, quantities. In a struggle between passions, there is not
a single instant in which there does not pass across the mind some
thought, which adds strength to, or takes it from, one or the other of
the contending powers. Unless one of them was, from the beginning, out
of all proportion stronger than the other, some time must elapse before
the balance adjusts itself between forces neither of which is for any
two successive instants the same. During that interval the agent is in
the peculiar mental and physical state which we call a conflict of
feelings: and we all know that a conflict between strong feelings is, in
an extraordinary degree, exhaustive of the nervous energies.† The
consciousness of effort, which we are told of, is this state of
conflict. The author I am quoting considers what he calls, I think
improperly, an effort, to be only on one side, because he represents to
himself the conflict as taking place between me and some foreign power,
which I conquer, or by which I am overcome.[*] But it is obvious that
“I” am both parties in the contest; the conflict is between me and
myself; between (for instance) me desiring a pleasure, and me dreading
self-reproach. What causes Me, or, if you please, my Will, to be
identified with one side rather than with the other, is that one of the
Me’s represents a more permanent state of my feelings than the other
does. After the temptation has been yielded to, the desiring “I” will
come to an end, but the conscience-stricken “I” may endure to the end of
life.l

I therefore dispute altogether that we are conscious of being able to
act in Edition: current; Page: [453] opposition to the strongest present
desire or aversion. The difference between a bad and a good man is not
that the latter acts in opposition to his strongest desires; it is that
his desire to do right, and his aversion to doing wrong, are strong
enough to overcome, and in the case of perfect virtue, to silence, any
other desire or aversion which may conflict with them. It is because
this state of mind is possible to human nature, that human beings are
capable of moral government: and moral education consists in subjecting
them to the discipline which has most tendency to bring them into this
state. The object of moral education is to educate the will: but the
will can only be educated through the desires and aversions; by
eradicating or weakening such of them as are likeliest to lead to evil;
exalting to the highest pitch the desire of right conduct and the
aversion to wrong; cultivating all other desires and aversions of which
the ordinary operation is auxiliary to right, while discountenancing so
immoderate an indulgence of them, as might render them too powerful to
be overcome by the moral sentiment, when they chance to be in opposition
to it. The other requisites are, a clear intellectual standard of right
and wrong, that moral desire and aversion may act in the proper places,
and such general mental habits as shall prevent moral considerations
from being forgotten or overlooked, in cases to which they are rightly
applicable.

Rejecting, then, the figment of a direct consciousness of the freedom of
the will, in other words, our ability to will in opposition to our
strongest preference; it remains to consider whether, as affirmed by Sir
W. Hamilton, a freedom of this kind is implied in what is called our
consciousness of moral responsibility. There must be something very
plausible in this opinion, since it is shared even by Necessitarians.
Many of these—in particular Mr. Owen and his followers—from a
recognition of the fact that volitions are effects of causes, have been
led to deny human responsibility. I do not mean that they denied moral
distinctions. Few persons have had a stronger sense of right and wrong,
or been more devoted to the things they deemed right. What they denied
was the rightfulness of inflicting punishment. A man’s actions, they
said, are the result of his character, and he is not the author of his
own character. It is made for him, not by him. There is no justice in
punishing him for what he cannot help. We should try to convince or
persuade him that he had better act in a different manner; and should
educate all, especially the young, in the habits and dispositions which
lead to well-doing: though how this is to be effected without any use
whatever of punishment as a means of education, is a question they have
failed to resolve. The confusion of ideas, which makes the subjection of
human volitions to the law of Causation seem inconsistent with
accountability, must thus be very natural to the human mind; but this
may be said of a thousand errors, and even of some merely verbal
fallacies. In the present Edition: current; Page: [454] case there is
more than a verbal fallacy, but verbal fallacies also contribute their
part.

What is meant by moral responsibility? Responsibility means punishment.
When we are said to have the feeling of being morally responsible for
our actions, the idea of being punished for them is uppermost in the
speaker’s mind. But the feeling of liability to punishment is of two
kinds. It may mean, expectation that if we act in a certain manner,
punishment will actually be inflicted upon us, by our fellow creatures
or by a Supreme Power. Or it may only mean, mknowingm that we shall
deserve that infliction.

The first of these cannot, in any correct meaning of the term, be
designated as a consciousness. If we believe that we shall be punished
for doing wrong, it is because the belief has been taught to us by our
parents and tutors, or by our religion, or is generally held by those
who surround us, or because we have ourselves come to the conclusion, by
reasoning, or from the experience of life. This is not Consciousness.
And, by whatever name it is called, its evidence is not dependent on any
theory of the spontaneousness of volition. The punishment of guilt in
another world is believed with undoubting conviction by Turkish
fatalists, and by professed Christians who are not only Necessitarians,
but believe that the majority of mankind were divinely predestined from
all eternity to sin and to be punished for sinning. It is not,
therefore, the belief that we shall be made accountable, which can be
deemed to require or presuppose the free-will hypothesis; it is the
belief that we ought so to be; that we are justly accountable; that
guilt deserves punishment. It is here thatn issue is joined between the
two opinions.

In discussing it, there is no need to postulate any theory respecting
the nature or criterion of moral distinctions. It matters not, for this
purpose, whether the right and wrong of actions depends on the
consequences they tend to produce, or on an inherent quality of the
actions themselves. It is indifferent whether we are utilitarians or
anti-utilitarians; whether our ethics rest on intuition or on
experience. It is sufficient if we believe that there is a difference
between right and wrong, and a natural reason for preferring the former;
that people in general, unless when they expect personal benefit from a
wrong, naturally and usually prefer what they think to be right: whether
because we are all dependent for what makes existence tolerable, upon
the right conduct of other people, while their wrong conduct is a
standing menace to our security, or for some more mystical and
transcendental reason. Whatever be the cause, we are entitled to assume
Edition: current; Page: [455] the fact: and its consequence is, that
whoever cultivates a disposition to wrong, places his mind out of
sympathy with the rest of his fellow creatures, and if they are aware of
his disposition, becomes a natural object of their active dislike. He
not only forfeits the pleasure of their good will, and the benefit of
their good offices, except when compassion for the human being is
stronger than distaste towards the wrongdoer; but he also renders
himself liable to whatever they may think it necessary to do in order to
protect themselves against him; which may probably include punishment,
as such, and will certainly involve much that is equivalent in its
operation on himself. In this way he is certain to be made accountable,
at least to his fellow creatures, through the normal action of their
natural sentiments. And it is well worth consideration, whether the
practical expectation of being thus called to account, has not a great
deal to do with the internal feeling of being accountable; a feeling,
assuredly, which is seldom found existing in any strength in the absence
of that practical expectation. It is not usually found that Oriental
despots, who cannot be called to account by anybody, have much
consciousness of being morally accountable. And (what is still more
significant) in societies in which caste or class distinctions are
really strong—a state so strange to us now, that we seldom realize it in
its full force—it is a matter of daily experience that persons may show
the strongest sense of moral accountability as regards their equals, who
can make them accountable, and not the smallest vestige of a similar
feeling towards their inferiors who cannot.

oThis does not imply that the feeling of accountability, even when
proportioned very exactly to the chance of being called to account, is a
mere interested calculation, having nothing more in it than an
expectation and dread of external punishment. When pain has long been
thought of as a consequence of a given fact, the fact becomes wrapt up
in associations which make it painful in itself, and cause the mind to
shrink from it even when, in the particular case, no painful
consequences are apprehended: just as the dislike to spending money,
which grows up while money can ill be spared, may be an absorbing
passion after the possessor has grown so rich that the expenditure would
not really cause him the most trifling inconvenience. On this familiar
principle of association it is abundantly certain that even if wrong
meant merely what is forbidden, a disinterested detestation of doing
wrong would naturally grow up, and might become, in its strength and
promptitude, and in the immediateness of its action, without reflection
or ulterior purpose, undistinguishable from any of our instincts or
natural passions.o

Another fact, which it is of importance to keep in view, is, that the
Edition: current; Page: [456] highest and strongest sense of the worth
of goodness, and the odiousness of its opposite, is perfectly compatible
with even the most exaggerated form of Fatalism. Suppose that there were
two peculiar breeds of human beings,—one of them so constituted from the
beginning, that however educated or treated, nothing could prevent them
from always feeling and acting so as to be a blessing to all whom they
approached; another, of such original perversity of nature that neither
education nor punishment could inspire them with a feeling of duty, or
prevent them from being active in evil doing. Neither of these races of
human beings would have free-will; yet the former would be honoured as
demigods, while the latter would be regarded and treated as noxious
beasts: not punished perhaps, since punishment would have no effect on
them, and it might be thought wrong to indulge the mere instinct of
vengeance: but kept carefully at a distance, and killed like other
dangerous creatures when there was no other convenient way of being rid
of them. We thus see that even under the utmost possible exaggeration of
the doctrine of Necessity, the distinction between moral good and evil
in conduct would not only subsist, but would stand out in a more marked
manner than now, when the good and the wicked, however unlike, are still
regarded as of one common nature.

pAn opponent may say, this is not a distinction between moral good and
evil; and I am far from intending to beg the question against him. But
neither can he be permitted to beg the question, by assuming that the
distinction is not moral because it does not imply free-will. The
reality of moral distinctions, and the freedom of our volitions, are
questions independent of one another. My position is, that a human being
who loves, disinterestedly and consistently, his fellow creatures and
whatever tends to their good, who hates with a vigorous hatred what
causes them evil, and whose actions correspond in character with these
feelings, is naturally, necessarily, and reasonably an object to be
loved, admired, sympathized with, and in all ways cherished and
encouraged by mankind; while a person who has none of these qualities,
or so little, that his actions continually jar and conflict with the
good of others, and that for purposes of his own he is ready to inflict
on them a great amount of evil, is a natural and legitimate object of
their fixed aversion, and of conduct conformable thereto: and this
whether the will be free or not, and even independently of any theory of
the difference between right and wrong; whether right means productive
of happiness, and wrong productive of misery, or right and wrong are
intrinsic qualities of the actions themselves, provided only we
recognise that there is a difference, and that the difference is highly
important. What I maintain is, that this is a sufficient distinction
between moral good and evil: sufficient for the ends of society and
sufficient for the individual conscience:—that Edition: current; Page:
[457] we need no other distinction; that if there be any other
distinction, we can dispense with it; and that, supposing acts in
themselves good or evil to be as unconditionally determined from the
beginning of things as if they were phænomena of dead matter, still, if
the determination from the beginning of things has been that they shall
take place through my love of good and hatred of evil, I am a proper
object of esteem and affection, and if that they shall take place
through my love of self and indifference to good, I am a fit object of
aversion which may rise to abhorrence. And no competently informed
person will deny that, as a matter of fact, those who have held this
creed have had as strong a feeling, both emotional and practical, of
moral distinctions, as any other people.*p

Edition: current; Page: [458]
But these considerations, qhoweverq pertinent to the subject, do not
touch the root of the difficulty. The real question is one of
justice—the legitimacy of retribution, or punishment. On the theory of
Necessity (we are told) rar man cannot help acting as he does; and it
cannot be just that he should be punished for what he cannot help.

Not if the expectation of punishment enables him to help it, and is the
only means by which he can be enabled to help it?

To say that he cannot help it, is true or false, according to the
qualification with which the assertion is accompanied. Supposing him to
be of a vicious disposition, he cannot help doing the criminal act, if
he is allowed to believe that he will be able to commit it unpunished.
If, on the contrary, the impression is strong in his mind that a heavy
punishment will follow, he can, and in most cases does, help it.

The question deemed to be so puzzling is, how punishment can be
justified, if men’s actions are determined by motives, among which
motives punishment is one. A more difficult question would be, how it
can be justified if they are not so determined. Punishment proceeds on
the assumption that the will is governed by motives. If punishment had
no power of acting on the will, it would be illegitimate, however
natural might be the inclination to inflict it. Just so far as the will
is supposed free, that is, capable of acting against motives, punishment
is disappointed of its object, and deprived of its justification.

There are two ends which, on the Necessitarian theory, are sufficient to
justify punishment: the benefit of the offender himself, and the
protection of others. The first justifies it, because to benefit a
person cannot be to do him an injury. To punish him for his own good,
provided the inflictor has any proper title to constitute himself a
judge, is no more unjust than to administer medicine. As far, indeed, as
respects the criminal himself, the theory of punishment is, that by
counterbalancing the influence of present temptations, or acquired bad
habits, it restores the mind to that normal preponderance of the love of
right, which smanys moralists and theologians consider to constitute the
true definition of our freedom.* In its other Edition: current; Page:
[459] aspect, punishment is a precaution taken by society in
self-defence. To make this just, the only condition required is, that
the end which society is attempting to enforce by punishment, should be
a just one. Used as a means of aggression by society on the just rights
of the individual, punishment is unjust. Used to protect the just rights
of others against unjust aggression by Edition: current; Page: [460] the
offender, it is just. If it is possible to have just rights, u(which is
the same thing as to have rights at all)u it cannot be unjust to defend
them. Free-will or no free-will, it is just to punish so far as is
necessary for this purpose,v as it is just to put a wild beast to death
(without unnecessary suffering) for the same object.

Edition: current; Page: [461]
Now, the primitive consciousness we are said to have, that we are
accountable for our actions, and that if we violate the rule of right we
shall deserve punishment, I contend is nothing else than our knowledge
that punishment will be just: that by such conduct we shall place
ourselves in the position in which our fellow creatures, or the Deity,
or both, will naturally, and may justly, inflict punishment upon us. By
using the word justly, I am not assuming, in the explanation, the thing
I profess to explain. As before observed, I am entitled to postulate the
reality, and the knowledge and feeling, of moral distinctions. These, it
is both evident metaphysically and notorious historically, are
independent of any theory concerning the will. We are supposed capable
of understanding that other people have rights, and all that follows
from this. The mind which possesses this idea, if capable of placing
itself at the point of view of another person, must recognise it as wnot
unjustw that others should protect themselves against any disposition on
his part to infringe their rights; and he will do so the more readily,
because he also has rights, and his rights continually require the same
protection. This, I maintain, is our feeling of accountability, in so
far as it can be separated from xthe associations engendered byx the
prospect of being actually called to account. No one who understands the
power of the principle of association, can doubt its sufficiency to
create out of these elements the whole of the feeling of which we are
conscious. To rebut this view of the case would require positive
evidence; as, for example, if it could be proved that the feeling of
accountability precedes, in the order of development, all experience of
punishment. No such evidence has been produced, or is producible. Owing
to the limited accessibility to observation of the mental processes of
infancy, direct proof can as little be produced on the other side: but
if there is any validity in Sir W. Hamilton’s Law of Parcimony, we ought
not to assume any mental phænomenon as an ultimate fact, which can be
accounted for by other known properties of our mental nature.

I ask any one who thinks that the justice of punishment is not
sufficiently vindicated by its being for the protection of just rights,
how he reconciles his sense of justice to the punishment of crimes
committed in obedience to a perverted conscience? Ravaillac, and
Balthasar Gérard, did not regard themselves as criminals, but as heroic
martyrs. If they were justly put to death, the justice of punishment has
nothing to do with the state of mind of the offender, further than as
this may affect the efficacy of punishment as a means to its end. It is
impossible to assert the justice of punishment for crimes of fanaticism,
on any other ground than its necessity for the attainment Edition:
current; Page: [462] of a just end. If that is not a justification,
there is no justification. All other imaginary justifications break down
in their application to this case.*

If, indeed, punishment is inflicted for any other reason than in order
to operate on the will; if its purpose be other than that of improving
the culprit himself, or securing the just rights of others against
unjust violation, then, I admit, the case is totally altered. If any one
thinks that there is justice in the infliction of purposeless suffering;
that there is a natural affinity between the two ideas of guilt and
punishment, which makes it intrinsically fitting that wherever there has
been guilt, pain should be inflicted by way of retribution; I
acknowledge that I can find no argument to justify punishment inflicted
on this principle. As a legitimate satisfaction to feelings of
indignation and resentment which are on the whole salutary and worthy of
cultivation, I can in certain cases admit it; but here it is still a
means to an end. The merely retributive view of punishment derives no
justification from the doctrine I support. But it derives quite as
little from the free-will doctrine. Suppose it true that the will of a
malefactor, when he committed an offence, was free, or in other words,
that he acted badly, not because he was of a bad disposition, but yfrom
no causey in particular: it is not easy to Edition: current; Page: [463]
deduce from this the conclusion that it is just to punish him. That his
acts were beyond the command of motives might be a good reason for
keeping out of his way, or placing him under bodily restraint; but no
reason for inflicting pain upon him, when that pain, by supposition,
could not operate as a deterring motive.*

While the doctrine I advocate does not support the idea that punishment
in mere retaliation is justifiable, it at the same time fully accounts
for the general and natural sentiment of its being so. From our earliest
childhood, the aidea of doing wrong (that is, of doing what is
forbidden, or what is injurious to others) and the ideaa of punishment
are presented to our mind together, and the intense character of the
impressions causes the association between them to attain the highest
degree of closeness and intimacy. Is it strange, or unlike the usual
processes of the human mind, that in these circumstances we should
retain the feeling, and forget the reason on which it is grounded? But
why do I speak of forgetting? In most cases the reason has never, in our
early education, been presented to the mind. The only ideas presented
have been those of wrong and punishment, and an inseparable association
has been created between these directly, without the help of any
intervening idea. This is quite enough to make the spontaneous feelings
of mankind regard punishment and a wrongdoer as naturally fitted
Edition: current; Page: [464] to each other—as a conjunction appropriate
in itself, independently of any consequences. Even Sir W. Hamilton
recognises as one of the common sources of error, that “the associations
of thought are mistaken for the connexions of existence.”* If this is
true anywhere, it is truest of all in the associations into which
emotions enter. A strong feeling, directly excited by an object, is felt
(except when contradicted by the feelings of other people) as its own
sufficient justification—no more requiring the support of a reason than
the fact that ginger is hot in the mouth:[*] and it almost requires a
philosopher to recognise the need of a reason for his feelings, unless
he has been under the practical necessity of justifying them to persons
by whom they are not shared.

That a person holding what is called the Necessitarian doctrine should
on that account feel that it would be unjust to punish him for his wrong
actions, seems to me the veriest of chimeras. Yes, if he really “could
not help” acting as he did, that is, if bit did not depend on his willb;
if he was under physical constraint, or ceven if he wasc under the
action of such a violent motive that no fear of punishment could have
any effect; which, if capable of being ascertained, is a just ground of
exemption, and is the reason why by the laws of most countries people
are not punished for what they were compelled to do by immediate danger
of death. But if the criminal was in a state capable of being operated
upon by the fear of punishment, no metaphysical objection, I believe,
will make him feel his punishment unjust. Neither will he feel that
because his act was the consequence of motives, operating upon a certain
mental disposition, it was not his own fault. For, first, it was at all
events his own defect or infirmity, for which the expectation of
punishment is the appropriate cure. And secondly, the word fault, so far
from being inapplicable, is the specific name for the kind of defect or
infirmity which he has displayed—insufficient love of dgoodd and
aversion to eevile. The weakness of these feelings or their strength is
in every one’s mind the standard of fault or merit, or degrees of fault
and degrees of merit. Whether we are judging of particular actions, or
of the character of a person, we are wholly guided by the indications
afforded of the energy of these influences. If the desire of right and
aversion to wrong have yielded to a small temptation, we judge them to
be weak, and our disapprobation is strong. If the temptation to which
they have yielded is so great that even strong feelings of virtue might
have succumbed to it, our moral reprobation Edition: current; Page:
[465] is less intense. If, again, the moral desires and aversions have
prevailed, but not over a very strong force, we hold that the action was
good, but that there was little merit in it; and our estimate of the
merit rises, in exact proportion to the greatness of the obstacle which
the moral feeling proved strong enough to overcome.

Mr. Mansel* has furnished what he thinks a refutation of the
Necessitarian argument, of which it isf well to take notice, the more
so, perhaps, as it is directed against some remarks on the subject by
the present writer in a former work:† remarks which were not intended as
an argument for so-called Necessity, but only to place the nature and
meaning of that ill-understood doctrine in a truer light. With this
purpose in view, it was remarked that “by saying that a man’s actions
necessarily follow from his character, all that is really meant (for no
more is meant in any case whatever of causation) is that he invariably
does act in conformity to his character, and that any one who thoroughly
knew his character, could certainly predict how he would act in any
supposable case. No more than this is contended for by any one but an
Asiatic fatalist.”[*] “And no more than this,” observes Mr. Mansel, “is
needed to construct a system of fatalism as rigid as any Asiatic can
desire.”[†]

Mr. Mansel is mistaken in thinking that the doctrine of the causation of
human actions is fatalism at all, or resembles fatalism in any of its
moral or intellectual effects. To call it by that name is to break down
a fundamental distinction. Real fatalism is of two kinds. Pure, or
Asiatic fatalism,—the fatalism of the Œdipus,[‡]—holds that our actions
do not depend upon our desires. Whatever our wishes may be, a superior
power, or an abstract destiny, will overrule them, and compel us to act,
not as we desire, but in the manner predestined. Our love of good and
hatred of evil are of no efficacy, and though in themselves they may be
virtuous, as far as conduct is concerned it is unavailing to cultivate
them. The other kind, Modified Fatalism I will call it, holds that our
actions are determined by our will, our will by our desires, and our
desires by the joint influence of the motives presented to us and of our
individual character; but that, our character having been made for us
and not by us, we are not responsible for it, nor for the actions it
leads to, and should in vain attempt to alter them. The true Edition:
current; Page: [466] doctrine of the Causation of human actions
maintains, in opposition to both, that not only our conduct, but our
character, is in part amenable to our will; that we can, by employing
the proper means, improve our character; and that if our character is
such that while it remains what it is, it necessitates us to do wrong,
it will be just to apply motives which will necessitate us to strive for
its improvement, and so emancipate ourselves from the other necessityg.
Ing other words, we are under a moral obligation to seek the improvement
of our moral character. We shall not indeed do so unless we desire our
improvement, and desire it more than we dislike the means which must be
employed for the purpose. But does Mr. Mansel, or any other of the
free-will philosophers, think that we can will the means if we do not
desire the end, or if our desire of the end is weaker than our aversion
to the means?*

Edition: current; Page: [467]
Mr. Mansel is more rigid in his ideas of what the free-will theory
requires, than one of the most eminent of the thinkers who have adopted
it. According to Mr. Mansel, the belief that whoever knew perfectly our
character and our circumstances could predict our actions, amounts to
Asiatic fatalism.[*] According to Kant, in his Metaphysics of Ethics,
such capability of prediction is quite compatible with the freedom of
the will.[†] This seems, at first sight, to be an admission of
everything which the rational supporters of the opposite theory could
desire. But Kant avoids this consequence, by changing (as lawyers would
say) the venue of free-will, from our actions generally, to the
formation of our character. It is in that, he thinks, we are free, and
he is almost willing to admit that while our character is what it is,
our actions are necessitated by it. In drawing this distinction, the
philosopher of Königsberg saves inconvenient facts at the expense of the
consistency of his theory. There cannot be one theory for one kind of
voluntary actions, and another theory for the other kinds. When we
voluntarily exert ourselves, as it is our duty to do, for the
improvement of our character, or when we act in a manner which (either
consciously on our part or unconsciously) deteriorates it, these, like
all other voluntary acts, presuppose that there was already something in
our character, or in that combined with our circumstances, which led us
to do so, and accounts for our doing so. The person, therefore, who is
supposed able to predict our actions from our character as it now is,
would, under the same conditions of perfect knowledge, be equally able
to predict what we should do to change our character: and if this be the
meaning of necessity, that part of our conduct is as necessary as all
the rest. If necessity means more than this abstract possibility of
being foreseen; if it means any mysterious compulsion, apart from simple
invariability of sequence, I deny it as strenuously as any one hin the
case of human volitions, but I deny it just as much of all other
phænomenah. To enforce this distinction was the principal object of the
remarks which Mr. Mansel has criticised.[‡] If an unessential
distinction from Mr. Mansel’s point of view, it is essential from mine,
and of supreme importance in a practical aspect.

The free-will metaphysicians have made little endeavour to prove that
Edition: current; Page: [468] we can will in opposition to our strongest
desire, but have strenuously maintained that we can will when we have no
strongest desire. With this view Dr. Reid formerly, and Mr. Mansel now,
have thrown in the teeth of Necessitarians the famous asinus
Buridani.[*] If, say they, the will were solely determined by motives,
the ass, between two bundles of hay, exactly alike, and equally distant
from him, would remain undecided until he died of hunger. From Sir W.
Hamilton’s notes on this chapter of Reid,* I infer that he did not
countenance this argument; and it is surprising that writers of talent
should have seen anything in it. I wave the objection that if it applies
at all, it proves that the ass also has free-will; for perhaps he has.
But the ass, it is affirmed, would starve before he decided. Yes,
possibly, if he remained all the time in a fixed attitude of
deliberation; if he never for an instant ceased to balance one against
another the rival attractions, and if they really were so exactly equal
that no dwelling on them could detect any difference. But this is not
the way in which things take place on our planet. From mere lassitude,
if from no other cause, he would intermit the process, and cease
thinking of the rival objects at all: until a moment arrived when he
would be seeing or thinking of one only, and that fact, combined with
the sensation of hunger, would determine him to a decision.

But the argument on which Mr. Mansel lays most stress (it is also one of
Reid’s)[†] is the following. Necessitarians say that the will is
governed by the strongest motive: “but I only know the strength of
motives in relation to the will by the test of ultimate prevalence; so
that this means no more than that the prevailing motive prevails.”[‡] I
have heretofore complimented Mr. Mansel on seeing farther, in some
things, than his master. In the present instance I am compelled to
remark, that he has not seen so far. Sir W. Hamilton was not the man to
neglect an argument like this, had there been no flaw in it. The fact is
that there are two. First, those who say that the will follows the
strongest motive, do not mean the motive which is strongest in relation
to the will, or in other words, that the will follows what it does
follow. They mean the motive which is strongest in relation to pain and
pleasure; since a motive, being a desire or aversion, is proportional to
the pleasantness, as conceived by us, of the thing desired, or the
painfulness of the thing shunned. And when what was at first a direct
impulse towards pleasure, or recoil from pain, has passed into a habit
or a fixed purpose, then the strength of the motive means the
completeness and promptitude of the association which has been formed
between an idea and an outward act. Edition: current; Page: [469] This
is the first answer to Mr. Mansel. The second is, that even supposing
there were no test of the strength of motives but their effect on the
will, the proposition that the will follows the strongest motive would
not, as Mr. Mansel supposes, be identical and unmeaning.[*] We say,
without absurdity, that if two weights are placed in opposite scales,
the heavier will lift the other up; yet we mean nothing by the heavier,
except the weight which will lift up the other. The proposition,
nevertheless, is not unmeaning, for it signifies that in many or most
cases there is a heavier, and that this is always the same one, not one
or the other as it may happen. In like manner, even if the strongest
motive meant only the motive which prevails, yet if there is a
prevailing motive—if, all other antecedents being the same, the motive
which prevails to-day will prevail to-morrow and every subsequent
day—Sir W. Hamilton was acute enough to see that the free-will theory is
not saved. I regret that I cannot, in this instance, credit Mr. Mansel
with the same acuteness.

Before leaving the subject, it is worth while to remark, that not only
the doctrine of Necessity, but Predestination in its coarsest form—the
belief that all our actions are divinely preordained—though, in my view,
inconsistent with ascribing any moral attributes whatever to the Deity,
yet if combined with the belief that God works according to general
laws, which have to be learnt from experience, has no tendency to make
us act in any respect otherwise than we should do if we thought our
actions really contingent. For if God acts according to general laws,
then, whatever he may have preordained, he has preordained that it shall
take place through the causes on which experience shows it to be
consequent: and if he has predestined that I shall attain my ends, he
has predestined that I shall do so by studying and putting in practice
the means which lead to their attainment. When the belief in
predestination has a paralysing effect on conduct, as is sometimes the
case with Mahomedans, it is because they fancy they can infer what God
has predestined, without waiting for the result. They think that either
by particular signs of some sort, or from the general aspect of things,
they can perceive the issue towards which God is working, and having
discovered this, naturally deem useless any attempt to defeat it.
Because something will certainly happen if nothing is done to prevent
it, they think it will certainly happen whatever may be done to prevent
it; in a word, they believe in Necessity in the only proper meaning of
the term—an issue unalterable by human efforts or desires.

Edition: current; Page: [470]


CHAPTER XXVII: Sir William Hamilton’s Opinions on the Study of Mathematics

no account of Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy could be complete, which
omitted to notice his famous attack on the tendency of mathematical
studies:[*] for though there is no direct connexion between this and his
metaphysical opinions, it affords the most express evidence we have of
those fatal lacunæ in the circle of his knowledge, which unfitted him
for taking a comprehensive or even an accurate view of the processes of
the human mind in the establishment of truth. If there is any
pre-requisite which all must see to be indispensable in one who attempts
to give laws to human intellect, it is a thorough acquaintance with the
modes by which human intellect has proceeded, in the cases where, by
universal acknowledgment, grounded on subsequent direct verification, it
has succeeded in ascertaining the greatest number of important and
recondite truths. This requisite Sir W. Hamilton had not, in any
tolerable degree, fulfilled. Even of pure mathematics he apparently knew
little but the rudiments. Of mathematics as applied to investigating the
laws of physical nature; of the mode in which the properties of number,
extension, and figure, are made instrumental to the ascertainment of
truths other than arithmetical or geometrical—it is too much to say that
he had even a superficial knowledge: there is not a line in his works
which shows him to have had any knowledge at all. He had no conception
of what the process is. In this he differed greatly and
disadvantageously from his immediate predecessor in the same school of
metaphysical thought, Professor Dugald Stewart; whose works derive a
great part of their value from the foundation of sound and accurate
scientific knowledge laid by his mathematical and physical studies, and
which his subsequent metaphysical pursuits enabled him, quite
successfully to the length of his tether, to clarify and reduce to
principles.

If Sir W. Hamilton had contented himself with saying of mathematics,
that it is not, of itself alone, a sufficient education of the
intellectual Edition: current; Page: [471] faculties; that it cultivates
the mind only partially; that there are important kinds of intellectual
cultivation and discipline which it does not give, and to which,
therefore, if pursued to the exclusion of the studies which do give
them, it is unfavourable; he would have said something, not new indeed,
but true, not of mathematics alone, but of every limited and special
employment of the mental faculties; of every study in which the human
mind can engage, except the two or three highest, most difficult, and
most imperfect, which, requiring all the faculties in their greatest
attainable perfection, can never be recommended or thought of as
preparatory discipline, but are themselves the chief purpose for which
such preparation is required. Sir W. Hamilton, however, has asserted
much more than this. He undertakes to show that the study of mathematics
is not an useful intellectual discipline at all, except in one
comparatively humble particular, which it has in common with some of the
most despised pursuits; and that, if prosecuted far, it positively
unfits the mind for the useful employment of its faculties on any other
object. As might be expected from an attempt to maintain such a thesis
by one who, however acute on other matters, had no sufficient knowledge
of the subject he was writing about, this celebrated dissertation is one
of the weakest parts of his works. He ignores not only the whole of his
adversary’s case, but the most important part of his own; and has made a
far less powerful attack on the tendencies of mathematical studies, than
could easily be made by one who understood the subject. He has, in fact,
missed the most considerable of the evil effects to the production of
which those studies have contributed; and has thrown no light on the
intellectual shortcomings of the common run of mathematicians, so
signally displayed in their wretched treatment of the generalities of
their own science. He finds hardly anything to say to their disadvantage
but things so trite and obvious, that the greatest zealot for
mathematics could afford to pass them by, insisting only on the
inestimable benefits which are to be set against them, and which alone
are really to the purpose; for it is no objection to a harrow that it is
not a plough, nor to a saw that it is not a chisel.

For instance, are we much the wiser for being once more told, at great
length, and with a cloud of witnesses[*] brought to back the assertion,
that mathematics, being concerned only with demonstrative evidence, does
not teach us, either by theory or practice, to estimate probabilities?
Did any mathematician, or eulogist of mathematics, ever pretend that it
did? Does the science to which Sir W. Hamilton assigns a place above all
others as an intellectual discipline—does Metaphysics enable us to judge
of probable evidence? If such a claim has ever been made in its behalf,
I am not aware of it; Sir W. Hamilton, certainly, was too well
acquainted with the subject to make any such pretension. Metaphysics,
like Mathematics, and all the rest Edition: current; Page: [472] of the
fundamental sciences, demands, not probable, but certain evidence. The
province of Probabilities in science is not the abstract, but what M.
Comte terms the concrete sciences; those which treat of the combinations
actually realized in Nature, as distinguished from the general laws
which would equally govern any other combinations of the same elements:
zoology and botany, for example, as contrasted with physiology; geology,
as opposed to thermology and chemistry.[*] In an abstract science a
probability is of no account; it is but a momentary halt on the road to
certainty, and a hint for fresh experiments.

Inasmuch as abstract science in general, and mathematics in particular,
afford no practice in the estimation of conflicting probabilities, which
is the kind of sagacity most required in the conduct of practical
affairs, it follows that, when made so exclusive an occupation as to
prevent the mind from obtaining enough of this necessary practice in
other ways, it does worse than not cultivate the faculty—it prevents it
from being acquired, and pro tanto unfits the person for the general
business of life. It is natural that people who are bad judges of
probability, should be, according to their temperament, unduly credulous
or unreasonably sceptical; both which charges our author, with great
earnestness and a heavy artillery of authorities, drives home against
the mathematicians. But he would have made little progress towards
proving his case, even by a much more complete catalogue of the
intellectual defects of a mathematician who is nothing but a
mathematician. A person may be keenly alive to these, and may hate them,
as M. Comte did, with a perfect hatred, while upholding mathematical
instruction as not only an useful but the indispensable first stage of
all scientific education worthy of the name.* Nor can any reasonable
view of the subject refuse to recognise, in the very faults which our
author imputes to mathematicians, the excesses of a most valuable
quality. Let us be assured that for the formation of a well-trained
intellect, it is no Edition: current; Page: [473] slight recommendation
of a study, that it is the means by which the mind is earliest and most
easily brought to maintain within itself a standard of complete proof. A
mind thus furnished, and not duly instructed on other subjects, may
commit the error of expecting in all proof too close an adherence to the
type with which it is familiar. That type may and ought to be widened by
greater variety of culture; but he who has never acquired it, has no
just sense of the difference between what is proved and what is not
proved: the first foundation of the scientific habit of mind has not
been laid. It has long been a complaint against mathematicians that they
are hard to convince: but it is a far greater disqualification both for
philosophy, and for the affairs of life, to be too easily convinced; to
have too low a standard of proof. The only sound intellects are those
which, in the first instance, set their standard of proof high. Practice
in concrete affairs soon teaches them to make the necessary abatement:
but they retain the consciousness, without which there is no sound
practical reasoning, that in accepting inferior evidence because there
is none better to be had, they do not by that acceptance raise it to
completeness. They remain aware of what is wanting to it.

Besides accustoming the student to demand complete proof, and to know
when he has not obtained it, mathematical studies are of immense benefit
to his education by habituating him to precision. It is one of the
peculiar excellences of mathematical discipline, that the mathematician
is never satisfied with an à peu près. He requires the exact truth.
Hardly any of the non-mathematical sciences, except chemistry, has this
advantage. One of the commonest modes of loose thought, and sources of
error both in opinion and in practice, is to overlook the importance of
quantities. Mathematicians and chemists are taught by the whole course
of their studies, that the most fundamental differences of quality
depend on some very slight difference in proportional quantity; and that
from the qualities of the influencing elements, without careful
attention to their quantities, false expectations would constantly be
formed as to the very nature and essential character of the result
produced. If Sir W. Hamilton’s mind had undergone this improving
discipline, we should not have found him employing the most precise
mathematical terms with the laxity which is habitual in his writings.
For instance; whenever he means that one of two things diminishes while
another increases, he says that they are in the inverse ratio of one
another. He affirms this of the Extension and Comprehension of a general
notion;* of the number of objects among which our attention is divided,
and the intensity with which it is applied to each;† of the
knowledge-giving and the sensation-giving properties of an impression of
Edition: current; Page: [474] sense;* and of the intensity and the
prolongation of an energy.† That an inverse ratio is the name of a
definite relation between quantities, seems never to have occurred to
him.

Neither is it a small advantage of mathematical studies, even in their
poorest and most meagre form, that they at least habituate the mind to
resolve a train of reasoning into steps, and make sure of each step
before advancing to another. If the practice of mathematical reasoning
gives nothing else, it gives wariness of mind; it accustoms us to demand
a sure footing; and though it leaves us no better judges of ultimate
premises than it found us (which is no more than may be said of almost
all metaphysics) at least it does not suffer us to let in, at any of the
joints in the reasoning, any assumption which we have not previously
faced in the shape of an axiom, postulate, or definition. This is a
merit which it has in common with Formal Logic, and is the chief ground
on which some have thought that it could perform the functions and
supply the place of that science; an opinion in which I by no means
agree.

That mathematics “do not cultivate the power of generalization,”‡ which
to our author appears so obvious a truth that he need not give himself
the trouble of proving it, will be admitted by no person of competent
knowledge, except in a very qualified sense. The generalizations of
mathematics, are, no doubt, a different thing from the generalizations
of physical science; but in the difficulty of seizing them, and the
mental tension they require, they are no contemptible preparation for
the most arduous efforts of the scientific mind. Even the fundamental
notions of the higher mathematics, from those of the differential
calculus upwards, are products of a very high abstraction. Merely to
master the idea of centrifugal force, or of the centre of gravity, are
efforts of mental analysis surpassed by few in our author’s metaphysics.
To perceive the mathematical law common to the results of many
mathematical operations, even in so simple a case as that of the
binomial theorem, involves a vigorous exercise of the same faculty which
gave us Kepler’s laws, and rose through those laws to the theory of
universal gravitation. Every process of what has been called Universal
Geometry—that great creation of Descartes and his successors, in which a
single train of reasoning solves whole classes of problems at once, and
demonstrates properties common to all curves or surfaces, and others
common to large groups of them—is a practical lesson in the management
of wide generalizations, and abstraction of the points of agreement from
those of difference among objects of great and confusing diversity, to
which the most purely inductive science cannot furnish many superior.
Even so Edition: current; Page: [475] elementary an operation as that of
abstracting from the particular configuration of the triangles or other
figures, and the relative situation of the particular lines or points,
in the diagram which aids the apprehension of a common geometrical
demonstration, is a very useful, and far from being always an easy,
exercise of the faculty of generalization so strangely imagined to have
no place or part in the processes of mathematics.

Sir W. Hamilton allows no efficacy to mathematical studies in the
cultivation of any valuable intellectual habit, except the single one of
continuous attention. “Are mathematics then,” he asks,

of no value as an instrument of mental culture? Nay, do they exercise
only to distort the mind? To this we answer: That their study, if
pursued in moderation and efficiently counteracted, may be beneficial in
the correction of a certain vice, and in the formation of its
corresponding virtue. The vice is the habit of mental distraction; the
virtue the habit of continuous attention. This is the single benefit, to
which the study of mathematics can justly pretend, in the cultivation of
the mind.*

He adds, truly enough, “But mathematics are not the only study which
cultivates the attention: neither is the kind and degree of attention
which they tend to induce, the kind and degree of attention which our
other and higher speculations require and exercise.”† So that, according
to him, there is no purpose answered by mathematics in general
education, but one which would be better fulfilled by something else.

Without stopping to express my amazement at the assertion that the
student of mathematics exercises no mental faculty but that of
continuous attention, I will avail myself of an admission which Sir W.
Hamilton cannot help making, but the full force of which he does not
perceive. “We are far,” he says, “from meaning hereby to disparage the
mathematical genius which invents new methods and formulæ, or new and
felicitous applications of the old. . . . Unlike their divergent
studies, the inventive talents of the mathematician and philosopher in
fact approximate.”‡ Was, then, Sir W. Hamilton so ill-acquainted with
everything deserving the name of mathematical tuition as to suppose that
the inventive powers which, in their higher degree, constitute
mathematical genius, are not called forth and fostered in the process of
teaching mathematics to the merest tyro? What sort of mathematical
instruction is it of which solving problems forms no part? We come,
within a page afterwards, to the following almost incredible
announcement: “Mathematical demonstration is solely occupied in deducing
conclusions; probable reasoning, principally concerned in looking out
for premises.”§ Sir W. Hamilton thinks he can never be severe enough
Edition: current; Page: [476] upon Cambridge for laying any stress on
mathematics as an instrument of mental instruction. Did he ever turn
over, I do not say a volume of Cambridge Problems,[*] for these, it may
be said, test the knowledge of the pupil rather than his inventive
powers, and may be an exercise chiefly of memory: but did he ever see
two such volumes as Bland’s Algebraical and Geometrical Problems?[†] Did
he really imagine that working these was not “looking out for premises?”
He seems actually to have thought that learning mathematics meant
cramming it; and apparently believed that a mathematical tutor resolves
all the equations himself, and merely asks his pupil to follow the
solutions. For in every problem which the pupil himself solves, or
theorem which he demonstrates, not having previously seen it solved or
demonstrated, the same faculties are exercised which, in their higher
degrees, produced the greatest discoveries in geometry. Mathematical
teaching, therefore, even as now carried on, trains the mind to
capacities, which, by our author’s admission, are of the closest kin to
those of the greatest metaphysician and philosopher. There is some
colour of truth for the opposite doctrine in the case of elementary
algebra. The resolution of a common equation can be reduced to almost as
mechanical a process as the working of a sum in arithmetic. The
reduction of the question to an equation, however, is no mechanical
operation, but one which, according to the degree of its difficulty,
requires nearly every possible grade of ingenuity: not to speak of the
new, and in the present state of science insoluble, equations, which
start up at every fresh step attempted in the application of mathematics
to other branches of knowledge. On all this, Sir W. Hamilton never
bestows a thought. It is hardly necessary to point out that any other
study, pursued in the manner in which he supposes mathematics to be,
would as little exercise any other faculty than that of “continuous
attention” as mathematics would. Next to metaphysics, the study he most
patronizes is that of languages; of which he has so lofty an opinion, as
to say that “to master, for example, the Minerva of Sanctius with its
commentators, is, I conceive, a far more profitable exercise of mind
than to conquer the Principia of Newton:”* we may at least say that he
was a better judge of the profit that might be derived from it. I, also,
rate very Edition: current; Page: [477] highly the value, as a
discipline to the mind, of the thorough grammatical study of any of the
more logically constructed languages: but if the study consisted in
learning the Minerva of Sanctius, or its commentators either, by rote, I
believe the benefit derived would be about the same with that which Sir
W. Hamilton considered to result from the exercise of “continuous
attention” in mathematics.

It is a characteristic fact, that when the paper “on the Study of
Mathematics” originally appeared as an article in the Edinburgh Review,
no mention was made in it of Mixed or Applied Mathematics: the little
which now appears on that subject being a subsequent addition, called
forth by Dr. Whewell’s reply.[*] Dr. Whewell must have looked down from
a considerable height upon an assault on the utility of Mathematics, in
which the part of it that, in the opinion of its rational defenders,
constitutes three-fourths of its utility, was silently overlooked. When
Sir W. Hamilton’s attention was called to what he had previously omitted
to think of, this is the way in which he disposes of it:

Mathematics can be applied to objects of experience only in so far as
these are measurable; that is, in so far as they come, or are supposed
to come, under the categories of extension and number. Applied
mathematics are, therefore, equally limited and equally unimproving as
pure. The sciences, indeed, with which mathematics are thus associated,
may afford a more profitable exercise of mind; but this is only in so
far as they supply the matter of observation, and of probable reasoning,
and therefore before this matter is hypothetically subjected to
mathematical demonstration or calculus.*

This passage amounts to proof that the writer simply did not know what
applied mathematics mean. The words are those of a person who had heard
that there was such a thing, but knew absolutely nothing about what it
was.

Applied mathematics is not the measurement of extension and number. It
is the measurement by means of extension and number, of other quantities
which extension and number are marks of; and the ascertainment by means
of quantities of all sorts, of those qualities of things which
quantities are marks of.

For the information of readers who are no better informed than Sir W.
Hamilton, and the reminding of those who are, I will illustrate this
general statement by bringing it down to particulars; which a person,
himself of Edition: current; Page: [478] very slender mathematical
acquirements, can do, provided he has studied the science as every
philosophical student ought to study it, but as Sir W. Hamilton has not
done, with especial reference to its Methods.

The first, and typical example of the application of mathematics to the
indirect investigation of truth, is within the limits of the pure
science itself; the application of algebra to geometry; the introduction
of which, far more than any of his metaphysical speculations, has
immortalized the name of Descartes, and constitutes the greatest single
step ever made in the progress of the exact sciences. Its rationale is
simple. It is grounded on the general truth, that the position of every
point, the direction of every line, and consequently the shape and
magnitude of every enclosed space, may be fixed by the length of
perpendiculars thrown down upon two astraight linesa, or (when the third
dimension of space is taken into account) upon three bplane surfacesb,
meeting one another at right angles in the same point. A consequence, or
rather a part, of this general truth, is that curve lines and surfaces
may be determined by their equations. If from any number of points in a
curve line or surface, perpendiculars are drawn to two crectangular
axes, or to three rectangular planesc, there exists between the lengths
of these perpendiculars a relation of quantity, which is always the same
for the same curve, or surface, and is expressed by an equation in which
these variable are combined with certain constant quantities. From this
relation, every other property of the curve or surface may always be
deduced. In this way, numbers become the means of ascertaining truths
not numerical. The periphery of an ellipse is not a number; but a
certain numerical relation between straight lines is a mark of an
ellipse, being proved to be an inseparable accompaniment of it. The
equation which expresses this characteristic mark of any curve, may be
handed over to algebraists, to deduce from it, through the properties of
numbers, any other numerical relation which depends on it; with the
certainty that when the conclusion is translated back again from symbols
into words, it will come out a real, and perhaps previously unknown,
geometrical property of the curve.

In such an example as this, the application of algebra to geometry
appears only in its most elementary form; but its extent is indefinite,
and its flights almost beyond the reach of measurement. Its general
scheme may be thus stated: In order to resolve any question, either of
quality or quantity, concerning a line or space, find something whose
magnitude, if known, would give the solution required, and which stands
in some known relation to the rectangular co-ordinates (for instance, in
the problem of Tangents, Edition: current; Page: [479] the length of the
subtangent). Express this known relation in an equation: if the equation
can be resolved, we have solved the geometrical problem. Or if the
question be the converse one—not what are the properties of a given line
or space, but what line or space is indicated by a given property; find
what relation between rectangular co-ordinates that property requires:
express it in an equation, and this equation, or some other deducible
from it, will be the equation of the curve or surface sought. If it be a
known curve or surface, this process will point it out; if not, we shall
have obtained the necessary starting point for its study.

This application of one branch of mathematics to another branch, ranks
as the first step in Applied Mathematics. The second is the application
to Mechanics. The object-matter of Mechanics is the general laws, or
theory, of Force in the abstract, that is, of forces, considered
independently of their origin. As an extension is not a number, though a
numerical fact may be a mark of an extension; so a force is neither a
number nor an extension. But a force is only cognisable through its
effects, and the effects by which forces are best known are effects in
extension. The measure of a force, is the space through which it will
carry a body of given magnitude in a given time. Quantities of force are
thus ascertained, through marks which are quantities of extension. The
other properties of forces are, their direction (a question of
extension, which has already been reduced to a numerical relation
between co-ordinates), and the nature of the motion which they generate,
either singly or in combination; which is a mixed question of direction
and of magnitude in extension. All questions of Force, therefore, can be
reduced to questions of direction and of magnitude: and as all questions
of direction or magnitude are capable of being reduced to equations
between numbers, every question which can be raised respecting Force
abstractedly from its origin, can be resolved if the corresponding
algebraical equation can.

While the laws of Number thus underlie the laws of Extension, and these
two underlie the laws of Force, so do the laws of Force underlie all the
other laws of the material universe. Nature, as it falls within our ken,
is composed of a multitude of forces, of which the origin (at least the
immediate origin) is different, and the effects of which on our senses
are extremely various. But all these forces agree in producing motions
in space; and even those of their effects which are not actual motions,
nevertheless travel; are propagated through spaces, in determinate
times: they are all, therefore, amenable to, and conform to, the laws of
extension and number. Often, indeed, we have no means of measuring these
spaces and times; nor, if we could, are the resources of mathematics
sufficient to enable us, in cases of great complexity, to arrive at the
quantities of things we cannot directly measure, through those which we
can. Fortunately, however, we can do this, sufficiently for Edition:
current; Page: [480] all practical purposes, in the case of the great
cosmic forces, gravitation and light, and to a less but still a
considerable extent, heat and electricity. And here the domain of
Applied Mathematics, for the present, ends. To it we are indebted, not
only for all we know of the laws of these great and universal agencies,
considered as connected bodies of truth, but also for the one complete
type and model of the investigation of Nature by deductive reasoning;
the ascertainment of the special laws of nature by means of the general.
I will not offer to the understanding of any one who knows what this
operation is, the affront of asking him if it is all performed “before”
the matter is “hypothetically subjected to mathematical demonstration or
calculus.”[*]

In being the great instrument of Deductive investigation, applied
mathematics comes to be also the source of our principal inductions,
which invariably depend on previous deductions. For where the
inaccessibility or unmanageableness of the phænomena precludes the
necessary experiments, mathematical deduction often supplies their
place, by making us acquainted with points of resemblance which could
not have been reached by direct observation. Phænomena apparently very
remote from one another, are found, in the mode of their accomplishment,
to follow the same or very similar numerical laws; and the mind,
grasping up seemingly heterogeneous natural agencies which have the same
equation, and classing them together, often lays a ground for the
recognition of them as having either a common, or an analogous, origin.
What were previously thought to be distinct powers in Nature, are
identified with each other, by ascertaining that they produce similar
effects according to the same mathematical laws. It was thus that the
force which governs the planetary motions was shown to be identical with
that by which bodies fall to the ground. Sir W. Hamilton would probably
have admitted that the original discovery of this truth required as
great a reach of intellect as has ever yet been displayed in abstract
speculation. But is no exercise of intellect needed to apprehend the
proof? Is it like an experiment in chemistry or an observation in
anatomy, which may require mind for its origination, but to recognise
which, when once made, requires only eyesight? Is “continuous
attention”[†] the only mental capacity required here? dTo think so would
require an ignorance of the subjectd greater than can be imputed to any
educated mind, not to speak of a philosopher.

In the achievements which still remain to be effected in the way of
scientific generalization, it is not probable that the direct employment
of Edition: current; Page: [481] mathematics will be to any great extent
available: the nature of the phænomena precludes such an employment for
a long time to come—perhaps for ever. But the process itself—the
deductive investigation of Nature; the application of elementary laws,
generalized from the more simple cases, to disentangle the phænomena of
complex cases—explaining as much of them as can be so explained, and
putting in evidence the nature and limits of the irreducible residuum,
so as to suggest fresh observations preparatory to recommencing the same
process with additional data: this is common to all science, moral and
metaphysical included; and the greater the difficulty, the more needful
is it that the enquirer should come prepared with an exact understanding
of the requisites of this mode of investigation, and a mental type of
its perfect realization. In the great problems of physical
generalization now occupying the higher scientific minds, chemistry
seems destined to an important and conspicuous participation, by
supplying, as mathematics did in the cosmic phænomena, many of the
premises of the deduction, as well as part of the preparatory
discipline. But this use of chemistry is as yet only in its dawn; while,
as a training in the deductive art, its utmost capacity can never
approach to that of mathematics: and in the great enquiries of the moral
and social sciences, to which neither of the two is directly applicable,
mathematics (I always mean Applied Mathematics) affords the only
sufficiently perfect type. Up to this time, I may venture to say that no
one ever knew what deduction is, as a means of investigating the laws of
nature, who had not learnt it from mathematics; nor can any one hope to
understand it thoroughly, who has not, at some time of his life, known
enough of mathematics to be familiar with the instrument at work. Had
Sir W. Hamilton been so, he would probably have cancelled the two
volumes of his Lectures on Logic, and begun again on a different system,
in which we should have heard less about Concepts and more about Things,
less about Forms of Thought, and more about grounds of Knowledge.

Nor is even this the whole of what the enquirer loses, who knows not
scientific Deduction in this its most perfect form. To have an
inadequate conception of one of the two instruments by which we acquire
our knowledge of nature, and consequently an imperfect comprehension
even of the other in its higher forms, is not all. He is almost
necessarily without any sufficient conception of human knowledge itself
as an organic whole. He can have no clear perception of science as a
system of truths flowing out of, and confirming and corroborating, one
another; in which one truth sums up a multitude of others, and explains
them, special truths being merely general ones modified by specialities
of circumstance. He can but imperfectly understand the absorption of
concrete truths into abstract, and the additional certainty given to
theorems drawn from specific experience, Edition: current; Page: [482]
when they can be affiliated as corollaries on general laws of nature—a
certainty more entire than any direct observation can give. Neither,
therefore, can he perceive how the larger inductions reflect an increase
of certainty even upon those narrower ones from which they were
themselves generalized, by reconciling superficial inconsistencies, and
converting apparent exceptions into real confirmations.* To see these
things requires more than a mere mathematician; but the ablest mind
which has never gone through a course of mathematics has small chance of
ever perceiving them.

In the face of such considerations, it is a very small achievement to
fill thirty octavo pages with the ill-natured things which persons of
the most miscellaneous character, through a series of ages, have said
about mathematicians, from a sneer of the Cynic Diogenes to a sarcasm of
Gibbon, or a colloquial platitude of Horace Walpole; without any
discrimination as to how many of the persons quoted were entitled to any
opinion at all on such a subject; and with such entire disregard of all
that gives weight to authority, as to include men who lived and died
before algebra was invented, before the conic sections had been defined
and studied by the mathematicians of Alexandria, or the first lines of
the theory of statics had been traced by the genius of Archimedes; men
whose whole mathematical knowledge consisted of a clumsy arithmetic, and
the mere elements of geometry.[*] Had there been twenty times as many of
these testimonies, what proportion of them would have been of any value?
Until quite recently, the professors of the different arts and sciences
have made it a considerable part of their occupation to cry down one
another’s pursuits; and men of the world and littérateurs have been, in
all ages, ready and eager to join with every set of them against the
rest: the man who dares to know what they neither know nor care for, and
to value himself on the knowledge, having always and everywhere been
regarded as the common enemy. Did Sir W. Hamilton suppose that a person
of half his reading Edition: current; Page: [483] would have any
difficulty in furnishing, at a few hours’ notice, an equally long list
of amenities on the subject of grammarians or of metaphysicians? When
our author does get hold of a witness who has a claim to a hearing, the
witness is pressed into the service without any sifting of what he
really says; it makes no difference whether he asserts that the study of
mathematics does harm, or only that it does not simply suffice for all
possible good. One of the authorities on whom most stress is laid is
that of Descartes. I extract the important part of the quotation as our
author gives it, partly from Descartes himself and partly from Baillet,
his biographer. The Italics are Sir W. Hamilton’s.

“It was now a long time, [says Baillet,] since he had been convinced of
the small utility of the mathematics, especially when studied on their
own account, and not applied to other things. There was nothing, in
truth, which appeared to him more futile than to occupy ourselves with
simple numbers and imaginary figures, as if it were proper to confine
ourselves to these trifles (bagatelles) without carrying our view
beyond. There even seemed to him in this something worse than useless.
His maxim was, that such application insensibly disaccustomed us to the
use of our reason, and made us run the danger of losing the path which
it traces.”[*] The words themselves of Descartes deserve quotation:
“Revera nihil inanius est, quam circa nudos numeros figurasque
imaginarias ita versari, ut velle videamur in talium nugarum cognitione
conquiescere, atque superficiariis istis demonstrationibus, quæ casu
sæpius quam arte inveniuntur, et magis ad oculos et imaginationem
pertinent, quam ad intellectum, sic incubare, ut quodammodo ipsa ratione
uti desuescamus; simulque nihil intricatius, quam tali probandi modo,
novas difficultates confusis numeris involutas expedire. . . .”[†]
Baillet goes on: “In a letter to Mersenne, written in 1630, M. Descartes
recalled to him that he had renounced the study of mathematics for many
years: and that he was anxious not to lose any more of his time in the
barren operations of geometry and arithmetic, studies which never lead
to anything important.”[‡] Finally, speaking of the general character of
the philosopher, Baillet adds:—“In regard to the rest of mathematics”
(he had just spoken of astronomy—which Descartes thought, “though he
dreamt in it himself, only a loss of time”)[§] “in regard to the rest of
mathematics, those who know the rank which he held above all
mathematicians, ancient and modern, will agree that he was the man in
the world best qualified to judge them. We have observed that, after
having studied these sciences to the bottom, he had renounced them as of
no use for the conduct of life and solace of mankind.”*

Whoever reads this passage as if it were all printed in Roman
characters, Edition: current; Page: [484] and declines to submit his
understanding to the italics which Sir W. Hamilton has introduced, will
perceive the following three things. First, that Descartes was not
speaking of the study of mathematics, but of its exclusive study. His
objection is to stopping there, without proceeding to anything ulterior:
conquiescere, incubare. Secondly, that he was speaking only of pure
mathematics, as distinguished from its applications, and under the
belief, how prodigiously erroneous we now know, that it did not admit of
applications of any importance. Finally, that his disparagement of the
pursuit, even as thus limited—his representation of it as “nugæ,” as “a
loss of time,” rested mainly on a ground which Sir W. Hamilton gave up,
the unimportance of its object-matter. It was a repetition of the
objection of Socrates, whom also our author thinks it worth while to
cite as an authority on such a question, and who “did not perceive of
what utility they [mathematical studies] could be, calculated as they
were to consume the life of a man, and to turn him away from many other
and important acquirements.”* Such an opinion, in the days of Socrates,
and from one whose glorious business it was to recal the minds of
speculative men to dialectics and morals, reflects no discredit on his
great mind. But the objection is one which Sir W. Hamilton, with every
thinker of the last two centuries, disclaims. “The question,” he
expressly says, “does not regard the value of mathematical science,
considered in itself, or in its objective results, but the utility of
mathematical study, that is, in its subjective effect, as an exercise of
mind.”† All that Descartes said against it in this aspect (at least in
the passage quoted, which we may suppose to be one of the strongest) is,
that by affording other objects of thought, it diverts the mind from the
use of ipsa ratio, that is, from the study of pure mental abstractions;
which Descartes, to the great detriment of his philosophy, regarded as
of much superior value to the employment of the thoughts upon objects of
sense, “fquæf magis ad oculos et imaginationem pertinent.”

It was by his example, rather than by his precepts, that Descartes was
destined to illustrate the unfavourable side of the intellectual
influence of mathematical studies; and he must have been a still more
extraordinary man than he was, could he have really understood a kind of
mental perversions of which he is himself, in the history of philosophy,
the most prominent example. Descartes is the completest type which
history presents of the purely mathematical type of mind—that in which
the tendencies produced Edition: current; Page: [485] by mathematical
cultivation reign unbalanced and supreme. This is visible not only in
the abuse of Deduction, which he carried to a greater length than any
distinguished thinker known to us, not excepting the schoolmen; but even
more so in the character of the premises from which his deductions set
out. And here we come upon the one really grave charge which rests on
the mathematical spirit, in respect of the influence it exercises on
pursuits other than mathematical. It leads men to place their ideal of
Science in deriving all knowledge from a small number of axiomatic
premises, accepted as self-evident, and taken for immediate intuitions
of reason. This is what Descartes attempted to do, and inculcated as the
thing to be done: and as he shares with only one other name the honour
of having given his impress to the whole character of the modern
speculative movement, the consequences of his error have been most
calamitous. Nearly everything that is objectionable, along with much of
what is admirable, in the character of French thought, whether on
metaphysics, ethics, or politics, is directly traceable to the fact that
French speculation descends from Descartes instead of from Bacon.* All
reflecting persons in England, and many in France, perceive that the
chief infirmities of French thinking arise from its geometrical spirit;
its determination to evolve its conclusions, even on the most practical
subjects, by mere deduction from some single accepted generalization:
the generalization, too, being frequently not even a theorem, but a
practical rule, supposed to be obtained directly from the fountains of
reason: a mode of thinking which erects one-sidedness into a principle,
under the misapplied name of logic, and makes the popular political
reasoning in France resemble that of a theologian arguing from a text,
or a lawyer from a maxim of law. If this be the case even in France, it
is still worse in Germany, the whole of whose speculative philosophy is
an emanation from Descartes, and to most of whose thinkers the Baconian
point of view is still below the horizon. Through Spinoza, who gave to
his system the very forms as well as the entire spirit of geometry;
through the mathematician Leibnitz, who reigned supreme over the German
speculative mind for above a generation; with its spirit temporarily
modified by the powerful intellectual individuality of Kant, but flying
back after him to its Edition: current; Page: [486] uncorrected
tendencies, the geometrical spirit went on from bad to worse, until in
Schelling and Hegel the laws even of physical nature were deduced by
ratiocination from subjective deliverances of the mind. The whole of
German philosophical speculation has run from the beginning in this
wrong groove, and having only recently become aware of the fact, is at
present making convulsive efforts to get out of it.* All these mistakes,
and this deplorable waste of time and intellectual power by some of the
most gifted and cultivated portions of the human race, are effects of
the too unqualified predominance of the mental habits and tendencies
engendered by elementary mathematics. Applied mathematics in its
post-Newtonian development does nothing to strengthen, and very much to
correct, these errors, provided the applications are studied in such a
manner that the intellect is aware of what it is about, and does not go
to sleep over algebraical symbols; a didactic improvement which Dr.
Whewell, to his honour be it said, was earnestly and successfully
labouring to introduce, thus practically correcting the real defects of
mathematics as a branch of general education, at the very time when Sir
W. Hamilton, who had not the smallest insight into those defects,
selected him for the immediate recipient of an attack on mathematics,
which as it only included what Sir W. Hamilton knew of the subject, left
out everything which was much worth saying.

It is not solely to Mathematical studies that Sir W. Hamilton professes
and shows hostility. Physical investigations generally, apart from their
material fruits, he holds but in low estimation. We have seen in a
former chapter how singularly unaware he is of the power and exertion of
intellect which they often require. Touching their effect on the mind,
he makes two serious complaints, which come out at the very commencement
of his Lectures on Metaphysics.† The first is, that the study of Physics
indisposes persons to believe in Free-will. To this accusation it must
plead guilty: physical science undoubtedly has that tendency. But I
maintain that this is only because physical science teaches people to
judge of evidence. If the free-will doctrine could be proved, there is
nothing in the habits of thought engendered by physical science that
would indispose any one to yield to the evidence. A person who knows
only one physical science, may be unable to feel the force of a kind of
proof different from that which is customary in his Edition: current;
Page: [487] department; but any one who is generally versed in physical
science is accustomed to so many different modes of investigation, that
he is well prepared to feel the force of whatever is really proof.
Metaphysicians of Sir W. Hamilton’s school, who pursue their
investigations without regard to the cautions suggested by physical
science, are equally catholic and comprehensive in the wrong way; they
can mistake for proof anything or everything which is not so, provided
it tends to form an association of ideas in their own minds.

The other objection of Sir W. Hamilton to the scientific study of the
laws of Matter, is one which we should scarcely have expected from him,
namely, that it annihilates Wonder.

“Wonder,” says Aristotle, “is the first cause of philosophy;”[*] but in
the discovery that all existence is but mechanism, the consummation of
science would be an extinction of the very interest from which it
originally sprang. “Even the gorgeous majesty of the heavens,” says a
great religious philosopher,* “the object of a kneeling adoration to an
infant world, subdues no more the mind of him who comprehends the one
mechanical law by which the planetary systems move, maintain their
motion, and even originally form themselves. He no longer wonders at the
object, infinite as it always is, but at the human intellect alone which
in a Copernicus, Kepler, Gassendi, Newton, and Laplace, was able to
transcend the object, by science to terminate the miracle, to reave the
heaven of its divinities, and to exorcise the universe. But even this,
the only admiration of which our intelligent faculties are now capable,
would vanish, were a future Hartley, Darwin, Condillac, or Bonnet, to
succeed in displaying to us a mechanical system of the human mind, as
comprehensive, intelligible, and satisfactory as the Newtonian mechanism
of the heavens.”†

We may be well assured that no Hartley, Darwin, or Condillac will obtain
a hearing, if the “great religious philosopher” can prevent it.

I shall not enter into all the topics suggested by this remarkable
argument. I shall not ask whether, after all, it is better to be
“subdued” than instructed; or whether human nature would suffer a great
loss in losing wonder, if love and admiration remained; for admiration,
pace tantorum virorum, is a different thing from wonder, and is often at
its greatest height when the strangeness, which is a necessary condition
of wonder, has died away. But I do wonder at the barrenness of
imagination of a man who can see nothing wonderful in the material
universe, since Newton, in an evil hour, partially unravelled a limited
portion of it. If ignorance is with him a necessary condition of wonder,
can he find nothing to wonder at in the Edition: current; Page: [488]
origin of the system of which Newton discovered the laws? nothing in the
probable former extension of the solar substance beyond the orbit of
Neptune? nothing in the starry heavens, which, with a full knowledge of
what Newton taught, Kant, in the famous passage which Sir W. Hamilton is
so fond of quoting (and quotes in this very lecture),[*] placed on the
same level of sublimity with the moral law? If ignorance is the cause of
wonder, it is downright impossible that scientific explanation can ever
take it away, since all which explanation does, in the final resort, is
to refer us back to a prior inexplicable. Were the catastrophe to arrive
which is to expel Wonder from the universe—were it conclusively shown
that the mental operations are dependent upon organic agency—would
wonder be at an end because the fact, at which we should then have to
wonder, would be that an arrangement of material particles could produce
thought and feeling? Jacobi and Sir W. Hamilton might have put their
minds at ease. It is not understanding that destroys wonder, it is
familiarity. To a person whose feelings have depth enough to withstand
that, no insight which can ever be attained into natural phænomena will
make Nature less wonderful. And as for those whose sensibilities are
shallow, did Jacobi suppose that they wondered one iota the more at the
planetary motions, when astronomers imagined them to take place by the
complicated evolutions of “cycle on epicycle, orb on orb?”[†] A
spectacle which they saw every day, had, we may rely upon it, as little
effect in kindling their imaginations then, as now. Hear the opinion of
a great poet:* not speaking particularly of wonder, but of the emotions
generally which the spectacle of nature excites, and in words which
apply to that emotion equally with the rest.

Some are of opinion that the habit of analysing, decomposing, and
anatomising, is inevitably unfavourable to the perception of beauty.
People are led into this mistake by overlooking the fact that such
processes being to a certain extent within the reach of a limited
intellect, we are apt to ascribe to them that insensibility of which
they are, in truth, the effect, and not the cause. Admiration and love,
to which all knowledge truly vital must tend, are felt by men of real
genius in proportion as their discoveries in natural philosophy are
enlarged; and the beauty, in form, of a plant or an animal, is not made
less but more apparent, as a whole, by more accurate insight into its
constituent properties and powers.

Hear next one of the most illustrious discoverers in physical science.
Instead of regarding understanding as antithetical to wonder, Dr.
Faraday Edition: current; Page: [489] complains that people do not
wonder sufficiently at the material universe, because they do not
sufficiently understand it.

Let us now consider, for a little while, how wonderfully we stand upon
this world. Here it is we are born, bred, and live, and yet we view
these things with an almost entire absence of wonder to ourselves
respecting the way in which all this happens. So small, indeed, is our
wonder, that we are never taken by surprise; and I do think that, to a
young person of ten, fifteen, or twenty years of age, perhaps the first
sight of a cataract or a mountain would occasion him more surprise than
he had ever felt concerning the means of his own existence; how he came
here; how he lives; by what means he stands upright; and through what
means he moves about from place to place. Hence, we come into this
world, we live, and depart from it, without our thoughts being called
specifically to consider how all this takes place; and were it not for
the exertions of some few inquiring minds who have looked into these
things, and ascertained the very beautiful laws and conditions by which
we do live and stand upon the earth, we should hardly be aware that
there was anything wonderful in it.*

If any additional authority be desired, the greatest poet of modern
Germany was also the keenest scientific naturalist in it.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [490]


CHAPTER XXVIII: Concluding Remarks

in the examination which I have now concluded of Sir W. Hamilton’s
philosophical achievements, I have unavoidably laid stress on points of
difference from him rather than on those of agreement; the reason being,
that I differ from almost everything in his philosophy on which he
particularly valued himself, or which is specially his own. His merits,
which, though I do not rate them so high, I feel and admire as sincerely
as his most enthusiastic disciples, are rather diffused through his
speculations generally, than concentrated on any particular point. They
chiefly consist in his clear and distinct mode of bringing before the
reader many of the fundamental questions of metaphysics; some good
specimens of psychological analysis on a small scale; and the many
detached logical and psychological truths which he has separately
seized, and which are scattered through his writings, mostly applied to
resolve some special difficulty and again lost sight of. I can hardly
point to anything he has done towards helping the more thorough
understanding of the greater mental phænomena, unless it be his theory
of Attention (including Abstraction), which seems to me the most perfect
we havea.* cThe facts and speculations on Sleep and Edition: current;
Page: [491] Dreaming, in his Seventeenth Lecture on Metaphysics,[*] have
been credited to him as an acquisition to philosophy, and are a good
specimen of inductive enquiry; but their principal merit, both in point
of observation and of thought, is avowedly Jouffroy’s.*c

Edition: current; Page: [492]
With regard to the causes which prevented a thinker of such abundant
acuteness, and more than abundant industry, from accomplishing the great
things at which he aimed, it would ill become me to speak dogmatically.
It would be a very unwarrantable assumption of superiority over a mind
like Sir W. Hamilton’s, if I attempted to gauge and measure his
faculties, or give a complete theory of his successes and failures. The
utmost I venture on, is to suggest, as simple possibilities, some of the
causes which may have partly contributed to his shortcomings as a
philosopher. One of those causes is so common as to be the next thing to
universal, but requires all the more to be signalized for its
unfortunate consequences: over-anxiety to make safe a foregone
conclusion. The whole philosophy of Sir W. Hamilton Edition: current;
Page: [493] seems to have had its character determined by the
requirements of the doctrine of Free-will; and to that doctrine he
clung, because he had persuaded himself that it afforded the only
premises from which human reason could deduce the doctrines of natural
religion. I believe that in this persuasion he was thoroughly his own
dupe, and that his speculations have weakened the philosophical
foundation of religion fully as much as they have confirmed it.

Edition: current; Page: [494]
A second cause which may help to account for his not having effected
more in philosophy, is the enormous amount of time and mental vigour
which he expended on mere philosophical erudition, leaving, it may be
said, only the remains of his mind for the real business of thinking.
While he seems to have known, almost by heart, the voluminous Greek
commentators on Aristotle, and to have read all that the most obscure
schoolman or fifth-rate German transcendentalist had written on the
subjects with which he occupied himself; while, not content with a
general knowledge of these authors, he could tell with the greatest
precision what each of them thought on any given topic, and in what each
differed from every other; while expending his time and energy on all
this, he had not enough of them left to complete his Lectures. Those on
Metaphysics, as already remarked, stopped short on the threshold of what
was, especially in his own opinion, the most important part of it, and
never reached even the threshold of the third and last of the parts into
which, in an early lecture, he divided his subject.* Those on Logic he
left dependent, for most of the subordinate developments, on extracts
strung together from German writers, chiefly Krug and Esser; often not
destitute of merit, but generally so vague, as to make all those parts
of his exposition in which they predominate, unsatisfactory;† sometimes
written from points of view different from Sir W. Hamilton’s own, but
which he never found time or took the trouble to re-express in
adaptation to his own mode of thought.‡ In the whole circle of
psychological and logical speculation, it is astonishing how few are the
topics into Edition: current; Page: [495] which he has thrown any of the
powers of his own intellect; and on how small a proportion even of these
he has pushed his investigations beyond what seemed necessary for the
purposes of some particular controversy. In consequence, philosophical
doctrines are taken up, and again laid down, with perfect
unconsciousness, and his philosophy seems made up of scraps from several
conflicting metaphysical systems. The Relativity of human knowledge is
made a great deal of in opposition to Schelling and Cousin, but drops
out or dwindles into nothing in Sir W. Hamilton’s own psychology. The
validity of our natural beliefs, and the doctrine that the incogitable
is not therefore impossible, are strenuously asserted in this place and
disregarded in that, according to the question in hand. On the subject
of General Notions he is avowedly a Nominalist, but teaches the whole of
Logic as if he had never heard of any doctrine but the Conceptualist;
what he presents as a reconcilement of the two being never adverted to
afterwards, and serving only as an excuse to himself for accepting the
one doctrine and invariably using the language of the other. Arriving at
his doctrines almost always under the stimulus of some special dispute,
he never knows how far to press them: consequently there is a region of
haze round the place where opinions of different origin meet. I formerly
quoted from him a felicitous illustration drawn from the mechanical
operation of tunnelling; that process affords another, justly applicable
to himself. The reader must have heard of that gigantic enterprise of
the Italian Government, the tunnel through Mont Cenis. This great work
is carried on simultaneously from both ends, in well-grounded confidence
(such is now the minute accuracy of engineering operations) that the two
parties of workmen will correctly meet in the middle. Were they to
disappoint this expectation, and work past one another in the dark, they
would afford a likeness of Sir W. Hamilton’s mode of tunnelling the
human mind.

This failure to think out subjects until they had been thoroughly
mastered, or until consistency had been attained between the different
views which the author took of them from different points of
observation, may, like the unfinished state of the Lectures, be with
great probability ascribed to the excessive absorption of his time and
energies by the study of old writers. That absorption did worse; for it
left him with neither leisure nor vigour for what was far more important
in every sense, and an entirely indispensable qualification for a master
in philosophy—the systematic study of the sciences. Except physiology,
on some parts of which his mental powers were really employed, he may be
said to have known nothing of any physical science. I do not mean that
he was ignorant of familiar facts, or that he may not, in the course of
his education, have gone through the curriculum. But it must have been
as Gibbon did, who says, in Edition: current; Page: [496] his
autobiography, “I was content to receive the passive impressions of my
professor’s lectures, without any active exercise of my own powers.”[*]
For any trace the study had left in Sir W. Hamilton’s mind, he might as
well never have heard of it.*

It is much to be regretted that Sir W. Hamilton did not write the
history of philosophy, instead of choosing, as the direct object of his
intellectual exertions, philosophy itself. He possessed a knowledge of
the materials such as no one, probably, for many generations, will take
the trouble of acquiring again; and the erudition of philosophy is
emphatically one of the things which it is good that a few should
acquire for the benefit of the rest. Independently of the great interest
and value attaching to a knowledge of Edition: current; Page: [497] the
historical development of speculation, there is much in the old writers
on philosophy, even those of the middle ages, really worth preserving
for its scientific value.* But this should be extracted, and rendered
into the phraseology of modern thought, by persons as familiar with that
as with the ancient, and possessing a command of its language; a
combination never yet so perfectly realized as in Sir W. Hamilton. It is
waste of time for a mere student of philosophy, to have to learn the
familiar use of fifty philosophic phraseologies, all greatly inferior to
that of his own time; and if this were required from all thinkers, there
would be very little time left for thought. A man who had done it so
thoroughly as Sir W. Hamilton, should have made his cotemporaries and
successors, once for all, partakers of the benefit; and rendered it
unnecessary for any one to do it again, except for verifying and
correcting his representations. This, which no one but himself could
have done, he has left undone; and has given us, instead, a contribution
to mental philosophy which has been more than equalled by many not
superior to him in powers, and wholly destitute of erudition. Of all
persons, in modern times, entitled to the name of philosophers, the two,
probably, whose reading on their own subjects was the scantiest, in
proportion to their intellectual capacity, were Dr. Thomas Brown and
Archbishop Whately: accordingly they are the only two of whom Sir W.
Hamilton, though acknowledging their abilities, habitually speaks with a
certain tinge of superciliousness. It cannot be denied that both Dr.
Brown and Archbishop Whately would have thought and written better than
they did, if they had been better read in the writings of previous
thinkers: but I am not afraid that posterity will contradict me when I
say, that either of them has doneh greater service to the world, in the
origination and diffusion of important thought, than Sir W. Hamilton
with all his learning: because, though indolent readers, they were, both
of them, active and fertile thinkers.*

Edition: current; Page: [498]
It is not that Sir W. Hamilton’s erudition is not frequently of real use
to him on particular questions of philosophy. It does him one valuable
service: it enables him to know all the various opinions which can be
held on the questions he discusses, and to conceive and express them
clearly, leaving none of them out. This it does, though even this not
always; but it does little else, even of what might be expected from
erudition when enlightened by philosophy. He knew, with extraordinary
accuracy, the ὅτι of every philosopher’s doctrine, but gave himself
little trouble about the διότι.[*] With one exception, I find no remarks
bearing upon that point in any part of his writings.* I imagine he would
have been much at a loss if he had been required to draw up a
philosophical estimate of the mind of any great thinker. He irarelyi
seems to look at any opinion of a philosopher in connexion with the same
philosopher’s other opinions. Accordingly, he is Edition: current; Page:
[499] weak as to the mutual relations of philosophical doctrines. He
seldom knows any of the corollaries from a thinker’s opinions, unless
the thinker has himself drawn them; and even then he knows them, not as
corollaries, but only as opinions. One of the most striking examples he
affords of this inability is in the case of Leibnitz; and it is worth
while to analyse this instance, because nothing can more conclusively
show, how little capable he was of entering into the spirit of a system
unlike his own.

If there ever was a thinker whose system of thought could without
difficulty be conceived as a connected whole, it was Leibnitz. Hardly
any philosopher has taken so much pains to display the filiation of all
his main conceptions, in a manner at once satisfactory to his own mind
and intelligible to the world. And there is hardly any one in whom the
filiation is more complete, these various conceptions being all
applications of one common principle. Yet Sir W. Hamilton understands
them so ill, as to be able to say, after giving an account of the
Pre-established Harmony, that “its author himself probably regarded it
more as a specimen of ingenuity than as a Edition: current; Page: [500]
serious doctrine.”* And again: “It is a disputed point whether Leibnitz
was serious in his monadology and pre-established harmony.”† To say
nothing of the injustice done, by this surmise, to the deep sincerity
and high philosophic earnestness of that most eminent man; it is obvious
to those who study opinions in their relation to the mind entertaining
them, that a person, who could thus think concerning the Pre-established
Harmony and the Monadology,[*] however correctly he may have seized many
particular opinions of Leibnitz, had never taken into his mind a
conception of Leibnitz himself as a philosopher. These theories were
necessitated by Leibnitz’s other opinions. They were the only outlet
from the difficulties of the fundamental doctrine of his philosophy, the
Principle of Sufficient Reason.[†]

All who know anything of Leibnitz, are aware that he affirmed it to be a
principle of the universe, that nothing exists which has not an
antecedent ground in reason, and cognisable by reason; a ground which,
when known, gives all the properties of the thing by natural and
necessary consequence. This Sufficient Reason might be some abstract
property of the thing, serving as the pattern on which it was
constructed, and being the key to all its other attributes. Such, for
example, is the property by which mathematicians define the circle or
the triangle, and from which, by mere reasoning, the remaining
properties of those figures are deducible. In other cases, the
Sufficient Reason of a phænomenon is found in its physical cause. But
the mere existence of the cause as an invariable antecedent, does not
constitute it the Sufficient Reason of the effect. There must be
something in the nature of the cause itself, something capable of being
detected in it, which, once known, accounts for its being followed by
that particular effect; something which explains the character of the
effect, and, had it been known beforehand, would have enabled us to
foretel the precise effect that would be produced. To so great a length
did Leibnitz carry this doctrine, as to affirm that God (saving actual
miracle, which as a highly exceptional fact he was willing to admit)[‡]
could not, in the exercise of his ordinary providence, conduct the
government of the world except par la nature des créatures; through
second causes, each containing, in its own properties, wherewithal to
furnish a complete explanation of the phænomena to which it gives
rise.[§]

Setting out with this à priori conception of the order of the universe,
Edition: current; Page: [501] Leibnitz found Mind apparently acting upon
Matter and Matter upon Mind, and was utterly unable to discover in the
nature and attributes of either, any Sufficient Reason for this action.
The two substances seemed wholly disparate: there was nothing in them
from which action of any kind upon one another could have been presumed
to be so much as possible. He saw in this one case, what is true, though
he did not see it, in all cases whatever—that there is no nexus, no
natural link, between agent and patient, between cause and effect, and
that all we know or can know of their relation is, that the one always
follows the other. But to accept the mere fact as ultimate, without
craving for a demonstration, could not enter into Leibnitz’s geometrical
mind; and was positively forbidden by his Principle of Sufficient
Reason. Here was a dilemma! Happily, however, the difficulty of
admitting that Mind could act upon Matter, disappeared in the case of an
Infinite Mind. In the Omnipotence of the Deity there lay a Sufficient
Reason for the possibility of anything which the Deity might be pleased
to do. It must be God, therefore, and no subordinate agency, that
directly produces the effects on Matter which seem owing to Mind, and
the effects on Mind which seem owing to Matter. This being admitted,
there were only two possible theories to choose from. Either God, from
the beginning, wound up Mind and Matter to go together like two clocks,
though without any connexion with one another; and I see an object, not
because the object is before my eyes, but because it was prearranged
from eternity that the presence of the object and the fact of my seeing
should occur at the same instant; or else, at the moment when the object
appears, God intervenes, and gives me the perception of sight, exactly
as if the object had caused it. The former theory is the Pre-established
Harmony; the latter is the doctrine of Occasional Causes, to which, as
rather the less grotesque supposition of the two, the Cartesians had
been driven by the pressure of the same difficulty. But this hypothesis,
as it supposed nothing less than a standing miracle, was wholly
inadmissible by Leibnitz. It was inconsistent with the idea which he had
formed to himself of the perfections of the Deity. He considered it as
assimilating Providence to a bad workman, whose engines will not work
unless he himself stands by, and gives them a helping hand; “a
watchmaker, who, having constructed a timepiece, would still be obliged
himself to turn the hands, to make it mark the hours.”* Leibnitz could
not find, in the idea of God, any Sufficient Reason why so roundabout a
mode of governing the universe should have been chosen by him. He was
thus thrown upon the hypothesis of a Pre-established Harmony, as his
only refuge; and there can be no doubt that he accepted it, with the
full conviction Edition: current; Page: [502] of an intellect accustomed
to pursue given premises to their consequences with all the rigour of
geometrical demonstration.

The doctrine of Monads was as necessary a corollary from Leibnitz’s
first principle as the Pre-established Harmony. Everything, whether
physical or spiritual, which has an individual existence, is a compound
of innumerable attributes, between many of which we cannot seize any
connexion, but on Leibnitz’s theory it was not admissible to suppose
that no connexion exists. There must be something, somewhere, which
contains in its own nature the complete theory and explanation of the
combination of attributes, and is the reason of its being that
combination and no other: and what could this be unless a sort of kernel
of the entire Being—the Soul in the case of a spiritual being, a kind of
Essence of the Individual in that of a merely physical object? The
Monads of Leibnitz do not really differ from the imaginary Essences of
the schoolmen, except in not being abstractions, but objective realities
in the completest meaning of the word; which, indeed, the Substantiæ
Secundæ of the Realists already were, only that they were essences of
classes, and were conceived as inhering simultaneously in numerous
individuals, while the Monads of Leibnitz were lively little beings, the
principles of animation and activity, each of them the real agent or
Force at the bottom of one individual. All this may seem poor stuff, and
a melancholy exhibition of a great intellect. But as there is nothing in
experience which directly disproves these theories, they are not really
more absurd than many a one which has not so quaint an appearance: and
it is the strength, not the weakness of a systematic intellect, that it
does not shrink from conclusions because they have an absurd look, when
they are necessary corollaries from premises which the thinker, and
probably most of those who criticise him, have not ceased to regard as
true. Leibnitz was led to the Monads and the Pre-established Harmony by
the same logical necessity, which made Descartes, far more absurdly,
affirm the automatism of animals;[*] and we might as reasonably doubt
the seriousness of the latter opinion, as of the former. The same
logical consistency made him a Necessitarian, and an Optimist; since the
doctrine of Sufficient Reason made God the author of all that happens,
consequently of all human actions; and God’s attributes could not be a
Sufficient Reason for any world but the best possible.

Other examples may be given, though none greater than this, of Sir W.
Hamilton’s inability to enter into the very mind of another thinker. Is
it not, for instance, a surprising thing, that one who knew Socrates,
Plato, and Aristotle so well, should attribute* to all of them his own
opinion that j(at Edition: current; Page: [503] least in the case of
speculative knowledge)j not truth but the search for truth is the
important matter, and that the pursuit of it is not for the sake of the
attainment, but of the mental activity and energy developed in the
search?* If there have been three men since speculation began who would
have vehemently rejected such a doctrine, they are the three who are
here placed at the head of the authorities in its support. Our author
arrives at this strange misunderstanding, by giving a meaning to single
expressions, derived from his own mode of thought and not from theirs.
In Aristotle’s case the assertion rests on a mistake of the meaning of
the Aristotelian word ἐνέργεια, which did not signify energy, but fact
as opposed to possibility, actus to potentia.† One hardly knows what to
say to a writer who understands Τέλος οὐ γνῶσις ἀλλὰ πρᾶξις,[*] to mean,
“The intellect is perfected not by knowledge but by activity.”‡

We see, from such instances, how much even Sir W. Hamilton’s erudition
wanted of what we have a right to expect from erudition in a superior
mind—that it should enter into the general spirit of the things it
knows, not know them merely in their details. Sir W. Hamilton studied
the eminent thinkers of old, only from the outside. He did not throw his
own mind into their manner of thought; he did not survey the field of
philosophic speculation from their standing point, and see each object
as it would be seen with their lights, and with their modes of looking.
The opinion of an author stands an isolated fact in Sir W. Hamilton’s
pages, without foundation in the author’s individuality, or connexion
with his other doctrines. For want of this elucidation one by another,
even the opinions themselves are, as in the case last cited, very liable
to be misunderstood. lA history of Edition: current; Page: [504]
philosophy from his hand, unless proposing to himself a new object had
altered his point of view, could not have been final; it would not have
been a philosophical history of philosophy; but it would have stood in
the same relation to such a work, in which accurate and complete annals
stand to political history: it would have been an invaluable protection
against the mistakes of subsequent historians, and would have
prodigiously abridged their labours. Such, therefore,l as his
expositions of the opinions of philosophers are, it is greatly to be
regretted that we have not more of them; and that his unrivalled
knowledge of all the antecedents of Philosophy has enriched the world
with nothing but a few selections of passages on topics on which
circumstances had led Sir W. Hamilton to write. He is known to have left
copious common-place books, without which indeed it would have been
hardly possible that such stores of knowledge could be kept within easy
reference. Let us hope that they are carefully preserved; that they
will, in some form or other, be made accessible to students, and will
yet do good service to the future historian of philosophy. Should this
hope be fulfilled, future ages will have greater cause than, I think,
Sir W. Hamilton’s published philosophical speculations will ever give
them, to rejoice in the fruits of his labours, and to celebrate his
name.m

Edition: current; Page: [505]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [506] Edition: current; Page: [507]




