


Essays on England, Ireland, and the Empire


BRODIE’S HISTORY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE
 1824

Edition: current; Page: [2]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, II (Oct., 1824), 346-402. Headed: “Art. V. A History
of the British Empire, from the Accession of Charles I, to the
Restoration; with an introduction, tracing the Progress of Society, and
the Constitution, from the Feudal Times, to the Opening of the History;
and including a particular Examination of Mr. Hume’s Statements,
relative to the Character of the English Government. By George Brodie,
Esq., Advocate. In Four Volumes, 8vo. Edinburgh. Bell & Bradfute.
London. Longman & Co. 1822.” Running titles: “Brodie’s History of the
British Empire.” Unsigned; not republished. Identified in Mill’s
bibliography as “A review of Brodie’s history of Charles I and the
Commonwealth, in the fourth number of the Westminster Review” (MacMinn,
6). Vol. II of the Westminster in the Somerville College Library has no
corrections or alterations. For comment on the review, see viii-ix and
lvi-lvii above.

Edition: current; Page: [3]


Brodie’s History of the British Empire

mr. brodie has rendered no mean service to his country by these volumes.
We allude, not so much to the merits of his work as a history, though
these are considerable, as to the unexampled exposure which he has
furnished of the demerits of former writers, and particularly of
Hume.[*] In no portion of our history has mis-representation more
extensively prevailed, because in no portion of it have the motives,
which lead to mis-representation, been more strong.

Hume possessed powers of a very high order; but regard for truth formed
no part of his character. He reasoned with surprising acuteness; but the
object of his reasonings was, not to attain truth, but to shew that it
is unattainable. His mind, too, was completely enslaved by a taste for
literature; not those kinds of literature which teach mankind to know
the causes of their happiness and misery, that they may seek the one and
avoid the other; but that literature which without regard for truth or
utility, seeks only to excite emotion. With the earlier part of his
work, we at present have no concern. The latter part has no title to be
considered as a history. Called a history, it is really a romance; and
bears nearly the same degree of resemblance to any thing which really
happened, as Old Mortality, or Ivanhoe,[†] while it is far more
calculated to mislead. As every romance must have a hero, in his romance
of the Stuarts, the hero is Charles I: and in making a pathetic story
about Charles I, the thing he gave himself least concern about was,
whether it was true.

Romance is always dangerous, but when romance assumes the garb of
history, it is doubly pernicious. To say nothing of its other evils, on
which this is no place to expatiate, it infallibly allies itself with
the sinister interests[‡] of the few. When events come to be looked at,
not as they affect the great interests of mankind, but as they bear upon
the pleasures and pains of an individual; a habit is engendered of
Edition: current; Page: [4] considering the pleasures and pains of an
individual as of more importance than the great interests of mankind.
That this is one of the most pernicious of all habits, is proved by
merely telling what it is; that it is one which the prevailing system of
education carefully fosters, is too true; that it is a habit into which
the mind has of itself too strong a tendency to fall, is matter of
universal experience. The pleasures and pains most interesting to an
ill-cultivated mind, are those of the one and of the few; of the men in
exalted stations, whose lot is most conspicuous, whose felicity, to the
ignorant, appears something almost divine, and whose misfortunes, from
their previous elevation, most powerfully affect the imagination. The
sufferings of the many, though multiplied almost beyond calculation from
their indefinite extent, are thought nothing of: they seem born to
suffer; their fall is from a less height; their miseries lie hidden, and
do not meet the eye. Who is there that would not admit, that it is
better one should suffer than a million? Yet among those who can feel
and cannot reason, nothing is so rare as to sympathize with the million.
The one, with them, is every thing, the million, nothing; merely because
the one is higher in rank, and perhaps suffers rather more, than any one
assignable individual among the million. They would rather that a
thousand individuals should suffer one degree each, than that one
individual should suffer two degrees.

This propensity is so thoroughly incompatible with the pursuit of the
only true end of morality, the greatest happiness of the greatest
number, that genuine and enlarged morality cannot exist till it be
destroyed; and to this object, he who writes to benefit his species will
bend his most strenuous efforts: but he who writes for effect, without
caring whether good or evil is the consequence, must address himself to
the prevalent feeling, and to this, one of the strongest of prevalent
feelings. He must select a hero; if possible a monarch, or a warrior;
and to excite a strong interest in this hero, every thing must be
sacrificed. If he be an historian, he will probably have to relate,
among the actions of his hero, some by which the many are made to
suffer; these it is necessary for him to justify or excuse. He may have
to relate attempts on the part of the many, to guard themselves against
those actions of his hero by which they are made to suffer; these
attempts he must represent as extremely wicked, and the many as villains
for engaging in such attempts. In short, whenever the interests of
mankind, and of his hero, are at variance, he must endeavour to make the
reader take part with his hero against mankind.

Such was the object of Hume; and the object to which he deliberately
sacrificed truth, honesty, and candour. When, in order to attain the
most mischievous of ends, a man does not scruple to employ the most
mischievous of means, it makes very little difference in the degree of
his immorality, whether he be himself the dupe of his own artifices or
not. To that extent, Hume may very possibly have been sincere. He may,
perhaps, have been weak enough to believe, that the pleasures and pains
of one individual are of unspeakable importance, those of the many of no
Edition: current; Page: [5] importance at all. But though it be possible
to defend Charles I, and be an honest man, it is not possible to be an
honest man, and defend him as Hume has done.

A skilful advocate will never tell a lie, when suppressing the truth
will answer his purpose; and if a lie must be told, he will rather, if
he can, lie by insinuation than by direct assertion. In all the arts of
a rhetorician, Hume was a master: and it would be a vain attempt to
describe the systematic suppression of the truth which is exemplified in
this portion of his history; and which, within the sphere of our
reading, we have scarcely, if ever, seen matched. Particular instances
of this species of mendacity, Mr. Brodie has brought to light in
abundance;[*] of the degree in which it pervades the whole, he has not
given, nor would it be possible to give, an adequate conception, unless
by printing Mr. Brodie’s narrative and Hume’s in opposite columns. Many
of the most material facts, facts upon which the most important of the
subsequent transactions hinged, and which even the party writers of the
day never attempted to deny, Hume totally omits to mention; others,
which are so notorious that they cannot safely be passed over in
silence, he either affects to disbelieve, or mentioning no evidence,
indirectly gives it to be understood that there was none. The direct
lies are not a few; the lies insinuated are innumerable. We do not mean
that he originated any lies; for all those which he could possibly need
were ready made to his hand. But if it be criminal to be the original
inventor of a lie, the crime is scarcely less of him who knowingly
repeats it.

The authorities from which the history of those times is to be collected
are various. There are royalist writers, and republican writers; and
there are original documents, letters, and others, from which the facts
may be gathered, free from that colouring which is put upon them in the
apologetical writings of either party. There are, in particular, a
variety of letters, written, some of them by Charles himself, others by
Strafford, and other eminent persons in the royal party, where they
unfold to one another designs which were carefully concealed from the
public, and which, when imputed to them by their opponents, they
repelled as the vilest of calumnies.[†] Almost the whole of these
documents Hume passes over, as Edition: current; Page: [6] if they did
not exist: because they prove his hero, not only to have been an adept
in dissimulation and perfidy, but to have been in the constant habit of
making asseverations, and corroborating them by the most solemn appeals
to Heaven, which asseverations, when he uttered them, he perfectly well
knew to be totally false. And as this fact, if known, would have spoiled
him for a hero, Hume makes a point, not only of concealing, but of
constantly and unblushingly denying it.[*]

Exclusively of these documents, the authorities which remain are the
publications of the two parties at the time, and those of their
partisans afterwards. If compelled to draw his whole information from
these questionable sources, a fair historian would at least take nothing
upon trust from either party; would compare their statements with one
another, reject the exaggerations of both sides, and while he would
repose tolerable confidence in their admissions against their own cause,
would attach little weight to their assertions, when tending to asperse
an adversary, or vindicate themselves. As for Hume, had he never looked
into any but the royalist publications, the spirit in which he has
written his history might have been pardoned, as the effect of blind
credulity and partiality. But the names of Whitelocke, Ludlow,
Rushworth, May,[†] appear so often at the bottom of the page, as to
leave no doubt that, with regard to many of the events which he relates,
he knew the truth, and wilfully concealed it. The republican writers are
believed—when they bear testimony in favour of the royalists; while the
royalists are never disbelieved, except when, by any chance, they make
admissions against themselves.

If we consider who these royalists were, we shall be able to form some
estimate of the credibility of a history, nearly the whole of which is
copied from them.

The first, and, on the whole, the most respectable, is Clarendon;[‡]
whom, though he was himself an actor in the scenes which he describes,
and was not the more likely to be impartial, that he was a renegade, it
has been usual to regard as a man of unimpeachable veracity, for no
other reason that we can discover, but because Hume says so;[§] for it
surely is no proof that a man will tell truth, because, like every man
of sense and prudence, he is sparing of foul language. The question,
however, concerning the veracity of Clarendon, may now be considered as
settled; see Brodie, Vol. III, pp. 110n-14n, 263n-4n, 265n, 306n-8n,
316n, 334n-5n, 336n, 389n, 551n-4n, et passim, for various instances of
his dishonesty and bad faith. It is too much to require that we should
believe what Hume says of Edition: current; Page: [7] Clarendon rather
than what Clarendon says of himself. A writer who makes a boast of the
dexterity with which he fabricated speeches, and published them in the
names of some of the parliamentary leaders,[*] was not likely to be over
scrupulous, when he sat down to write an express vindication of himself
and of his party.

If such be the character of the most candid of the royalist writers, it
may be judged what credit is due to the more furious partisans. Even
Clarendon, indeed, is too honest for Hume; for he occasionally lets out
facts which it suits Hume to conceal.[†] His other authorities were less
scrupulous. The chief of these are Carte, Clement Walker, and
Perinchief;[‡] particularly the former, whom he seems almost to have
taken as his text book, but whom he rarely ventures to quote; and he
frequently commits the dishonesty of referring to Whitelocke or
Rushworth for a story, of which the important features are to be found
only in Carte. It is chiefly towards the latter end of the story that
Perinchief and Walker come into play. Of these three, it is difficult to
say which is least deserving of credit. Carte was a vulgar fanatic on
the side of royalty, who believed every thing in favour of Charles, and
nothing against him; and it is some presumption in favour of his
sincerity, that, by the documents published in his Appendix, he
furnished, in a great measure, the materials of his own refutation. Of
Walker we shall say more hereafter. Of Perinchief we need say nothing,
because we are quite sure that no man who has ever read a page of his
work, will pay the least regard to any thing that he asserts.

The arts by which Hume has succeeded in obtaining belief for a period so
much exceeding the ordinary duration of party lies, are various, and
well worthy of examination.

In the first place, he avoids the appearance of violence, and yields
some points, in order to make a show of moderation; knowing well that a
writer, if he acknowledges only a tenth part of what is true, obtains a
reputation for candour which frequently causes people to overlook the
mis-statement of the other nine-tenths. Such points, therefore, as are
wholly untenable, he gives up with a good grace. He allows some merit to
the popular leaders, and acknowledges that they had some reason to
complain. Yet, though the people may sometimes have been in the right,
he will not allow that Charles can ever have been in the wrong; and if
he allows that the people can have been right, it is only to a trifling
extent.[§] To extenuate the abuses of the government, there is no sort
of concealment which Edition: current; Page: [8] he does not practise:
for those which cannot be concealed, while, by an ordinary artifice, he
represents them as solitary instances, and exceptions to the general
rule, he industriously supplies every palliation which the most refined
ingenuity can devise. In the first place, however bad the government
might be, it was milder under Charles than under his predecessors;[*] as
if that were true; or any thing to the purpose if it were. In the next
place, we are told, in at least twenty places, that he was driven to
these abuses by an appearance of necessity;[†] when Charles himself
never pretended to be moved by necessity, but asserted that he had a
right to do all that he did. The religious grievances are expressly
declared to be of no consequence;[‡] as if it were of no consequence
when a king attempts to force his own religion down the throats of the
people; as if this were not of itself one of the most tyrannical of all
acts of power; and as if a king who would do this, would not do any
thing. If it be fanaticism to resist the introduction of a superstitious
observance, how much greater is the fanaticism of upholding that
observance, by cutting off men’s ears and imprisoning them for life? Or,
if Charles was himself conscious of the frivolity of the ceremonies
which he imposed, what more charitable supposition remains, than that he
supported Laud’s religion, that Laud might support his power?

Another of the artifices of Hume consists in attempting to prepossess
the reader for or against a particular person, while he is still in
ignorance of those actions of that person, from which, and not from the
assertions of his partisans, or of his enemies, his character ought to
be inferred. Thus, every opportunity is taken of holding up King Charles
as a person distinguished by every moral excellence: many of his actions
indicate the reverse; but as the character has the advantage of coming
first, it is hoped that the reader will credit the character rather than
the actions. The parliamentary leaders, on the other hand, he represents
as hypocrites or fanatics, and (when he dares) as uneducated, coarse,
and brutal in their manners and in their character.[§] All this, as Mr.
Brodie has shown, is untrue;[¶] but it answers the purpose; and the
reasoning amounts to this: Vane, Ireton, and Harrison were fanatics,
therefore King Charles’s government was good: a specimen of
argumentation which, if not strictly logical, is, at any rate, extremely
convenient, since it is hard if a partisan, however weak his cause,
cannot contrive to pick a hole either in the intellectual or moral
character of some one or more of his opponents.

We might fill a whole article with an analysis of the artifices of Hume;
but a few specimens are necessary, to convince the reader that we have
not brought charges which it is not in our power to prove; imperfect as
the conception is which can be Edition: current; Page: [9] given by
specimens, of a work of which almost every sentence contains in it more
or less of misrepresentation. And as it is also incumbent on us to give
some idea of what Mr. Brodie has done to throw light upon this portion
of history, it seems to us that these two objects may best be united by
such a concise sketch of the events of the period as is compatible with
the narrow limits of an article; and to this, after requesting the
indulgence of the reader to the very general view which it is in our
power to afford, we shall proceed.

It is first, however, necessary to say something on the nature of the
government before the time of the Stuarts. Mr. Brodie has written a
long, and, he will forgive us for saying, a dull, introductory volume,
to prove that it was by no means so arbitrary as is generally imagined.
Though this volume contains much valuable information concerning the
practical workings of the government, and the condition of the people,
we wish he had placed it at the end rather than at the beginning; for it
looks formidable, and its bulk may alarm the reader, while it
contributes little to the main object of the history. The agitation,
indeed, of such a question is of little use for any purpose, and,
assuredly, of no use whatever for the purpose of enabling us to form a
correct judgment on the events which ensued. It is of little consequence
whether misgovernment was of an ancient or of a modern date in Great
Britain; in either case, resistance to it was equally a duty; the
opposition to that resistance, equally a crime; and it is a strange
doctrine, that we are not entitled to good government, unless we can
prove, that our ancestors enjoyed it: although, as mankind, educated as
they have hitherto been, are governed by custom and precedent much more
than by reason, it was perfectly natural that each party at the time
should endeavour to throw the reproach of innovation upon its opponents.

The truth, in as far as it can be elicited from the facts which have
been handed down to us, seems perfectly to coincide with what the
experience of all nations, similarly situated, would have led us to
infer. There was no distinct line of demarcation between what was
permitted to the king, and what was forbidden. He was not nominally
recognized as absolute; at the same time, he was practically so, as
often as he was a man of talents, and circumstances favoured his power.
When, on the other hand, a weak prince filled the throne, the nobles
were every thing, and the king nothing. Precedents, therefore, may be
found (if by precedents the question is to be decided), both for and
against the claim of absolute power. If it be true, as Mr. Brodie
asserts, that Elizabeth and Henry VIII rarely attempted to raise money
without consent of parliament,[*] what does this prove, except that the
parliament was always willing to grant, if not as much as those monarchs
desired, so much that, dependant as they were on public opinion from
their peculiar situation, they did not care to provoke the people by
exacting more? In like manner, if it be true that the Tudors did not
imprison and fine men in the Edition: current; Page: [10] star-chamber
to so great an extent as is supposed,[*] so neither, it should be
remembered, did Charles, unless when some one resisted his authority;
and under the Tudors there was no resistance to authority, or none
capable of exciting any uneasiness in the breast of the sovereign. But,
at length, resistance came; and with resistance came cruelty, for the
purpose of its suppression.

The great deficiency in Mr. Brodie’s work, is, that he has not explained
why resistance began so soon; how it happened, that sentiments and
ideas, in almost every other country then utterly unknown, were at this
early period so widely diffused in Great Britain. It is scarcely fair,
indeed, to blame Mr. Brodie for a deficiency which he shares with all
former English historians. Our present concern, however, is not with the
causes of the resistance, but with the resistance itself.

There is sufficient evidence to prove, that James I had a strong leaning
to popery;* moved, it may be supposed, in part, by respect to the memory
of his mother,[†] but chiefly by the readiness with which that religion
allies itself with arbitrary power. In proportion to his inclination for
popery, was his hatred of all the protestant sectaries. Where he had, as
in England, archbishoprics and bishoprics to give away, he had a
tolerable security that the conduct of a majority in the church would be
sufficiently conformable to his wishes, whatever they might be. In
Scotland, where he had no such precious gifts at his disposal, he found
the clergy by no means equally compliant. To the presbyterian church
government, therefore, he professed an inveterate dislike; “declaring
that, under it, Jack, and Tom, and Dick, and Will, presumed to instruct
him in affairs of state.” (Brodie, Vol. I, p. 333.)[‡] His aversion
extended to the Puritans in England, who were Presbyterians, and
hostile, if not at first to episcopacy, at least to the intermeddling of
bishops in secular affairs. And throughout the reign of James they were
severely visited with the penalties of the law. Nor was the civil
government of James less despotic than the ecclesiastical. In
profession, indeed, his claim of arbitrary power Edition: current; Page:
[11] went far beyond that of his most tyrannical predecessors. “The
power of kings,” he told the parliament, “was like the divine power;
for, as God can create and destroy, make and unmake at his pleasure, so
kings can give life and death, judge all and be judged by none. As it
was blasphemy,” he added, “to dispute what God might do, so it was
sedition in subjects to dispute what a king might do, in the height of
his power.”[*] Nor did his practice fall short of his professions.

In ecclesiastical matters he assumed supreme power, and struck at the
very vitals of the constitution by issuing illegal proclamations with
penalties, which were enforced by the court of star-chamber, while, by
levying taxes without an act of parliament, he prepared the way for the
disuse of that assembly. He, of his own accord, imposed new duties at
the ports, and arrogated the right of doing so at pleasure, a pretension
in which he was supported by venal statesmen and corrupt lawyers, who
concurred in fabricating precedents to deceive the people; nay, his
judges solemnly decided so monstrous a principle in his favour.
Innumerable projects and monopolies were devised for raising money, but
he was latterly obliged to pass an act against them: forced loans,
without the pressing emergencies which were used as an apology for them
in the preceding reign, were resorted to; and the hateful measure of
benevolence, which had been so much reprobated, and so opposed even in
Henry VIII, and so long discontinued, was revived. (Ibid., pp.
351-2.)[†]

All offices were filled by creatures of the unworthy favourite,
Buckingham; selected, not for their fitness, but for subservience to his
will. We except, of course, such offices as were sold (which was the
case with many) for the benefit of the king or of his favourite.

Let us suppose that Charles I, when he ascended the throne, had
expressed the strongest determination to redress these abuses; is there
any one who will have the folly to say that he ought to have been
trusted? That, because he found it convenient to make promises, in
contradiction to his obvious interest, he should have been left at full
liberty to perform them, or not, as he pleased? But when there was not
only no reason to anticipate a reform, but every reason to anticipate
the contrary; when, in defiance of public opinion, he had just married
an avowed Catholic,[‡] and issued warrants to forbear all proceedings
against recusants; when he not only pursued the same measures as his
predecessor; but the same men, and especially Buckingham, so deservedly
the object of popular odium, still maintained a boundless ascendancy
over his counsels; this surely was not the time to show unlimited
confidence, but rather the time to push for beneficial concessions,
before the king should have advanced so far as to be unable, without
humiliation, to recede.

We may be excused for dwelling at so much length upon the state of
affairs at the commencement of Charles’s reign, when it is considered
what reproaches have been cast upon his first parliament by Hume,
because, instead of granting Edition: current; Page: [12] immediately
all the money which he required, they gave him, at first, but little,
that they might still retain some control over his actions. Hume,
however, declares that, at this period, “an unbounded power was
exercised by the crown,” and that “it was necessary to fix a choice,
either to abandon entirely the privileges of the people, or to secure
them by firmer and more precise barriers than the constitution had
hitherto provided for them.”[*] What, then, in his opinion, ought they
to have done? To have submitted to despotism? If not, what means had
they to resist it, other than by withholding supplies? They are further
accused of having acted an ungenerous part, by forcing the king upon a
war, and then refusing him the means of carrying it on.[†] True, as
usual, in sound, and false in substance. It was well known by Hume to
have been one main cause of the war, that Charles and Buckingham, on
their return from Spain, had told (or, at least, the one had looked on
while the other told) some few lies to the parliament, concerning the
transactions in which they had been engaged.[‡] And the other motive by
which the parliament were swayed, when they urged the king to a war, was
the hope of, by that means, preventing him from marrying a Catholic,
which, notwithstanding, he immediately did; their quarrel was not with
Spain, but with popery and slavery: it was Charles and his favourite who
now pressed the war, and from motives of purely personal pique.

The last subsidies had been granted under an express condition that
their expenditure should be controlled by commissioners appointed by
parliament;[§] this condition had never been fulfilled, and it was now
complained, surely not without reason, that an account of the
expenditure, though promised, did not make its appearance. Great
complaints, too, were heard against an oppressive imposition which the
late king had imposed, by his own authority, upon wines.[¶] It was
evident, that by summoning the parliament to the metropolis during one
of the most dreadful pestilences ever known in England, it had been
hoped to obtain an immediate supply, without leaving time to enter upon
the consideration of grievances. The Commons, therefore, wisely granted
two subsidies, and no more.[∥]

At this time, Montague, one of the king’s chaplains, published a
work,[**] called, by Hume, “a moderate book, which, to their great
disgust, saved virtuous Catholics, as well as other Christians, from
eternal torments:”[††] but he does not Edition: current; Page: [13]
state that this moderate book was a tissue of the most furious invective
against the Puritans; that it openly vindicated many of the popish
tenets, and more covertly, though not less really, defended that
religion as a whole. A committee of the Commons was appointed to report
upon this work, and Montague was bound, under recognizances, to answer
for it at the bar of the House. From this transaction Hume takes
occasion to accuse the Commons of illiberality, forgetting, that in the
age in which they lived, some degree of intolerance towards popery was
necessary for self-defence; that those dangers which are now chimerical,
were then real and alarming; that those disabilities, which can now
serve no purpose, except that of oppression, were necessary then to
hinder Protestants from being blown up, or, once more, burnt in
Smithfield. Such a book, too, from a chaplain of the king, and that
chaplain retaining his place, proved surely that the king himself could
not be very hostile to the sentiments which it contained. The Commons
had no claim upon Charles for the punishment of Montague, but they had a
claim for his dismissal. Proceedings, however, were stopped by a message
from the king, declaring that he meant to take the matter under his own
consideration.[*] So well did he keep his word, that, ere long, Montague
was made a bishop.

It is for acts like this that we read so often in Hume’s history of
Charles’s mild and tolerant disposition.[†] As if any man in his senses
could believe that the persecutor of Leighton and Prynne was an enemy to
persecution; as if it were any proof of a mild and tolerant disposition,
to bestow rewards upon one religion and inflict punishments upon
another. We had always thought that this was the very essence of
intolerance; what else, we take leave to ask, does intolerance mean?

Before the parliament was re-assembled, an incident had occurred, which,
alone, would have sufficed to justify all its subsequent proceedings.
The French king[‡] was then at war with his protestant subjects at
Rochelle: to aid him in subduing them, Charles lent him a fleet; and,
but for the manly resistance of the sailors, a fleet, equipped with the
very money granted for the defence of the Protestants in Germany, would
have been employed for the suppression of the protestant religion in
France, and the support of popery and arbitrary power. As an excuse for
Charles, Hume observes, that he was probably deceived by the French
government; which is more than was asserted by Buckingham himself, in
the long speech which he made in parliament on the occasion.[§] But Hume
is not ashamed to defend the transaction itself; and because the English
resented it, he thence infers, that of all European nations they were at
that time the most bigotted.[¶] If this be bigotry, may they always
continue bigots.

Had the parliament been previously inclined to add any thing to their
former Edition: current; Page: [14] grant, they would scarcely have done
so after this experience of the use to which they might expect it to be
applied. The king’s complaint of poverty[*] was met by remonstrances
against extravagant expenditure;* and he was petitioned against the sale
of offices, against monopolies and illegal impositions: yet Hume does
not scruple to say, that the growth of popery was ever the chief of
their grievances, and now their only one; though he had said, a few
pages before, that an unbounded power was exercised by the crown; but
this, in his opinion, was no grievance.[†] Charles dissolved the
parliament, and supplied his present wants by a compulsory loan, the
produce of which being dissipated in an unsuccessful expedition against
Cadiz, he was compelled to summon another parliament. By pricking
several of the popular leaders[‡] sheriffs of counties, he incapacitated
them from being returned to parliament. This paltry artifice, by which
he hoped to secure compliance with his desires, only exposed his
weakness, without repressing the spirit of resistance to mis-rule.

The Commons immediately voted three subsidies and three fifteenths, and,
soon after, one subsidy more; but deferred passing their vote into a
law, until after the public grievances should have been considered.[§]
Situated as they were, it is difficult to see how they should have
adopted a wiser, or a more moderate course.

A condition, [says Hume,] was thus made, in a very undisguised manner,
with their sovereign. Under colour of redressing grievances, which,
during this short reign could not be very numerous, they were to proceed
in regulating and controlling every part of government which displeased
them; and if the king either cut them short in this undertaking, or
refused compliance with their demands, he must not expect any supply
from the Commons. Great dissatisfaction was expressed by Charles, at a
treatment which he deemed so harsh and undutiful.[¶]

This is the way in which the people of England are spoken of, for
exercising their legal and acknowledged privilege of withholding
supplies. For what purpose was that privilege given to them, but to
enable them to “make conditions with their sovereign?” for what purpose,
but that they might avail themselves of his necessities to curtail his
mischievous power? To hold up the making “conditions” with their
sovereign in this manner ad invidiam, as if to make conditions with
their sovereign were a crime, is to insinuate a doctrine which Hume
himself does not dare to acknowledge as his own, and which, therefore,
he artfully puts into the mouth of another.[∥] Their grievances, too,
“during this short reign, could not be Edition: current; Page: [15] very
numerous.” As if a grievance ever consisted in a single oppressive act;
as if the continual liability to such acts—the system, the state of
things, which renders them possible, were of no consequence whatever.
The individual act, however tyrannical, is past, and cannot be recalled.
What is sought is, security against its renewal; and it is for this
aiming at security, that the people of England, throughout this portion
of Hume’s history, are held up to scorn and detestation.

The sale of offices, and the exorbitant gifts lavished upon Buckingham
and his creatures, being warmly complained of, and some members not
sparing their censures upon the favorite himself, Charles summoned both
houses to Whitehall, where he told them, that to reflect upon the duke
was to reflect upon himself, and threatened them, if they persevered,
with a dissolution. The Commons, however, were not to be discouraged by
menaces; and they soon shewed their resolution, by preferring an
impeachment against the duke.[*]

None of their proceedings has been more grossly misrepresented than
this. They have been reproached for voting, that common fame was a
sufficient ground for accusation.[†] Common fame is not, certainly, a
sufficient ground for punishment; but punishment is one thing, and
accusation another. It may not only be justifiable, but an imperative
duty, to proceed against an individual, even upon a slight suspicion,
that so his guilt or innocence may be fully ascertained. If a charge
were never brought until it were known with certainty that it could be
proved, where, we ask, would be the use of trial?

All the charges, Hume goes on to say, appear, from comparing the
accusation and reply, to be either frivolous, or false, or both.[‡] How
their truth or falsehood can be established, by hearing the accusers
affirm, and the accused deny, Hume, with his usual accuracy, omits to
inform us. If embezzlement, extortion, neglect of duty as admiral, the
purchase and sale of offices, the loan of ships to suppress the
Protestants in France, and the poisoning of the late king, be frivolous
accusations, then, indeed, the charges against Buckingham were
frivolous—that they were false, remained to be proved by trial: that
trial which the Commons sought, and which Charles and Buckingham
avoided. The principal managers[§] of the impeachments were sent to the
Tower, and soon after the parliament was dissolved.

After a breach with the parliament, [says Hume,] which seemed so
difficult to repair, the only rational counsel which Charles could
pursue was, immediately to conclude a peace with Spain, and to render
himself, as far as possible, independent of his people, who discovered
so little inclination to support him, or rather, who seem to have formed
a Edition: current; Page: [16] determined resolution to abridge his
authority. Nothing could be easier in the execution than this measure,
nor more agreeable to his own and to national interest.[*]

The same man, who thus stands forward, the open and avowed advocate of
despotism, can nevertheless lavish hypocritical praises upon the popular
leaders, for resisting designs, so “agreeable to national interest.”

Despotism in the design, hypocrisy in the outside, he here acknowledges
to have characterized the conduct of his hero. “Had he possessed any
military force, on which he could rely, it is not improbable that he had
at once taken off the mask, and governed without any regard to
parliamentary privileges.”[†] To some it may appear, that he could not
well have taken off the mask more completely than he did. Ship-money,
benevolences, and a general forced loan, were the expedients resorted to
for obtaining money: for resisting these illegal exactions, seventy-six
gentlemen were imprisoned, five of whom appealed to the law for redress.
Sir Randolph Carew, chief justice, not being found a ready-enough tool,
was displaced to make room for Sir Nicholas Hyde, who readily pronounced
the power of arbitrary imprisonment to be legal.[‡] Billetting of
soldiers was another instrument of extortion. Manwaring, the king’s
chaplain, published two sermons,[§] maintaining broadly the doctrine of
active and passive obedience, and particularly the right of levying
taxes without consent of parliament. For refusing to licence these
sermons (which were printed by the king’s special command), the primate
Abbot was suspended from his office, and confined to his country house.
The employment of popish recusants was continued, notwithstanding a
solemn promise to the parliament.[¶]

One of the grand objects of Hume’s History is, to prove, that Charles’s
conduct, throughout, was open and sincere. “Some historians have rashly
questioned the good faith of this prince: but, for this reproach, the
most malignant scrutiny of his conduct, which in every circumstance is
now thoroughly known, affords not any reasonable foundation. Probity and
honor ought justly to be numbered among his most shining qualities.”[∥]
It is difficult to understand, what Hume meant by probity and honor. The
instances of Charles’s bad faith are far too numerous to be named; some
of the more remarkable of them will be noticed as we go on: but, in this
instance, Hume admits him to have violated a solemn pledge; and mark the
attempt to palliate this breach of faith: “he was apt, in imitation of
his father, to Edition: current; Page: [17] imagine that the parliament,
when they failed of supplying his necessities, had, on their part, freed
him from the obligation of a strict performance.”[*] Apt to do what?
Only to lie; an offence which, in Hume’s estimation, seems to be very
venial.

Fortunately the king was mad enough to plunge himself into a war with
France; which compelled him, once more, to summon a parliament. Resolved
to leave him no just ground of complaint, the Commons voted five
subsidies, the largest supply, according to Mr. Brodie, ever before
granted in parliament.[†] They withheld, however, for a time, the bill
of supply, and proceeded to frame a law, called the Petition of Right,
which should secure them in time to come from the oppression under which
they had suffered.[‡] By this enactment (which inquirers of all parties
are, to an extraordinary degree, unanimous in applauding), “forced
loans, benevolences, taxes without consent of parliament, arbitrary
imprisonments, the billetting of soldiers, martial law”* were declared
illegal.

The king, by an ambiguous answer,[§] evaded giving his assent to the
petition of right. Meanwhile, the Commons sent up an impeachment against
Manwaring,[¶] for the two sermons to which we before referred. It is
very easy to cry out against intolerance; but, if they had not met their
opponents with their own weapons, they could not have met them at all.
It was surely excusable to punish adversaries, whom they were not
permitted to refute. No one is so great an enemy to intolerance as Hume,
when it is the intolerance of the Puritans; but, he is very indulgent to
the bitterest persecution, when Charles is the persecutor. It is better
to avoid persecution, as it is better in war to refrain from the
massacre of prisoners; but, if your enemy obstinately refuses to give
quarter, it would be very false humanity on your part, to abstain from
retaliation.—Manwaring was sentenced to imprisonment, deprivation, and
fine. No sooner did the session terminate, than he was pardoned,
received a living, and some years after was promoted to a bishopric.

The Commons proceeded to inquire into a commission which had been
granted to levy troops in Germany, and transport them into England. As
the number mentioned was only a thousand horse, Hume insinuates a doubt
that they were intended for a mischievous purpose:[∥] omitting to state,
that arms were likewise ordered for ten thousand foot.

At length the king, being hard pressed for money, gave his assent to the
petition Edition: current; Page: [18] of right, and the subsidy bill
passed immediately after.[*] The Commons then framed a Remonstrance,
recapitulating their grievances, and ascribing them wholly to the
counsels of Buckingham.[†] “As this,” says Hume, “was the first return
which he (Charles) met with for his late beneficial concessions, and for
his sacrifices of prerogative, the greatest by far ever made by an
English sovereign, nothing could be more the object of great and natural
indignation.”[‡]

A grosser falsehood than is insinuated here, it is scarcely possible to
conceive. The remonstrance was the “first return” for his concessions!
when Hume has just before told us, that the “first return” was the grant
of money. In the next place, Charles had made no concessions which had
not been forced upon him, and which he did not, as we shall presently
see, intend to revoke, as soon as it should be in his power.

Soon after, the king, hearing that they were preparing a remonstrance
against the levying of tonnage and poundage, in open infringement of the
petition of right, without consent of parliament, came suddenly to the
house of Lords, and ended the session by a prorogation.[§]

The petition of right was no sooner passed, than it was violated: duties
were levied, and merchants imprisoned for refusing to pay them, as
before. Charles likewise gave a striking proof of the insincerity of his
concessions, by suppressing the copies of the petition of right which
the parliament had ordered to be printed, and circulating others with
his former evasive answer annexed: “an expedient,” says Hume, “by which
Charles endeavoured to persuade the people, that he had nowise receded
from his former claims and pretensions.”[¶] Yet this writer has the
effrontery to say of Charles, in another place, “In every treaty, those
concessions which he thought he could not in conscience maintain, he
never could, by any motive or persuasion, be induced to make.”[∥]

No sooner was the parliament re-assembled, than the Commons proceeded to
inquire into this pitiful evasion: they took notice of the recent
violations of the petition of right; complained of the popish ceremonies
which the prelates had already begun to introduce, and resumed the
consideration of the question of tonnage and poundage. When, at length,
at the motion of Sir John Elliot, and after a discussion of more than
usual violence, a remonstrance was passed against levying that impost
without parliamentary authority, Charles was so enraged that he at once
dissolved the parliament,[**] and committed Elliot, Hollis, and other
Edition: current; Page: [19] leading members,[*] to prison; where Elliot
soon after died, a victim to his exertions to free his country from the
yoke of despotism.

For twelve years after this period, no more parliaments were summoned:
and here Mr. Brodie pauses to pass under review the individuals who at
this time swayed the counsels of Charles.[†] In this we shall follow his
example, confining, however, our attention to the principal figures in
the picture—Strafforde and Laud.

The tragical close of Strafforde’s life has enabled his partisans to
throw a theatrical glare over his character, which has long concealed
its deformity from the public eye. In private life he was haughty,
vindictive, and cruel; in public, he had no principle, other than the
aggrandizement of himself: from his first entry into public life, he put
himself up to auction, and only when the court refused to buy him, threw
himself into the popular party: when bought, he turned round, and at
once became not only the unblushing advocate, but the active instrument,
of that system of tyranny which he had been the loudest to condemn.

With equal tyranny, and equal servility, were joined in Laud the most
furious bigotry and the most puerile superstition. Himself a papist, in
every thing except the supremacy of the pope, he caused the popish
tenets and the popish ceremonies to be adopted by the Church of England:
and so general was the expectation, that through his means Great Britain
would again be brought within the catholic pale, that he actually had
the offer of a cardinal’s hat, which, however, he did not venture to
accept. In lending himself, body and soul, to the service of despotism,
he only did what almost any man would have done in a similar situation.
His other vices were peculiarly his own; cringing and adulation in order
to rise, insolence after he had risen; the basest ingratitude towards
his benefactors, and the most inveterate hatred towards all whom he
believed to be, in any way, obstacles to the increase of his power.*

But how shall we attempt to describe the atrocities perpetrated during
the twelve years’ intermission of parliament, under the government of
Charles and of these worthy instruments? In the space to which we are
confined, it would be the height of absurdity to make the attempt. Mr.
Brodie has dedicated a long chapter to the purpose, and to him,
therefore, the reader must refer.[‡] Suffice it to say, that ship-money,
benevolences, loans, were now the least oppressive modes of extortion.
Obsolete forest laws, statutes concerning tillage, and an old law
against Edition: current; Page: [20] the increase of the metropolis,
were revived;[*] and under pretence of these laws, fines were levied
upon hundreds. Every person who possessed £20 a year in land was
compelled to receive the honour of knighthood, which involved the
payment of exorbitant fees. On the pretext of remedying defective titles
to land, those who would not pay largely for a new title were threatened
with the loss of their estates. Monopolies were carried to an extent
before unknown; and the severest penalties were inflicted on all who
infringed them. Chambers, a merchant of London, for refusing to pay
tonnage and poundage without parliamentary authority, was summoned
before the council, where having remarked that the merchants of England
were as much screwed up as in Turkey, he was fined £2,000 in the
star-chamber;[†] and lay twelve years in prison, because he would not
degrade himself by submission. One Hillyard was fined £5,000 for selling
salt-petre, contrary to proclamation: Rea, £2,000 for exporting fuller’s
earth;[‡] and so in hundreds of instances which it would be tedious to
mention. “Such severities,” says Hume, “were afterwards magnified into
the greatest enormities.”[§] They really were not, then, in his opinion,
enormities!

In respect to religion, Hume labours to the utmost of his power to
excite contempt and scorn for the great mass of the people, because they
thought there was reason to apprehend the re-establishment of popery;
and he says that “the groundless charge” of popery against Laud, “was
belied by his whole life and conduct.”[¶] We would willingly ask Hume,
or any who share his sentiments, what there is in popery which renders
it so great a curse to mankind? Its intolerance? But if in this respect
there was any difference between the Church of England and the Church of
Rome, it was only that the one employed one sort of torture, and the
other another; that the one persecuted by burning, the other by
protracted torments, exceeding in magnitude a hundred burnings. But they
differed, perhaps, in tenets. Scarcely so; when image-worship, prayer to
the dead, adoration at the altar, worship of saints, the real presence,
confession, and absolution, were part of the established religion.* In
ceremonials? But the formalities of the catholic church, Edition:
current; Page: [21] whether with respect to worship, or to days, meats,
and vestments, were scrupulously exacted. Nor was this all: even the
supremacy of the king was denied; and the divine authority of bishops,
and their superiority to the civil power, became fundamental articles of
the high-church creed. Nay, an open defence of popery itself, published
by one Chowney,[*] was dedicated to, and patronized by, Laud. The
assertion, therefore, that there was no danger of popery, if it be true
in sound, is in substance one of the grossest falsehoods ever palmed
upon the credulity of the world.

Of the punishments inflicted upon all who vindicated the doctrines of
the reformed, in opposition to popery and to the Church of England, we
shall present the reader with a few examples.

Leighton, a doctor of divinity, for writing against the hierarchy, and
the new ceremonies,[†] was seized by the officers of the
high-commission, and after the most brutal treatment, was adjudged by
the star-chamber to pay 10,000 pounds; in addition to which, it was
ordained that,

after degradation, he should be whipped at Westminster, and set in the
pillory there during the sitting of the court; have one ear cut off, one
side of his nose slit, and one cheek branded with s. s. for sower of
sedition: that he should then be carried back to prison, and, at a
future convenient time, be brought to Cheapside, on a market-day, and be
there whipt again, and set in the pillory, and have his other ear cut
off, his other cheek branded, and the other side of his nose slit: after
which was only to follow imprisonment for life.*

The whole of this sentence was executed to the letter. What an unfeeling
slave must he be, who can talk in the following strain of these
atrocious cruelties:

Leighton who had written libels against the king, the queen, the
bishops, and the whole administration, was condemned by a very severe,
if not a cruel sentence; but the execution of it was suspended for some
time, in expectation of his submission.† All the severities, indeed, of
this reign were exercised against those who triumphed in their
sufferings, who courted persecution, and braved authority; and, on that
account their punishment may be deemed the more just, but the less
prudent.‡

A king, then, may justly be guilty of any cruelties which he pleases,
provided he practises them only upon those who resist his power; only
upon those on whom alone he can have any motive to practise them. The
robber, who murders you to obtain your purse, would find this doctrine
extremely convenient: had you quietly consented to give up your money
you might possibly have escaped with your life; for which reason he is
perfectly justified in depriving you of both.

Edition: current; Page: [22]
Prynne, declared by Lord Clifford in the House of Lords (10th May, 1809)
to have been one of the most eminent lawyers whom England ever produced,
had written a book to prove the unlawfulness of stage-plays.[*]
Bastwick, a physician, in a work against popery and prelacy, had
asserted the supremacy of the king.[†] For these crimes, Prynne was
condemned to lose his ears, to stand twice in the pillory, to be
degraded from the bar, and at the university, to pay a fine of £5,000,
and to be imprisoned for life. Bastwick, to pay £1,000; to be debarred
his practice of physic, to be excommunicated, and imprisoned till he
made a recantation.

These two individuals published vindications of themselves;[‡] not
without considerable warmth of expression (and no wonder): for this they
were adjudged to lose their ears (Prynne’s having, on the former
occasion, been imperfectly cut off), and to be closely imprisoned for
life in the isles of Jersey, Guernsey and Scilly, without access of
kindred or friends, and without books, pens, ink, or paper.[§] In this
situation they continued until released by the long parliament. Burton,
a divine, for two sermons which he had published, suffered the same
punishment. This “severity” (such is the mild expression of Hume), he is
pleased to acknowledge as having been “perhaps, in itself, somewhat
blameable.”[¶]

Persecution was not confined to the opponents of the established
religion; it was extended to all who resisted arbitrary power, and to
all against whom Laud and Strafforde had any personal pique.

Sir David Foulis, a member of the council of York, was, upon a charge of
speaking irreverently of his office, opposing the commission of
knighthood, and throwing out some remarks against Wentworth, which he
denied, fined by the star-chamber, 5,000l.; assessed in damages to
Wentworth, 3,000l.; and ordained to make an acknowledgment of his
offences, both to his majesty and to Wentworth, not only in the
star-chamber, but in the court of York, and at the assizes, and
condemned to imprisonment during the king’s pleasure, and to be deprived
of his various offices as member of the council of York,
deputy-lieutenant, and justice of peace; his son, Henry, was likewise
fined 500l.*

Williams, bishop of Lincoln, who had raised Laud to his present power,
and whom, as a formidable rival, Laud was resolved to crush, was, on
frivolous Edition: current; Page: [23] pretences, suspended from his
office, fined 10,000l., and imprisoned during the king’s pleasure; and
further, on a charge of having received letters, in which contemptuous
allusions were made to some one, supposed to be Laud, he was fined
8,000l. more, and again imprisoned.*

These are a few of the acts of that administration, under which Hume can
say that the people enjoyed “every blessing of government except
liberty”[*] (quære, what does he mean by liberty). These are some of the
grievances which, in his opinion, were “neither burthensome on the
people’s properties, nor anyway shocking to the natural humanity of
mankind.”[†] And when Hampden, Pym, and others, resolved to seek refuge
in another hemisphere from the tyranny which oppressed them at home,
Hume can assert, that they fled in order to “enjoy lectures and
discourses of any length or form which pleased them!”[‡]

But we are now drawing near to a period when these horrors were to be at
an end; and the first blow was struck from a quarter from which it was
least to be expected—from the aristocracy.

While in England the accumulation of property, and the rise of the
commercial towns, had raised up a wealthy mercantile class, which
trimmed the balance between the king and the nobility; the neighbouring
country of Scotland had continued poor, and like the other poor
countries of Europe, to a great degree feudal and aristocratic. Hence an
important difference in the character of the struggle which ensued. In
England, the people were strong enough to overcome the united force of
the king and of the nobility. In Scotland, the quarrel was substantially
nothing more than that struggle for power between the aristocracy and
the king, which had existed in one shape or another from the earliest
period of its history. The people followed, as usual, the banner of
their superiors, with only the additional stimulus of religious zeal.

The king had never been so powerful in Scotland as in England, because
the nobility had been more so. By the addition which he obtained to his
power from his accession to another throne, he was enabled to carry
various measures into effect, which, though hurtful to the aristocracy,
were beneficial to the people. The greater part of the church-lands had,
at the Reformation, been granted out to the nobility. Edition: current;
Page: [24] A general revocation[*] was now published; it was never
executed, but suspended, in terrorem, over their heads. The tithes,
which had been transferred to them at the same period, and which they
had exacted from the smaller proprietors, or heritors, with much greater
rigour than ever the church had done, they were now ordered to dispose
of to the heritors at a fixed rate.[†]

It was by the extraordinary institution of the Lords of Articles that
the passing of these acts had been obtained. The lords of articles were
a committee of thirty-two (eight barons, eight prelates, and sixteen
commoners), appointed originally to prepare bills for the parliament,
but who had by custom obtained the initiative of the laws. In this
committee the spiritual lords chose the temporal, and the temporal the
spiritual; but the commons had hitherto chosen deputies for
themselves.[‡] By giving the choice of the sixteen commoners to the
sixteen lords, James had given absolute power over the committee, and
consequently over the parliament, to the prelates, that is, to himself,
the parliament retaining only a veto, which they were usually afraid to
exercise.[§]

Even this power Charles might have retained, could he have refrained
from insulting the religious feelings of the people. But, whether from
bigotry or love of power, or, as is most probable, from both combined,
he cherished an inveterate hatred against the presbyterian religion.

For the overthrow of this sect, James had already done much; he had
re-established episcopacy, as the religion of the state; he had obtained
in a packed general assembly the ratification of the five articles of
Perth, by which, ceremonies borrowed from the English church, and
savouring of popery, were introduced; he had further, without any colour
of law, established the high-commission court, which assumed the power
of summoning persons before it, interrogating them on their religious
opinions, and if their answers were not deemed satisfactory, inflicting
the most arbitrary punishments.[¶] All this the people had borne; but
this was not enough for Charles: not content with having established the
episcopal church government, he must needs impose upon them the
episcopal tenets also.

He visited Scotland in person, and summoned a parliament, which
gratified him by passing, among other obnoxious acts, one which gave him
the power of regulating the habits of the clergy.[∥] It was generally
believed that this and other Edition: current; Page: [25] acts were
obtained by making a false return of the votes. A petition which had
been prepared against them, but which had never been presented nor
published, was, nevertheless, made use of to crush Balmerino, one of the
refractory lords. The only crime which could be laid to his charge, was
that of possessing a copy of the petition, and showing it confidentially
to a friend. For this he was tried by a packed jury, condemned to death,
and only not executed from apprehension of popular resentment.[*]

The accurate, the candid Hume, who so often asserts that a groundless
dread of popery was the sole cause of the Scottish troubles—what says he
of this? Not a word. Of an event so notorious, he gives no intimation
whatever; because it is alone sufficient to stamp with falsehood the
whole of his assertions concerning the mildness of Charles, and the
inoffensiveness of his measures.

Having thus struck terror, as he thought, into the Scottish aristocracy,
Charles next proceeded to introduce a new liturgy and canons, resembling
closely, in most respects, the religion of the Church of England, but in
some points more nearly approaching to popery than their model.[†] A
despot never knows when his safety requires him to stop short. At the
introduction of the new service-book, the tumult was so great that it
could not be read, and the bishop[‡] who attempted to read it was
compelled to fly for his life. Charles still persisted in his design,
and by his imprudent measures, the ferment was still further increased.
The nobles improved the opportunity: petitions without number were
poured in against the service-book; a great proportion of the gentry,
and twenty peers, openly protested against it; the people thronged to
Edinburgh, and the council, alarmed at their numbers, consented to the
appointment of representatives to manage the concerns of the whole body.
The popular party was thus regularly organized, and the four tables, so
the deputies were called, gave unity to all their proceedings.

The king, as is usual with weak persons when their will is unexpectedly
resisted, first bullied, and then became alarmed. A furious proclamation
was put forth, bestowing praise on the liturgy, and abuse on the
petitioners, and commanding them, under the penalties of high treason,
to disperse.[§] This proclamation was protested against as soon as
issued, and led to the famous Covenant, which was now drawn up and
signed by a great majority of the Scottish population.[¶] The Edition:
current; Page: [26] king at length took the alarm, and determined to
temporize. He sent the Marquis of Hamilton into Scotland, with authority
to treat; and “he thought,” says Hume, “that on his part he had made
very satisfactory concessions, when he offered to suspend the canons and
the liturgy, till, in a fair and legal way, they could be received, and
so to model the high-commission that it should no longer give offence to
his subjects.”[*] The Covenanters, however, were not to be so easily
duped; and it was as impossible to disunite, as to deceive or overcome
them. The commissioner wrote to the king, saying, that he must either
prepare for war, or recal the canons, the liturgy, and the five articles
of Perth, summon a parliament, and convoke a general assembly of the
church.[†] Charles soon took his resolution; but directed Hamilton to
temporize till his preparations for war should be completed. In Burnet’s
Memoirs of the Hamiltons, a work to which Hume continually refers,
several of Charles’s letters are preserved, in which he permits the
commissioner to flatter the covenanters with what hopes he pleases,
provided he does not commit the king himself; and tells him, that his
chief end is, to win time till the royal fleet shall have set sail.*
Yet, Hume can say, that Charles “was candid, sincere, upright, as much
as any man whom we meet with in history;” that “it would be difficult to
find another character so unexceptionable in this particular;” and that,
“even his enemies, though they loaded him with many calumnies, did not
insist on this accusation.”[‡]

Hamilton returned to London and, finding the king’s preparations less
advanced than he had expected, convinced him that, to gain time, great
concessions must be made. While the king, therefore, was maturing his
preparations, Hamilton was sent back into Scotland with power to recal
the canons and liturgy, to abolish the high-commission, to suspend the
five articles of Perth, and to summon a parliament and a general
assembly. He carried down with him a counter-covenant,[§] containing a
bond to maintain the established religion as at present professed, a
phrase applicable alike to both the contending sects. So palpable an
evasion had no effect, but still further to disgust the opposite party.
The general assembly met: and before any thing had been done, the
commissioner, by the king’s direction (see his own letters), found a
pretext for dissolving it.[¶] (Yet the king was ever “candid, upright,
sincere.”) Matters were now at a crisis. The alternative was, to
disobey, or to give up all that had been gained. Having proved Edition:
current; Page: [27] by precedents their right of sitting,
notwithstanding any injunction to the contrary, the assembly proceeded
to abolish episcopacy, and abrogate the articles of Perth.[*]

It was impossible any longer to avoid a war. The king appears to have
anticipated an easy conquest: so ill was he prepared for the resistance
which he experienced, that without a single battle, or almost a single
skirmish, he was compelled to patch up a peace, and convoke an assembly
and a parliament.

Without mentioning the former assembly, that which was now convened
proceeded to confirm its acts; and the new commissioner, Traquair, was
authorized by the king to ratify these regulations, but not without
captious distinctions. Even Hume is here compelled to admit, that the
king secretly “retained an intention of seizing favourable
opportunities, in order to recover the ground which he had lost:”[†] and
yet, “in every treaty, those concessions which he thought he could not
in conscience maintain, he never could, by any motive or persuasion, be
induced to make.”[‡]

A piece of casuistry, therefore, was provided. The bishops protested
against the acts of the assembly; that the non-concurrence of what they
deemed an essential part, might afford a pretext for disregarding the
proceedings of the whole. Traquair was also directed to put in, at the
close of the session, a reservation, that anything done in the king’s
absence might be challenged afterwards, if prejudicial to his interest.

Episcopacy having been abolished, the institution of Lords of Articles,
as formerly constituted, could no longer exist; and the parliament
proceeded to place it on a different footing. It was now enacted, that
each estate should choose its own deputies to sit on the articles, and
that they should no longer possess a veto on debate, but merely the
powers of a committee.[§] A bill was also prepared for triennial
parliaments,[¶] and several other important measures were in progress,
when Traquair, by the king’s direction, prorogued the parliament, a
power hitherto exercised solely by the parliament itself. Cautious not
to give any hold against them, they obeyed the order, and in the mean
time, sent commissioners to London to protest against the prorogation.

Charles, however, now determined to take off the mask. Scarcely had the
commissioners reached London, when they were thrown into prison. “The
earl of Traquaire,” says Hume, “had intercepted a letter written to the
king of France by the Scottish malcontents.”[∥] The insinuation
contained in this phrase is false. The Edition: current; Page: [28]
letter had never been intercepted, for it had never been sent. It had
only been written: and besides, there was nothing in it which did not
fairly bear an innocent interpretation. This, however, was the pretence
on which the commissioners, Loudon and Dunfermline, were imprisoned.

When, to the ordinary charges of government, was to be added the expense
of a war, the illegal resources, which were adequate to all common
occasions, could no longer suffice. Charles called a parliament at
Westminster, but the Commons, as before, refused to give supply the
precedence over grievances.[*] He saw, or thought he saw, that if they
continued to sit, they would pass a vote declaring ship-money to be
illegal. This he prevented by a hasty dissolution,[†] before they had
granted a supply, and committed three of their leading members to the
Tower.[‡] To obtain money, new extortions were practised; the East India
company (on pretence of a purchase on credit) were robbed of all their
pepper, which was sold at a great discount for ready money. A grant from
the convocation, and three subsidies which had been obtained from the
Irish parliament, did something;[§] voluntary contributions from the
royalist party supplied the rest.

The second Scottish campaign was still more unsuccessful than the first.
No sooner had the king’s army advanced to Newcastle, than the Scots
passed the Tweed, routed Lord Conway, and forced the king to retreat.
Newcastle then fell into their hands. With an army disaffected, and a
people more disposed to join with the Scots than to attack them, Charles
did not venture to fight. A negotiation was opened, and during its
continuance he had to maintain the Scottish army as well as his own. The
money which, for this purpose, he was compelled to borrow from the city,
could only be obtained on condition of summoning a parliament.

It was under new and favourable auspices that the long parliament was
convened. Secured against dissolution by the necessities of the king,
and by the presence of the Scottish army in England, they had only to
improve the opportunity, and tyranny might yet be overthrown.

The same historian, who has laboured to disguise the selfishness of
Charles under the mask of conscience and of principle, has endeavoured,
by malicious insinuations, to discredit the motives of the popular
leaders.[¶] With their motives, however, we have nothing to do; nor, if
we had, is it possible that their motives should ever be, with any
certainty, ascertained. During their lives these statesmen enjoyed a
high reputation for integrity; nor do they appear, by any thing which
they did, to have deserved to forfeit that character. If they had
possessed undue power, Edition: current; Page: [29] they would probably,
like other men, have abused it; not having such power, they are to be
judged by what they did, and not by what, under other circumstances,
they might have done.

Among the first and best of their acts was the impeachment of
Strafforde.[*] His general support of despotism, and specific acts of
misgovernment, as lord lieutenant of Ireland, and president of the
council of York, were the principal charges. Finch and Laud were
likewise impeached.[†] The former in his successive capacities of
Speaker of the House of Commons, chief-justice and lord-keeper, had been
the instrument of some of the worst acts of the government of Charles.
He fled, and it is a striking proof of the moderation of the popular
leaders, if, as was suspected, they connived at his escape. Some judges,
ecclesiastics and others, the subordinate instruments, shared the fate
of their superiors.[‡] Prynne, Bastwick, Burton, and other victims of
judicial tyranny, were liberated from confinement. Ship-money, and other
extortions, were declared to be illegal.[§] The levying of tonnage and
poundage, without consent of parliament, was forbidden.[¶] Petitions
against episcopacy, and complaints against the lives of the clergy, were
received from all parts of the kingdom.[∥] To inquire into this last
grievance, a committee was appointed, which Hume stigmatizes with the
strongest epithets of reproach.[**] That in some cases undue severity
may have been used, or venial trespasses exaggerated, is probable
enough; we will add, that it is not to be wondered at: for when was it
known that, in a dispute of such magnitude, either party confined itself
scrupulously within the bounds of moderation? The only question which
deserves the slightest consideration is, which party was substantially
in the right. To lay undue stress upon a trifling irregularity, is among
the strongest of all presumptions against the goodness of a cause.*

To prevent that disuse of parliaments, which had been the fruitful cause
of so Edition: current; Page: [30] many evils, the triennial act was
passed,[*] that one meeting of parliament, at least, in three years
might be secured. It was not without great reluctance that Charles
assented to this important bill.

At this period, however, if Hume is to be believed, he “resolved to
alter his whole conduct, and to regain the confidence of his people by
pliableness, by concessions, and by a total conformity to their
inclinations and prejudices.”[†] This is one of those bold assertions by
which Hume has generally succeeded in deceiving his readers, merely
because they cannot believe, that a historian of eminence would hazard
an assertion which he must necessarily have known to be false. But the
insincerity of Charles is a subject on which, as yet, we cannot enter.
The trial of Strafforde first demands our attention, as well from its
importance, as from the utter want of candour which Hume’s account of it
displays.

A committee had been appointed to prepare the articles of charge, “with
authority,” says Hume, “to examine all witnesses, to call for every
paper, and to use any means of scrutiny, with regard to any part of the
earl’s behaviour and conduct.”[‡] This he calls an inquisition. In the
first place, his account of it is false. They were not authorized to
employ the torture: they could not therefore be authorized to use “any
means of scrutiny.” What is probably true is, that their powers were not
defined; nor, indeed, in English law, is any thing defined: but it does
not appear that they went, in any respect, beyond the bounds of justice.
In the next place, nothing is easier than to call any kind of
investigatorial procedure an inquisition. “No man can be expected to
oppose arguments to epithets.”* The question is simply this: Shall, or
shall not, the accusers be compelled to bring charges, without knowing
what charges there is evidence to support? Is it meant, that to examine
witnesses, and to call for papers, is an inquisition? If so, it is an
inquisition which ought always to exist.

What, above all, excites the indignation of Hume, is, that the committee
was permitted to examine privy counsellors with regard to opinions
delivered at the board; which banished, he says, all confidence from the
deliberations in council.[§] One thing is clear—either the king who
acts, or the ministers who advise, must be responsible: but whether the
one or the other be punished, Hume’s indignation is the same.

He then deliberately asserts, that the impeachment of Sir George
Ratcliffe had no other purpose than to deprive Strafforde of the
assistance of his best friend. And where is the proof? the charge, it
seems, was not prosecuted against him.[¶] As if Edition: current; Page:
[31] Hume did not know, that not Ratcliffe only, but numbers of the
tools of power were now impeached, and never afterwards molested.
Ratcliffe was the principal accomplice in all the atrocities of
Strafforde’s government in Ireland; all the evidence against Strafforde,
was evidence against him; and he might with perfect justice have been
put to the bar with Strafforde, tried, condemned, and executed along
with him. The Commons were satisfied with one sacrifice to public
justice; they spared the rest: and their moderation and forbearance are
to be construed into a proof of intentional injustice!

In commenting upon the articles of charge, Hume has, if possible, been
still more disingenuous. The odium which Strafforde had drawn upon
himself in Ireland, Hume coolly ascribes to his virtues; and the general
character of his administration Hume asserts to have been “innocent, and
even laudable.”[*] We cannot convey a better idea of the character of
Hume, than by advising the reader to look into Mr. Brodie,[†] nay, into
the letters and despatches of Strafforde himself, and see what was
Hume’s idea of innocent and laudable conduct in public men. Would space
permit, we might enlarge upon the despotism, the rapacity, the cruelty,
which characterized this “laudable” administration, and leave the reader
to judge of the feelings of the man who can assert, that his conduct was
“equally promotive of his master’s interests, and that of the subjects
committed to his care.”[‡] But we willingly stake our case upon one
single act: and that act we will quote in the words of Hume himself.

It had been reported at the table of Lord Chancellor Loftus, that
Annesley, one of the deputy’s attendants, in moving a stool, had sorely
hurt his master’s foot, who was at that time afflicted with the gout.
Perhaps, said Mountnorris, who was present at table, it was done in
revenge of that public affront which my lord deputy formerly put upon
him: But he has a brother, who would not have taken such a revenge. This
casual, and seemingly innocent, at least ambiguous, expression, was
reported to Strafforde, who, on pretence that such a suggestion might
prompt Annesley to avenge himself in another manner, ordered
Mountnorris, who was an officer, to be tried by a court-martial for
mutiny and sedition against his general. The court, which consisted of
the chief officers of the army, found the crime to be capital, and
condemned that nobleman to lose his head.[§]

A pretty stretch of authority, and a tolerable proof what must have been
the spirit of Strafforde’s administration. But mark what follows:

In vain did Strafforde plead in his own defence, against this article of
impeachment, that the sentence of Mountnorris was the deed, and that,
too, unanimous, of the court, not the act of the deputy; that he spake
not to a member of the court, nor voted in the cause, but sat uncovered
as a party, and then immediately withdrew, to leave them to their
freedom; that sensible of the iniquity of the sentence, he procured his
majesty’s free pardon to Edition: current; Page: [32] Mountnorris; and
that he did not even keep that nobleman a moment in suspense with regard
to his fate, but instantly told him, that he himself would rather lose
his right hand than execute such a sentence, nor was his lordship’s life
in any danger.[*]

If ever the truth was so told, as to have the effect of a lie, it is
here. What is true, is, that Strafforde did make these assertions, as is
represented: what is not true is, that Hume believed them. When
Strafforde, and his panegyrist, asserted that the sentence was the act
of the court, and that he procured the king’s pardon, because he was
sensible of the iniquity of the sentence, they forgot to state, that it
was at the persuasion of Strafforde himself, and not without great
difficulty, that the court was persuaded to pass sentence, and that they
did not at length comply, without previously stipulating for
Mountnorris’s life; in consequence of which stipulation, he was only
dismissed the army, imprisoned for three years, and deprived of his
estate. It may be pardonable in a man, whose life is at stake, to
endeavour to save himself by a falsehood;* but what shall we say of a
historian, who, with the facts before him, repeats and countenances a
story which he must have known to be false?

Being unable to extenuate the conduct of the council of York, which, if
possible, exceeded even that of the star-chamber in atrocity, Hume does
his best to exculpate Strafforde, by asserting that he never in person
presided in the court.[†] But what is to become of official
responsibility, if a public functionary is not responsible for the
conduct of a deputy, removeable at his pleasure, and sure, therefore, to
act in the way which he knows to be agreeable to his superior?

With regard to the evidence of the illegal advice which Strafforde was
accused of having given as a privy counsellor, Hume has a number of
cavils, which have been fully exposed by Mr. Brodie,[‡] but which, in
fact, were scarcely deserving of notice. To prove the words, was rather
necessary on technical, than on rational, grounds. If the tyranny of the
government was notorious, and if, of that government, Strafforde was a
member, he was surely responsible for its tyranny, in justice, and even
in law, unless he could prove that he had actually done whatever he
could to prevent it.

The most plausible part of Strafforde’s defence, was that in which he
endeavoured to make it appear, that, whatever might be his guilt, he was
not a Edition: current; Page: [33] traitor, the legal definition of
treason not including his offence.[*] Nothing, indeed, can be more
conclusive than his arguments against the practice of inflicting
punishment for undefined offences; and it would be well if our lawyers,
and lawyer-ridden legislators, would bestow somewhat more of attention
upon them than has hitherto been usual. Unless, however, there be
punishment for undefined offences, under English law there can be no
punishment at all. Judge Hale long ago confessed, that he knew not what
theft was;[†] yet we see men, every day, hanged for theft. It may be
replied, moreover, that Strafforde, if he had not violated any one law,
more than any other, had violated all the laws, by setting the royal
authority above them: that if he was not tried under any particular law,
so neither was he tried before a court of law, but before a tribunal
expressly created to take cognizance of those offences, to the treatment
of which the ordinary law was considered inadequate.

The legal argument, however, after considerable discussion, had so much
weight with the Commons, that they dropped the impeachment and brought
in a bill of attainder; a course which, though strictly legal, and a
striking proof of their regard for the forms, as well as for the
substance, of justice, is represented by Hume as a proof of their
consciousness that grounds had not been shewn for a conviction.[‡] The
impeachment, he says, was against law; and yet, to drop the impeachment,
and proceed according to law, was, it seems, a proof of injustice.*

When the bill of attainder had passed both houses,[§] and awaited the
royal Edition: current; Page: [34] assent, information was received of a
conspiracy among the officers, instigated by Charles, to bring the army
to London, rescue Strafforde, and dissolve the parliament. It is
impossible to exceed the disingenuousness with which this incident is
spoken of by Hume.[*] His object is, to make it appear that there was no
plot, and to insinuate, that the whole story was a forgery of the
popular leaders. He cannot deny that there was a secret association
among the officers, in close correspondence with some of the king’s
servants; that a petition was sent to Charles, countersigned by him, and
sent back, to be signed by the army; and that in this petition they
offered to come up to London.[†] He asserts, however, first, that the
project had been laid aside, two months before it was disclosed to the
parliament. In this he follows Clarendon:[‡] that the assertion is
false, has been proved by Mr. Brodie from Clarendon himself, as well as
by giving at length the evidence taken by the Commons on the
occasion.[§] In the next place, he also copies from Clarendon in his
account of the petition itself; although, as Mr. Brodie well observes,
the gross anachronisms in Clarendon’s petition prove it conclusively to
be a forgery. But, thirdly, he suppresses part, even of what Clarendon
admits; viz. the recommendation to punish the ring-leaders in certain
alleged tumults, for the suppression of which the army offered its
services. But the plan, he says,[¶] was an absurd one, while the Scots
were in England; yet the king is admitted to have countersigned the
petition; folly, indeed, characterized his counsels throughout: and in
calculating upon the probable conduct of a despot, we must never proceed
upon the supposition that he possesses common sense.*

The king now finding it no longer safe to withhold his assent from the
bill of attainder, the bill passed, and Strafforde was executed. The
perfection of history, like the perfection of a novel, has usually been
considered to be a strong dramatic effect. So fine an opportunity for
pathos was not to be lost; of the last meeting of Strafforde with Laud,
Hume has attempted to make a most affecting scene, and to call forth all
the sympathies of mankind in favour of these great criminals, after
turning the sufferings of their hundreds of victims into a jest.[∥] But
this practice is Edition: current; Page: [35] universal with Hume; the
many, and their sufferings, he laughs to scorn: are the one and the few
affected? then is the time to whine.

Another bill, which received the royal assent conjointly with the bill
of attainder, was, in its consequences, most fatal, and has never yet
received due attention. We mean, the bill by which the parliament was
made indissoluble, except by its own consent,[*] and was thus erected
into a perpetual aristocracy. The professed object of this act was, to
prevent the king from dissolving the parliament. But this might have
been done, without rendering it indissoluble. The people, on those few
occasions on which they have risen against misgovernment, have seldom,
unhappily, been wise enough, while they overthrew one tyranny, to
provide securities against the establishment of another.

The Commons might reasonably be expected still to continue faithful to
their duty so long as they were weak; but no sooner was Charles
overcome, and the powers of government thrown wholly into their hands,
than the public interest was sure to be postponed to theirs, and their
subsequent proceedings to degenerate into a mere struggle for power.

This bill gives Hume another opportunity for pathos; and he endows his
hero, for the occasion, with an appropriate quantum of sentimentality.

Charles, in the agony of grief, shame, and remorse, for Strafforde’s
doom, perceived not that this other bill was of still more fatal
consequence to his authority, and rendered the power of his enemies
perpetual, as it was already uncontrollable. In comparison with the bill
of attainder, by which he deemed himself an accomplice in his friend’s
murder, this concession made no figure in his eyes.[†]

Very pathetic truly; but history is not to be written like a tragedy.
The truth is, that, without an abuse of terms, such a thing as
friendship, between a king and his subject, cannot be said to exist;
still less between a despot and his tool. As well might that name be
applied to the connexion between a debauchee and the pimp who ministers
to his pleasures. Charles knew, that by employing and protecting
Strafforde, he was promoting his own interest; Strafforde knew, that, in
serving Charles, he was promoting his. The real truth is, that Charles
gave his assent to the bill, not out of grief for Strafforde, but as a
means of getting money; a Lancashire knight having offered to procure
him a loan of 650,000l. upon that condition. For the hero, however, of a
romance, who could do so very unromantic a thing as to abandon his
friend, it was absolutely necessary to find some palliation, and it was
a very obvious thought to endow him with a remorse, which there is no
sufficient reason to believe that he actually felt.

During the course of the above proceedings, bills had been prepared for
the abolition of the council of York, the star-chamber, the
high-commission, and other arbitrary and oppressive jurisdictions.[‡]
After some hesitation, Charles passed the Edition: current; Page: [36]
bills; and, though with great difficulty, was prevailed upon to disband
the Irish army, which having been raised solely for the subjugation of
Scotland, was now no longer required. The Scots immediately returned to
their homes, and the English army was dismissed.

The king now determined to visit Scotland, where he had already begun to
intrigue with a powerful party. “He arrived,” says Hume, “in Scotland
with an intention of abdicating almost entirely the small share of power
which there remained to him, and of giving full satisfaction, if
possible, to his restless subjects in that kingdom.”[*] Hume’s language
always imports, that he can dive into the hearts of all his characters.
It is difficult to understand how that which he here asserts could have
been known to him, even had it been true. In reality, however, he knew
that it was not true; he must have learned as much even from Clarendon,
who, for these transactions, is his chief authority.[†] That the king
had no intention of resigning any power which he could safely keep, is
sufficiently certain from the principles of human nature; but the
perfidy which he meditated was of a still more atrocious kind; and the
entire suppression of the evidence of it by Hume, had he been guilty of
no other violation of truth, would alone suffice to cover him with
eternal infamy.

Argyle and Hamilton, being seized with an apprehension, real or
pretended, that the Earl of Crawford and others meant to assassinate
them, left the parliament suddenly, and retired into the country; but,
upon invitation and assurances, returned in a few days. This event,
which had neither cause nor effect, that was visible, nor purpose, nor
consequence, was commonly denominated the incident.[‡]

Would it be believed, that the event which is thus slurred over was a
plot to seize, if not to assassinate the most distinguished of the
popular leaders?

There were three parties at this time in Scotland; the royalists, the
covenanters, and the trimmers. Of the covenanters, the acknowledged head
was Argyle. The royalists had recently acquired a leader in Montrose, a
man of no principle, who had begun his career as a covenanter, but
finding himself supplanted in the field by Leslie, and in counsels by
Argyle, went over to the court, and entered into a treaty to betray his
late associates. Among those who by trimming and compromise endeavoured
to keep well with both parties, Hamilton and his brother Laneric were
the chief. As is usual with trimmers, they had no credit with either
party; and were abhorred as rivals by Montrose, scarcely less than
Argyle himself. A conspiracy was formed to seize the Hamiltons and
Argyle, who were to be detained on board a frigate in Leith roads, and
assassinated on the slightest resistance. Thus much is proved beyond the
possibility of dispute, and confirmed, in the most material
circumstances, by the evidence of the actors themselves. Such a project
would Edition: current; Page: [37] never have been formed, without some
ulterior design. The immediate renewal of the war is the very least
which can have been contemplated. At the time, it was believed that the
royalists were to rise in arms and possess themselves of Edinburgh,
before the other party could recover from its surprise. We learn from
Clarendon,[*] that Montrose had before offered to assassinate the three
lords; but that the king had recommended as a preferable measure, that
proofs should be prepared for a parliamentary impeachment. As it is
evident by what sort of a parliament the impeachment would have been
tried, if the conspiracy had succeeded, the atrocity would have been
much the same whether perpetrated with or without the forms of law.

In a subsequent note,[†] Hume endeavours to prove, that Clarendon must
have been mistaken in ascribing such an offer to Montrose; since, during
the whole of Charles’s continuance in Scotland, Montrose was in prison;
having been detected, during the expedition into England, in a secret
correspondence with the court. But even men who are in prison may,
notwithstanding, have ways and means of communicating with those who are
without; no very recondite truth, one would suppose, but a truth of
which Hume seems to have been ignorant. It is proved that three letters
were conveyed to the king from Montrose, and that Cochrane, who carried
the letters, and who was one of the chief actors in the conspiracy, had
a secret interview with the king. We do not learn this from Hume, but we
learn it from Murray,* groom of the chamber, through whose intervention
Cochrane was introduced to a private audience.

The failure of this conspiracy did not deter Charles from engaging in
new projects of a similar nature. And it was at this period that he
resolved upon the violent proceedings, which almost immediately followed
his return to Whitehall.

When he returned, he found the parliament already re-assembled, and the
celebrated remonstrance already passed.[‡] In this document, the Commons
recapitulated the principal of the grievances which had been complained
of since Charles ascended the throne, ascribing them to the influence of
evil counsels, which the king showed no inclination to discard. Nothing
can be more undeserved than the reproaches thrown out by Hume upon this
part of their conduct; nor any thing more unfair, than his whole
representation of the posture of affairs at this crisis. “All these
grievances had been already redressed, and even laws enacted for future
security against their return.”[§] In the first place, it is not true,
that all the grievances had been redressed. But secondly, in strictness
of speech, none of them Edition: current; Page: [38] had been redressed
at all. What, in fact, had been done? They had been declared illegal:
was this an adequate “security against their return?” As much as this
had been done by the petition of right; and with what advantage, the
years of tyranny that followed abundantly testify. But further, Hume has
entirely misrepresented the very nature and object of this celebrated
state paper, in as far, at least, as it is possible to gather from his
statements any conception of its nature and object at all. What the
Commons complained of was, not the grievances, which had been removed,
but the counsels which had occasioned them, and the want of securities
against their revival.[*] Their object was, to obtain a real and
effectual security, by making the appointment of public officers
dependent upon the approbation of parliament. This, among many other
beneficial regulations, had already been enacted in Scotland;[†] and a
bill to the same effect had been introduced into the English House of
Commons.[‡] The object of the remonstrance was, to prepare the way for
this bill; and had the majority which passed the remonstrance been a
large one, the bill would have been pressed with almost a certainty of
success; the majority, however, being small, it was permitted for the
present to drop.

The first act of Charles, on his return to the capital, was to dismiss a
guard, which the parliament, in their alarm at the incident, had
appointed under the Earl of Essex for their own protection. Hume plainly
insinuates that their alarm was feigned,[§] which is exactly of a piece
with all the rest of the story, as he tells it. The guard was no more
than what is allowed to every petty court of justice; and when an
attempt was made to circumvent the principal leaders of the popular
party in Scotland, the leaders of that party in England had surely some
reason for alarm. In lieu of the guard which he dismissed, the king
offered them another; but they chose rather to dispense with a guard
altogether, than to accept one under a commander of his appointment.[¶]

Various circumstances now contributed to hasten a breach. By the power
of impressing any of his subjects at pleasure, the king could inflict a
severe punishment upon any one who might be obnoxious to him for any
reason. The bill which was before the House, for pressing soldiers to
serve against the Irish rebels, seemed to offer a favourable opportunity
for redressing this grievance; and a clause, directed against the power
of arbitrary imprisonment, was inserted in the bill, and sent up to the
Lords along with it.[∥] That Charles should willingly acquiesce in this
invasion of his power, was certainly not to be expected; and in
violation of parliamentary privilege, he came to the upper House, while
the bill Edition: current; Page: [39] was there depending, and declared
that he would not pass the bill if it contained any such clause.[*] The
growing strength of the popular party had already begun to alarm the
aristocracy; and the Lords endeavoured to delay the bill, not daring
openly to reject it.

Although the designs of Charles were, as yet, by no means matured, he
had the imprudence to act as if they had already been successful. Sir
Henry Vane was dismissed from his office, for no apparent cause except
the evidence he had given against Strafforde. A frivolous accusation was
brought by Charles himself against Lord Newport, another material
witness on the same great occasion. And he unaccountably chose this time
to publish a proclamation, for conformity to the established church and
worship;[†] thus clearly manifesting a determination to refuse all the
demands of the Commons with respect to religion. At the same time, he
gave fresh cause for alarm, by dismissing Sir William Balfour,
Lieutenant of the Tower, and appointing in his stead one Colonel
Lunsford, who was actually under outlawry for an attempt at
assassination. Meanwhile, the king had collected round him a number of
discharged officers and soldiers who, together with some royalist
gentlemen, and students of the inns of court, formed, under the command
of Lunsford and others, a sort of irregular guard, ready to act as
circumstances might require.

Against the appointment of Lunsford as Lieutenant of the Tower,
petitions were presented, and resolutions passed:[‡] when these were
found ineffectual, Lord Newport, Constable of the Tower, was ordered by
the parliament to reside within it, as a check upon Lunsford; but was
immediately dismissed from his office. And when at length the king felt
himself under the necessity of dismissing Lunsford, he appointed Sir
John Byron, who was almost equally obnoxious.

The alarm of the Commons was still further heightened, when twelve of
the bishops, alleging that their access to the House of Peers was
obstructed by the mob, protested against any thing which might be done
in their absence. This, it will be remembered, was the very artifice
which had already been employed to invalidate the proceedings of the
general assembly fo the Scottish church. The bishops were impeached and
thrown into confinement.[§] Their conduct, though in itself merely
Edition: current; Page: [40] contemptible, and utterly unworthy of
notice, was calculated, from the accompanying circumstances, to give
serious reason for alarm. The protestation, before it was presented to
parliament, had been communicated to the king, and approved by him. This
even Hume calls an “egregious imprudence.”[*] But was it no more? A
declaration of the king (for having received his approbation it was
his), that whatever the parliament might hereafter do, was by him
considered to be invalid, and, therefore, not binding upon him, however
he might find it convenient to give it his nominal assent—was this no
more than an imprudence? To the impartial reader, it may perhaps appear
to be treachery, and treachery of the basest, because of the most
pernicious, kind.

“A few days after,” says Hume, “the king was betrayed into another
indiscretion, still more fatal; an indiscretion, to which all the
ensuing disorders and civil wars ought immediately and directly to be
ascribed. This was the impeachment of Lord Kimbolton and the five
members.”[†]

Even this admission from Hume is important. The measure, however, to
which, as he truly says, the war which ensued is directly to be
ascribed; the measure by which the king declared open war against his
parliament, and demonstrated that his ever cordially acquiescing in the
just and necessary diminution of his power was hopeless; this measure,
which, in a most artful and plausible manner, Hume labours to represent
as the effect of passion and precipitation,[‡] had actually been
resolved upon before the king left Scotland.

In justice to Hume, it is necessary to state, that the correspondence
between Charles and Secretary Nicholas, by which this important fact is
completely and indisputably established, had not, at the time when he
wrote, been given to the world.[§] Enough, however, was even then known
to render it almost certain, that this violent measure had been long
premeditated, and was by no means adopted, as he represents, in a moment
of haste. The whole conduct of the king, from his arrival at Whitehall;
the dismissal of the guard under Essex; the appointment of Lunsford and
Byron to the command of the Tower; the large number of reformed officers
whom he had assembled round him, and the threatening language which they
held; all these are important articles of circumstantial evidence, and
the exact similarity of the project to the Scottish incident, renders it
probable that both were part of the same preconcerted plan of
operations.

Edition: current; Page: [41]
The charges against the six members, Kimbolton, Hampden, Hollis, Pym,
Hazlerig, and Strode, were, that they had attempted to subvert the
fundamental laws, to alienate the people from the king, and deprive him
of his authority, that they had endeavoured to draw the king’s army into
disobedience, had encouraged a foreign power to invade the kingdom, had
countenanced tumults, and lastly, had conspired to levy, and actually
had levied, war against the king.

With the exception of the latter charge, which we do not understand,
there was none of these accusations which was not equally applicable to
a great majority of the parliament: if the leaders were guilty of high
treason, so also were all those who had followed in their steps.
Resistance was now an act of self-defence. In a period of peace and
order, when a fair trial can be rationally hoped for, if the accused
does not submit to it, he may fairly be presumed to be guilty; but such
rules are not applicable to a crisis like the present; deprived of their
leaders, the parliament would have been an easy prey to their infuriated
enemy: war might now be regarded as openly declared, the king was
plainly the aggressor, and on his head were all the consequences which
might ensue.

A party was sent, by the sole authority of the king, to seal up the
trunks and doors of the impeached members. This conduct the Commons
declared to be a breach of privilege;[*] meanwhile, a serjeant at arms
came to the lower house, and demanded the five members. The Commons
hereupon appointed a committee to acquaint the king, that his message
was so important as to require a serious consideration, but that they
would return an answer as speedily as possible, and in the meantime
would take care that the members should be ready to answer to the
accusation. Without replying to this message, Charles came in person,
the next day, to the lower house, “accompanied,” says Hume, “by his
ordinary retinue to the number of above two hundred, armed as usual,
some with halberds, some with walking staves.”[†] Thus much could not be
concealed; but the fact was, that, in addition to his ordinary retinue,
he was accompanied by the lately-enlisted guards, and that the whole
number of his attendants was not less than five hundred; in addition to
which, the gentlemen from the inns of court, who had recently been
gained over, were ordered to be ready at an hour’s notice. The king’s
followers used the most insulting and threatening language towards the
Commons, and some of them asked, “When comes the word?” Being questioned
afterwards by a committee of the House of Commons, what they meant by
that expression, they answered that “questionless, in the posture they
were set, if the word had been given, they should have fallen upon the
House of Commons, and cut all their throats.”[‡] It was further proved,
that a hundred stand of arms, and two barrels of gunpowder, with match
and shot in proportion, were sent, on this very day, from Edition:
current; Page: [42] the Tower to Whitehall, with the knowledge of the
lieutenant.[*] All these facts, which Hume prudently conceals, render it
manifest that the employment of force, if any resistance should be
offered, had been fully determined on beforehand. The five members,
however, having received timely notice of the king’s intention, had
already left the house.

The same evening, they removed for protection into the city, whither
Lord Digby proposed to follow them, “with a select company of
gentlemen,” says Clarendon, “whereof Sir Thomas Lunsford was one, to
seize upon them and bring them away alive, or leave them dead in the
place, which,” he continues, “must have had a wonderful effect.”[†] The
king chose rather to go in person into the city and demand them; but,
though he was received without disrespect, he obtained no
encouragement.* A petition against his late proceedings was presented,
two days afterwards, from the city, but received an evasive answer.[‡]
The total failure of the intended arrest had, for the present,
disconcerted Charles’s plans; he issued a proclamation for the
apprehension of the impeached members, and immediately retired from the
capital.

Here was another fine opportunity for pathos:

the king, [says Hume,] apprehensive of danger from the enraged
multitude, had retired to Hampton Court, deserted by all the world, and
overwhelmed with grief, shame, and remorse, for the fatal measures into
which he had been hurried. His distressed situation he could no longer
ascribe to the rigours of destiny, or the malignity of enemies. His own
precipitancy and indiscretion must bear the blame of whatever disasters
should henceforth befal him.[§]

This may, for aught we know, be very pathetic; but it is wholly untrue.
We pass over the insinuation of danger from the multitude, where there
is no appearance that there was, and great appearance that there was
not, any danger whatever. There is falsehood at the very root of the
whole. The king, who is described as having left London thus overwhelmed
by remorse, left it with a determination immediately to make war upon
his people.

Edition: current; Page: [43]
The labyrinth of falsehood in which Hume found it necessary to involve
himself, in order to exonerate Charles from the criminality of the
ensuing war, is in itself no trifling presumptive evidence of that
monarch’s guilt. In the first place, it was necessary to make it appear
that the parliament were the aggressors; that they were encroaching upon
him, not he upon them; that he was upholding that ancient constitution
which they were endeavouring to destroy. For this purpose it was
necessary to dwell minutely upon the most trifling instances of
discretionary power in former reigns, and to make it appear that there
was systematic despotism, where there was really nothing systematic at
all; that there was a regular and definite constitution, when even the
forms of public business had nothing settled or defined, and the
substance still less than the forms.[*] In the next place, supposing
this to have been established, what does it prove? It might have been
retorted, that although the Commons had aimed at subverting the ancient
constitution, yet, if the ancient constitution was a bad one, to subvert
it was not only excusable, but meritorious. That it was a bad one, Hume
admits; since he says it was a despotism; and no one but a supporter of
despotism would blame those who resisted it. All this might have been
said, Hume himself felt how justly; it being impossible, therefore, to
blame the resistance itself, there still, however, remained two things
to blame, the time and manner of the resistance, and the extent to which
they pushed it. The manner, he represents as insidious, harsh, and
cruel;[†] and the insinuations, for they are insinuations rather than
reasons, by which he supports this representation, leave no other
inference, than that he disapproved of the resistance itself: on no
ground can resistance at that period be condemned, which would not be an
equally good ground for condemning resistance at any period; on no
ground can resistance by the means which they adopted, and which were
the only means that they could adopt, be disapproved of, unless upon the
supposition that they ought not to have resisted at all. So much for the
means. Next, as to the extent of the resistance, it is Hume’s
indefatigable endeavour, to prove that, after having obtained the
temporary cessation of immediate oppression, they should have stopt
short and left Charles with full possession to re-establish it: that so
long as they resisted present tyranny, they were right; so soon as they
attempted to obtain future security, they were wrong; an inference which
the experience of every age and nation laughs to scorn; but which it was
only for that reason the more necessary to support by falsehood and
concealment. For this it is, that all the pretended perils of the king
are magnified into the most serious dangers, while the well-grounded
fears of the popular party are derided as visionary, or exclaimed
against as feigned alarms—feigned for the mere purpose of stimulating
the passions of the populace. For this, did Hume, with the evidence
before him, ridicule the army-plot as an unfounded and calumnious
imputation, and slur over the royalist conspiracy in Scotland, without
even adverting to it as a subject of Edition: current; Page: [44]
controversy. For this, finally, does he represent the project of
resorting to arms, as having originated with the parliament; and as
having been adopted by Charles, only in consequence of the attempt to
wrest from him the power of the sword:[*] though Clarendon admits that
Charles, before he left Whitehall, despatched the Earl of Newcastle to
seize and garrison Hull; and that at the same time it was resolved, that
the queen should proceed to Portsmouth, which Goring, the governor, had
already engaged to surrender.[†] Not a trace of this is to be found in
Hume, who abandons even the royalist historians, when by any accident
they deviate into sincerity and candour.

In the same spirit, when Charles’s band of discarded officers, with
Lunsford at their head, retired to Kingston-upon-Thames, and when Digby,
having gone to them by the king’s command, accepted of their service in
the king’s name, arms and ammunition being at that very time actually on
their passage to the same place; the following is Hume’s version of this
transaction: “Lord Digby having entered Kingston in a coach and six,
attended by a few livery servants, the intelligence was conveyed to
London, and it was immediately voted that he had appeared in a hostile
manner, to the terror and affright of his majesty’s subjects, and had
levied war against the king and kingdom.”[‡] Would it be believed, that
Digby himself, in his apologetical defence of his conduct, admits that
“many soldiers and commanders” were assembled at Kingston, and that he
was sent there to convey his majesty’s good acceptance of their
service?[§]

There can be little doubt that the purpose of Charles, at this juncture,
was to assemble troops and march upon London, where a sure person was
already in command of the Tower. This design, however, was frustrated by
the vigilance of the Commons. The arms and ammunition which were on
their passage to Kingston were stopped, and any attempt in that quarter
was guarded against, by raising the four neighbouring counties. Goring
was enjoined to obey no orders but such as came from the king and
parliament: Sir John Hotham was sent as governor, with similar orders,
to Hull. Hume, while he dwells invidiously upon these precautionary
measures, omits to state the motives by which they were occasioned, and
leaves it to be inferred, that they were acts of unprovoked aggression.
Sir John Byron, Governor of the Tower, was ordered to attend the
parliament and give an account of certain suspicious proceedings: on his
refusal, he was voted a delinquent, a guard was placed round the Tower,
and the king was petitioned for his removal, which was at length
granted, now when he could be of no further use.[¶]

The immediate designs of Charles being thus defeated, the queen, under
Edition: current; Page: [45] pretence of conveying her daughter, the
Princess Mary, to her husband in Holland, went abroad to solicit
assistance from foreign states, and raise money on the security of the
crown jewels.* Meanwhile, the king resolved to temporize till he could
reach a place of security, where he might organize an army.

A bill for removing the bishops from parliament had already passed both
houses; and now, together with the bill for impressment,[*] received the
royal assent. These bills, which he found it necessary to pass, when he
feared least the queen should be detained in England by the parliament,
he never intended to observe; and we are told by Clarendon that he
satisfied his conscience with the wretched subterfuge, that in their
passage through the houses there had been something like constraint.
Hume, though compelled to acknowledge this piece of jesuitry in a note,
has the boldness to say, “neither Clarendon, nor any other of the
royalists, ever justify him from insincerity, as not supposing that he
had ever been accused of it.”[†] He asserts, moreover, that this scruple
of the king affected only the two bills in question;[‡] directly in the
teeth of Clarendon (an unquestionable authority), who says, “I doubt
this logic had an influence upon other acts, of no less moment than
these.”†

The bill for vesting the command of the militia in officers appointed by
parliament, was the pretext, rather than the cause of the final
breach.[§] By this bill, Edition: current; Page: [46] the parliament did
not arrogate to themselves a greater power than the parliament of the
present day constantly exercises by means of the annual mutiny-bill. In
the posture of affairs at that time, it is not too much to say that it
was absolutely necessary. The king still continued to temporize. Hume
wishes it to be understood, that he had even yet no intention of war;[*]
though even Clarendon does not attempt to conceal that, before the queen
left England, not only had he resolved upon war, but had even promised
never to make peace without her consent. Yet, even now, and long after,
he continued to declare with the most solemn asseverations before God,
that he had no thought of making war. Even after a supply of arms had
been received from Holland, and when his warlike preparations were
already far advanced, he issued a declaration, expressing in the
strongest terms his abhorrence of such a design; and this declaration
was signed by all the lords and counsellors present, not excepting the
virtuous Lord Falkland;[†] of all which, not a word in Hume. At length,
after some acrimonious correspondence between the king and parliament,
and a fruitless attempt on the part of Charles to obtain admittance into
Hull, he erected his standard at Nottingham, and hostilities commenced.

Thus, for the gratification of his own appetite for power, did Charles
voluntarily plunge his country into all the horrors of a civil war. Next
in immorality to the monarch, who could perpetrate, with his eyes open,
this greatest of all crimes, may justly be reckoned the historian who
could praise it, and who could hold up such detestable selfishness to
the applause of the world, under the high-sounding names of conscience
and of principle.

Had Charles succeeded in his guilty undertaking, we have it on
unquestionable authority, that of the more moderate men in his own
party, that all appearance of moderation would have been discarded from
his counsels, and that he would have been wholly governed by the most
furious of the royalists, particularly by his Catholic queen, and her
Catholic faction. Such was the opinion of Lord Savile, afterwards Earl
of Sussex; such was known to be the opinion of Lord Falkland; and such,
from the letters of Lord Spencer, another distinguished royalist, Mr.
Brodie proves to have been his opinion also.[‡] These men, who had not
utterly discarded all regard for their afflicted country, dreaded almost
as much the success of their own, as that of the opposite party.

More than once during the war, negotiations were opened for a treaty;
and Hume, as often as he can, endeavours to throw the blame of their
failure upon the parliament;[§] but Clarendon informs us, that the
king’s overtures were feigned, and that from the beginning he was
resolved against peace, upon any other terms Edition: current; Page:
[47] than absolute submission; “the promise to the queen having shut out
all opposite consultations.”[*]

As it is not our intention to write a history of the civil wars, we
shall content ourselves with sketching the rise and progress of the
dissentions in the popular party itself; a portion of history which even
Mr. Brodie seems not fully to comprehend, though his conception of it is
more correct than that of any former historian.

Of the two sets of men into which the popular party was divided, because
one set called themselves Presbyterians, and the other set Independents,
it has been supposed that the contest between them was mainly a
religious dispute. In reality, it was essentially a struggle for power.
The parliament, we have already observed, was an aristocracy, and, like
every other aristocracy, it split into factions. It would have done the
same thing had there been no religious disputes; though, as there were,
the two parties naturally fell in with the two sects. Religion merely
constituted that bond of union, which otherwise would certainly have
been supplied by something else.

These calamitous dissentions were heightened by the death of the two men
of highest character in the party, Hampden and Pym, which threw the
government into the hands of such men as St. John, Hollis, Hazlerig, and
Vane; men, for the most part, either unprincipled, or weak; and enabled
one man of superior talents, to subdue one party, overreach the other,
and raise himself to sovereignty upon the ruins of both.

Various circumstances combined to make the Presbyterian party, and the
aristocratic, coincide. In the first place, the Independent tenets were
nearly akin to republicanism. In the next place, the Scottish
covenanters were bigotted Presbyterians. Further, the military leaders,
being novi homines, were the great opponents of the aristocracy; but the
military leaders were naturally of that religion which enabled them, in
the capacity of preachers, to secure to themselves an undivided
ascendancy over the soldiers, whose obedience they must otherwise have
been content to share with the ministers of religion. Add to this, that
Independency, excluding persecution, was the religion of the
enlightened, and the enlightened are necessarily enemies to aristocracy.
The leaders of the Independents were Vane and Cromwell; of the
Presbyterians, Hollis, who was driven, we are told, into that party,
principally by jealousy of those eminent men.[†]

Though weak, and in numbers insignificant in the commencement, the
Independent party gained strength with the continuance of the war, by
the gradual rise to power of the military leaders. But the epoch of
their decisive victory was the self-denying ordinance,[‡] which, by
excluding all members of either house from Edition: current; Page: [48]
civil and military employments, threw the command of the army into the
hands of Fairfax and Skippon, both of whom belonged to the Independent
party.

Of the mode in which the Independents effected the passing of this act,
Hume has borrowed from Clarendon a long account, which it is scarcely
possible to believe that he did not know to be false.[*] The story is,
that they caused a general fast to be proclaimed the day before, and
procured the preachers at all the churches in the metropolis to exert
themselves strenuously on that day in favour of the measure; of which
concurrence they afterwards availed themselves, as a declaration from
heaven in its favour. Now, Rushworth, who is also quoted by Hume, gives
a circumstantial account of the whole proceedings, with dates and
speeches, proving, says Mr. Brodie, “that the new model was resolved
upon before a fast was even voted, and that the ordinance itself had
undergone the fullest discussion before the fast was held:”[†] that the
fast, moreover, when it did take place, was kept only by the two Houses,
and not by the public, so that there could not possibly be that
concurrence in the language of the different preachers on that day,
which is pretended.

The self-denying ordinance was unquestionably a stroke of party, but it
does not follow that it was a bad measure. Essex, Manchester, and the
other aristocratic commanders, were destitute of military skill; and, as
it was not their interest that the king should be entirely subdued, they
did not exert to the utmost even the talents which they possessed. The
new model placed the command of the army in abler and more efficient
hands, and was so far good. In what respect it was bad we are yet to
learn. If it be said that the new commanders would abuse their power, so
also, we answer, would the old ones, or any others, under an equal
absence of control. Power, without responsibility, can no more be
trusted in the hands of one man, than in those of another.*

At length the decisive defeat of Naseby compelled Charles to throw
himself upon the mercy of the Scots. Had this infatuated prince even
then been capable of common honesty and fair dealing, he might have
retained his throne, and with it a considerable share of power. But
while in public he professed a resolution to put an end to the war, and
wrote to Ormonde, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to suspend the
negotiations which he had been directed to open with the Irish
rebels,[‡] he at the same time, sent privately to him, commanding him to
disobey; and the result of his Edition: current; Page: [49] intrigues
was, the conclusion of a treaty, by which the Irish agreed to pour an
army of 20,000 men into Scotland. Even this, however, was not enough.
Like most cunning persons, he laid so many trains that they interfered
with one another. We shall not here enter into the history of the
commission to Glamorgan; that transaction, which was so strenuously
denied by the royalist party at the time, and the evidence of which has
been so craftily, and, at the same time, so impudently evaded by Hume,
who has not scrupled, for that purpose, to make assertions which even
the royalists did not venture to hazard in their own vindication. The
reader who has drawn his conception of Charles’s character from Hume, if
he peruse the evidence as adduced by Mr. Brodie,[*] will be filled with
astonishment at finding this paragon of candour to have been as finished
a dissembler, and even perjurer, as the page of history can supply;
false to his word, nay, false to his oath, and a traitor even to
Ormonde, the most devoted of his adherents. “It is impossible,” says
Hume, alluding to a letter in which the king tells Ormonde that he never
meant Glamorgan to act independently of his control, “it is impossible
that any man of honour, however he might dissemble with his enemies,
would assert a falsehood in so solemn a manner to his best friend.”[†]
Suffice it, then, to say, that Mr. Brodie has shown, that he actually
did assert such a falsehood; and has laid open a scene of complicated
treachery, which nothing can equal but the disingenuous arts of the
historian, who, to pander to the vulgar appetite for an affecting story,
has condescended to erect such a man into a hero!

Meanwhile, the struggle between the two parties was rapidly drawing to a
crisis: the Presbyterian party still retained a majority in parliament,
which was considerably increased since the close of the war: for when,
at length, the western counties, so long the seat of military
operations, began again to send members to parliament, these members,
who were mostly royalists, joined with the Presbyterian party, as the
best inclined to monarchy of the two. The grand object of Hollis, and
the Presbyterian leaders now was, to rid themselves of the army: but
while they were anxious to disband the troops, or send them to fight
against the rebels in Ireland, they were by no means equally anxious to
pay them their arrears, for which, indeed, they had not the means. The
discontents in the army, which this had a tendency to excite, were the
grand resource of the Independent party for raising themselves to power.
They exerted themselves, not only to stimulate but to organize the
malcontents. A council was formed of deputies from every troop, called
adjutators, a word afterwards corrupted into agitators: Ireton,
son-in-law of Cromwell, a staunch republican, took the lead in their
proceedings. Deputies were appointed to negociate with the parliamentary
commissioners. Encouraged by their growing strength, they were not
content with demanding payment of their Edition: current; Page: [50]
arrears. They soon preferred other complaints; they did not object to
the Presbyterian church-government, but they objected to its
intolerance; and complained that the parliament, notwithstanding the
self-denying ordinance, shared all offices among their own body, and
appropriated the public money to themselves.

Alarmed at the rising spirit of the army, and sensible that the
probability of its quietly disbanding grew every day less and less, the
Presbyterian leaders took measures for raising another. The army were
guided at this time by men of talents. They acted with promptitude and
decision; they possessed themselves of the king’s person (of importance
now, when parties were so nearly balanced), and marched, without loss of
time, against the parliament. Their professed object was to obtain a
speedy dissolution, with a biennial law to secure a frequent change;[*]
and, the seclusion, in the mean time, of eleven obnoxious members,
including Hollis, Stapleton, Waller, Massey, Maynard,[†] and the other
leaders of the Presbyterian party. The two Speakers,[‡] and a great
proportion of both Houses, seceded, and joined with the army: after some
unavailing attempts at resistance, the parliament was compelled to
yield, the eleven members were expelled, and the Independent party
became for the present supreme.

Their power, however, was still far from being firmly established. They
had yet to conquer the whole Scottish nation; all of whom, whether
Royalists or Presbyterians, were their irreconcileable enemies. Even in
England, both Presbyterians and Cavaliers were still far from being
entirely subdued. Thus situated, the Independent leaders were naturally
anxious to obtain the king’s support and sanction to their undertakings,
and so far were they, at this time, from meditating the abolition of
monarchy, that they offered him better terms than had been proposed
before the commencement of the war.

That unhappy prince, however, instead of hearkening to accommodation,
only meditated a fresh war upon his people. Courted now by all parties,
he was intoxicated by hope, and vainly believed that he had it in his
power to hold the balance between them. Without relaxing in his
exertions to obtain the aid of the Irish rebels, he was now intriguing
with the Scottish commissioners, Laneric and Lauderdale: and at this
time was laid, according to Clarendon, the foundation of the famous
engagement.[§] So elated was he with the prospect of success in these
various intrigues, that he not only rejected the overtures of the
Independent leaders, but had the imprudence to give them personal
offence. Not long after, finding that his secret plottings began to get
wind, he determined upon flight, but Edition: current; Page: [51]
managed his enterprise so ill as to fall into the hands of Hammond,
Governor of the Isle of Wight, and a faithful adherent of the
parliament.

Without one particle of evidence, Hume takes upon himself to assert,
that the Independent leaders rejoiced at Charles’s flight because it
gave them a pretext for keeping him in close confinement.[*] But why
should we suppose them insincere in their wish for an accommodation? It
was obviously for their interest; that they thought so, is proved by the
mildness of their terms. They were not now so insane as to have any
confidence in his sincerity; yet it is not true that they treated him
with any degree of severity, beyond what the security of his person
absolutely required; and they offered him, even now, better terms than
had been proposed by the Presbyterians when he was in the Scottish camp.
But Charles had now completed his negotiations with the Scottish
commissioners. A clandestine treaty had been concluded, in which he
engaged to confirm the covenant, to establish presbytery for three
years, and to join in extirpating the sectaries, that is, the
Independents. This treaty, which was never intended to be kept, but only
to purchase the aid of a Scottish army, and enable Charles to recover
the power of the sword, was inclosed in a sheet of lead, and buried in a
garden, as it was suspected that the Scottish commissioners might be
searched on leaving the Isle of Wight. It was afterwards, however,
transmitted to them in London. The warmest advocates of Charles are
unable to justify this new attempt to plunge his country into a war. It
is in fact so difficult, even of palliation, that Hume found it the
shortest course to say nothing about it. His silence, however, is in
this case nearly as expressive as his words. Could any thing, even
plausible, have been urged, either to justify the treaty, or to
invalidate its authenticity, the historian who has ventured to deny the
commission to Glamorgan, would not have allowed the “engagement” to pass
unnoticed.

Not content with suppressing the truth, he tells a direct falsehood, or
rather two: first, he asserts that the vote of the Commons to send no
more addresses to the king, and the precautionary measures which they
took to prevent his escape, were occasioned solely by his rejecting
their terms,[†] when in reality they were occasioned by the detection of
his intrigues with the Scots. Secondly, he has described those
precautionary measures themselves, as being much more severe than they
really were: as may be seen by comparing his statement with that of
Herbert, a keen royalist, who, at this time, was in actual attendance
upon the king.[‡] Herbert, however, was too honest a man to assert what
he knew to be false. From what source Hume drew his statements, or
whether from any source, except his own invention, we cannot pretend to
determine.

Meanwhile, the effects of the engagement, so the secret treaty was
called, began Edition: current; Page: [52] to manifest themselves. The
royalists rose in all parts of the kingdom. On the return of Laneric and
Lauderdale to their own country, an invasion of England was resolved on
by the Scottish parliament,[*] notwithstanding the vehement opposition
of Argyle, and the rigid Presbyterians, who, however attached to
presbytery, and averse to a republic, would not trust Charles, nor unite
themselves to the royalist party.

The renewal of the war, by removing from the English parliament such of
its members as held commands in the army, restored a temporary
preponderance to the Presbyterian party. The eleven secluded members
resumed their seats, and in their turn opened a negotiation with
Charles; who, even now, had he agreed to their terms, might have
regained considerable authority. But he confidently expected that the
success of the insurrection would restore him to absolute power. “Of all
the demands of the parliament,” says Hume, “Charles refused only two.
Though he relinquished almost every power of the crown, he would neither
give up his friends to punishment, nor desert what he esteemed his
religious duty.”[†] And upon this foundation, Hume proceeds to ascribe
to him a high sense of principle and moral duty, as if he had been in
reality a martyr to his friendship and to his religion. It happens
rather unfortunately for Hume, that during these negotiations Charles
himself writes to Sir William Hopkins, “To deal fairly with you, the
great concession I made to-day was merely in order to my escape, of
which, if I had not hopes, I had not done.”[‡] And from this and other
evidence, which proves him to have been at this time meditating an
escape, it is obvious that there was no sincerity in his concessions,
that he was only temporizing, and that he made a stand upon the two
points of religion and of his friends, merely because he thought them to
be the most popular grounds he could choose.*

Edition: current; Page: [53]
This letter of Charles is in direct contradiction, by the way, to
another also of Hume’s assertions: “Having given his word to the
parliament, not to attempt the recovery of his liberty during the
treaty, and three weeks after, he would not, by any persuasion, be
induced to hazard the reproach of violating that promise.”[*] A very
different story, we see, is told by the unhappy monarch himself.

While Charles was thus endeavouring to gain time, with a view to escape,
the opportunity passed away. The royalist insurrection was suppressed;
the Scottish army was defeated; Hamilton was taken prisoner, and Argyle
and his party restored to undisputed sway. Triumphant now in every other
quarter, the Independents had only to regain the ascendancy in the
legislature. The army marched to London, and purged the parliament of
almost all the Presbyterian members, thus finally crushing that party,
which never recovered from the blow.

It was now manifest that the king was not to be trusted. No engagement
which he might enter into would be held valid one moment longer than
while he had not power to set it aside. While he survived, a hundred
accidents might restore him to power. The dominant party consulted their
own safety by bringing him to the scaffold.

That Charles deserved punishment, it has been our object, throughout
this article, to prove. Whether, under a good government, he ought to
have been put to death, would have been a question of policy, not a
question of justice. He was sacrificed, however, not to the good of the
many, but to that of the few, who then happened to possess power. His
execution was the act of a nest of despots, removing a rival despot out
of their way.

But Hume, whose grand object is, to render his hero interesting, and the
enemies of his hero odious, seems to have picked up indiscriminately all
the old woman’s stories which he could find, about the prodigious
sufferings of Charles, and the unheard of enormities of those by whom he
was put to death; to such of them, indeed, as are not of themselves
sufficiently pathetic, he adds copiously from his own stores.

It is lamentable to find a writer like Hume, who cannot easily be
suspected of credulity, retailing with an air of sincerity, the puerile
tales of Clement Walker and Perinchief. The former of these he
represents as a writer of vast authority; and why? because he is a
parliamentarian.[†] Now we can inform the reader, that there were two
sets of parliamentarians—Presbyterians and Independents; each of
Edition: current; Page: [54] which hated the other with at least as much
bitterness as either hated the royalists: and that Clement Walker
happened to belong to that set by whom the regicides were considered to
be little better than demons. As for Perinchief, from whom, without
acknowledgment, Hume copies whole paragraphs almost word for word, he
does not even dare to make a reference to him more than once;[*] well
aware that any thing known to rest upon such authority, would never
obtain so much as a moment’s belief.

Notwithstanding the length to which this article has extended, there are
some of these stories, addressed either ad misericordiam or ad invidiam,
which we cannot pass unnoticed. He puts a speech into the mouth of
Cromwell, in which he makes him assert, that, when offering up prayers
for the king, he felt his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth. The
first part of this speech is taken, without acknowledgment, from Walker;
where he found the latter part we know not, except that there is
something a little like it in Perinchief, which it is probable that Hume
manufactured, to suit his purpose. (See Brodie, Vol. IV, p. 183.)[†]

He next makes up a good story concerning a prophesying woman of
Herefordshire, out of a passage in Whitelocke.[‡] The passage, to be
sure, does not bear him out in more than one half of the story; but this
was nothing to a writer of Hume’s ingenuity; he could easily fill up the
outline.

For the same purpose of making a good story, he affirms that Charles,
when in the Isle of Wight, allowed his beard to grow as if estranged
from the world; when, in reality, he was wholly intent upon the renewal
of the war.[§] Now the fact is, that Charles was in the habit of wearing
his beard. And what is the foundation of this story? A passage in
Perinchief, stating that Charles neglected during that period to have
his beard so neatly picked as was his custom![¶] Had not these artifices
formed part of a system, we should be ashamed to insist upon things so
little worthy of the notice of an historian. But Hume seizes hold of
every thing that can be adapted to his purpose, from the gaining of a
battle down to the combing of a man’s beard.

“The soldiers, instigated by their superiors, were brought, though with
difficulty, to cry aloud for justice. ‘Poor souls,’ said the king to one
of his attendants, ‘for a little money they would do as much against
their commanders.’ Some of them were permitted to go the utmost length
of brutal insolence, and to spit in his face as he was conducted along
the passage to the court.”[∥] Now, is it possible to believe that, if
this story of the spitting had been true, Herbert, the Edition: current;
Page: [55] king’s most faithful attendant, and who was present at the
time, would have omitted to mention it? Yet not only does he omit the
spitting, but tells a very different story concerning the cry for
justice.[*] Hume was not, however, without authority, for Mr. Brodie saw
his pencil marks opposite to this story, in the copy of Perinchief
belonging to the Advocate’s library.[†]

The silly story of the four lords who offered themselves to suffer
instead of Charles, Hume himself quotes from Perinchief, and Lloyde,
another writer of equal authority.[‡] The story about the conversation
between Charles and the young Duke of Glocester, is taken, without
acknowledgment, from Lloyde.[§] Both these tales, if true, must have
been known to Herbert, yet he seems not to have been acquainted with
them.

From the same Perinchief, Hume drew the ridiculous stories which he
gravely relates, concerning women who miscarried, and men who died of
grief, at the news of Charles’s execution. There is only one important
part of the story which he has omitted to mention; an omission the more
surprising, as it is very fully related by Perinchief. We allude to the
miracles which were worked by handkerchiefs dipped in the royal martyr’s
blood.[¶]

Hume likewise asserts, that, every night during the interval between his
trial and his execution, “the king slept sound as usual, though the
noise of workmen, employed in forming the scaffold and other
preparations for his execution, continually resounded in his ears.”[∥]
This, we presume, is meant to be a fine dramatic incident: it is taken
from Walker. Not only is it false, but Hume knew it to be such; for Mr.
Brodie found his pencil marks in Herbert’s Memoirs, opposite to the very
passage in which we are informed that Charles slept at St. James’s, and
therefore could not possibly hear the noise of the scaffolding at
Whitehall.[**] Even Walker himself unguardedly admits, that he came from
St. James’s to Whitehall on the morning of his execution.

But the instance of misrepresentation and misquoting which we have now
to mention, is probably unmatched in the pages of any historian of
reputation.

A fresh instance of hypocrisy was displayed the very day of the king’s
death. The generous Fairfax, not content with being absent from the
trial, had used all the interest which he yet retained to prevent the
execution of the fatal sentence; and had even employed Edition: current;
Page: [56] persuasion with his own regiment, though none else would
follow him, to rescue the king from his disloyal murderers. Cromwell and
Ireton, informed of this intention, endeavoured to convince him that the
Lord had rejected the king; and they exhorted him to seek by prayer some
direction from heaven on this important occasion: but they concealed
from him that they had already signed the warrant for the execution.
Harrison was the person appointed to join in prayer with the unwary
general. By agreement, he prolonged his doleful cant until intelligence
arrived that the fatal blow was struck; he then rose from his knees, and
insisted with Fairfax, that this event was a miraculous and providential
answer, which heaven had sent to their devout supplications.[*]

This is another of Perinchief’s stories, though Hume has the assurance
to quote Herbert for it. Mr. Brodie has given the very passage of
Herbert which Hume had marked in the copy belonging to the Advocate’s
library.[†] And what does this passage prove? Merely that Herbert met
Fairfax, who had been at prayer with other officers in Harrison’s room,
and that from a question which Fairfax casually asked, Herbert inferred
that he was ignorant of the king’s execution!

The truth is, that Fairfax was among the foremost in all the measures of
the Independent party to a late period: at the Restoration, however, he
ratted, and became a courtier, for which reason, as well as his high
character, the royalists are eager to exculpate him from all these
transactions, and to throw the blame upon any one rather than upon him.

But we have already far exceeded our ordinary limits, and we must refer
our readers for further information to Mr. Brodie. One word, however, is
required in justice to the memory of that unfortunate and traduced body,
the Long Parliament.

They were despots, no doubt: but compare them with other despots—compare
them with any English parliament before or since. What British
legislature, subsequent to our boasted Revolution, has dared to execute
the plans which they devised? Had their authority continued, landed
property would have been made liable for simple contract debts; the
absurd fictions of fine and recovery would have been abolished; a system
of universal registration would have been established for contracts in
land; and the whole body of law would have been digested into a code.
Bills for all these reforms had been introduced into the Long
Parliament,[‡] and were broken off only by its abrupt dissolution. So
much for what they would have done. What they did was, perhaps, the most
important step to a reform in the law, which in this country has ever
been taken, down to the present day. The legal proceedings, which, till
that time, had been carried on in Norman-French, were Edition: current;
Page: [57] ordered to be henceforth transacted in the vulgar tongue.[*]
The abolition, at the same time, of monopolies, and other exclusive
privileges, gave a new stimulus to industry and accumulation, and caused
wealth to increase with a rapidity before unknown.[†]

The Independent leaders have been as disgracefully calumniated by Hume,
in their private, as in their public capacity. He has, indeed, made it
his business to hold them up, individually and collectively, to
sovereign contempt; yet they were men of the best education which their
age and country could afford; men, for the most part, of approved
integrity, and many of them of distinguished talent. The reader who
wishes for specimens of the inaccuracy and disingenuousness which he has
here displayed, may refer, in particular, to his characters of Cromwell,
Harrison, Ireton, and Vane, with Mr. Brodie’s remarks.*

We shall not now relate the subjugation of the Presbyterian or
monarchical party in Scotland; the forcible dissolution of the Long
Parliament, and the elevation of one man to unbounded power; the
struggles of that man to maintain himself against the two parties, the
royalists on the one hand, and the republicans on the other; the
impotent attempt of the Long Parliament to recover their authority at
his death, and their renewed dissolution by the army; when the contest
degenerated into a struggle between two rival generals,[‡] and he who
was victorious found it more for his interest to restore the exiled
king, than to take his chance of maintaining himself in that seat which
Cromwell himself had scarcely been able to hold. Even Edition: current;
Page: [58] Monk, of whose character the lowness and meanness has long
been universally acknowledged, is not too contemptible to be made a hero
by Hume.[*] But we may now leave this writer, after the specimens we
have given, to the fair judgment of the impartial reader.

It is necessary to say something, though our limits preclude us from
saying so much as we would wish, on the character of Mr. Brodie as a
historian. From what we have said, it will readily be understood, that
his principal merits are diligence, accuracy, and perseverance. He
displays, too, considerable skill in evolving the facts from a number of
scattered, and seemingly unconnected, articles of circumstantial
evidence. In the higher qualities of an historian, in aquaintance with
the great principles of legislative philosophy, and in that
comprehensiveness of intellect, which traces up effects to their causes,
and teaches the reader to take in by a coup d’œil the mutual connexion
of all the great events of the age, Mr. Brodie has not evinced any
extraordinary degree of excellence. His style, though not strikingly
deficient, has no peculiar merit. He has produced, nevertheless, one of
the most important historical works of which modern English literature
has to boast; and although something had already been done by Mr. Laing
and Mrs. Macauley, he has added so many new facts, and confirmed by so
much new evidence the facts which they had adduced, that we cannot but
express a hope that we do not now part with him for ever. We trust that
he will persevere in his useful undertaking; that he will carry on his
labours to the period immediately following the Restoration, and will
render the same service to the history of the second Charles, which he
has already rendered to that of the first.

Edition: current; Page: [59]


IRELAND
 1825

Edition: current; Page: [60]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Parliamentary History and Review; Containing Reports of the Proceedings
of the Two Houses of Parliament during the Session of 1825:—6 Geo. IV.
With Critical Remarks on the Principal Measures of the Session. 2 vols.
London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green, 1826, II (Review),
603-26. Headed: “Ireland./The ADDRESS—Catholic Association—Catholic
Claims—Elective Franchise—Provision for Catholic Clergy—Church
Establishment, &c.” Running titles as title. Unsigned; not republished.
Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An article on the Catholic
Question which appeared in the Parliamentary Review for 1825” (MacMinn,
7). For comment on the article, see xlix and lvii above.

Edition: current; Page: [61]


Ireland

it is now our duty, conformably with the plan of this work, to pass
judgment upon that portion of the proceedings of Parliament, a report of
which is contained under the general head of Ireland.[*]

These proceedings divide themselves into two parts; the one consisting
of acts, the other of discussions: the one comprising what was done, by
one or other House, as a body; the other, what was said, by individual
members.

In our examination of what was done, it will be necessary to state our
own opinions on the great public questions which occupied the attention
of Parliament; to assign the grounds of those opinions, without which
neither our opinions, nor those of any one, are worth regarding; and,
lastly, to examine how far what was done, did or did not accord with
what, in our estimation, ought to have been done.

In our examination of what was said, it will be our duty to scrutinize
rigidly the arguments advanced on both sides of every question; to
expose the shifts and pretences of a bad cause, and rid a good one of
those bad arguments by which its real merits are often so materially
obscured.

When a ground shall thus have been laid for passing a deliberate
judgment upon the conduct, both of the legislature as a whole, and of
every member of it individually; something more will be necessary, to
give to this part of our work all the utility of which it is
susceptible.

Though many proceedings in Parliament are very important in their
effects, few of them are so important in their effects, as they are in
their causes. When an event, in addition to whatever good or evil may
result immediately from itself, gives indication of the existence of a
cause, from which an indefinite number of events of like tendency may be
expected to flow; an estimate of its importance would be very imperfect,
in which this indication should not be included.

The actions of public, like those of private, men, are governed by their
interests. Their interests result directly from the institutions under
which they live: if these be good, public men have no interest that is
not in unison with the interest of the community: under bad
institutions, their interest is frequently different from, and even
opposite to, that of the community. Accordingly, the working of good or
bad institutions may always be traced in the conduct of public men. If
the institutions Edition: current; Page: [62] be good, their conduct is
directed towards the advantage of the community, which in that case is
also their own. If the institutions be bad, they pursue either their
individual interest, or that of the class, or party, to which they
belong: and the interest of the community is sacrificed.

In our comments, therefore, upon the proceedings in Parliament, we shall
endeavour, in each instance, to bring to view, not only the events
themselves, but their causes; viz.—the interests, generated by political
institutions, and variously modified by those numerous and diversified
circumstances which compose what is termed the spirit of the age.[*]

In all these points of view, few events will demand a greater share of
our attention, than the proceedings of the last session in regard to the
Catholics of Ireland. The range of these proceedings took in, not one
only, but several great questions: the Catholic Association; the
Catholic Claims; and the two measures, called the wings.[†] On each of
these, rooted prejudices exist: the merits, therefore, of the different
questions must be entered into, at least sufficiently to place every
conclusion upon evidence sufficient to support it. The multiplicity of
arguments, or what passed under that name, which were brought forward by
all parties, render a proportional number of words necessary for making
a due estimate of their validity: and finally, discussions, in which
almost every prominent person in both Houses took a part, bore unusually
strong marks of that general character which is impressed upon British
statesmen by British institutions, and by the particular stage of
intellectual and moral improvement at which the British nation has
arrived.

The main question—that of Catholic emancipation—is, in our opinion, by
no means a difficult one: and that any person capable of reasoning
should feel a moment’s doubt upon the subject, would surprise us, if we
did not know that the strongest reasoning powers desert their possessor,
when he is frightened. With all opponents of the Catholic Claims, in
whose instance private interest is out of the question, the contest is
simply, as it seems to us, between the great principles of justice on
the one hand, and vague apprehensions on the other.

The public mind, in this country, is now so far advanced, that we may
affirm, without hazard of being openly contradicted, even by those who
would contradict Edition: current; Page: [63] us if they dared, that to
subject any person to temporal inconvenience in any shape, on the ground
of his religious opinions, is, primâ facie, injustice and oppression:
that it cannot be justified on any such ground as that his religion is
bad, or unacceptable in the sight of God: nor by any thing but the
certainty, or at least a preponderant probability, that some great
temporal calamity will befal the rest of the community, unless averted
by imposing restraints, disabilities, or penalties, upon persons of some
particular faith. It will also be allowed, that, if there be a danger,
and if security against that danger require the imposition of
disabilities on account of religious opinions; at least no disability
should exist which does not, in some way or another, conduce to the end
in view; that end being, security. We might join issue on both points,
and maintain, not only the non-existence of danger, but the existence of
disabilities, which, with whatever view they were imposed, can under no
conceivable supposition (except that of extreme mental imbecillity) be
now maintained, with any such view as that of guarding against danger.
But as we have not space to argue both these questions, we will confine
ourselves to the first and most important.

Before we can be called upon to say, what the danger is not, we are
entitled to expect that the opponents of Catholic emancipation will
declare what it is. This, however, the greater number of them would find
an embarrassing question: accordingly few of them have ever attempted to
answer it. So vague and indefinite are those fears, on the ground of
which they are willing to degrade five or six millions of their
countrymen to the condition of an inferior caste, that if they were
asked what great calamity it is which they apprehend from the concession
of the Catholic claims, we doubt whether one in ten of them could tell.
What they have in their minds is an indistinct feeling that the
Catholics are dangerous persons: and this being assumed, it never occurs
to them to consider, whether the Catholics not emancipated are not fully
as dangerous as the Catholics emancipated would be.

We will concede one point, about which there has been much unprofitable
discussion: that no confidence is to be reposed in the professions of
the Catholics; that, whatever they may now say, or think, they would not
be satisfied with equality, if they could obtain superiority. We know of
no body of men who would. We have no doubt—it would be absurd to
doubt—that the Catholic clergy would willingly possess themselves of the
temporalities of the Protestant Church; that the Catholic nobility and
gentry, in destroying Protestant ascendancy, would willingly supply its
place by the ascendancy of their own creed; and that the great body of
the Catholics would gladly embrace any opportunity, and any means, of
making their own religion the dominant religion of the state. We will
even allow that they would aim at the suppression of all other
religions, by persecution: for this is no more than has been done by
Catholics; and not by Catholics only, but, in every age and country, by
that sect of religionists who have been uppermost, as far as they have
dared.

That the Catholic aristocracy and clergy should desire a monopoly of
political Edition: current; Page: [64] power, and of the wealth which
that power affords, is no more than natural. The propensity to pursue
their own interests, is not peculiar to Catholic human beings. To
persecute, indeed, is not the interest of any sect: and this the
majority of every sect would see, if they were wise. But the majority of
every sect has hitherto been unwise: accordingly no sect (with at most
but one or two exceptions) which has had the power to persecute, has
ever failed to make use of it. The Romish Church persecuted, and does
persecute, wherever it is strong enough: so did the Church of England,
as long as it was strong enough; so did the Greek Church; so did the
Presbyterian.

Now, therefore, when we have made every concession against the Catholics
which the most unreasonable opponent could demand, we require of our
antagonists, in our turn, that they will find some better ground for
imposing disabilities upon millions of human beings, than the mischief
which it is feared they would do, if it were but in their power.

If the Catholic disabilities were upheld as a measure of hostility, it
would be fit to consider whether the Catholics were proper objects of
hostility. But as they are professedly measures, not of hostility, but
of security; the question, and the only question, is, not what the
Catholics would be willing, but what they would be able, to do.

It is hard to guess what precise evil the fears of most of the
Anti-Catholic orators point to. Some of them talk of a divided
allegiance. “The Protestant,” says Lord Liverpool, “gives an entire
allegiance to his sovereign; the Catholic, a divided one. The service of
the first is complete, of the last only qualified.”*

Now, if by the sovereign be meant the king, we should be sorry to think
that every, or any, Protestant gave to his sovereign an unqualified
allegiance. If allegiance mean obedience, and what else it can mean we
know not, an entire allegiance is suitable only to a despotic
government. What there is of meaning in this accusation, must be, that
the Catholics acknowledge a foreigner as the head of their church, to
whose interests, it is imagined, they are disposed to sacrifice the
interests of their country. That there is a party of persons, professing
the Catholic faith, who are so disposed, is true: that this party is any
thing but a small minority, is not true: for, if it were, what must be
the situation, we do not say of Protestant states in which Catholics lie
under no disqualifications, but of countries in which a vast majority of
the people are Catholics, as France, Austria, and Spain? If the
authority of the Pope be there paramount to that of the temporal
sovereign; if the Pope be there suffered to depose kings; the danger
apprehended is real: if not, it is imaginary.

The few Anti-Catholics who can tell what they are afraid of, seem
chiefly to fear that the Catholics would attempt to subvert the
established church; and this is the only tangible ground which they have
assigned for their alarm.

Edition: current; Page: [65]
In the first place, then, we think we may lay it down as an indisputable
axiom, that the re-establishment of Catholicism, as the dominant
religion in this country, is an event quite beyond the range of human
probability. That six millions of persons, not having the powers of
government in their hands, should either convert or conquer twelve
millions, does not seem a very probable contingency. If probable at all,
however, it is more probable before emancipation than after: since the
power, whether of converting or of conquering, is the same, and the
motive incomparably greater. They are six millions now, they would be
but six millions then: their clergy would hardly be more eager to
convert, nor their laity more able to rebel.

But though they might not be able, in opposition to the whole body of
Protestants, to make their own religion the religion of the state; they
might still, it is perhaps supposed, in concert with the sectarians, and
with those other Protestants who are hostile to a church establishment,
bring about the downfal of the existing church, and make all religions
equal in the eye of the law.

This is to suppose, that, persons of all persuasions being included, a
decided majority of the population of the two islands either is, or is
likely to become, hostile to the continuance of the present church
establishment. For, under any other supposition, it is difficult to see
what danger there could be in throwing an additional weight into a
scale, which would continue, notwithstanding, to be the lighter. Now, if
this be true; without giving any opinion on the question, how far good
government, good order, or religion itself, would suffer, if all
religions were made equal in the eye of the law; we may be permitted to
doubt whether the minority should be allowed to establish their
religion, against the will of the majority; and whether the few might
not, with as much justice, tax the many to build palaces for them as
churches, and to pay their physicians and their lawyers as their clergy.
But we do not wish to argue the question on a ground which would provoke
so much opposition.

If the church were to be subverted, it would be in one of two ways: by
means of the legislature, or in opposition to it; that is, by rebellion.
If, then, after emancipation, it would be in the power of the Catholics,
aided or not by the dissenters, to effect, in either of these two ways,
the subversion of the church; what hinders them from doing it at this
moment? Is it to be done by physical force? But if they are not strong
enough now, emancipation would not make them so. Is it to be done by
commanding a majority in Parliament? A few Catholic peers would take
their seats in the Upper House; but in the Lower, beyond those whom they
command at present, they would not be able to command a single vote.
There would not be one Catholic elector—the Catholic aristocracy would
not possess one borough—more than at present. They would indeed be
enabled to return Catholics to Parliament; and, if nobody could be found
but Catholics to assail the church, the disabilities would be some
security: but it would be affectation in the most zealous churchman to
pretend to doubt that the number of Protestants who are Edition:
current; Page: [66] hostile to the church, is at least sufficient to
fill the few seats which are at the disposal of the Catholic party. How
happens it then that the church is not destroyed? The question is
absurd. With almost every liberal Protestant on their side, the
Catholics cannot command votes enough to carry their own emancipation;
and it is supposed that with the great body of the Protestants against
them they could command enough to overthrow the Protestant church!—But
their influence in Parliament may increase. The Catholic electors may
grow more numerous; more Catholics may become borough proprietors.—They
may: and so they may, while their disabilities continue, and to the full
as easily.

For the above reasons, and many others which we have not room to
mention, we dismiss the idea of danger from Catholic emancipation. On
the other hand, we are inclined to abate much from the current estimate
of its advantages. An importance has been attached to it, both in
respect of good and of evil, for which we are at a loss to find any
adequate ground. We do not think that of itself it would do much for
Ireland; the evils by which that country is afflicted, are not to be so
summarily cured: and though Catholic emancipation might be a useful
preparative to other and more important ameliorations, we do not think
that it is by any means a necessary one.

Catholic emancipation would do nothing for the body of the people.
Eligibility to office would be to them but a nominal privilege: excluded
in fact by their situation in life, it is scarcely an additional evil to
be excluded in law too. If they really feel as strongly on the subject
of emancipation, as the friends of that measure wish it to be
believed,—a belief which we find it difficult to entertain,—they must
expect much more from it than the removal of disabilities; they must
expect something which cannot be realized: to them, therefore, the
effect of emancipation would be disappointment; and disappointment is
seldom followed by tranquillity.

It is idle to expect tranquillity in Ireland so long as its inhabitants
are the poorest and the most oppressed people in Europe. That they are
the poorest, appears from the testimony of all who know them: that they
are the most oppressed, no unprejudiced person can doubt, who will read
the evidence taken before the Committees of the two Houses in the
sessions of 1824 and 1825.[*] He will there find, that whatever the end
of government in Ireland may be, it at any rate is not the protection of
the weak against the strong: that government and law exist in that
country solely for the benefit of the strong: that, while the Negro
slave is at least protected against the encroachments of all masters
except his own, the Irish peasant is at the mercy, not only of a whole
series of landlords, from the proprietor of the soil down to the lowest
middleman, but moreover of the tithe-owner and the tithe-farmer or
proctor, to say nothing of vestries and grand juries: that against
Edition: current; Page: [67] undue demands on the part of all these
persons he has no remedy: that there is no law, no administration of
justice for him; the superior courts being at all times inaccessible to
him, and those of the country magistrates who do not take bribes, being
for the most part leagued together to deny him redress; which is in
general the less difficult, as the defects of the law are such, that he
who would oppress under color of the law must be exceedingly unskilful
if he cannot accomplish his object without incurring the penalties of
the law.

All these causes of misery, and of that discontent which does, and, we
hope, ever will, accompany all remediable evils, are perfectly
independent of the Catholic disabilities, and would in no respect be
affected by their removal. And why should we deem it impossible to apply
remedies to these evils, leaving the Catholic disabilities as they are?
That “purer administration of justice,” which even the bishop of
Chester* admits to be necessary, would of itself suffice, and without it
nothing will suffice, to tranquillize Ireland. It is not the power of
the Protestant over the Catholic, which has made Ireland what she is: it
is the power of the rich over the poor.

A superficial observer might perhaps infer, from the active
demonstrations of hostility between the two sects, that it is the
Catholics who are oppressed as Catholics, not the poor as poor, and that
the body of the people, if they were not oppressed as Catholics, would
not be oppressed at all. But if, in removing the Catholic disabilities,
the power of landlords over tenants, of the tithe-owner over the
tithe-payer, and of magistrates over the great body of the people, were
left untouched, we cannot perceive that the condition of the Irish
peasantry would be in any respect altered for the better. There is no
evidence that a Catholic landlord treats his tenants better than a
Protestant landlord. Catholic emancipation would not affect the mode of
collecting tithe; and the few Catholic magistrates that there are, have
now an interest in protecting the poor against their brother
magistrates, which, in the event of emancipation, it is possible they
might not retain.

That the Protestant aristocracy, who are now in possession of a monopoly
of political power and of its attendant profit, should be averse to
sharing that power and profit with the Catholic aristocracy, is quite
natural. It is quite natural also that the Catholic aristocracy should
feel uneasy under this forced exclusion: and as the aristocracy are much
better able to make their complaints heard, than the people are, it is
also natural that their grievances should be more thought of, than those
of the people; but we are not therefore to suppose them of more
importance.

There still remains another question to be answered, before we proceed
with our comment upon the debates. If the Catholic disabilities be not
in reality the grand evil of Ireland, how happens it that, in the two
Houses of Parliament, they are so often spoken of as if they were?

Edition: current; Page: [68]
Questions of this sort are what, in the sequel of this work, we shall
very frequently have occasion to put.

In reviewing the proceedings of Parliament, it may in general be
remarked, that the great abuses almost always escape its notice. The
composition of the Parliament affords a key to this, as it does to so
many of its other peculiarities.

The truth is, that there is scarcely an individual in either House whose
interest it is that the great abuses should be reformed. The members of
both Houses belong, almost all of them, to those classes for the benefit
of which all great abuses exist; and not being accountable to, nor in
any other way under the influence of, that much larger class, who suffer
by the abuses, they have abundant motives to uphold, and no sufficient
motive to redress them.

This interest being common to both parties in the two Houses of
Parliament, the great abuses are, in Parliamentary discussions, by a
sort of tacit consent kept out of view. The Opposition party, however,
must have something to attack; or they could shew no ground for finding
fault with the party in power. Nothing, therefore, remains for them to
do, except to fall might and main upon the small abuses, and do every
thing in their power to cause them to be taken for great ones.

To apply these principles to the case now in hand. Here is a country,
the most miserable, and at the same time the most turbulent, of all
countries pretending to civilization; and that, under a set of
institutions, which all—that is, all who derive either money or power
from them—unite in designating as the best institutions that wisdom ever
devised for the government of mankind. Here then is an anomaly to be
explained; a cause must be found for it, and that too without imputing
blame to these admirable institutions. The Catholic Question, appearing
well adapted to the purpose, is eagerly laid hold of by the Whigs, and a
part of the Tories, and exalted into a sovereign remedy for the ills of
Ireland. It answers the purposes of the Whigs, by affording a handle for
attacking the ministry, who, having such a panacea in their hands,
neglect to apply it. It serves the purposes of both sections of the
Tories, by diverting the public attention, from much more important
grievances. All parties being thus interested in making as much noise
about this question as possible, it is not wonderful that so much noise
has been made.

*     *     *     *     *

The subject which chiefly engaged the attention of Parliament, on the
day of its meeting, and for some time afterwards, was the Catholic
Association. We need not inform our readers what this Association was:
it may, however, be of some use to put them in mind of its objects. It
held meetings—and it raised money. At the meetings, certain persons,
mostly Catholics, and of the higher ranks, were in the habit of
expressing, in strong language, their dissatisfaction at the existing
state of things in Ireland, chiefly as it regarded the Catholic
disabilities. To what purposes the money was applied, has never been
fully made known: the offer of the Edition: current; Page: [69]
Association to produce their books not having been accepted by
Parliament.[*] Part of it, however, is known to have been laid out in
defraying the law expenses of such persons as had been, or were supposed
to have been, injured, and were too poor to seek redress for themselves.
The Association, moreover, put forth at least one address to their
Catholic countrymen, earnestly exhorting them to remain peaceable and
obedient to the laws.

Bodies of men very seldom act wisely: and it was little to be expected
that a body of Irishmen should form an exception to the rule.

All men love power: most men love it better than any other thing, human
or divine. There are times when, by joining in sufficient numbers, and
acting in a body, men are enabled to exercise very considerable power.
In this power, every man among them is eager to participate, by giving
himself up heart and soul to the prosecution of the common design. The
only part, however, of their joint operations which displays power, is
the acting part; and this, accordingly, is the only part in which every
man is eager to take a share. But to wise conduct, thinking is
necessary, as well as acting. Thinking, however, is trouble: to the mass
of mankind it is the most insupportable of all kinds of trouble: and
trouble being pain, and pain being a thing which every body avoids as
much as he can, we find that, as a general rule, a man will never do any
thing requiring trouble, which he thinks he can, without too great a
sacrifice, prevail upon another person to do for him. While every
individual, therefore, is eager to act, the business of thinking for the
whole body generally falls into the hands of a few: and these few will
naturally be those who are known to the greatest numbers; the noisiest
talkers, who, even when they have no private interest of their own to
serve, are very seldom the best thinkers. As, moreover, people are
naturally guided, other things being the same, by those who profess the
greatest zeal to serve them; and as one very obvious mode of shewing
zeal in a man’s service, is to rail vehemently against those whom he
considers to be his enemies; the leaders will, in addition to their
other attributes, be in general among the most intemperate of the set.

These considerations would have prepared us to expect much intemperance
of language in the speeches of the Association, and no very great
measure of wisdom in their acts. The most foolish of their acts,
however, as far as they are known (and let it be remembered by whose
fault they are not all known) were not of a nature to do much harm to
any body except to themselves. Considering the number of persons
interested in bringing whatever was exceptionable either in their
purposes or in their measures to light, it is astonishing how little has
appeared but what was allowable, if not laudable. The purpose of
tranquillizing the Irish people was undoubtedly a laudable purpose; the
purpose of exciting attention to their own claims, cannot well be said
to be a blameable one. The purpose of giving the poor man access to that
justice which the expensiveness of the law has put out of the Edition:
current; Page: [70] reach of every man who does not come with a full
purse in his hand,—this surely was among the most laudable of all
purposes. And suppose that occasionally a party in the wrong were by
their assistance enabled to come into court, and be told publicly, by
judge and jury, that he was in the wrong—for that was the only privilege
which their assistance conferred upon him—was this a thing to be
complained of? There would be little use in a public trial, if no one
were to have the benefit of it until it had first been ascertained that
the right was on his side. Until malâ fide suitors shall wear their
characters stamped in large letters upon their foreheads, a public
investigation is, and ought to be, the privilege of every one, whether
an honest man or a knave.

Such, however, as they were, these proceedings of the Association gave
great alarm to the Protestant aristocracy of Ireland. The few, in every
country, are remarkable for being easily alarmed; more especially when
any one takes upon himself to censure their acts. So easily are they
frightened at censure, that they never seem to feel secure until they
imagine that they have put a stop to it entirely; and whenever they have
been able, they have treated such censure as a crime which could never
be punished too severely. It is no wonder, therefore, that they should
have taken alarm at the Catholic Association. They did take alarm at it
a year before. Even then, as Mr. Canning said, the ministers were
“goaded” to put it down;* and, as the Association went on, the alarm
increased, and ministers were “goaded” more and more, till at last they
were goaded into compliance.[*] That which a large portion of their
parliamentary supporters really and earnestly demand, the ministers, if
they would continue ministers, cannot long persist in refusing.

At the opening of Parliament, it was stated from the throne, that there
existed associations in Ireland, which had “adopted proceedings
irreconcileable with the spirit of the constitution,” and were
“calculated, by exciting alarm and exasperating animosities, to endanger
the peace of society, and to retard the course of national
improvement.”[†]

What is called a King’s speech enjoys a prescriptive right to be
unmeaning, and we are not disposed to find fault with it for being so in
the present instance. We cannot refrain, however, from representing to
the framers of the speech, that a sic volo sic jubeo would have been
more decent than the mere pretence of a reason. Such vague phrases as
“irreconcileable with the spirit of the constitution,” “endanger the
peace of society,” and the like, deserve no better name. They are not
reasons; they are mere expressions of dislike. When a cause affords no
better reason, there is little to be said for it: when it does, these
phrases are useless, and can serve at best no higher purpose than that
of swelling a period.

Edition: current; Page: [71]
If the King’s speech afforded few reasons, and those few of little
worth, the subsequent speeches made ample amends, in quantity of
reasons, if not in quality. We will lay before our readers the whole
catalogue. We imagine that the more rational and sober among the
Anti-Catholics will view it with as little complacency as we ourselves.

It was alleged, then, of the Catholic Association, 1st, that its
tendency was to overthrow the constitution; 2nd, that the language of
some of its members was inflammatory; 3d, that it imposed taxes, issued
proclamations, made laws, and in fact, exercised all the powers of
government; 4th, that its business was to evade and nullify the laws;
5th, that it was a convention; 6th, that it was an imperium in imperio;
7th, that it frustrated the effect of beneficial measures of government;
8th, that it diverted the attention of the people from honest industry;
9th, that its subscriptions were collected by Catholic priests; 10th,
that it retarded emancipation; 11th, that it adjured the Catholics “by
the hatred they bore to Orangemen”;[*] 12th, that it was a second
Parliament, and used parliamentary forms; 13th, that it employed
coercion in levying the Catholic rent; 14th, that it prevented capital
from flowing into Ireland; 15th, that it pandered to the prejudices and
passions of the multitude; 16th, that it interfered with the
administration of justice; 17th, that even in cautioning the people to
be quiet, it libelled the law; 18th, that its members, in their
speeches, made attacks on private character; 19th, that it named those
who should and should not be returned as members of Parliament; 20th,
that it had not its freedom of speech from the crown, nor could the
crown suspend it; 21st, that if it had power to quell disturbances, it
had power to raise them; 22nd, that it could sit whenever it pleased;
23rd, that if it continued, it would demand the Church property; 24th,
that it was the machinery of a rebellion, for the time when an occasion
might arrive.

Of these twenty-four reasons, we abandon twenty-one to the justice and
mercy of the reader. The remaining three we reserve in our own hands:
viz. the inflammatory speeches; the levying of the rent, and the
interference of the Association in the administration of justice.

By inflammatory language is, of course, meant, language calculated to
excite hostility. Now whether hostility, and the language of hostility,
be blameable or not, depends upon the occasion, and the manner. Both the
occasion and the manner were in this case very peculiar.

Here is a country of which it has been said by a Lord Chancellor—Lord
Redesdale—who will not be suspected of aspiring to that character which
another Lord Chancellor says, he has lived too long to have much respect
for, the character of a reformer:*—Here is a country, we say, in which a
Lord Chancellor says, that there is one law for the rich, and another
for the poor. Here is a people, who, Edition: current; Page: [72] having
but the smallest pittance beyond what is barely sufficient to sustain
life, are compelled to give up nearly the whole of that pittance to
build churches and pay clergymen for about one-fourteenth part of their
number: in return for which, that fourteenth part take every opportunity
of expressing their hatred and contempt for those who furnish them with
money for these purposes, and their firm determination to extort as much
more money from them, for other purposes of all sorts, as they can. Now
then comes the Catholic Association, and, addressing itself to the
thirteen-fourteenths, tells them that all this misery and degradation is
not the work of nature, but of men; powerful men, who produce it for
their own advantage, who for their own advantage will continue it as
long as they have power, and who therefore, as a first step to effecting
any improvement, must be deprived of power. This may be called
exasperating animosities; in a certain sense, it is exasperating
animosities: to tell the many in what way the few have treated them,
certainly has no tendency to make them love the few: and if the Catholic
Association are to be tried by this standard, their cause, we fear, must
be given up: as must also that of all other reformers, ancient or
modern. If it be always a crime to excite animosities, it must be always
a crime to expose abuses. If the exposure is to be deferred until it can
be made in such language as will excite sentiments of affection and
good-will towards the authors of the abuses, it would be as reasonable,
and more honest, to say, that it is not to be made at all.

The language of the weaker party is ever inflammatory; that of the
stronger, never: because it is the stronger who is the judge. A man may
rail as much as he pleases at the party which is undermost, and the
language which he makes use of will not be very nicely scanned: he may
inflame the passions of the powerful; he may incite those to tyrannize,
who have it in their power to tyrannize; and “every thing is as it
should be.”[*] But let him address himself to the weak; let him attempt
to stir them up, not to tyrannize, for that is not in their power, but
to use their efforts to take from the strong their power of
tyrannizing—and the state is going to wreck: sedition, insurrection are
abroad: and one would imagine that heaven and earth were coming
together.

It is a mockery to tell a man that he is wronged, and to bid him at the
same time feel no hostility against those who have wronged him. The
proper exhortation is, not to let his feelings of hostility overcome his
reason, and drive him to acts of useless and wicked violence: not to
wreak his vengeance upon the hay-stacks and barns of those who have
acted so ill a part towards him, nor to set fire to their houses, and
burn them and their families alive; but to direct all his energies to
one great object, the ridding them of their mischievous power. Now all
this, the Catholic Association did. It not only exhorted the people to
be peaceable, but many of its enemies acknowledge, that it actually made
them so.

Edition: current; Page: [73]
When a man has resolved to do a thing, and has it in his power, any
reason will in general suffice. If the Association had not pacified the
Irish, that would have been a reason for putting it down: but it did
pacify the Irish: and this also was a reason for putting it down. It was
discovered, that, as it had power, to quell disturbances, it probably
had power to raise them: and as it was probable that it had the power,
it could not but appear certain that it had the will. Upon this
principle, we should be justified in throwing a man into prison, for
helping a drowning person out of a river. If he had power to drag him
out, he has power to push him in: so dangerous a man must not be
suffered to go at large: no time must be lost in depriving him of the
means of doing mischief.

It seems, however, that they had a way of pacifying the people, which
made it much worse than if they had bid them go and cut throats: they
adjured them to be peaceable, “by the hatred they bore to Orangemen:” it
being deemed preferable by certain members of Parliament, that they
should slaughter and burn the Orangemen, probably out of love, than live
with them, out of hatred, in the peace of God and of the king. We will
not now go over Dr. Lushington’s argument, which instead of answering,
Mr. Canning sneered at, and put to flight a whole army of syllogisms
with a volley of jokes.[*] But we do think that the Orangemen, who so
rigidly act up to the Christian principle of returning good for evil,
should make some allowance for the frailty of those inferior natures
which fail of reaching that standard of perfection. They should bear in
mind that all men cannot, like them, love their enemies, turn the left
cheek to those that smite them on the right, and do good to those that
hate them, and despitefully use them.[†] Pure as they are themselves
from all malignant passions, Christianity does not surely enjoin so much
severity, towards those who aim at no more than to make those passions
subservient to virtue. We have no great objection to a species of
hatred, which inspires men to obey the laws, and be good citizens and
peaceable subjects.

We pass to the accusation of levying money, by improper means, from the
people.

The Catholic Association was not the only association which was in the
habit of levying money from the people. To say nothing of any others,
the Methodist Conference is accustomed to levy money to a much greater
amount, and for purposes much more strictly sectarian.* As therefore the
receiving of the money could not, without too gross a violation of
decency, be adduced as the heinous part of the offence; a vigorous
attempt was made to get up a case which should shew that the
subscriptions were obtained by coercion. It was first said, that the
priests Edition: current; Page: [74] were in the habit of encouraging
and collecting the rent: which not being denied, it was next insinuated,
that they extorted subscriptions by refusing the sacraments to those who
did not subscribe. We say insinuated, because it was only spoken of as a
possibility; and upon this possibility the House was called upon to
legislate. It was not shewn that the priests did as was represented, it
being sufficient that they could do so, without violating their
religion: this last was, indeed, denied by the Catholic prelates; but
then it was affirmed by Mr. Goulburn,* and the Solicitor General.†

Without cavilling at this logic; which, however, if nicely looked into,
might probably be found to be not quite formal; we will content
ourselves with asking one question. Since after all no physical coercion
was used, what definition is it possible to give of moral coercion? Or
how are we to distinguish that legitimate influence, by which the Rev.
Mr. Wilson persuades his parishioner to give, through the fear of God,
his guinea to the Bible Society, from that improper influence, that
coercion (since that is the word) by which the Catholic priest persuades
his parishioners to give, through a similar fear, their several pennies
to the Catholic rent? We might also ask, if the peasant can be persuaded
to give money, in order to purchase absolution, how it is expected, that
this sort of traffic should be put a stop to by an Act of Parliament?
But we have not space to follow out this question as we could wish.

Another sort of coercion, it was positively affirmed, was practised, not
by the priests, but by the Association itself. This consisted in making
entries in a book, which was called the black book, of the names of all
those who refused to subscribe.‡ Without repeating the question, which
we put just now, or asking how a pretence can ever be wanting to the
strong man, if such a proceeding as this is to be called coercion; we
will content ourselves with one fact. It was publicly stated by Mr.
Brougham,§ in behalf of the Association, that the names of those who
refused to subscribe were not entered in any book: proof of this
assertion was offered to be presented at the bar of the House; and the
House would not hear it: the fact speaks for itself.¶

The only remaining charge against the Association, which we intend to
notice, Edition: current; Page: [75] is one to which we have already
made some allusion: the charge of interference with the administration
of justice. We do not know very well how to meet this charge; having
some difficulty in discerning through the vague and misty language of
the accusers, what sort of improper conduct it is, that was really
imputed to the Association. One of them, indeed, Mr. W. Lamb, has not
left his sentiments on the subject uncertain.

There was already too much disposition, [said he,] about the lower
orders, even in England, to litigation. Every body knew, that if half
the indictments and causes which were tried in courts were entirely
omitted, it would be for the benefit of all the parties concerned in
them. Then, if people would go to law, and prosecute each other
needlessly, at their own expense, and even to their own ruin, where
would be the end of petty ill-blood and dissension, when they were
enabled to do that free of cost!*

It having been made quite clear, by these shrewd observations, that the
great fault of the judicial administration of both countries is, that
justice is too accessible; that the only use of an administration of
justice is to create “petty ill-blood and dissension,” and that it is a
great crime to have been wronged; it is no wonder that Mr. Lamb should
condemn the Catholic Association: who, instead of lamenting, with him,
that people should apply for justice, were perverse enough to tell them
that it was their due; and even gave them money to assist them in
obtaining it.

Others said, that the Association, by putting forth ex parte statements,
biassed the minds of the jury, and deprived those whom they prosecuted
of their fair chance for justice. And this, we believe, is what the
charge of “interfering with the administration of justice”[*] amounts
to. In proof of this, two instances were given, and no more, of what
were considered to have been improper prosecutions by the Association.
In both these instances, Mr. Brougham succeeded in rendering the
impropriety of the prosecution at least a matter of doubt.[†] But let us
see what it is that is to be proved, and what it is that is given in
evidence to prove it. The assertion is, that the minds of juries were
prejudiced against the persons whom the Association selected for
prosecution; and the proof is, two prosecutions in both of which the
prisoners were acquitted.

One word on the subject of prejudging, and ex parte statements: a
subject which we thought had long ago been set at rest for ever. What
notion can these gentlemen have of trial by jury, if they imagine that
jurymen, who have sworn to decide according to the evidence, will suffer
themselves to be biassed by the vague rumours, the extrajudicial and
unsupported opinions, which they have heard out of doors? If this be a
true character of an Irish jury, either an Irish jury must be a very
different thing from an English one, or jury trial is altogether a very
different thing from what it is supposed to be.

Edition: current; Page: [76]
When it has been determined that a thing is at all events to be found
fault with, it is usual, in making an account of its effects, to strike
out all the good items, and leave the bad ones standing alone: to hold
up to view the possible evils which may arise from it, and to say
nothing of the necessarily accompanying good. When publicity was given,
by the Catholic Association, to the whole story of the supposed offence,
the minds of the jury, say these gentlemen, might possibly be biassed
against the prisoner: well—we grant them this; let them make what they
can of it. But may not this very publication raise up persons, to bear
witness in his favour? Is it nothing that the public eye has been
attracted to the case, and fixed anxiously upon the behaviour of the
judge and the jury? And is it no advantage, to the prisoner himself, to
know the prosecutor’s case,—the assertions which he intends to make, and
the evidence by which he expects to prove them? What could be of more
use to the defendant in a cause, than that the counsel for the
prosecution should allow him to inspect his brief? Surely then it is no
injury to him, that all which is contained in that brief should be made,
before the trial, a subject of public discussion.

*     *     *     *     *

The petition of the Catholics of Ireland for emancipation was presented
to the House of Commons on the first of March by Sir Francis Burdett,
who, on the same evening, moved a string of resolutions setting forth
the expediency of granting the Catholic claims.[*] The motion was
introduced by what is termed a conciliatory speech; that is to say, a
speech in which every body found himself praised, who had any reason for
expecting that he would be blamed. “A more enlightened and liberal body
of men” than the clergy of the Church of England, “did not do honour to
this or any other country. The Church of England was, of all others, the
faith he would rather adopt,” and no wonder, if we consider the
excellent reason he had for adopting it: he had been “bred up” in it,
“as ample a reason as any man could be called on to give for his
religion.”* The Orangemen, too, were nearly perfect. “There did not
exist more honourable or more liberal men.” They had, to be sure, one
small failing, an “unfortunate propensity to domination;” an
“unwillingness to be deprived of the power they had been accustomed to
exercise;” a “right which they fancied they had by birth, to trample
upon their Catholic fellow-subjects.”† They had no fault, in short, but
a desire to get and keep, at all costs, as great a quantity of undue
power as they could. We would ask, in what other habit of mind the worst
acts of the worst tyrants have taken their rise? What else was it that
Edition: current; Page: [77] prompted the crimes of an Augustus or an
Aurungzebe? What else made an Alexander or a Napoleon the scourges of
mankind?

There is no mistake which seems to be more universal among public men,
not to speak of other men of all descriptions, than that of imagining it
to be of no consequence what they do with their praise. In most other
matters it seems to be pretty generally understood that the gift which
is meant to be valued must be sparingly bestowed: but no measure, no
temperance, is thought necessary in the distribution of praise; people
seem in general to be ready to throw it at the first dog they meet.
After what fashion men bepraise their friends, the proceedings at any
public dinner will testify. At such entertainments (next to eating and
drinking), the principal purpose for which the guests are assembled,
seems in general to be that of receiving assurances from one another
that they are patterns of every human virtue. Most men, too, are glad of
any decent opportunity for bestowing laudation upon their opponents. It
has so candid an appearance, and men are so naturally, and even so
properly, eager to shew that they have no private hatred of those to
whom they are politically hostile, that, even in bringing accusations
against their opponents, which, if true, import the very essence of
imbecillity and wickedness, they frequently clothe them in language
expressive of the most profound veneration.

If Sir Francis Burdett,—after representing the state of things in
Ireland as uniting a flagrant breach of faith with the most odious
tyranny—after characterizing the Orangemen as the upholders of this
state of things, and imputing to them as motives, a “propensity to
domination” and a fancied right to “trample upon their Catholic
fellow-subjects,”—can yet affirm, in the same breath, that “there did
not exist more honourable or more liberal men” than these same
Orangemen; how is it possible, henceforth, to set any value on any
praise which he can bestow? We are not blaming the disposition to
conciliate opponents; and we have the strongest objections to vague and
general vituperation: but excessive praise, much more that which is
totally unmerited, is equally mischievous, and almost equally offensive.

Bating this one fault, which, however much to be regretted, is too
common not to be quite venial, and which we are far from imputing to any
but the most creditable motives; the tone of Sir F. Burdett’s speech was
highly commendable. In some of his reasonings we are not quite sure that
we concur; in particular where he partly founds the claims of the
Catholics upon the treaty of Limerick. We are favourable to those
claims, because we are unfavourable, on general principles, to all
religious distinctions; unless when there is strong ground for them in
point of expediency, which, in the case of the British Catholics, we
think that there is not: but if there were,—if it were really dangerous
to admit the Catholics into a participation of political power,—we are
by no means prepared to say that we should be bound to incur this
danger, because certain persons, none of whom are now in existence,
promised something about a hundred and thirty years ago, to certain
other persons, none of whom are now in existence. Every man is bound to
Edition: current; Page: [78] keep his promise—agreed: that is, he ought
not to make the promise, unless he is sure that he can keep it. But that
the Government of that day should be at liberty to make promises which
should be binding under all circumstances upon the Government of this,
or that we should be pledged to do for one set of men, whatever our
ancestors promised to do for another, is a maxim of much wider extent,
and we will add, of much more dubious propriety. Granting, for the sake
of the argument, that the Catholics of that day, though all of them
partisans of the exiled family, were wronged by the non-fulfilment of
the pledge which was given to them at Limerick: nothing which can be
done now, will be any reparation to them. The question at present is,
what is to be done with another set of men professing the same religion,
but in no other conceivable sense the same, and who, whatever claims
they may have upon our justice, or our humanity, can have none upon our
good faith, since our faith has never been plighted to them. The fallacy
of irrevocable laws is alike absurd, in every one of its shapes.

Mr. Leslie Foster, Mr. Peel, and the Solicitor General, followed in the
debate,[*] on the side opposed to the Catholics, and set forth, at
considerable length, the badness of the Catholic religion, the
intolerance of Catholics in other countries, &c. &c., all which being
very little to the purpose, unless it could be shewn that they would
derive an increase of power for bad purposes, from the concession of
their claims, the following arguments were thrown as a makeweight into
the scale: 1. Grant this, and they will ask for more:* (fallacy of
distrust). 2. “This concession to the Catholics would involve a
violation of the Constitution: Was not the principle of the Protestant
religion in church and state, made a fundamental and inviolable part of
the compact with King William III after the expulsion of James II?[†]
and would they abandon that indispensable principle of the Bill of
Rights?”† (fallacies of irrevocable laws, and vague generalities,
cloaking a petitio principii).[‡] 3. The House ought not to yield to
menace and intimidation:‡ or, in other words, having driven the
Catholics to exasperation by denying them justice, they were to make
that exasperation a reason for denying it to them still longer. 4. The
great men, who framed the Act of Union with Scotland,[§] introduced into
that measure the principle of excluding Catholics from office:§
(fallacies of Edition: current; Page: [79] irrevocable laws, and wisdom
of ancestors).[*] 5. Retaining the religion of the minority as the
religion of the state, would it be safe to allow the majority to come
into an equal participation with them of rights and power?*—A mere
assumption, in the first place; and in the next place, it looks a little
too much like the argument of the highwayman who ties your hands in
order that he may more safely rob you.

Mr. Plunkett and Mr. Brougham, without grappling with the question,
pointedly exposed some of the fallacies of their opponents, and
addressed themselves to the House in the manner which alone has much
influence with an interested audience, by appealing to their fears.[†]
In the present case, it was not possible to act upon this passion but
through the medium of a fallacy. The two assumptions, upon which these
gentlemen proceeded, were that Catholic emancipation would, and that,
without that measure, any thing else would not, tranquillize the Irish
people.† The unconscious action of those interests, to which we have
before pointed as the secret springs of the conduct both of Whigs and
Tories on this question, will sufficiently account for the course
pursued by both these gentlemen. But to those who desire the passing of
this question on its own account, and on its own account solely, we
recommend a much more effectual mode of frightening its opponents into
concession. Let them drag forth and hold up to view the real evils of
Ireland: let them assail the abuses of the Church, the Law, and the
Magistracy: and the alarmed participators in the profits of these abuses
will soon consent to forego the small interest, which they have in the
exclusion of Catholics from office, in hopes of disarming some portion
of the opposition to those much greater evils, to which they are
indebted for so much of their wealth, and their power, the power of the
few over the many.

In the interval between this first debate on the Catholic question in
the Commons, and its final rejection in the Lords,[‡] much of the time
of both Houses was occupied by angry discussions, arising out of the
petitions which were presented for and against the bill. This, which
would have required no notice if it had occurred only once, having been
repeated so often as to become a marked feature in the history of the
Session, we will not omit those observations which appear to us to be
applicable to it.

Edition: current; Page: [80]
The grand object, with both parties, in these discussions, was to make
it appear that public opinion was in their favour. When a petition was
presented, either from the friends or the opponents, but particularly
from the opponents of the bill, up started somebody on the contrary side
to prove that the petition did not, followed by somebody on the same
side with the petitioners, to prove that it did, represent the true
state of public opinion on the question. All this solicitude about
public opinion clearly shewed how nicely the two parties were balanced.
When either of them is sure of a majority, right or wrong, it seldom
troubles itself much about public opinion.

The meaning (if it had any meaning) of all this talk, must have been
either, 1st. That, if the public were with them, they must necessarily
be in the right, (vox populi, vox Dei);[*] or, 2nd. That public opinion
had declared itself so strongly on one side, that for Parliament to take
the opposite side, however right at other times, would at this time be
unsafe, and therefore wrong. The first supposition (the fallacy of
authority, in its least delusive shape)[†] is too obviously absurd, to
be imputed to any body: and the very fact, that there could be any
dispute upon the subject, proves the falsity of the second. Those who
felt sufficient interest in the question to put their names to a
petition being in number no more than a minute fraction of the public,
and these being nearly equally divided, things were exactly in that
state in which it was quite certain that Parliament might take either
course without one atom of risk from public opinion. To what end, then,
all these acrimonious discussions?

If we disapprove of the end, we disapprove equally of the means; we see
as much to blame in the tone and spirit which characterized the
discussions, as we do in the discussions themselves.

It is a principle of human nature, as well established as any principle
can be, that, taking men as they are (that is, ninety-nine out of every
hundred of them), a man’s opinion, as such, is of no value, on any
matter in which his interest is concerned. Not only the assertion of the
knave, but the unfeigned opinion of the honest man, if he be not a man
of an unusually powerful mind, is sure to follow any strong interest, or
fancied interest. On this principle nobody attaches any weight to the
opinion of a Catholic, in favour of Catholic emancipation: and, on the
same principle, no weight ought to be attached to the opinion of a
clergyman of the Church of England, against that measure.

It admits of no question that the clergy of the Established Church in
general apprehend great danger to the Church, from the concession of the
Catholic claims. The clergy of an establishment, and dissenters from the
establishment, are seldom on very good terms with one another; and the
clergy, knowing that no Catholic can possibly approve of a Protestant
church establishment, imagine that the establishment Edition: current;
Page: [81] would go to pieces immediately if a single Catholic were
admitted into power. The correctness or incorrectness of this notion, is
not now in question; its existence is all that we are arguing for; and
while it exists, every body must perceive that the clergy are as
incompetent witnesses on Catholic emancipation, as they would be on the
expediency of the Church Establishment itself.

When, therefore, petitions were presented from clergymen of the Church
of England against the bill; supposing Lord King, or any other supporter
of the Catholic claims, to have said any thing, what would it have been
proper for him to say? Simply this:—that the petitions came from a body
of men, who, as to this question, were an interested body: that if their
only object were to shew that the opinions of the petitioners were
unfavourable to Catholic emancipation, this was scarcely worth proving,
since it was hardly to be expected that they would be favourable; but
that if the object of the petitioners were to prove that the measure
ought not to pass, they deserved not one particle of regard beyond what
might be due to their reasons, if they gave any; and that these were no
more than a repetition of what had been said and answered a hundred
times in that House.

This would have been common sense, and would have had its effect, both
in Parliament and out of it, without the aid of declamation or
invective.—The advocates of the Bill took, however, a different course.
Instead of shewing that the opinions of the clergy, on this question,
were worth nothing, they did what was utterly useless as well as
irrelevant, they vituperated the men. They told them, that they were
intolerant, that they were illiberal, that they were deficient in
Christian charity; all which language, besides that it assumed the very
point at issue, namely, that the sentiments of the petitioners were
wrong,—really meant nothing, except that those who used the terms were
very much dissatisfied with those to whom they applied them; and
moreover had all the appearance of that disposition which is itself the
very essence of intolerance, a disposition to apply bad names to others
for having a different opinion from ourselves.

The handle which was so injudiciously given by the one party was eagerly
laid hold of by the other. They retorted the charge of intolerance upon
the impugners of the clergy; they called the clergy a proscribed body.*
As the other side had begged the question against the clergy, they, not
content with begging it in their favour, proceeded to something like a
threat, saying, that “the petitioners belonged to a body of men whom
their lordships would find out one day, as their ancestors had found
before them, that they ought to treat with respect, and not with
contumely.”†

The debate on the second reading of the Catholic bill opened with an
exhibition of honesty and courage not often exemplified in public men.
Mr. Brownlow, a leading Orangeman, abjured his old opinions, and
declared himself a convert to Edition: current; Page: [82] the cause of
Catholic emancipation.[*] Such things rarely happen in the sphere of
party morality, where consistency in right or wrong usurps the praise of
honesty, and where the merit of having chosen and for half a century
rigidly adhered to that path which is the shortest cut to honour,
wealth, and power, is accepted as an equivalent for every quality which
goes to make a good minister or an honest statesman.* Where the
interests of rival parties have succeeded in rendering almost infamous
the highest act of virtue perhaps which a public man can perform, we
hail with joy the dawn of a better morality in the public recantation of
Mr. Brownlow. The manner in which that recantation was received is among
the most striking marks of the improving spirit of the age.

At the same time, we must be permitted to remark, sorry as we are to say
any thing which may seem indicative of a wish to tarnish the credit
which Mr. Brownlow has so justly earned,—that his new opinions, upon his
own shewing, have scarcely more foundation in reason than his old ones;
and we should not be surprised if some of the late proceedings of the
New Catholic Association were to shake his recently acquired liberality,
and re-incline him to his former prejudices.

The evidence before the Committees had wrought, he said, his conversion.
Dr. Doyle had declared that two doctrines, the power of the Pope to
exercise temporal authority over the subjects of other sovereigns, and
his power to grant dispensations for crimes, were not doctrines of the
Catholic church. Dr. Doyle certainly did say so.[†] He also said (what
Mr. Brownlow did not mention) that these doctrines never had been
doctrines of that church; by which latter assertion he took away the
whole value of the former. If, according to Dr. Doyle, the temporal
authority of the Pope is as much a doctrine of the Catholic church as it
was when a Gregory or a Boniface fulminated their excommunications and
sentences of deposition against kings and emperors; if the power of
dispensation is as much a doctrine of the church as it was when
indulgences were openly sold from one end of Europe to the other; of
what consequence is it that, in the opinion of one man, or of two men
(Dr. Doyle and Dr. Murray), these powers were not authorized? Their not
being authorized did not prevent their being acted upon then, nor could
it prevent them, if an opportunity offered, from being acted upon now.
If individual opinions were wanted, we had opinions already; opinions of
foreign universities, at least as high authority as Dr. Doyle. As for
the Pope, we can hardly conceive any thing more ridiculous than to talk
of danger from him. The real danger is from the power of the priests,
whether concentrated in one man, or Edition: current; Page: [83]
diffused through a great number. If they place the supreme direction in
his hands, it is for their own purposes: and if they do not, it is for
the same reason. His power is only their power: and does Mr. Brownlow
really think that either priests or any other sort of men ever give up
any power which they can possibly keep; or are withheld from resuming it
by any other reason than because they cannot?

We shall pass slightly over the remainder of the debate. Mr. Dawson
brought forward several arguments against emancipation, the chief of
which were, that Mr. O’Connell and Dr. Doyle were temperate before the
committee but turbulent in Ireland: that the Catholics, in 1824,
petitioned parliament for a reform in the temporalities of the Irish
church, and that a Catholic parliament treated the Protestants in 1687
pretty much as Protestant parliaments have treated the Catholics ever
since.[*] Sufficient answers having been given to these objections,
either by the speakers who followed, or in the former part of this
article, we shall not waste our readers’ time and our own by going over
them again.

Mr. Goulburn and Mr. Peel again insisted upon danger to the
Constitution, the Church, and the State,[†] but without proving, any
more than their predecessors had done, that whatever danger there might
be would be in any wise increased by Catholic emancipation. Mr. Peel
illustrated his general argument by a particular example; he put the
case of a Catholic king, who, by the bill before the House, would have
it in his power to appoint a Catholic ministry.[‡] The contingency is
somewhat distant, as well as somewhat improbable: but suppose it certain
and near at hand; unless a majority in Parliament were Catholics too,
what harm could be done by a Catholic king, though backed by a Catholic
ministry? If such chimerical terrors are to be listened to, what dangers
are we not exposed to already! What is there to hinder the King from
turning Presbyterian, and filling every office in the ministry with
Presbyterians? yet is this very likely to happen? or where would be the
harm if it did? Has the King, with or without a ministry of his choice,
the power to change the established religion, against the will of his
people? If so, he can as well change the constitution itself; whatever
advantages we owe to it, exist only by his sufferance, and the
government of this country is in reality despotic. But if not, what
becomes of the imaginary danger?

We must now need say something (much we need not) on the celebrated
speech of the Duke of York.[§] What there was objectionable in it has
been sufficiently exposed by others; and the station of the royal
speaker has drawn down animadversions more severe than the speech, if
delivered from other lips, would Edition: current; Page: [84] probably
have called forth. As a piece of argument, it cannot be spoken of
seriously; indeed it scarcely laid claim to that character. With the
exception of what Mr. Canning called “the idle objection of the
coronation oath,”* it only offered one reason, which turned upon the
oddest of all équivoques. No clergyman can sit in the House of Commons;
therefore (said his Royal Highness), the Protestant church, meaning the
clergy, is not represented; ergo, the Catholic church, meaning the
laity, ought not to be represented either. Considered merely as a
declaration of opinion, we have not much to say against this speech: his
Royal Highness was as well entitled, as any other person, to choose his
side. It may be questioned, however, whether it would have been in any
way discreditable to his Royal Highness, if, in testifying his
attachment to the opinion he had chosen, he had remembered that even the
Heir to the Throne is not infallible, and that it was just possible,
that the opinion, to which he was thus solemnly vowing an eternal
adherence, might be wrong.

In the interval between the second and third reading of the Catholic
bill, two auxiliary measures were introduced into the Lower House, which
have excited much discussion, and occasioned much difference of opinion,
both among the supporters and among the opponents of the Catholic
claims.[*]

The question of a state provision for the Catholic clergy does not seem
to us encumbered with many difficulties. Such a provision certainly is
not per se desirable. To a Protestant, it must of course appear
desirable that there should be none but Protestants, in which case there
would be no Catholic clergy, and consequently no need of paying
them.—There are, however, Catholic clergy, and they exercise great
influence over the people. We should be very glad to see that influence
weakened: but, in the meantime, the question is, whether every thing
which can be done ought not to be done, towards rendering it as little
noxious as possible.

By the admission of all who know any thing of Ireland, one of the
greatest evils of that country is, a deficiency of employment compared
with the numbers of the people, or, what is the same thing, an excess of
numbers, compared with the means of employment. As the best established
general principles forbid us to expect that any measures, having for
their object to provide employment for the people, can afford any thing
more than a temporary palliation to the evil, whilst their numbers
continue to increase at the present rate—there is nothing to be done
without correcting the prevailing habit of early marriages and heedless
increase of families. But to the introduction of any change in this
respect, no state of things can Edition: current; Page: [85] be more
adverse than one in which the priests derive their chief emoluments from
marriages, baptisms, and funerals.* We make no invidious insinuations;
we will not ask, whether the priests have given direct encouragement to
those early marriages, which have co-operated with bad government to
make the Irish people what they are;† but we say that nothing can be
more impolitic, nor can shew a greater ignorance of human nature, than
to admit of the continuance of a state of things in which it is their
interest to do so.

Whenever, therefore, a public provision shall be granted to the Catholic
clergy of Ireland, we hope that the act conferring it will contain a
clause, providing, not for the discontinuance of the fees on marriages
and baptisms, but for their being regularly handed over to some officer,
for the benefit of the public revenue. To reconcile the priests
themselves to this transfer, we would suggest that a portion of their
stipends should be in name as well as in reality a commutation for their
fees. Under this arrangement they would no longer have an interest in
encouraging improvident marriages, while the money received on account
of fees would in part contribute to defray the expense of the stipends.

Another reason for paying the Catholic clergy, is to diminish the
interest they now have in proselytism. Believing, as we do, the Catholic
religion to be a bad one, we of course think it undesirable that
proselytes should be made to it. The motives to proselytism will be but
too strong, without the aid of pecuniary interest: but when the priest’s
emoluments entirely depend upon the number of his flock, those motives
are at the highest pitch. Surely all Protestants should wish this to be
at an end.

It deserves notice, that of all those who advocated this measure in the
House of Edition: current; Page: [86] Commons, there was not one who
placed the expediency of it upon the right grounds. One reason assigned
was, that the Catholic clergy were a meritorious body.[*] Another, that
it was desirable they should be connected with the state;[†] a
proposition in which, if, by connexion with the state, is meant
dependence upon the government, we are so far from agreeing, that if the
stipends were to be put upon such a footing as to create any such
dependence, it would shake our confidence in the expediency of the
measure itself. Another reason was, that it was desirable that a portion
of the higher classes should form a part of the Catholic clergy.[‡] We
do not exactly see why; or how the higher classes could be drawn into it
by changing the source of its emoluments; unless at the same time an
increase were made in the amount, which would be objectionable on
another score.

If the reasons given for the measure were bad, the reasons against it
were still worse.

The first was, that no provision is made for the clergy of any of the
dissenting sects. But there is no other sect, for the payment of whose
clergy there are the same reasons.[§]

The second was, that the Catholic clergy, if paid at all, ought to be
paid out of the superfluous property of the Established Church: and if
the payment could not be made in that way, it ought not, however
desirable, to be made at all.[¶]

The third was, that the measure tended to undermine the Established
Church. Of this tendency no proof was so much as pretended to be given.
But danger to the church is that sort of thing which persons of a
certain stamp are accustomed to see in every thing which they do not
like.[∥]

The fourth was, that the House ought not to establish a Papal Church,
armed with all the jurisdiction belonging to Papacy.* Who would not have
supposed that the question before the House was whether there should be
a Catholic church in Ireland, or not?

The fifth was, that it would diminish the influence of the Catholic
clergy over their flocks. This objection was brought forward in the
House by nobody but Mr. Edition: current; Page: [87] Goulburn;[*] in
whose mouth it seems to be any thing but appropriate: but it is the
objection which we have heard oftenest urged in other places. It has
not, however, been proved by any sufficient evidence, that the Catholics
would like their priests the less for being no longer a burden on them;
that they feel the burden most severely, is well known: that the
priests’ fees were a subject of complaint with the discontented, almost
equally with tithes and rents, has been given in evidence by several
witnesses before the Committees.* Further, if it were made out, that the
influence of the priests would be diminished by a public provision, we
should not consider this an evil, but a good; it appearing to us to be
any thing but beneficial, either to religion or morality, that a body of
priests should exercise any such influence over the people, as is
exercised by the Catholic clergy: and the influence of the priests
having besides afforded to the enemies of emancipation their most
plausible topic of alarm.

The proposed alteration of the elective franchise in Ireland appears at
first sight a measure of greater delicacy. To those, however, who look
to things rather than names, there is no great difficulty in the
question.

The forms of liberty, are one thing; the substance another. These two
things are often confounded; and the consequence is, that the substance
is very often sacrificed to the forms. There is a certain set of
politicians, who maintain it as an established principle, that the
substance always ought to be sacrificed to the forms; the form being in
their estimation every thing, the substance nothing. It is, according to
them, not only useful, but essential to good government, that the body
of the people should, at every election, go to the poll, and vote for
somebody; because this contributes exceedingly to the generation of
public spirit: but once there, it is not of the slightest consequence
whom they vote for; at least, it is not necessary that they should
exercise any choice; or rather, it would be of the most fatal
consequence if they did. Elections, according to them, are on the best
footing, when there are but two or three real choosers; the two or three
thousand, who are the nominal choosers, discharging no other functions,
in regard to the favoured candidate, than that of committing to memory
his name, and repeating it at the hustings, to a person stationed there
to hear it.

This class of politicians find in Ireland a system of election
management to their heart’s content. Droves of electors, driven to the
poll often without knowing, till they reach the spot, the name of the
candidate whom they are to vote for; themselves the property of their
landlord, a sort of live stock upon the estate, whom nobody thinks of
canvassing, and who would probably stare on being told that the
franchise (as it is ironically called) was regarded as a privilege to
Edition: current; Page: [88] themselves. In one or two instances of late
years, when the state of misery to which they were already reduced
rendered ejectment from their wretched tenancies an event scarcely to be
dreaded, they did, in considerable numbers, break through their
subjection, and from being the tools of their landlords, became the
tools of their priests: in consequence of which defection they had to
endure all the sufferings which the rage of their thwarted taskmasters
could inflict upon them.*

It is moreover well established, though in the lamentable ignorance
which prevails in this country with respect to Ireland, it seems not to
be generally known, that, of those who are called, and give their votes
as, forty-shilling freeholders, it is a very small proportion indeed who
are really so; the remainder consisting of persons who not only have not
an interest to the value of forty shillings in the land, but who pay to
their landlords a full, and more than a full rent; and are registered as
freeholders by the grossest perjury on their own part, and the grossest
subornation or rather compulsion of perjury on that of the Irish
gentlemen, their landlords.†

It is true, as was justly observed by Col. Johnson, that the proper
remedy for these evils is not disfranchisement, but vote by ballot.[*]
Vote by ballot, however, there was no chance of obtaining.
Disfranchisement there was a chance of obtaining: it could do no harm,
and might do good; by taking away from a few lords of the soil the power
of bringing their thousands and tens of thousands to the poll, it would
tend to give at least somewhat more importance to the small number of
electors who can choose for themselves, without drawing down upon their
heads inevitable ruin. It is no mark of wisdom to reject what is good,
because you cannot have what is better.

On the other hand, we agree with Lord Milton,‡ that the good effects of
this measure have been much exaggerated. It has been assumed, as it
appears to us on scarcely any evidence, that the desire of making
freeholds for electioneering purposes, has been a great cause of the
minute subdivision of lands. That it may have been so in one or two
instances we do not deny; indeed it is sufficiently proved Edition:
current; Page: [89] that it has. But, that, as a general rule, such
political influence as the landlords of the predominant party might
acquire by splitting farms, over and above what they might have had
without it, could act upon them with sufficient force to counterbalance
the direct and obvious interest which they have in the good cultivation
of their estates, is a conclusion not to be founded on one or two, or
even on ten or twenty, instances. That the lands should be parcelled out
in small farms, was no more than is natural in a country where, till of
late, scarcely any tenants had capital enough to occupy large ones. Now,
when capital is flowing into the country, the landlords are rapidly
clearing their estates of the wretched cottier tenantry; uniting numbers
of small farms into one, and introducing a better system of cultivation.
Observe that the church lands, on which no freeholds can be created, are
just as minutely divided as the rest;* while in England, where political
influence is fully as much valued as in Ireland, the land is generally
let in large farms: why? because there are farmers possessed of
sufficient capital to occupy them; and because it is in general of much
more importance to a landlord that his lands should be cultivated by
persons of capital and intelligence, than that he should gain a few
votes, by means which are equally open to the opposite party, if they
are willing to make the same sacrifice.

We, therefore, do not claim for the proposed bill, the merit of giving
to Ireland a “sturdy and independent yeomanry;”† we bound its
pretensions to those of diminishing, in some small degree, the power of
the aristocracy, and putting an end to a great amount of perjury.
Though, even for these purposes, we are much inclined, with Mr. Leslie
Foster and Mr. Vesey Fitzgerald,[*] to think that it did not take a
range sufficiently wide, and that to produce any very sensible
improvement, the disfranchisement ought to have extended to freeholders
in fee, as well as to freeholders for lives.

In the debates on this question, it may be remarked, that the extremes
both of Toryism and of Whiggism were found on one side, and the more
moderate of both parties on the other. This anomaly appears to us to
have naturally arisen out of the circumstances of the case. The
thorough-goers on both sides, in their opposition to this measure, will
be found to have been perfectly consistent with themselves; while the
more moderate have on this occasion made a sacrifice of party
principles, from an honest desire to promote the public good.

Edition: current; Page: [90]
Every Englishman who knows any thing of the manner in which the
legislature of his own country is formed, knows perfectly well that the
great mass of the electors, though they have somewhat more of the form,
have as little of the reality of a free choice, as their degraded
brethren, the forty shilling freeholders of Ireland. If all the English
electors were disfranchised, who dare not vote but according to the
bidding of their landlords, or customers, so few would be left that
there would be no semblance of a popular choice, and the real amount of
the aristocratic power would be made universally apparent. This would
not suit either section of the aristocracy: neither the stronger
section, who are now the absolute masters of the government, nor the
weaker section, who hope to become the stronger, and by that means to
become the masters of the government in their turn.

In confirmation of the above remark, so far as it affects the Whig
party, it may be observed that the various plans which have been
proposed by that party for putting the election of Members of Parliament
upon a different footing, have been of a nature to add to the
aristocratic power, not to diminish it: and to add to it, too, in the
very manner to which the principle of the Irish freeholders’ bill is
most directly hostile, viz. by giving the franchise to a set of electors
who are irresistibly under aristocratic controul. One of these plans is
to take away the franchise from the electors of the rotten boroughs who
do exercise a free choice, though from their small number they are
interested in making a bad one, and to give an additional representation
to the county electors, who are almost all of them under the absolute
command of their landlords, and who are the very same class of electors
whom the Irish freeholders’ bill would disfranchise.[*] Another of their
plans, is to extend the elective franchise to copyholders; who would be
every where under exactly the same influence as the freeholders.[†]

The more consistent, therefore, and clear-sighted among the Whigs,
perceived that it was impossible for them to give their support to this
measure, without departing from the principles on which they had
constantly acted, and to which they were determined to adhere. Mr.
Lambton’s declaration, then, that he would oppose Catholic emancipation
in order to frustrate this measure, appears to us perfectly consistent,
and, on his own principles, proper.[‡]

The consistent Tories had exactly the same interest in opposing the
measure, as the consistent Whigs: they were also actuated by the general
hostility to change; and several (Mr. Goulburn for instance)[§] who
approved of the measure, opposed it with the view of thwarting Catholic
emancipation. Some persons have wondered that such men as Mr. Bankes
should stand forward on this occasion as the champions of popular
rights: but to us it appears nothing surprising, that a man Edition:
current; Page: [91] who has been all his life a determined opponent of
all innovation, should oppose it on this occasion as on any other.[*]

If we have succeeded in laying open the springs of action which impelled
both classes of opponents to say and do what they said and did against
the bill, the reader will be able to make the application to the
different speeches without our assistance, and we should have quitted
the subject had there not been one passage in the speech of Mr.
Brougham, which appears to us to call for particular animadversion.[†]

We do not allude to the bitter complaint which he made [pp. 192-3],
oddly enough, of the want of information, when there is probably no
subject relative to Ireland, in respect to which the information was
equally complete; nor to the still odder reason that he gave for
suffering the Irish freeholders to continue perjuring themselves,
because officers in the army, members of parliament, and bishops,
perjured themselves too [pp. 194-5]; nor even to the excellent
definition which he gave of the “natural influence of property,” when he
defined it to consist in driving Englishmen by threats to go to the poll
and utter a deliberate falsehood, enforcing that falsehood by the
ceremony of an oath, to put a candidate into parliament of whom they
knew nothing; of which influence he added that he did not complain, and
that it must exist every where.* The only part of his speech which we
have it in view to touch upon, is the unprovoked attack, which he went
out of his way to make, upon “the political economists.”

They were told by a class of men, who had carried their dogmatical
notions almost as far, and with a spirit similar to the religious
persecutions of other times—he meant the political economists, who had
held up a valued friend of his, Mr. Malthus, to public ridicule, only
because he differed from Mr. Ricardo on a mere metaphysical, not a
practical point—that they ought to pass this measure, &c. &c.

(Ibid., p. 193.)

We cannot see in what manner a knowledge of the circumstance, that the
political economists were intolerant, or had dogmatical notions,
conduced to the forming a right decision on the subject of Irish
freeholds; but the irrelevancy of this accusation is the least of the
faults, with which it is justly chargeable.

If, by the term “political economists,” Mr. Brougham intended to
designate any particular individuals, we would recommend him,—before he
again vituperates the cultivators of a science, the first principles of
which it would do him no harm to study,—to consult Lindley Murray’s
English Grammar,[‡] from which he will learn the difference between
nouns proper and appellative, and will be taught to avoid confounding
classes with individuals. But if he include under the expression
Edition: current; Page: [92] “political economists,” all or most of
those who have made the cultivation of that science their particular
pursuit, we have not heard of any act which has emanated from these
persons as a body; and we imagine that Mr. Malthus must have been
somewhat surprised to find himself represented by his “valued friend” as
having been “held up to public ridicule,” by a class of philosophers,
among whom he probably esteems himself to be not one of the least
considerable. It strikes us, too, as rather odd, that the act of
“holding a man up to public ridicule” should be regarded as proof of “a
spirit similar to the religious persecutions of other times.” Religious
persecutors have been wont to resort to tortures of a keener description
than public ridicule: and is Mr. Malthus the first person who has been
held up to ridicule for a “merely speculative” opinion?

To be serious, it is astonishing, that a man like Mr. Brougham should
either be ignorant himself, or should count upon so extraordinary a
degree of ignorance on the part of his audience, as to impute
intolerance to the political economists: a class of men who are by
nothing more distinguished, than by the mildness and urbanity with which
their warmest discussions have been carried on: a mildness till then
unknown in the history of controversy; and forming a most striking
contrast with the bitterness and animosity which have characterized the
disputes not merely of politicians and theologians, contending for power
over the bodies or souls of mankind, but even of the professors of
purely abstract science, for example the mathematicians: who in their
controversies with one another, or with those who have impugned any of
their doctrines, have on several occasions displayed even more than
ordinary arrogance, petulance, and ill-temper. He who was ignorant of
all this, or knowing it could charge the political economists with
dogmatism and intolerance, must have merely taken up the first bad name
which occurred to him, and without for a moment considering whether it
was applicable or not, flung it at the heads of those whom he had a mind
to assail.

We have not left ourselves space to comment at much length upon the two
remaining discussions on the Catholic question.[*] The subject was much
more thoroughly sifted in these two debates than in the foregoing: we
allude particularly to the speeches of Mr. Horace Twiss and Lord
Harrowby, by both of whom the only argument was put forward which really
goes to the bottom of the question, namely, that, for any mischievous
purpose, the Catholics would not gain one particle of power by
emancipation.[†] Mr. Charles Grant was, as usual, honest and manly.[‡]
The opponents of the Catholics begged the question against them, in all
the old, and a variety of new ways: but their speeches were in every
material feature so like those of their predecessors, that we need not
waste any words upon Edition: current; Page: [93] them. The only speech
deserving of notice on that side of the question was the speech of the
Bishop of Chester: and this not so much from the merits or demerits of
its arguments as from the lengths to which the right reverend prelate
was hurried by the clerical esprit de corps, and the cavalier manner in
which he treated all classes in Ireland, except the priesthood of the
church, “a priesthood,” (including, we suppose, the Honorable and
Venerable Archdeacon Trench, and the Rev. Mr. Morrett of Skibbereen)*
“which, in the moral desolation of Ireland, remained the Oasis of the
desert, and gave to the eye some points on which it could rest with
pleasure.”† It was ludicrous enough too, to hear a man who is pocketing
thousands a year by his opinions, and who has nothing to fear from a
strict adherence to them but removal from a lower grade of emolument and
grandeur to a higher, spout mock-heroics, and talk of martyrdom.

*     *     *     *     *

Hitherto what we have been mainly considering, in the different
speeches, has been their arguments. The occasion now calls for another
sort of remark.

In private life, no maxim, that has human conduct for its subject, is
more universally assented to than the paramount importance of an
inviolable adherence to truth. To charge a man with a disregard to truth
is justly considered as the most flagrant insult which can be put upon
him: and the state of mind which characterizes an habitual liar, as one
with which no good or great quality can easily coexist.

It has however been long ago observed by Addison, that party lies are in
a great measure exempt from this stigma; and that men who would sooner
die than be guilty of the slightest violation of truth for their
individual advantage, are ready, for the benefit of their party, to put
forth assertions which they not only know to be false, but which they
know cannot, in the common course of things, be believed by any body for
more than a few days.[*]

Whether matters have altered in this respect, since the days of Addison,
is what we do not pretend to determine. Thus much, however, will, it is
believed, be found to be borne out by a considerable body of modern
experience: that what would be a falsehood anywhere else, is a
justifiable piece of rhetorical artifice in the House of Commons; and
that gentlemen, in all other respects of the most unblemished Edition:
current; Page: [94] honour, and quite incapable of saying or doing any
thing which is generally regarded as dishonorable, are in the daily
habit of making assertions in Parliament, which would infallibly lead an
indifferent auditor to suppose that the convenience of an assertion for
their purposes was a circumstance much more regarded by them than its
truth.

It will be for the reader to judge, whether the assertions which we are
now about to quote, belong to the class of assertions which we have just
mentioned, or not. We will deal fairly by him and them; we will lay
before him,—together with the assertions,—if not the proofs, at least an
indication of the proofs, which lead us without hesitation to pronounce
them unfounded. It is possible that the gentlemen to whom they are
ascribed, may have been misrepresented by the reporters; if so, they are
bound in justice to the public and to themselves, to disavow them. It is
also, in the case of some of these gentlemen, just possible, that they
may not have known positively that the assertions were unfounded, but
only, not known them to be true. We shall be extremely glad to find that
the gentlemen have been misrepresented. We bear them no ill will; on the
contrary, we have for some of them individually great respect. In the
code of party ethics, the stain may not be a very black one; but we
confess it is one from which we would gladly see them freed.

Mr. Doherty:

Frequent allusions had been made to the partial administration of
justice in Ireland. Now he would say, and the experience of some years
entitled him to say it, that the Catholics of Ireland enjoyed the
fullest and fairest administration of justice. He affirmed, without fear
of contradiction from any Irish member, that the courts of justice were
equally open to the rich and the poor, without distinction of religious
sentiments.*

The same gentleman:

As far as the experience of seventeen years’ attendance on the Irish
circuit enabled him to judge, the administration of justice in ireland
was perfectly pure. He repeated that the administration of justice in
Ireland was perfectly pure, that the rights of the poor man were equally
respected with those of the rich, and that no distinction whatever was
made between Catholic and Protestant.†

Edition: current; Page: [95]
Mr. North:

Mr. Cobbett, who within the last two months had become the oracle of the
Catholics, had desired them to make out a list of the cases in which
justice had been denied, or in which oppression and violence had
received a sanction from the law. The Catholics, however, had drawn out
no such list, because they could not; no such cases of successful
injustice existing except in the heated imaginations of those who had
fabricated them.*

Mr. Goulburn:

It had been said that there was one law for the rich and another for the
poor in Ireland. If that meant that there was a denial of justice to the
poor man, he begged to deny the fact. With respect to magistrates, he
would assert, and he defied contradiction, that there was no such thing
as a disposition among them to take bribes for the administration of
justice to the poor.†

To the above list, it is with great pain we add the following passage;
which, however, is so vague and intangible that it can hardly be said to
contain an assertion at all, consequently not a false assertion.

Mr. Brownlow:

The Protestant gentlemen of Ireland, in the relations of parents,
landlords, and magistrates, followed the precepts of their religion, by
studying the good of all committed to their charge, in a manner not to
be surpassed by a similar body of men in any country.‡

The following assertion belongs to the same class:

The Earl of Roden:

The situation of the peasantry of Ireland had, he conceived, been very
much misrepresented. No set of people enjoyed more amply the benefits of
the British Constitution than the peasantry of Ireland.§

We shall not attempt to do what volumes would not do effectually, to
present the Edition: current; Page: [96] reader with the original of
this delightful picture: but we can at least tell him what to read. If
he will peruse those passages in the Evidence before the Committees to
which we are about to refer him, he will form some conception of the
purity of the administration of justice in Ireland (we are not speaking
of the superior courts), both in other respects, and in regard to the
taking of bribes; of the benefits which no set of people enjoy more
amply than the peasantry of Ireland, to wit, those of the British
constitution; and of the manner in which the Protestant gentlemen of
Ireland follow the precepts of their religion, by studying, in the
character of landlords and magistrates, and we will add, grand jurors,
the good of all committed to their charge. We have inclosed our
references to the most important passages within brackets. The authority
of any one of these witnesses may be cavilled at; but we recommend to
the reader to count them.


Before the Commons’ Committee of 1825.

Mr. [Daniel] O’Connell, pp. 51, 55-6, [60, 61]. Col. Currey, 297, [312].
Major Gen. Bourke, 324, [325], 326-7, 330, [336], 339, [340]. Rev. John
Keily, 397. Rev. Thomas Costello, [417], 418. Mr. Rochfort, 446, 448,
[449]. Mr. [Arthur] Kelly, 521, [522, 526]. Mr. Barrington, 578. Lord
Carbery, [603]. Mr. [John] Currie, [634]. Mr. [John] Godley, 741.
[Parliamentary Papers, 1825, VIII.]


Before the Commons’ Committee of 1824.

Mr. Blacker, pp. [60, 61]. Major Willcocks, 101, [109], 113. Major
Warburton, 164. Mr. [William Wrixon] Becher, [183, 184, 185]. Mr. Leslie
Foster, 242. Mr. Justice Day, [253, 257-9, 264]. Mr. [William Henry]
Newenham, 306. Mr. Macarty, [328-9, 332]. Rev. Michael Collins, 335,
336, [337, 371-7]. Mr. O’Driscol, 381, [383-5, 396]. Dr. [John Richard]
Elmore, [417]. Dr. Church, 424, [429-30]. Mr. Lawler, 441, 442-3.
[Ibid., Vol. VII.]


Before the Lords’ Committee of 1825.

Mr. Leslie Foster, pp. 55, [60], 65. Mr. Doherty, 91, 94, [95]. Mr.
O’Connell, [130], 131, 134, [135]. Major Gen. Bourke, 173, 176, [178],
180. Mr. [Joseph] Abbott, [196-8]. Rev. Henry Cooke, 217. Sir John
Newport, 288. Mr. Barrington, 305. Earl of Kingston, [437, 439].
Archdeacon Trench, [447]. Mr. Justice Day, [524], 526, 527, [528-9]. Mr.
Dominick Browne, 588. [Ibid., Vol. IX.]


Before the Lords’ Committee of 1824.

Major Willcocks, pp. 554-5. Major Warburton, [579]. Major [Thomas]
Powell, 609. Mr. [Alexander] Nimmo, [631-2], 659, 663, [665], 679. Mr.
Becher, 634, [637], 639. The Duke of Leinster, [Augustus Frederick
Fitzgerald,] Edition: current; Page: [97] 704. Mr. Macarty, 719. The
Marquis of Westmeath, [George Thomas Nugent,] 728-31. Mr. O’Driscol,
[733-4]. [Ibid., Vol. VII.]

But, infinitely more than all these, let him read from beginning to end
the evidence of Mr. Macdonnell, of Ballinasloe, before the Commons’
Committee of 1825: that part of it which relates to magistrates, that
part of it which relates to grand juries, that part of it which relates
to illegal tolls, and other illegal charges, and that part of it which
relates to tithes.[*] He will find there—it is not safe to tell him what
he will find: let him read for himself.

*     *     *     *     *

Among the minor proceedings of the last session relative to Ireland,
none are of sufficient importance to require notice, with the exception
of Mr. Hume’s motion concerning the Irish church, and the debate to
which it gave rise.[†]

As this was only a motion for inquiry, we are not called upon to give
any opinion on the expediency of a revision of the Church Establishment
of Ireland: a large subject, and one upon which we shall have other
opportunities of stating our opinions, at greater length than our limits
would have enabled us, on the present occasion, to afford. We shall
content ourselves, then, with an examination of the grounds, on which
the House resolved, that there was no need of inquiry.

The only speaker against the motion (Mr. Peel said but a few words)[‡]
was Mr. Canning. His arguments were two. One was, that a revision of the
Irish Church Establishment was contrary to the Union.[§] The other
consisted in calling the church revenues property, in denouncing all
interference with them as spoliation, and affirming that the House
might, with equal right, seize upon the lay tithes, and the property of
corporations. To these arguments Mr. Canning added (what is often more
effective than argument) vituperation: “he had never heard a principle
so base propounded for consideration in that House.”*

The first argument is defective in two ways: in the first place,
because, as was remarked by Sir Francis Burdett[¶] in his pointed answer
to Mr. Canning, the Act of Union is not a law of the Medes and Persians;
in the next place, because, supposing it were so, the opponents of the
motion failed, on their own shewing, in making it out to be a violation
of the Union. It is a mockery to say, that, in merely enacting that the
churches of England and Ireland should be united in one Protestant
Edition: current; Page: [98] Episcopalian church, to be subject to the
same laws, it was ever intended to tie up the hands of the legislature
from introducing any reform into either, which might render it more
conducive to its object, or to the good of the state. Mr. Peel attempted
to bolster up this flimsy argument, by referring to that article of the
Union by which it was provided, that the Irish bishops should succeed in
a certain order to seats in Parliament:[*] this he called recognizing
the number of bishops; and so it was: recognizing the actual number;
recognizing it as being the actual number: but not surely as a number
never to be altered, should any other number be, in the opinion of the
legislature, more eligible. Is a law to be construed as giving
perpetuity to every thing, the existence of which it takes for granted
as a fact, and provides for the consequences of it accordingly? If there
had been a provision in the Union to regulate the right of pasturage
upon a common, or of cutting turf upon a bog, would it have been a
consequence of that provision, that the common should never be ploughed
up, the bog never drained? If a man had bound himself by a contract to
give his footman a livery, would he by that contract have debarred
himself from ever parting with his footman?

The other argument, which turns upon the words property and spoliation,
was completely demolished in the masterly speech of Mr. Brougham,[†] who
pointed out the inherent distinctions between the revenues of the Church
and private property, and the consequent inapplicability of such a term
as spoliation to any measure for regulating their amount.
Spoliation,—whatever be meant by spoliation, must at any rate be
spoliation of somebody. The spoliation in question, if such it is to be
called, would not be spoliation of the present incumbents, since it was
proposed to leave their incomes untouched: it would not be spoliation of
their children, or heirs, since these would not have got the incomes,
and therefore cannot lose them. No man, no person, no actually existing
being would be deprived by the proposed measure of any thing which he
has, nor of any thing which he is entitled to expect. Of whom then would
it be spoliation? Of an ideal being; a mere imaginary entity: an
abstract idea: a name, a sound. It would, in one word, be spoliation of
nobody.

Having no better arguments than these, it is no wonder that Mr. Canning
should have had recourse to the old expedient of “flinging dirt.” It is
the characteristic of a bad cause to resort to such helps, as it is of a
good one to have no need of them.

Edition: current; Page: [99]


THE GAME LAWS
 1826

Edition: current; Page: [100]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, V (Jan., 1826), 1-22. Headed: “Art. I. Report from
the Select Committee on the Laws relating to Game. Ordered by the House
of Commons to be printed, 18th April, 1823. [Parliamentary Papers, 1823,
IV, 107-53.] / [John Weyland.] A Letter on the Game Laws. By a Country
Gentleman, a Proprietor of Game. [London:] Baldwin, [Cradock, and Joy,]
Paternoster Row, and Hatchard, Piccadilly, 1815. / [John Weyland.] A
Second Letter on the Game Laws. By a Country Gentleman, a Proprietor of
Game. [London:] Baldwin, [Cradock, and Joy,] Paternoster Row, and
Hatchard, Piccadilly, 1817. / [Edward Harbord.] Considerations on the
Game Laws. By Edward Lord Suffield. [London:] J. Hatchard and Son. 1825.
/ Reconsiderations on certain proposed Alterations in the Game Laws. By
George Bankes, Esq. [London:] J. Hatchard and Son. 1825.” Running
titles: “The Game Laws.” Unsigned; not republished Identified in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article on the Game Laws, in the 9th number of the
Westminster Review” (MacMinn, 7). For comment on the essay, see lvii
above.

Edition: current; Page: [101]


The Game Laws

when we learned from the newspapers, that a bill to reform the Game Laws
had been introduced into parliament by the representative of the
greatest agricultural county in England, had been supported by a home
secretary, and triumphantly carried through the Lower House; we pleased
ourselves with the thought that, for once, at least, the aristocracy of
Great Britain had shewn that the happiness and virtue of the bulk of the
community were not altogether a matter of indifference in their eyes.[*]
They have hastened to undeceive us. They have shewn a commendable
anxiety that the public may not continue long to think better of them
than they deserve. It has pleased our lords the peers to exercise, on
the occasion of Mr. Stuart Wortley’s bill, that glorious privilege of
crushing improvement, which has been vested in them, no doubt, for wise
purposes, by our happy constitution. The legislature of this country has
once more solemnly declared, that, come what will of the morals, the
liberties, and even the lives, of the great mass of the agricultural
population, the amusements at least of the aristocracy shall not be
invaded. It remains to be seen how this declaration will be received by
the public. How it ought to be received is evident enough.

To a superficial observer it might appear, that the wisdom and virtue to
which we are thus indebted for the perpetuation of poaching, and (by an
infallible consequence) of all other kinds of crime, are those of the
House of Lords. More accurate reflection shows, that the root of the
evil lies far deeper; that the peers have but borne their share in the
triumph of the few over the many; and that to lay the blame upon them
would be to throw that responsibility upon a part, which in justice
belongs to the whole.

In the examination which we thought it necessary to institute in our
first number Edition: current; Page: [102] into the nature and
composition of the British aristocracy, we pointed out the manner in
which the governing power is shared between the landed and the monied
interests; the landed interest, however, retaining a decided
preponderance.[*] Had any new proof been wanted of this preponderance,
such a proof would have been afforded by the fate of Mr. Stuart
Wortley’s bill. It is well known that those members of both branches of
the legislature, who voted against the bill, have belonged almost
exclusively to the class of landholders. The monied interest have been
almost unanimous in its favour. The reason is obvious: the exclusive
privilege which it was the object of the bill to take away, was a
privilege created not for them, but against them. The whole body of
peers are, almost without exception, landholders. Even in the Lower
House a large majority are either themselves landholders, or are
returned by that class. In that House, however, there were found
landholders possessed of common humanity, and of an ordinary share of
understanding, in sufficient numbers, when supported by the monied
interest, to turn the balance in favour of improvement. That it was
otherwise in a House composed almost entirely of landholders, only
proves that in the agricultural class, as in every class, the purely
selfish always form a large majority.

The fate of the Game bill, therefore, is a pretty conclusive proof,
what, in this country, the landholders can do: it is also a pretty
decisive specimen of what they will do, and such a specimen as,
antecedently to experience, it would not have been very easy to
anticipate.

Let us see what it is which the landholders get by these laws. They have
a little more game to shoot, and a little more game to eat, than they
possibly might have, if the game laws were amended; and they have the
privilege of sending such game as they have shot, and do not desire to
eat, as a present, to an unqualified friend, under pretence of its being
a rarity; though all the world knows that it may be had of any poulterer
for a few shillings.

Let us now turn our eyes to the other side of the account; and try to
form some conception, though it be but an imperfect one, of the price
which the Many pay to secure the Few in the enjoyment of these
inestimable advantages.

If we were writing for the “great men,” we should descant upon the
hardship of denying to the “second son of a man of £20,000 per annum,”
the liberty of shooting over his father’s estate,* and refusing to the
merchant or manufacturer the luxury of game, unless he happen to have a
qualified friend who is able and willing to keep his table supplied. In
the eyes of the said second son, or of the said merchant or
manufacturer, these grievances might, for aught we know, be more
acceptable subjects of remonstrance than those which we have chosen; and
there have been pamphlets enough, and speeches enough, in which these
and similar topics have Edition: current; Page: [103] been dwelt upon
usque ad nauseam. As, however, the little men happen to outnumber the
great men in the proportion of some thousands to one; and as, moreover,
in our estimation, to be first tempted to crime, and then transported
for it, with a considerable probability of being ultimately hanged, is a
greater evil than that of being debarred from the pleasure of shooting,
or the pleasure of eating, a partridge; we shall leave these
last-mentioned privations to the generous indignation of would-be
sportsmen, and of aldermen, with their associate speech-makers and
pamphlet-makers. Our objection to the Game Laws rests upon a different
ground. The class of evils to which we shall direct the attention of our
readers, are so immeasurably superior in magnitude, that we cannot think
it worth while to insist upon any others.

That among the poorer classes in the game-preserving districts, the
crime of poaching is almost universal, and that the habitual poacher
almost constantly ends by being a thief, are facts unhappily so
notorious, that to adduce any proofs in support of them is a labour
which may be spared. It is instructive, however, to mark the acute sense
which is entertained of these evils by those who, in their capacity of
magistrates, are best able to appreciate their magnitude and extent.

The receipt to make a poacher, [says Lord Suffield,] will be found to
contain a very few and simple ingredients, which may be met with in
every game county in England. Search out (and you need not go far) a
poor man with a large family, or a poor man single, having his natural
sense of right and wrong, and as much more as he was taught before he
was seven or ten years old; let him absent himself from church, or go to
sleep when he is there; give him little more than a natural
disinclination to work; let him exist in the midst of lands where the
game is preserved; keep him cool in the winter, by allowing him
insufficient wages to purchase fuel; let him feel hungry upon the small
spare pittance of parish relief; and if he be not a poacher, it will
only be by the blessing of God. In the poacher thus easily concocted, my
experience justifies me in asserting, that we have at least a fair
promise, if not the absolute certainty, of an ultimately accomplished
villain.*

The extent and progress of the evil, [says the able author of the
letters on the Game Laws,] cannot be conceived by those who are not
conversant with the lower ranks in the country villages. From extensive
observation and inquiry, I believe in my conscience, that it is not too
much to assert, that three fourths of the crimes which bring so many
poor men to the gallows, have their first origin in the evil and
irregular habits, necessarily introduced by the almost irresistible
temptations held out, in consequence of the prohibitions of the Game
Laws, to a nightly breach of their enactments. This I can safely declare
of my own knowledge—that of the numerous country villages with which I
am acquainted, not one exists in which the profligate and licentious
characters may not trace the first and early corruption of their habits
to this cause. The experience of every impartial magistrate, of every
judge of assize, will fortify this assertion; many, indeed, have openly
declared it.†

This state of things, dreadful as it is, the situation in which the
country labourer is placed, might of itself have led us to anticipate.

Edition: current; Page: [104]
It is well known that, over a great part of England, the common
agricultural labourer, by the most incessant toil, can scarcely earn
more than nine-pence or a shilling a day. In comparison with this the
gains of the poacher must be enormous. A gang of poachers has been known
to take as much as three sacks of game in one night.* At however low a
price game may occasionally have been sold, the dividend of each poacher
upon a booty like this must have been ample. The pursuit is not only no
toil, but a positive pleasure; the risk of detection is little or
nothing; for though an habitual poacher probably is in most cases
ultimately discovered, the chances are many to one against the detection
of any individual act. The same feelings which guard the honesty of the
poor man on other occasions, have no existence here; for nothing is more
notorious than that the taking of game is regarded as no crime, either
by the offenders themselves, or by their neighbours. A little wire and
string are the only materials required; and the facilities which exist
for the immediate disposal of game can only be appreciated by those who
have read the minutes of evidence taken before the committee of the
House of Commons. Is it not, then, much more wonderful that any should
resist such temptations, than that so many should yield to them?

If, by frequent and undetected repetition, the poor man has acquired a
habit of trusting either wholly or in part to the illegal traffic for
his subsistence; the first time that by accident or precaution he is
prevented from obtaining his usual supply of game, he is averse to
return to that life of toil which he has abandoned, and unable, perhaps,
if his practices are suspected, to obtain employment were he to seek it.
Inured now to the breach of the laws, he no longer regards the violation
even of acknowledged property in the same light as before; what little
scruple he has, soon yields to the pressure of necessity, and the
orchard, the hen-roost, or the sheep-fold becomes the next object of his
depredations. His illicit pursuits, too, bring him into contact with
other characters of greater experience in crime; with poachers of longer
standing than himself, and of more depraved habits; with thieves by
profession, who, in the exercise of their calling, do not neglect a line
of business at once so easy and so safe.

The thieves who become poachers, [says Lord Suffield,] united with the
poachers who become thieves, are usually those who lead the gangs whose
bloody and ferocious deeds are so frequently recorded during the winter
months in all the newspapers of the day. These desperadoes provide guns
and other instruments, the materiel for poaching—they hire (the fact
falls within my own immediate knowledge) poor men, generally upon the
same wages, or very little more, than are paid by the game-preserver to
his night-watchers—they discipline these unhappy mercenaries in the
exercise of their calling—they sometimes claim the whole of the
booty—offer their mighty protection, and often actually do pay the
penalties, if any novice should get into trouble by detection in a
trivial offence on some other occasion; and finally, they undertake to
dispose of the game with safety and profit, whenever it suits the
convenience of the young beginner to produce any. (Pp. 26-7.)

Edition: current; Page: [105]
Under such tuition it is not necessary to trace the progress of the
unhappy novice from crime to crime. He who knows the first steps, can
imagine the last.

If, on the other hand, he be detected, he is imprisoned for one, two, or
three months, with or without hard labour, as the caprice or revenge of
the game-preserving magistrate, who sits in judgment in his own cause,
may dictate. If things were so ordered in an English gaol, that
imprisonment should have the effect of making a man better, instead of
worse, this temporary suspension of his illegal pursuits, and separation
from his guilty associates, might be made the means of saving him from
destruction. After he had endured, or while he was enduring, his
allotted quantum of punishment, pains might be taken to eradicate his
mischievous habits, to implant good ones in their stead, and to send him
forth an altered man. This is what might be done, if prisons were what
they might be made. To all who know what English prisons are, it is
unnecessary to say, that their effects are precisely the reverse. There
is nothing, even in the best of them, which deserves the name of
reformatory discipline. Nothing is done to make the prisoner better; and
when there is nothing doing to make him better, it is pretty certain,
that there is enough doing to make him worse. Habituated to the society
of criminals, he not only becomes prepared for the perpetration of any
villainy, but learns from his associates the most skilful modes of
committing crime and eluding detection. On leaving prison, he finds
himself shut out from all decent means of obtaining a livelihood; those
to whom he once looked for employment have learned from experience what
sort of characters the discipline of an English gaol turns out upon
society; his imprisonment, instead of being the instrument of his
reformation, is the badge of his infamy, and an effectual bar to his
ever retracing his steps, and quitting the path which leads from crime
to crime, from punishment to punishment, and terminates in premature
death.

This may suffice for a general sketch of the progress of village
criminality. Particular instances, without number, might be selected
from the works before us, if particular instances could give any
additional certainty to general facts so unhappily notorious.

Daniel Bishop, one of the principal officers of the Bow-street Police
Office, said on his examination,

“I think within four months there have been twenty-one transported that
I have been at the taking of, and through one man turning evidence in
each case, and without that they could not have been identified; the
game-keepers could not, or would not, identify them.” [Parliamentary
Papers, 1823, IV, 138.]

“You detected some men in Dorsetshire; how far did they come?—Sixteen
miles, the whole of the village from which they were taken were
poachers; the constable of the village, and the shoemaker, and other
inhabitants of the village.” [P. 137.]

“Does not the poacher become frequently, what he does not allow himself
in the first instance to be, a thief?—Yes; they go on from step to step;
I had a case at Bishop’s Stortford, where they began with poaching and
went on to thieving; and one was hanged, and there were seven or eight
transported for life.” [P. 138.]

Edition: current; Page: [106]
“Have you ever heard from any of the poachers that they have been
concerned in other robberies?—Yes, I have; poaching is the first step to
all depredations; if they are disappointed in poaching, they will go on
and rob hen-roosts, or break into any farmer’s house, or steal a sheep,
they have told me that.” [P. 136.]

Mr. John Stafford, chief clerk at the Bow-street office, being asked
whether he was acquainted with any cases of particular atrocity,
answered:

“I think one of the worst cases that I recollect, and that was a pretty
early one (in the year 1816), was the case in Gloucestershire, where
there was a large gang thoroughly organized, and bound together with
secret oaths, that attacked the keepers belonging to the Berkeley
estate, near Berkeley castle. Vickery, who was a very intelligent
officer, was sent down upon that occasion, and from his exertions and
the assistance he met with in the neighbourhood, he was enabled to bring
the whole gang, or pretty nearly so, to justice. It consisted of about
twenty; there were thirteen or fourteen of them, I think, tried and
convicted of the murder. A man of the name of William Ingram, one of the
principal keepers, was shot dead upon the spot; another of the keepers
had an eye shot out; another was shot through the knee; and several of
them were dangerously wounded. A man of the name of Allen, who was a
farmer, and also a collector of rates or taxes in the parish, and looked
upon as a respectable man, was at the head of that gang; and Allen was
executed with a man of the name of Penny, who was a labourer, and was
supposed to be the man that actually shot the game-keeper who was
killed; the other offenders were all transported for life. And after
that a young man, who was a lawyer or a lawyer’s clerk in some village
adjoining, and who had administered the oath to those people to bind
them together, was also tried and transported; it turned out that he
swore them upon a Ready Reckoner,[*] but the court took that as
sufficient, it having the effect to bind them.”

“Was the union of these men solely for the purpose of poaching?—Solely
for the purpose of poaching in that instance, and the offence arose in
the act of poaching. About the same time, I rather think a little before
that, there were two men executed at Chelmsford; their offence was not
committed in the act of poaching, but they certainly commenced their
career by being poachers. There was a shoemaker of the name of Trigg,
who lived at a little village called Berden, in Essex, who was shot . .
. . Vickery and Bishop were sent down, and I went afterwards myself to
direct them, and after a little time they succeeded in apprehending two
men whose names were Turner and Pratt; they were apprehended at Bishop’s
Stortford, and the number of implements that were found in the
possession of these two men, exceeded any thing I ever heard of or saw
before. It was astonishing the number of picklock keys they had, also
wires, snares, every thing for the carrying on the combined operations
of poachers and thieves . . . . Both were convicted and executed for the
murder; and one of these men himself told me, that he had all his
misfortunes to blame himself for, from originally commencing poacher;
that poaching led them out at nights, and into bad company; that when
they went out to get game, if they were disappointed in getting game,
they would take poultry sometimes, and sheep; and that sometimes, rather
than go home without any thing, they would break open houses; and it was
in the breaking open of this shoemaker’s shop, that the man was shot in
coming down to prevent the act; each charged the other with the actual
commission of the murder, but they admitted they were both present.”

“Were these people at the time connected with poaching, and was poaching
one of their occupations?—Certainly.”

Edition: current; Page: [107]
“From the result of your information, has it appeared to you, that
thieves and poachers are frequently connected together in the country,
and that they are frequently the same persons?—I think that very soon
after men become poachers, they either become thieves or are led into
connection with them. I think that many men, perhaps, would not have
been thieves if they had not previously become poachers.” [Ibid., pp.
143-4.]

Mr. Page, a Surrey magistrate, whose evidence to this point is
particularly valuable, because he is hostile to any alteration in the
law, says “I conceive that poachers are all poultry stealers and sheep
stealers also.” [Ibid., p. 149.]

Mr. William Peel, another opponent of the bill, stated in Parliament,
that one fourth of all the commitments in England were on account of
offences against the game laws.[*]

The return made to the House of Commons shews that the number of persons
in prison for such offences, in England and Wales, on the 24th February
1825, amounted to 581.[†]

And lastly, Mr. Secretary Peel, in his place in Parliament, declared,
that the commitments for this class of offences, during the last six or
seven years, had exceeded 9000; being considerably more than 1200
annually.[‡]

When we consider that, at least, eleven-twelfths of these unfortunate
persons, from the loss of character which they suffered by being thrown
into gaol, and the habits which they acquired while there, became, by a
sort of moral necessity, confirmed and accomplished depredators, and the
majority in all probability ended their career in New South Wales, in
the hulks, or on the gallows, we may form some faint conception of the
amount of evil which is annually inflicted upon the community by the
game laws. And for what purpose?

Let us concede to the advocates of these laws, all which they could ask.
Let us grant that the end and object for which all this misery is
occasioned, is not the mere maintenance of an exclusive privilege. Let
us grant that the measures proposed by Mr. Stuart Wortley would
altogether extirpate the breed of game. This, at least, is the maximum
of its mischievousness, the very “head and front of its offending;”[§]
and if it did so much, it could not well do more. Now, is there any one,
we ask, whose love of partridge is so strong, or his love of his fellow
creatures so weak, that if he had to choose between depriving himself of
the former, and inflicting all the evils, which we have attempted to
delineate, upon the latter, he would feel so much as a moment’s
hesitation in making his choice? Or if our great landholders be such
persons, have they any reason to complain of any one for holding them up
to hatred and contempt?

Edition: current; Page: [108]
The end of property, as of all other human institutions, is, or ought to
be, no other than the general good. If the existence of any particular
kind of property be contrary to the general good, that kind of property
ought not to exist. If the existence of game, and the existence of all
this crime and misery, be necessarily concomitant, a reward ought to be
offered for every head of game till the whole breed be extinct. Nor have
there been wanting men who have had honesty enough and courage enough to
avow such a doctrine, in the very face of an assembly of landholders.
Lord Milton “thought the House had nothing to do with the effect which
the bill might have, either as to the increase or the diminution of
game. It was not the duty of parliament to provide for the amusement of
country gentlemen, but to legislate for the preservation of the morals
of the country.”* Lord Suffield, whose benevolence and manliness form so
striking, and, to him, so honourable a contrast with the cowardice, the
bigotry, and the selfishness, which fill the benches around him,
declared in the House of Lords (February 20, 1824) that “so enormous
were the evils produced by the present system, that he would give his
support to the proposed alteration, though its effect were to be, to
sweep every head of game from the face of the earth.”†

According to Mr. William Peel, indeed, even the extirpation of game
would not put an end to those evils, of which the existence of game is
positively proved to be the cause. “Because if there were no poachers,
there would not cease to be criminals. After a few years, when the
occupation of poachers should be destroyed, was it supposed that these
men would return to the habits of honest industry?”[*] We never met with
any one who supposed that because there were no poachers, there would
cease to be criminals; nor did we ever meet with any one who supposed,
that if there were no murderers, there would, for that reason, cease to
be criminals. As little, however, did we ever meet with any one, who
argued from thence, that it was not desirable there should cease to be
murderers; or that it was not worth while to make a considerable
sacrifice, if by any sacrifice this object could be attained. That they
who have grown old in the crimes to which they were first allured by the
temptations arising out of the game laws, might not cease to be
criminals under any laws, is probable enough. But if the dreadful evils
which these laws have produced in time past cannot now be remedied, even
by the abolition of the laws, does it follow that they should not be
prevented from continuing to produce evils equally dreadful in time to
come? If it be proved, and the reader can judge for himself whether it
be so, that poaching is, to an enormous extent, the cause of other
crimes, that cause to which they owe their existence, and but for
Edition: current; Page: [109] which, they would not have been; the
truism, that “because there were no poachers, there would not cease to
be criminals,” will avail the country gentlemen very little.

Mr. Stuart Wortley’s bill is an experiment, and ought to be considered
as such. It is an experiment to ascertain, whether it be possible to
have the pleasures of game, without the evils of poaching. Granting that
its success is doubtful; granting that its promoters have failed of
making it perfectly certain that it would really produce all the good
which they anticipate; does this exculpate those by whom the bill has
been thrown out? No! If they, who have forbidden this experiment, had
instituted any other experiment which might afford a better chance of
mitigating the evil—if, objecting to this mode, they had pointed out any
other mode by which their amusements might be reconciled with the
happiness and virtue of their countrymen,—something more might have been
said for their benevolence as well as for their wisdom. But if they who
have so strenuously resisted this alteration, are as strenuous in their
resistance to every alteration in that system which is the cause of such
unspeakable evils; if they oppose this plan, only as they oppose every
plan by which their exclusive privileges are to be curtailed; then are
they accountable for all the misery which is produced, for all the lives
which are sacrificed, by the direct or indirect consequences of the
system; and whatever appellation is due to the man who, for a paltry
gratification, knowingly and wilfully inflicts the greatest conceivable
evils upon hundreds and thousands of his countrymen, that appellation
properly belongs to them.

The alterations proposed to be made in the existing game laws by Mr.
Stuart Wortley’s bill are principally three: 1. to legalize the sale of
game. 2. to abolish qualifications. 3. to render game the private
property of the person on whose land it is killed.

Of the first two of these proposed changes, we unequivocally approve;
and of the principle of the third, though we disapprove of some of the
details.

It is against the first proposition, to legalize the sale of game, that
the enemies of the bill have mainly directed their opposition. Let us
hear what can be said for them on this point, by the ablest of their
advocates.

I must be allowed, [says Mr. Bankes,] to insert a short extract from
Lord Suffield’s pamphlet. “Few persons, I am apt to think,” says his
lordship, “are aware of the sum it costs to rear pheasants. I have seen
a very accurate calculation, made upon a series of years, for one of the
best stocked estates in the kingdom, and computing at the very lowest
rate, it appears that every pheasant killed thereon, has cost the
proprietor twenty shillings.” I suggest, then, [continues Mr. Bankes,]
that if the proprietor attempts to undersell the poacher, supposing game
to be sold at the same rate at which it stands at this day, as between
poulterer and poacher, viz. for pheasants, sometimes no more than one
shilling a head, he, the proprietor, will lose nineteen shillings a head
upon every item of his dealings, and this on the very lowest rate of
computation: the idea of underselling, therefore, is absurd, and some
other principle of excluding poachers from the market must be fixed
upon, or the subject will not bear a grave consideration; for, admitting
that the profit of the poacher were Edition: current; Page: [110]
reduced far below even the low quotation which I have above made, if he
gained only one penny a head, and subjected the landed proprietor, his
competitor, to a loss of nineteen shillings and eleven pence farthing,
still, is it not clear, that he would poach and sell to advantage? the
prime cost of the pheasants to the poacher being the expense of a little
wire and string; a cheap and durable material! Of the value of his time
and trouble, I say nothing, for it is admitted that he is allured by an
innate love of the sport, which is the common property of our nature; no
wonder, therefore, if he shall unwillingly forego a course of life,
which combines profit with amusement; and, in whatever ratio the profit
may decrease, the amusement is still the same: he will pursue it,
therefore, so long as the produce will barely feed and maintain him.*

Now this, we own, might appear very plausible, did we not happen to
possess positive proof directly in the teeth of it. The evidence taken
before the committee establishes, that a considerable proportion of the
game which is sold in London, is even now received from the rightful
owners. One poulterer says, that he draws one third of his supply from
that source. Another, that he has had upwards of 400 head of game per
week from a qualified person. Another, that he has had two hampers, or
three hampers, a day, from noblemen.[*]

I have heard, [says Lord Suffield,] from a friend, on whose veracity I
can place the most perfect reliance, of a nobleman who did send his game
to a poulterer. The poulterer returned him in exchange a certain
quantity of poultry, for which, without this set-off, he would most
unquestionably have been paid in cash. From another friend, equally
entitled to credit, I have heard of another nobleman who actually did
sell his game to a London dealer, and was annually paid for it in money.
From a third friend, whom I believe as implicitly as the two former, I
have heard of a country magistrate who now annually pockets from three
to five hundred pounds by the sale of his game. . . . An example has
fallen within my own knowledge, of a proposal made by a London dealer,
to take all the game a gentleman, possessing a large estate well
furnished, might choose to send him. And what renders the matter still
more singular, and still more illustrative of the fact, that such
contracts are common—the party applied to was a gentleman whose
character was of a kind to render his entering upon such a traffic
utterly improbable, and the dealer had not the slightest knowledge of
him, either personally or by intercourse of business. I ask, then—I
confidently ask, is it reasonable to suppose that such a proposal as
this could be made to a gentleman, unless the professed dealer in game
had some reason to think it would be accepted? And what reason could he
have for thinking it would be accepted in this instance, but the
positive knowledge of similar transactions?†

Proprietors, then, in considerable numbers, do sell their game, and find
poulterers to buy it, even under the present law, under which it is
alike punishable to deal with the lawful proprietor, and with the
poacher; notwithstanding, too, that the game which the gentlemen send,
being mostly shot, is usually in worse condition than the snared game of
the poacher. There could not well be a more Edition: current; Page:
[111] complete practical refutation of Mr. Bankes’s nineteen shilling
argument. If a proprietor can afford to sell his pheasants* contrary to
law, he can afford to sell them according to law.

We have reason to believe, that Lord Suffield’s estimate of the cost of
rearing pheasants is greatly above the mark.† Be this, however, as it
may; game is an article, the price of which is not regulated by its cost
of production. It is killed for amusement, and not for profit. If so
many landholders are willing to rear pheasants at so enormous a cost,
for the mere amusement, when they are not permitted to send them to
market at all, it is not very likely that, if the sale were legalized,
they would cease to rear them, because, in addition to the amusement,
they could only obtain five shillings a head for them, and not twenty.

As we are anxious to make every possible concession to our opponents, we
will suppose that the object for which game is preserved, is not the
pleasure of killing it, but the pleasure of giving it away; a pleasure
which would cease, when the game itself ceased to be, or rather to be
called, a rarity; and that the game-preserver would no longer incur so
great an expense merely for the amusement of shooting. What then? The
worst that could happen, is, that there would be no preserves, no
feeding, no artificial multiplication of game. Whatever might be the
case with the game which is fed and preserved, it cannot be said of the
game which flies about and finds subsistence for itself, that the cost
of its production is nineteen or twenty shillings. Of such game the cost
of production is really nothing; and what Mr. Bankes says of the thief,
may be said, with equal truth, of the proprietor, that “even the lowest
price must always bring in more than he gave.”[*] The sum total, then,
of the greatest evil, which, under any possible circumstances, could
arise from the measure, is, that there would be no more battues, and
that gentlemen would be under the necessity of resigning themselves to
the hard fate of killing, like their fathers before them, twenty or
thirty birds in a day, instead of four or five hundred. We cannot say
that we think them much to be pitied; we have no sensibility to spare
for this kind of distress; and even if the worst fears of the country
gentlemen were realized, if an end were put, for good and all, to
game-preserving, we are inclined to suspect that the sun would continue
to rise and set, very much as usual. Such a consummation, perhaps, is
rather to be wished than dreaded;[†] for experience has proved, that if
there be one passion, more than another, which, when once it takes
possession of a man, has a tendency to extinguish in his mind every
spark of Edition: current; Page: [112] humanity, and to make him
inflict, without remorse, for the sake of a selfish gratification, the
most immeasurable evils upon his fellow-creatures, it is the passion of
game-preserving; “the very mention,” it has been truly said, “of hares
and partridges in the country, too often puts an end to common humanity
and common sense.”[*]

But we are told, that, if game were made saleable, no penalty could be
inflicted upon any one for having it in his possession, and the
principal means of detecting poachers would thus be sacrificed.

If game is made saleable, [says Mr. Bankes,] it may, by possibility,
form part of the provision of the bill which makes it so, that licensed
brokers alone shall deal it forth to the public, and that qualified
persons alone shall be the first suppliers of it; but, that there should
be any qualification or license required for the buyer, is of course out
of the question; that which every man may buy, it follows of
consequence, every man must have a right to hold in possession,
unmolested and uncontrolled; consequently, when the proposed law shall
have passed, if the poacher shall succeed in taking his prey from the
trap or wire unnoticed, his danger is at an end; if questioned, the law
will have furnished him with an answer; nay, how shall the law allow of
his being questioned? unless, indeed, under such suspicious
circumstances relative to time or place, as would justify the detention
of a man under the same circumstances, who might have fowls or any other
articles of property about him; but in such cases the detention is
solely intended to give opportunity for an owner to come forward, and if
no owner shall appear, the suspected party is necessarily discharged.
With respect to game, since it cannot be identified, ownership of course
cannot be proved; a game-keeper, who should attempt to swear to the bulk
or plumage of his master’s pheasants, would he not be laughed at by a
jury? It will be of no avail, therefore, to commit a man, though you
should meet him not far from your own preserves, with part of your
patrimony, ratione soli, peeping from his pockets; for, unless by his
own confession, he never can be convicted. Will it be said—Oh! but a
poor man—a pauper—a man who has no means—a man who cannot have bought;
we may convict him—What? convict him of being poor!*

It is a very trite adage, that prevention is better than cure. If you
cannot go to the root of the evil, it is the next best thing, but only
the next best, to lop off the branches. So far as regards those who
poach for gain, it is sufficiently proved that the motive to poaching
would be taken away, if the sale of game was legalized, since they would
be undersold by the rightful owner. It is of very little consequence,
therefore, so far as they are concerned, whether the facilities of
detection would be increased or diminished. What it is not a man’s
interest to do, he will not do, whether the facilities of detection be
great or small. It is only with respect to those who poach for sport,
that the means of detection need to be attended to. What proportion this
class of poachers bears to the whole, it is impossible to guess—it can
only be proved by experiment. We may be permitted to doubt, however,
whether the penalty against unqualified persons having game in their
possession, be the chief, or anything like the chief, security against
Edition: current; Page: [113] poaching. “Poachers,” says Mr. Secretary
Peel, “are much more frequently convicted for being detected in the act
of killing game than for having game in their possession. It appeared,
from a return of persons convicted for having game in their possession,
in Norfolk, Suffolk, Dorsetshire, and Sussex, that they bore no
proportion to those convicted for being found out at night in the act of
destroying game.”* In fact, as we have already observed, and as is fully
proved by the Minutes of Evidence, the facilities for the immediate
disposal of game are such, that unless from mismanagement, it can very
rarely happen to a poacher to be found with game in his possession,
unless the game-keepers have the good fortune to catch him immediately
after he has shot it, or taken it out of the snare. It would still be
punishable, in any but persons legally entitled to game, or their
game-keepers, to possess snares, or any other engines for the
destruction of game, except a gun. To be found out at night with a gun,
unless for sufficient reasons assigned, might also be punishable.

We have hitherto contented ourselves with pointing out the specific
evils arising out of the prohibition of the sale of game, and have
abstained from insisting upon the general argument, that all laws, which
are practically inoperative, should be repealed. Yet this is an argument
which the supporters of the existing laws would find it extremely
difficult to answer. “If laws,” says Mr. Secretary Peel, “stand upon our
Statute Book which are practically evaded and violated every day; this
is of itself a sufficient reason for their repeal—the constant violation
of laws is a bad example. And by whom are these laws violated? In
general, by those whose duty it is to enforce the laws of the country.
It often happens that a gentleman who is occupied during the morning in
enforcing the laws, himself sets the example of violating them in a
subsequent part of the day.”[*]

The extent to which these laws are violated needs not to be dwelt upon,
for it is sufficiently known. Suffice it to say, that one poulterer
says, he would undertake to provide every family in London with a dish
of game on the same day; another, that he would engage to supply the
whole House of Commons, without the least difficulty, twice a week for
the whole season; and a third, that he sells on the average 500 head per
week for about three months in the season, and has sold upwards of 1200
head in the course of a single week.[†] It appears, indeed, that almost
the only person who is ever prevented, by the existing laws, from
selling game, is the rightful owner. For the end for which they were
designed, no laws can be more completely and notoriously inefficacious.
For the end of securing to the Edition: current; Page: [114] thief
almost a monopoly of the market, they are unfortunately to a great
degree effectual.

On the subject of qualifications, but little needs be said; the state of
the law under this head is too ridiculous to require any exposure. Let
the reader who wishes to know it in all its absurdity, turn to Mr.
Secretary Peel’s humorous description.[*] For what reason should not the
poorest man in the kingdom be at liberty to kill game, if invited by the
owner of it? except in so far as it might be expedient to make this
privilege a source of revenue, by requiring the payment of a certain tax
for a game certificate. There cannot be a more unobjectionable subject
of taxation; and the only restriction necessary to be observed (a
restriction applicable to all other taxes) is, not to raise the tax so
high as to afford an adequate motive for its evasion.

To the general principle of vesting the property of game in the owner of
the soil on which it is found, there can, as it appears to us, be no
valid objection. It has, indeed, been said, that, inasmuch as the
produce of the soil which the game feeds on, belongs to the occupier,
and inasmuch as it is just that the game should be the property of him
at whose expense it is maintained, therefore, the ownership of game
should be vested in the occupier, and not in the landlord; a question,
in reality, of mere form, and not of substance, since in whatever way
this matter might be regulated, the terms of the lease would be adjusted
accordingly. The tenant, of course, would be willing to give a
considerable additional rent, for the power of destroying, and the right
of appropriating game. On the other hand, if the landlord chose to
reserve to himself the exercise of the same privileges, either
conjointly with his tenant or exclusively (as he now reserves the right
of sporting over the land), he would also, as a matter of course, make a
proportional abatement of rent.

So much for the principles of the bill. Details are foreign to our
present purpose. We shall not, therefore, take up the time of our
readers by examining, whether the subordinate arrangements might or
might not be improved. We trust that we have sufficiently established
the general expediency of the measure.

There is scarcely any thing so bad, as not to have its use; and however
bad a thing may appear on the whole, nevertheless in a fair estimate of
its character, such uses as it may have, ought not to be omitted. Even
the Game Laws, it must be acknowledged, have their uses; and it is but
just that these should be taken for as much as they are worth.
Accordingly, near the commencement of this article, we made an
enumeration of as many of them as at that time occurred to us; which
seemed chiefly to consist in affording to honourable gentlemen a few
additional pheasants and partridges, to be consumed at their own tables,
or despatched (with compliments) to their friends. We omitted, however,
to notice one highly important use, of which, to say the truth, we were
not, at the time, apprized; but, having since received information of
it, fairness requires that we should afford it a Edition: current; Page:
[115] place in our pages. That our readers may not suppose it to be the
work of our invention, we inform them that it rests on no less authority
than that of a writer in the Sporting Magazine, under the signature of
“Nimrod,” who, we are told, is regarded as a sort of oracle by the
sporting world; and that the person to whom, according to Nimrod,
mankind are indebted for the idea, is “a large landed proprietor, a
magistrate for two counties, a preserver of game” (this we could have
guessed) “and a member of parliament of more than twenty years
standing.”

I am one of those, [says this preserver of game,] who think that evil
alone does not result from poaching. The risk poachers run from the
dangers that beset them, added to their occupation being carried on in
cold dark nights, begets a hardihood of frame, and contempt of danger,
that is not without its value. I never heard or knew of a poacher being
a coward. They all make good soldiers, and military men are well aware,
that two or three men, in each troop or company, of bold and
enterprizing spirits, are not without their effect on their comrades.
Keepers are all brave men, and willingly subject themselves to great
perils to preserve their employer’s property.[*]

What a pity that the good old English practice of highway robbery has of
late years so lamentably declined; a misfortune for which we are in some
measure indebted to the mistaken policy of our ancestors, who most
unwisely laid hold of every highwayman they could catch, and hanged him.
Had they been gifted with a tithe of the wisdom which falls to the lot
of a modern game-preserver, they would have joyfully embraced the
opportunity of recruiting the army with such undaunted spirits; in which
case the highway might very probably, to the great advantage of the
state, have remained a nursery for soldiers to this day. Bereft of this
resource, the squires are now compelled to betake themselves to the
poachers; who, if they are not highwaymen, are something very nearly as
bad.

Considering the vast importance of an army to Great Britain, it would be
squeamishness to find fault with the morality of filling the country
with bloodshed and murder, in order to make good soldiers; since, after
all, it is not much worse than impressment, which, however, we do not
remember to have ever heard so ingeniously defended. But we submit that,
if to the training of a good soldier it be indispensably necessary that
he be engaged, once a week, or thereabouts, in a nightly affray, means
might be found of securing to him this inestimable advantage without the
expense of so much crime and so much wretchedness to the community.
Instead of fighting against the gamekeepers, these future heroes might
be set to fight against one another: a battle-royal might be held, if
deemed requisite, every “cold, dark night” in the season; with the
assistance of a drill-serjeant, they might be put in the way of
destroying one another scientifically, which would at all events be a
point gained; and if an adequate motive were found wanting, when
pheasants and partridges were no longer to be the reward of their toils,
parliament could not decently refuse an annual grant, to Edition:
current; Page: [116] promote so laudable an end. Or if it be the pains
and penalties of poaching, rather than the nighly affrays, which beget
that “contempt of danger,” so highly prized by this sporting
philanthropist, we would suggest the sending down commissioners, once a
year, into every village, there to call together all the able-bodied men
in the neighbourhood, for the purpose of drawing lots, which of them
should be hanged or transported. This scheme (besides being fairer than
the present system) would have a twofold operation, and, indeed, in
every supposable case, could not but prove highly advantageous, since if
it failed in producing “hardihood and contempt of danger,” it would have
the opposite advantage of striking a salutary terror into the lower
classes. There is indeed, as we are informed by the same authority, “a
certain canting party in the House of Commons, who want to appear better
than their neighbours; and, in affectation of finer feelings, would
soon, if left to themselves, alter the bold and manly character of this
country” (of the poachers, we presume) “but I hope they will never
succeed:”[*] these persons who “want to appear better than their
neighbours,” for which insolent wish they deserve to be hunted out of
respectable society, will be apt to state, as an objection to the
proposed plan, that it involves the shedding of innocent blood; but if
it be necessary that a certain number of our countrymen should be
annually hanged, pour encourager les autres,[†] we conceive that it is
better to take hold of the first man you meet, and hang him out of hand,
than to wait till he shoots a gamekeeper, and then hang him for the
offence.

The arguments of the landed gentlemen against Mr. Stuart Wortley’s bill,
are not all of them, it may be supposed, of the force of that last
mentioned; several of them, however, are curious, and characteristic.
Thus, Mr. William Peel’s “great objection to the bill was, that it would
destroy the noble amusement of fox-hunting; for when to the other
inducements to destroy foxes, the occupier of land had the additional
one of preserving his game, the race would soon be extinct.”[‡] If this
be fox-hunting morality, truly fox-hunters seem to be blessed with an
easy conscience.

Mr. Lockhart was of opinion, that “qualifications had their value; they
afforded inducements to the acquisition of learning and honour, and to
the perseverance necessary to attain the stations which conferred them.
They were cheap incentives to exertion.”[§] Mr. Lockhart seems to
imagine that learning and honour, like waifs and estrays, are
perquisites which attach themselves to the lord of the manor.

Mr. Horace Twiss objected to legalizing the sale of game, because “its
tendency Edition: current; Page: [117] would be, to degrade the country
gentlemen into hucksters.”[*] This being said of those who without any
scruple sell the consciences of their tenants at every election, either
for money or for power, is not a little ridiculous; but it seems that a
man then only becomes a huckster, when he sells that which is his own.
Yet we never heard that country gentlemen felt any invincible aversion
to selling their timber, or any other part of the produce of the land.

Mr. William Peel “was surprised that his honourable friend, the member
for Yorkshire, who was so little of a reformer in general, should have
disposed in so radical a manner of the Game Laws, by a bill which would
annihilate all the Game Laws in the country.”[†] It is, indeed, but too
plain, that this is the first step towards the subversion of the social
fabric; and had Mr. Stuart Wortley succeeded in carrying his bill for
the annihilation of the Game Laws, no doubt his next step would have
been, to bring in a bill for the annihilation of all laws. Mr. Peel,
however, did not go far enough, in calling this bill a radical measure.
Why not call it atheistical? The epithet would have been equally
appropriate.

“Had not this country,” asked Sir John Shelley, “had not this country
risen to its highest pinnacle of glory during the existence of these
laws.”* We cannot be too thankful to the country gentlemen for their
conduct on this occasion. They have ridden all the vulgar fallacies so
hard, that one would almost think they had a mind to try how ridiculous
they could make them.

But the argument which has been repeated oftenest, and insisted upon
most earnestly, is the importance of a resident gentry; a favourite
topic in an assembly of landowners, and which was re-echoed from all
sides of the House, it is difficult to Edition: current; Page: [118] say
by whom loudest, the supporters or the opponents of the measure.[*] By
the latter, it was made the foundation for the following exquisite
ratiocination. It is of the greatest importance that there should be a
resident gentry—now if there be no game, there will be no resident
gentry, it being notorious that the only purpose, for which a country
gentleman ever resides on his estate, is that of killing game; but if
the law be altered, there will be no game; the law, therefore, ought to
remain as it is, and we ought to go on as hitherto, making poachers
first, giving them time to ripen into thieves, and hanging them
afterwards. This is not bad logic, for a country ’squire, and, but that
every one of the premises is false, it would be quite unobjectionable.

Assumption the first: Alter the law, and you destroy game. Destroy game,
and there will be no resident gentry; this is assumption the second, and
a curious one too. A resident gentry is of vast importance; this is the
grand assumption of all. If we were content to refute them out of their
own mouths, we might ask what great good can come out of the residence
of a country gentleman, whose sole motive for residing upon his estate,
is, by their own confession, the killing of game? But we wave this:
their authority is not worth having, even against themselves.

We ask, then, why it is of such vast importance that country gentlemen
should reside on their estates? By what means do they contrive to render
their presence so great a blessing to their tenantry? Is it by riding
with horses and hounds through the growing corn, destroying for a day’s
amusement the labours of a year? Is it by carrying with them a whole
host of London retainers, to infect the village with the vices of the
town, as if the vices of the country were not sufficient? or if not in
either of these ways, how is it?

We shall be told, no doubt, of the unwearied exertions of the country
gentlemen in administering justice, and preserving the peace of the
country. Particular stress will be laid upon the circumstance, that
these exertions are unpaid; it being in this country an article of
faith, that whatsoever is unpaid is good, and that every thing is unpaid
which a man does not actually pocket money for. The real character of
that unpaid magistracy, who, if credit is to be given to their own
assertions, are the most glorious of all the glories of this happy
country, and who are really the cause why, in England, which is called
the land of freedom, the mass of the people are Edition: current; Page:
[119] the slaves of a more degrading despotism than they probably are in
any other country in Europe, will, on some future occasion, be examined
in detail. For the present purpose, a few obvious reflections will
suffice: That one-fourth of the annual commitments in England and Wales,
and probably, as far as regards the agricultural population, much more
than half, are for offences against the Game Laws: That on every one of
these occasions, the committing magistrate is at the same time judge and
party; that he is deciding in his own cause, just as truly as if he were
pronouncing sentence upon a poacher taken on his own estate. The
consequences, in a tribunal unchecked by publicity, and subject to no
appeal, unless from the magistrates individually to the magistrates
collectively, are exactly such as might be expected. But the oppressions
practised upon poachers convict, are nothing in comparison with the
oppressions which are practised upon those who are only suspected to be
poachers. Every one who has lived in the country knows what we mean, and
the memory of every one will supply him with numerous instances; though
it is not every one who is aware of the legal traps which it is in the
power of a magistrate to lay for any one who has offended him—of the
number of sleeping laws which he can revive when he pleases, laws which
are not, and cannot be, impartially executed, or common justice and
common humanity would be shocked, but which it is left to the discretion
of a vindictive or tyrannical magistrate to execute or not as he will.
Many a man has been immured, many a man is even now lying in a gaol,
whose nominal offence has been that of cutting a twig, or going off a
path; his real offence, that of being poor, and being suspected, truly
or untruly, of being a poacher.

If the reader wishes to form some conception of the extent of the
arbitrary power which magistrates possess, let him look at the late
Report of Commitments under the Vagrant Laws.[*] Under these laws it is
scarcely too much to say, that there is not a man, certainly there is
not a poor man, who is not in the power of any one who will take the
trouble of watching him for a short time; there is scarcely an act of
human life which, if done in the way in which it often must be done by
the poor man, is not an act of vagrancy. To convict a man of being a
vagrant, little more is necessary than to find him guilty of the crime
of being poor.

It is an insult to our understandings to say, that powers like these are
not abused. Till lately, indeed, the abuses of magisterial power, like
the abuses of almost every other power, were comfortably hidden from the
public eye. Of late, however, it has not been in the power of libel law
to prevent occasional instances from becoming known. In one instance
within our own knowledge an unfortunate man was committed to the
treadmill for a month as a “rogue and vagabond” under the Vagrant laws,
on no ground whatever but that of being found on a private path.
Edition: current; Page: [120] This act of magisterial tyranny took place
in Yorkshire.* Ex uno disce alios. It is not every magistrate who would
commit an act of this kind; but every magistrate can do so if he please.

Edition: current; Page: [121]


INTERCOURSE BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE BRITISH COLONIES IN THE WEST INDIES
 1828

Edition: current; Page: [122]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Parliamentary Review. Session of 1826-7:—7 & 8 Geo. IV. London: Baldwin
and Cradock, 1828, 298-335. Headed as title. Running titles: “foreign
relations.—United States.” Unsigned; not republished. Identified in
Mill’s bibliography as “An article on the Commerce between the
West-Indies and the United States of America, which app. in the
Parliamentary review for the session of 1827” (MacMinn, 9). In the
Somerville College copy of this volume an inked note in Mill’s hand on
the title page identifies this article as his, and, at the equivalent of
133.27-9, there is a pencilled comment (possibly in Mill’s hand) that
reads (ignoring a cancellation and an incomplete revision): “The
Superior skill of Shipbuilders & Seamen is decidedly with the
Americans”. For comment on the article, see lvii-lviii above.

Edition: current; Page: [123]


Intercourse between the United States and the British Colonies in the West Indies

a short conversation which took place when a late correspondence between
the British Government and the Envoy of the United States was laid upon
the table of the House of Commons by Mr. Canning,* affords us an
opportunity, of which we gladly avail ourselves, to lay before our
readers the history of that correspondence, with a few observations on
the subject which has produced so much unfriendly feeling between two
kindred nations.

It is known that, until within a short period, it was a favourite object
of British policy that British shipping should engross as large a share
as possible of the commercial intercourse of the world. With this view,
foreign vessels resorting to the ports of Great Britain and her
dependencies, and goods imported into Great Britain and her dependencies
in foreign vessels, were made subject to numerous burthens and
restrictions, from which British vessels, and goods imported in British
vessels, were exempt.

It is known, also, that by several recent statutes commonly called the
Reciprocity Acts, these restrictions were relaxed, and some of them
entirely abrogated, in favour of such countries as should relieve
British shipping from all similar restrictions, to which, by the laws of
those countries, it was subject. Among the Reciprocity Acts, was one
called the 6 Geo. IV, c. 114, an Act passed on the 5th of July, 1825,
which permitted foreign nations, upon certain conditions of reciprocity,
to trade, in their own vessels, with the British colonies.[*]

Among foreign nations, that which, from its situation and productions,
is capable of carrying on the most beneficial trade with our colonies,
is the United States of America. That country, however, did not comply
with the conditions of reciprocity which the act of parliament required,
and consequently did not become entitled to the privileges which that
act conferred. An order in council was therefore issued, in July 1826,
interdicting, after a certain day, all intercourse, in Edition: current;
Page: [124] American vessels, between the United States and the British
West India colonies;[*] and, consequently, the shipping of the United
States not only did not acquire any new privileges under the Act of
1825, but lost those which it already enjoyed by virtue of a partial
relaxation of our Navigation Laws which took place in 1822.[†]

On the appearance of the Order in Council, Mr. Gallatin, Envoy
Extraordinary of the United States, addressed an official note to Mr.
Canning, as Secretary of State for the Foreign Department, remonstrating
against it. He observed that, by the laws of the United States, our
commerce and navigation stood, in every respect, on the footing required
by the Act of 1825, with the exception of certain discriminating duties
on British vessels, and on goods imported in British vessels, entering
the ports of the United States from the British colonies. That the
British government had already retaliated, by the imposition of
countervailing duties on American vessels, resorting to our colonies,
and on their cargoes. That, the only inequality supposed to exist having
been removed by these countervailing duties, there could be no reason
for adopting the harsher measure of altogether interdicting the
intercourse, in American vessels, between the United States and so
important a part of those colonies.[‡]

In answer to this communication from Mr. Gallatin, Mr. Canning addressed
a letter to that gentleman,[§] of which we shall next endeavour to
explain the purport. It is, however, not easy to present a connected
view of Mr. Canning’s argument, without expressing much of what he
himself has rather left to be understood. This is no matter of blame to
him; it is no fault of his, if what was meant only for purposes of
information, is not sufficiently explicit for purposes of argument. But
when a proposition is to be discussed, it must be written out at full
length. Mr. Canning rather indicated than stated the several points
which he sought to establish; and did not so much make out a case, as
bring together the materials, out of which, when properly connected
together, a case might be made.

He began by complaining that Mr. Gallatin treated the question as if
there were no inherent distinction between colonial trade and the trade
of independent nations. Mr. Gallatin misconceived the nature of the
colonial trade. It was the unquestionable right, and had, till within
these few years, been the invariable practice, of countries having
colonies, to reserve to themselves the trade with those colonies, and to
relax that reservation only under special circumstances, and on
particular occasions. The right, therefore, which Great Britain clearly
possessed, as against all nations, the United States could not justly
complain if she thought fit Edition: current; Page: [125] to exercise
against them. In 1822, Great Britain conceded to the shipping of the
United States, under certain restrictions, the privilege of trading with
the British West India colonies; a privilege which she still withheld
from all the powers of Europe. It could not, however, be supposed—it was
not affirmed by Mr. Gallatin—that, by granting this privilege to one
nation, Great Britain came under any implied engagement, not at any
future period to extend it to others. As little could be supposed that,
because Great Britain submitted, at a moment of necessity, to terms
which were inconvenient to her, she bound herself to continue to submit
to them when that necessity should have passed away. She had a right to
open the ports of her colonies, or to keep them closed, as might suit
her own convenience. She had a right to open them either unconditionally
or conditionally; and if conditionally, on what conditions she pleased.
She had a right—(but this necessary step in Mr. Canning’s argument was
rather understood than expressed)—she had a right, after her original
conditions had been accepted, to revoke them whenever she pleased, and
impose others; and though she might profess to take the principle of
reciprocity for the guide of her counsels, no other nation had a right
to remonstrate, as Mr. Gallatin had done, if the conditions she imposed
were at variance with the principle of reciprocity; for Great Britain
was not bound to abide by that principle.

Having thus disposed of the general subject of Colonial Trade, Mr.
Canning proceeded to explain why the British Government, not satisfied
with laying the same burthens upon the trade in American vessels which
had been laid upon that in British vessels by the United States, had
recourse to the more severe measure of prohibiting the trade in American
vessels altogether.

In 1822, when Great Britain permitted the United States, under certain
limitations and conditions, to trade in their own vessels with our West
India colonies; in accepting these terms Congress at the same time
imposed on all British vessels trading between the United States and the
West Indies, and on all goods imported in such vessels, an alien
duty.[*] This duty was to continue until American vessels, and their
cargoes, should be admitted into our colonies on the same terms as
British vessels, and as the same description of goods imported from
elsewhere: meaning by elsewhere, not only all foreign nations, but the
other trans-marine possessions of Great Britain, and even the mother
country herself.

This unwarrantable pretension on the part of the United States, to an
equalization of the duties on their produce with those on our own, was
the motive which had induced the British Government, after an interval
of three years, to issue the Order in Council now complained of. The
delay which had intervened, Mr. Canning thus accounted for: The British
Government at first misapprehended the import of the term elsewhere,
conceiving it to apply to foreign countries alone, and not to the
British possessions in North America; and could not, for some time, be
Edition: current; Page: [126] brought to believe, that it was intended
to lay claim to the admission of American produce into our colonies,
subject to no higher duties than that of the mother country herself, and
her other dependencies. When such was at length ascertained to be the
true construction of the Act of Congress, our Government, by their own
Act of 1822, were entitled to have at once interdicted all intercourse
between the United States and the British West India colonies. The
milder measure of a retaliatory duty was preferred, because it was not
supposed that a claim so extraordinary as that implied in the
above-mentioned Act of Congress would be persisted in after explanation.
The attempt, however, to obtain the abandonment of it by means of
negociation having failed, and Congress having, during the last session,
rejected a motion for the repeal of the discriminating duties, Great
Britain had now asserted that right, which, as long as there appeared to
be any chance of an amicable arrangement, she had forborne to exercise.

But further, Mr. Canning could not admit the assertion that the
discriminating duties were our only ground of complaint. In making this
averment, Mr. Gallatin appeared to overlook the fact, that, by the same
enactment which imposed those duties, it was provided that no British
ships not coming directly from the West Indies, should be allowed to
clear out for the West Indies, from a port of the United States. It was
true that something analogous to this regulation had existed on our
side. By the Act of 1822, American vessels entering the ports of our
colonies, were prohibited from clearing out for any country other than
the United States. But such was the peculiar character of colonial
trade, that we were justified in imposing this restriction; the
Americans were not justified in retaliating.

To allow a foreign ship to enter colonial ports at all, and upon any
terms, is a boon; to withhold from the ship of a country having
colonies, trading from the mother country to a foreign state, under a
regular treaty between the two countries, the right of clearing for
another port belonging to that mother country, in another part of the
world, is an injury.*

Had the restriction, therefore, still existed on our part, this would
have formed no justification for its imposition on theirs. But it did
not exist on our part. It had been repealed by the Act of 1825; and yet
the retaliatory restriction, expressly founded upon it, continued in
force.

Since the 5th of January, 1826, an American ship trading to a British
West India colony, may clear out from thence to any part of the world,
the United Kingdom and its dependencies alone excepted. But the British
ship in the American port still remains subject to all the restrictions
of the American law of 1823, prohibiting a trade through the United
States between the mother country and her West India colonies. (Ibid.)

In conclusion, Mr. Canning said, that the British Government could not
consent to enter into any further negociation upon the intercourse
between the United States and the colonies, so long as the pretension
recorded in the Act of 1823 remained part of the law of the United
States. But further, after the United States Edition: current; Page:
[127] had declined conditions which other nations had thought worthy of
their acceptance, and by so doing had compelled the British Government
to apply to them the interdict prescribed (he should have said allowed)
by the Act of 1825, it could not hold itself bound to remove that
interdict, as a matter of course, whenever it might suit the convenience
of the United States to reconsider the measures by which the application
of that interdict was occasioned.

We have thought it necessary to give this full abstract of Mr. Canning’s
first letter to Mr. Gallatin, because the views of the British
Government concerning the whole matter to which the Order in Council
relates, are no where else so clearly and fully set forth. The same
minuteness will not be necessary in the account, which it now remains
for us to give, of the remainder of the correspondence.

Mr. Gallatin intimated his dissent from the doctrine of Mr. Canning with
respect to Colonial Trade.[*] The right of Great Britain to reserve to
herself the trade with her colonies, or to open it to whatever nations,
and upon whatever terms she thought proper, was not denied; but,
considered purely as a matter of right, this, which was an attribute of
sovereignty, applied to all other territories as well as to colonies.
The real distinction between the trade of foreigners with colonies, and
that with other territories, did not consist in a greater or less
complete right, but in a difference in the usage and practice. Since the
late final separation, however, of the greater part of the continent of
America from the mother countries, and the more liberal policy adopted
towards the remaining colonies, the usage of nations in respect to
colonial policy might be considered to have changed, and the Colonial
Trade to have been so far assimilated to all other trade as to admit of
being discussed on the basis of equal and reciprocal conditions. Indeed,
in every negociation which had taken place on this subject between the
United States and Great Britain, the principle of reciprocity had been
the basis assumed, by the consent of both parties.

Mr. Gallatin next proceeded to vindicate, at some length,[†] the
enactments of Congress, to which exceptions had been taken by Mr.
Canning: the imposition, or rather revival, of the discriminating
duties, and the prohibition of what is called the circuitous intercourse
between Great Britain and her colonies, through the United States. But
the reasons which induced Congress to adopt these measures will be more
conveniently stated in a subsequent part of this article.

Finally, Mr. Gallatin said, that the United States could scarcely be
expected to repeal their restrictions upon British vessels, when not
only the intercourse was altogether prohibited in American shipping, but
when they were with frankness informed, that a removal of that interdict
would not, as a matter of course, follow such repeal on their part.[‡]
Since Mr. Canning, however, had refused to negociate while the
pretension involved in the Act of 1823 continued part of the law of the
Edition: current; Page: [128] United States, Mr. Gallatin informed him,
that the Act complained of was already repealed, by virtue of one of its
own provisions, which enacted, that it should cease to operate if at any
time the British Government should prohibit the intercourse with our
colonies in American vessels. That contingency having taken place, the
laws of 1818 and 1820 had revived, which prohibited the intercourse in
British vessels altogether;[*] and all laws since passed to regulate the
intercourse, were abrogated by its entire interdiction.

The answer of Mr. Canning was brief,[†] and replied only to that part of
Mr. Gallatin’s letter which denied the peculiar character of the
Colonial Trade. It might be true, as stated by Mr. Gallatin,[‡] that
every country had a right to interdict to foreign nations a trade even
with itself; but the exercise of that right had been so unusual, that
foreign nations might justly complain of such interdiction as a
grievance. They had no such ground of complaint, and no other nation
than the United States had ever complained, of the interdiction of trade
to the colonies; because, in all ages, all nations having colonies had
maintained such an interdiction. The assumption that the colonial system
was at an end, Great Britain explicitly denied. Whatever relaxation
Great Britain might think fit to introduce, for her own sake, and for
that of her colonies themselves, into her colonial system, she held her
right to maintain that system, as with respect to foreign nations, to be
unaltered and entire. Considerations of which she alone was the judge,
had induced her to open her trade to other nations, on specified
conditions, offered to all nations indiscriminately. Other nations had
accepted these conditions; the United States, having declined them, were
excluded from our colonies, not by any act of ours, but by their own
free and deliberate choice.

After an interval of a few weeks, Mr. Gallatin, having received a
despatch from the Secretary of State of the United States, again
addressed Mr. Canning[§] with a statement of the reasons which had
hitherto prevented the United States from accepting the conditions of
the Reciprocity Act of 1825. The first of these reasons was, that they
had so much difficulty in comprehending the import of the act, and how
much it did or did not repeal of former acts, that they did not venture
to legislate on the subject without receiving such previous explanations
as could not fail to be obtained in the course of the negociation which
Mr. Gallatin came authorized to renew. In the next place, so far as they
were able to understand the meaning of the act, the reciprocity which it
offered appeared to be a reciprocity in name only, not in fact; and this
Mr. Gallatin, at some length, proceeded to demonstrate.

In reply to the above communication, Mr. Canning declined entering into
any Edition: current; Page: [129] discussion with respect to the nature
of the reciprocity offered by the act of 1825.[*] He contented himself
with justifying the resolution of the British Government, not to enter
into any further negociations on a subject on which there had been
clearly ascertained to be an incurable difference of opinion; and with
adducing evidence to prove that it was not for want of a sufficient
understanding of the intent of the act of parliament, that the
conditions of it were not accepted by the United States.

We quote some of the concluding paragraphs of Mr. Canning’s letter,
chiefly because they afford indication of the opinion which our
Government entertains concerning the principle of reciprocity, and the
nature of trade in general.

The undersigned trusts that it is unnecessary for him, in concluding
this note, to return to Mr. Gallatin’s assurances of the friendly
disposition of the United States of America—assurances equally sincere,
that there is the most cordial desire, on the part of Great Britain, to
cultivate the friendship of the United States.

The ties of common origin, laws, and language, must always form strong
bonds of national alliance between them. Their respective interests,
well understood, harmonize together as much as their feelings.

But it has never yet been held a duty of international amity (any more
than of friendship in private life) to submit to unequal compacts; nor
has it ever been held an offence against such duty that a nation (any
more than an individual) should decline to make uncompensated
sacrifices.

The refusal to regulate the trade of our colonies by a commercial
treaty, which the British Government may think (even if erroneously)
disadvantageous to its interests, cannot give just cause of offence to
any power whatever. (Ibid., p. 51.)

Among the many observations suggested by the perusal of this
correspondence, none is more obvious than the continual endeavour of Mr.
Canning, not, perhaps, sufficiently resisted by Mr. Gallatin, to give a
character to the discussion foreign to that which belongs to the nature
of the subject. The whole argument is made to turn upon the question of
right; as if our right to regulate the trade of our colonies were
disputed, or as if the conduct either of a nation or an individual, in
the exercise of a right, could never be a proper subject for censure or
animadversion. The clearness of our right does not justify whatever use
we can make of it. One person may injure another almost to any extent,
by the exercise of an acknowledged right. A man who quarrels with his
friends, turns off his servants, or disinherits his children, merely
does what every person will allow to be his right; yet surely any of
these things, if done without just cause, is an injury, and the party
aggrieved by it might very reasonably complain, without being supposed
to dispute the right which every man possesses of cultivating what
acquaintances, employing what servants, and appointing what legatees he
pleases.

But, in the case before us, there is neither any question of right, nor
any complaint of injury, except on our side. No such complaint could be
made without absurdity. In the commercial intercourse between two
nations, as in Edition: current; Page: [130] transactions of the same
nature between man and man, the only considerations relevant to the
subject are those of mutual interest. If each party, instead of seeking
or making occasions for crimination where none exist, would put aside
all feelings except those which arise from a calm and dispassionate
consideration of the interests of the parties,—those interests, in the
case of commercial intercourse, never being contrary, but always the
same,—there might be reasonable hope that some arrangement would be
adopted advantageous to both. But if either country is more anxious to
prove to the other that it will not suffer itself to be dictated to,
than to establish the commerce of both upon the most desirable basis,
and does not choose to concede to foreigners on their asking, what it
ought to grant even if unasked, not for their sake, but for its own;
then, indeed, neither the commerce nor the friendship between the two
nations, rests upon a very secure foundation.

Putting apart any pretended right on either side to prescribe measures
to the other, let us consider merely the interests of the two nations,
and examine how far each of them appears to understand rightly what
those interests require.

It seems, then, in the first place, that the two parties,—who are, so
far, perfectly agreed, that both entrench themselves within the
principle of reciprocity, but who differ so widely in its
application,—are neither of them by any means aware of the serious
objections which may be made to the principle of reciprocity itself.

According, indeed, to Mr. Canning’s view of the principles of trade,
there is no room for doubt or hesitation. The permitting foreign
vessels, under any circumstances, to carry goods to any part of our
possessions, he considers as an advantage to the foreigner, not only
unattended with any benefit to ourselves, but implying a sacrifice on
our part, and therefore not to be conceded, unless an equal advantage,
either of the same or of some other kind, be granted to us in return.

But this, surely, is a very partial view of the case, and implies an
entire misconception of the nature and objects of commerce.

That a measure is injurious to Great Britain because it diminishes the
employment for British shipping; that it causes a loss to the country
because it causes the loss, or the decay, of some particular branch of
manufactures, or some particular branch of trade; this would have been
consistent language from the lips of a merchant of the days of Sir
Josiah Child, but it is scarcely what we might expect from a ministry
who inscribe free trade upon their banners, and claim the merit of being
guided, in their commercial legislation, by the principles of Smith and
Ricardo.

Bread, we apprehend, does not exist for the sake of the farmer, cloth
for the sake of the manufacturer, ships and navigation for the sake of
the builder and ship-owner. The numerous and diversified productions
which conduce, each in its way, to the relief of human necessities, or
the convenience of human life, are not called into existence merely in
order that somebody may be paid for producing them. That a large number
of productive labourers should be employed and maintained, where a small
number would suffice, is no advantage, but the reverse. Edition:
current; Page: [131] The real advantage would be, if the same amount of
produce could be obtained by employing, that is to say, expending, less
labour and less capital. Whatever was thus saved would constitute an
addition to the fund which might be appropriated to further production,
and the further increase of the comforts and enjoyments of man. For what
reason, then, does the language we hear from all practical statesmen,
even from those who make pretensions to political economy, always import
that the one grand danger in the production of commodities is, lest we
should get them without employing capital enough? The golden age, then,
was not, after all, so desirable a state of existence; since all human
wants were then supplied, if we are not mistaken, without employing any
capital at all.

The proper and only end, both of production and of commerce, is, to
supply commodities: nor, with a view to the national wealth, does one
employment of capital possess any advantage over another, except that of
supplying them at less cost. It is for the interest of the consumer, not
for that of the producer or carrier, that production and commerce exist.
The interest of the consumer, however, is an element which is usually
left out of the calculations of practical statesmen. They generally
imagine that it is their business to take care of the producer. The
consumer is commonly left to take care of himself.

Now, the direct contrary of this ought to be the case. The late Mr.
Ricardo, in replying to those who never ceased to talk of protection to
the farmer, and protection to the manufacturer, and protection to every
other description of producer, used to say, that it was strange nobody
ever called for protection to the consumer, when, in fact, it is the
consumer alone who needs protection.[*] The producer can protect
himself. If he is not paid for producing he will not produce. Time, for
disengaging his capital, and allowing that portion to wear out gradually
which cannot be disengaged, he may justly claim; the rest is in his own
hands. It is to the consumer that protection, protection against too
high a price, is indispensable. The only protection that is effectual
(but it is always effectual) is liberty to supply his wants wherever
they can be supplied at the smallest cost. Our legislators are prodigal
of protection to those to whom it is superfluous; they withhold it from
those to whom alone it is needful.

When we take this view, which surely is not a visionary, overstrained,
or fanciful, but a sound, practical, and experimental view of the nature
of trade, we are led to conclusions, on the subject discussed in Mr.
Canning’s correspondence, widely at variance with his. We conclude, that
the opening our ports to foreign vessels is not a boon to foreigners,
but a benefit to ourselves, and a much greater benefit to ourselves than
to foreigners; that our interest is more promoted by our allowing
foreigners to bring goods to us, than even by their granting permission
to our vessels to carry goods to them.

Edition: current; Page: [132]
To those who cannot perceive that commerce yields any benefit to the
nation, other than what it yields to its own instruments and agents,
overlooking the great body of consumers, for whose sake it really
exists, the above thesis may seem a paradox; but to them alone will it
appear so.

From the language which our statesmen hold, one would imagine them to
suppose, that, by obtaining the privilege of importing into foreign
countries in our own ships, we should gain an entire new branch of
trade, with the whole of its profits as a neat addition to the national
income. Yet, this is only true in the sense in which it might be said
that by planting vineyards on the Surrey hills we should gain a new
branch of productive industry. The industry and trade of a country are
limited by the capital of the country: if a new channel be opened to
either, the capital which supplies it must be drawn from the other
channels. We cannot raise capital from the ground, as Pompey imagined
that he could raise armies, by stamping upon it with our feet.[*] So
that the subject of all this contention is merely the difference between
one mode of employing capital and another. The new employment may,
indeed, be the more profitable one; and in this consists the advantage,
when advantage there is, of the opening of a new channel of trade. But
the commonest principles of trade shew us, that when the profits in any
employment exceed what can be obtained in others, additional capital
rushes in, and restores the level. If it were found that our
ship-owners, on being permitted to carry for other countries, could gain
more than the ordinary profits of British stock, British competition
would compel them to go on lowering their freights (by which reduction
the foreigner alone would benefit) until, with the exception of the
extra profit which they had made for a short time, neither they nor
their country would have gained any thing by the privilege they had
acquired. So little is a nation benefitted by being a carrier for other
countries; except, indeed, so far as it is an advantage, for purposes of
national defence, to possess a large commercial marine; an advantage
which, as our marine is already so much more than sufficient for that
purpose, may be laid out of the question.

But it is impossible to set any limits to the degree in which we might
be benefitted, by permitting foreign vessels to carry for us. They would
not be able to do so, unless they could do it cheaper than our own
vessels; and if they could, what would be saved in freight would be
gained by the British consumer in the price of the goods. If we consider
how much of what all of us consume is imported from abroad,—how much
more there is which could not be produced, unless the “appliances and
means”[†] of its production were imported from abroad,—as likewise, how
much of all this is composed of bulky goods, and how great a proportion
of its price is occasioned by cost of carriage,—we shall be enabled to
Edition: current; Page: [133] form a rough estimate of what the country
would gain by allowing its trade of importation to take place in foreign
vessels, if the fact be, that it can be carried on less expensively in
that way. If, in consequence, any British shipping were thrown out of
employment, the evil to the ship-owners might easily be prevented from
being considerable. The foreigner would probably be willing to purchase
their ships; and, at the worst, a ship does not last one third part so
long as a house, or even so long as a steam-engine; and, if a few years
were allowed, those ships which could not find other employment would
wear out in the course of nature, as would have happened in any other
circumstances. Nor would there be the slightest reason to fear, from
such an event, the loss of any useful naval strength. Were we excluded
from all other commerce—our fisheries, and the perils of the most
difficult coasting navigation in Europe, would keep us supplied with
ships and seamen to meet every possible emergency.

The admission, therefore, of American vessels to trade with our
colonies, not being any sacrifice, does not require any compensation;
and if our colonies are to be considered (which for this purpose they
must) as a part of ourselves, it is a moot point by which of the two we
should gain most, the compensation, or the sacrifice.

The state of the case is this: so far as concerns the trade to the
United States, that it should take place in ships of the one country
rather than of the other may be of consequence to the people of the
United States, who consume the cargoes, but to us it is merely a
question whether a certain amount of British capital shall be employed
in navigation, or in some other equally profitable business. With
respect, however, to the trade from the United States, or from any third
country, to our colonies, it is a concern of the colonial consumer, and
exclusively so. It is his interest that the goods should be carried by
whichever of the two countries, or of all other countries, and carry
them cheapest. If the two countries are nearly equal—(which we believe
to be the case; for the advantage which America possesses in cheapness
of material, we make up by the superior skill of our ship-builders and
seamen,) even in this case it is very much the interest of the
consumers, who are the inhabitants of our colonies, that the trade
should be left open to the competition of both, in order that each may
be urged on to the rapid adoption of every species of improvement, by
the rivality of the other.

All these things, which are demonstratively true, if such a thing as
demonstration be possible in human affairs, clearly show what the
principle of reciprocity, in the commerce between two nations, is, and
on what grounds it may admit of justification. The only case which
offers any difficulty may be stated as follows:

Two nations have carried on, for many years, a war of prohibitions, to
the great detriment of both; each of the two perceiving, in the effect
of its own interdictions, that part only which is injurious to the other
country, and being blind to that part which affects itself. One of these
governments subsequently embraces sound and liberal principles of trade,
while the other still adheres to antiquated prejudices. As long as the
enlightened government maintains its restrictions, it has in its power
Edition: current; Page: [134] to offer to the stupid government what
that government may consider as an equivalent for the abandonment of the
counter-prohibitions. By giving up the restrictions unconditionally,
this advantage would be sacrificed. It is a question between the
immediate advantage of getting rid of one evil, and the chance of being
freed from two by suffering that one a little longer. And we can easily
conceive that it may be a very fit problem to propose, though often a
very difficult one to solve, whether the enlightened government is
justified in maintaining its own restrictive laws, after it has become
sensible of their mischievousness, in order to induce the bigotted
government to purchase their abrogation by renouncing its own.

But the case before us has none of these difficulties. Perfect
reciprocity is here the declared object of both nations: and neither
party objected to the conditions proposed by the other, on any ground
excepting that they were not reciprocal; each country professing
complete readiness to take off its restrictions, provided that the other
country would do the same. That two nations, meeting one another with
these avowed dispositions, should so far misunderstand one another as to
terminate their negociations without removing a single restriction, is
sufficiently unaccountable: but that the attempts of both parties to
render the trade free, should end by interdicting it altogether, argues
either a strange obliquity of intellect, or at least a complete
misunderstanding of the principle of reciprocity, on one side, or on
both. It shall be our endeavour, in the remainder of this dissertation,
to shew, by which of the two governments the principle which both
profess has been misunderstood, and at whose door the failure of the
attempts at an amicable arrangement ought to be laid.

In order that the commercial intercourse between two countries should be
on a footing of exact reciprocity, it is necessary that either there
should be no discriminating duties in either country, upon the shipping
of the other; or that those duties, if any exist, should be equal. On
the first of these suppositions there is free trade on both sides, and
consequently reciprocity: in the second case, there is reciprocity of
restriction, which, though never desirable, may be allowable as a means
of arriving at reciprocity of free trade.

It was in conformity with these principles, that the trade between the
United States and the Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, was
regulated by the Convention of 1815.[*] That treaty provides, that no
distinction shall be made by either nation, between the ships of the
other country coming directly from that country, and its own. Thus far
there is reciprocity of free trade. In what follows, there is
reciprocity of restriction:—neither country enjoys the privilege of
importing into the other the produce of a third country, on any
conditions or under any circumstances whatever.

Edition: current; Page: [135]
This treaty of commerce extends only to the King’s European dominions.
The party, at whose instances it was thus limited, was Great Britain. It
was the wish of the United States, that the British colonies should, for
the purposes of the treaty, be considered as a part of Great Britain,
and the trade between America and those colonies laid open, like that of
the mother country, to the shipping of both nations, on a footing of
perfect equality. This proposition was recommended, not only by its
conformity with sound principles, but by what, to the then ministry,
might be supposed a more powerful recommendation,—the authority of Mr.
Pitt. We believe it is not generally known, that this statesman, shortly
after the close of the American war, introduced a bill into Parliament,
admitting American vessels, so far as regards the direct trade between
the United States and the West Indies, to all the privileges of our
own.[*] The bill was lost by the breaking up of the Shelburne
Administration; when the vulgar and exploded ideas of commercial policy
regained their ascendancy, by the elevation of Mr. Fox. But the
Castlereagh ministry, faithful to their custom of borrowing nothing from
Mr. Pitt except whatever was bad in his principles or policy, were
resolved to keep, so far as it was still in their power, the monopoly of
the colonial trade unimpaired. The colonies were therefore excepted from
the Convention of 1815; and the intercourse, in American vessels,
between the United States and the West Indies, remained interdicted. The
United States, becoming impatient under the exclusion, at length
interdicted the intercourse in British vessels, until it should be
permitted in their own: a measure which Mr. Canning, in his first letter
to Mr. Gallatin, allows to have been, under the circumstances above
stated, justifiable.[†]

We have mentioned these circumstances, (although they have no immediate
bearing upon the matter at issue,) because they shew that it was Great
Britain, and not the United States, who commenced the war of
prohibitions; and that nothing, except the obstinate refusal of Great
Britain, prevented a perfect system of reciprocity from having been
established as long ago as 1815. From what cause such a system failed to
be established, when a ministry hostile to free trade had been succeeded
by one which has given substantial proofs of an inclination to it,
remains to be accounted for.

An examination of the provisions of our Act of Reciprocity, will, we
think, explain very satisfactorily the causes of this failure.

The privilege conferred by the Act in question upon foreign nations was,
in all cases, one and the same. It was that of trading to our colonies
in their own vessels, subject to the same duties, and no more, which
were imposed upon the same intercourse when carried on in British ships.

Edition: current; Page: [136]
But while the privilege offered was the same to all nations, there was a
great diversity in the conditions by the acceptance of which, that
privilege was to be purchased. Even the apparent difference in the terms
was very great; but the real difference still greater.

From nations which, having colonies, could repay us in kind, nothing
more was required than that they should do so. Their colonies were to be
opened to our vessels, in the same manner, and on the same footing of
equality, on which our colonies had been opened to theirs.

If we examine these terms of reciprocity by the principles laid down by
Mr. Canning, in his correspondence with Mr. Gallatin, we must pronounce
them highly disadvantageous to Great Britain. No other nation now
possesses colonies, in any degree to be compared for extent and
productiveness with those of Great Britain. If, therefore, the admission
of foreigners to share the trade and navigation of our colonies be
indeed, as Mr. Canning represents it, a sacrifice, assuredly our
admission to a like share of the trade and navigation of theirs, is by
no means an adequate compensation. Sweden, for instance, (as Mr.
Gallatin very pertinently observed,)[*] by admitting British vessels to
trade, on the same terms as her own, with the single island of St.
Bartholomew, would obtain all the privileges which were offered to the
United States. All this, in our opinion, is no evil; because it is not
the carrier nation, but the nation for whose use it carries, that we
consider to be mainly, we may almost say solely, benefitted by the
existence of the trade. But Mr. Canning’s opinion was different, and it
was his part to shew, how such opinions and such conduct could be
reconciled.

These terms, which were offered to nations having colonies, being in
their nature inapplicable to those which had not; other conditions,
therefore, had to be thought of for these last, of which class America
was one. It was accordingly required, that they should place the
commerce and navigation of Great Britain and her dependencies on the
footing of the most favoured nation.

It is obvious, without proceeding further, that this was a very
different, and might be a much greater concession, than that which was
required from nations having colonies. A nation, therefore, which
possessed colonies, might act very reasonably in accepting the
reciprocity offered to it, while yet the United States might be
perfectly right in supposing, that what was required from them was not
reciprocity, but something totally different. From the acceptance,
therefore, of the conditions of the Act, by any nation having colonies,
no just argument can be drawn, in condemnation of the policy of the
American government in refusing them.

But further, even to countries in a similar situation with the United
States, the terms which the Act offered differ in their nature as widely
as the laws of one country differ from those of another. What is
required is, that they should admit Edition: current; Page: [137] Great
Britain to the privileges of the most favoured nation. But the
privileges of the most favoured nation are as diversified as the
commercial policy of different states. In some countries they may amount
to a free trade; in others, to no more than an intercourse loaded with
innumerable burthens and restrictions. Nor should we omit to observe,
that the concession required from nations without colonies, by what Mr.
Canning terms reciprocity, is great in proportion to the general
liberality of their policy. And as the policy of the United States, in
respect to navigation, is more liberal than that of any other maritime
power, Mr. Canning’s assertion, that the United States had rejected
terms which other nations had accepted, cannot be admitted. From no
other nation were concessions required, equal to those which were
demanded from the United States.

Mr. Gallatin, however, with great propriety, waived this objection.[*]
He made no complaint on account of the more favourable conditions which
were offered to other countries: he looked only to the conditions
offered to the United States; and we shall follow his example.

By the laws of the two countries, the trade, both in British and in
American vessels, between the West Indies and the United States, had
been long prohibited, and when permitted, loaded with heavy duties on
both sides. For our permitting this trade to be carried on in American
vessels, the proper equivalent would, it should seem, have been, that
America should permit the same trade to be carried on in British
vessels; to which, equally with those of America, it had, up to that
time, been closed. With regard to discriminating duties, if none were
imposed on our side, the equivalent would have been, that none should
have been imposed on theirs.

Our Reciprocity Act required much more than this; and for what it
required beyond this, it offered no equivalent.

It claimed for British vessels freedom of trade between our colonies and
the United States; and for this it offered the proper
equivalent,—freedom of the same trade to American ships. But it claimed,
moreover, certain privileges in the ports of the United States, for the
commerce and navigation of the mother country. Now the commerce and
navigation of Great Britain, considered as distinct from her colonies,
already enjoys every privilege in the American ports, which Great
Britain herself grants to the commerce and navigation of the United
States. The sole object, therefore, of our pretended reciprocity must
have been, to obtain further privileges from the United States, which we
ourselves do not grant to that power; or to retain the privileges which
our commerce and navigation now enjoy, although we should cease to grant
the corresponding privileges to that of the United States.

It has been already mentioned, that, with respect to the direct trade
between Great Britain and the United States, British shipping enjoys all
the privileges not Edition: current; Page: [138] only of the most
favoured nation, but all those of American shipping itself. British
vessels, however, are not permitted to trade from any third country to
the United States. A similar prohibition applies, in this country, to
American shipping. But with us this restriction is founded on the
exclusive principles of our Navigation Laws;[*] with the United States,
it is part of the general system of reciprocity, and therefore extends
only to those countries which have adopted a similar regulation. Were we
admitted, therefore, to the privileges of the most favoured nation,
(merely in return for our admitting American vessels to our colonies,)
we should acquire this privilege without giving the equivalent which the
most favoured nation has given for it.

If the United States had accepted what we termed reciprocity, British
vessels would have been permitted to trade between the United States and
all foreign nations without any discriminating duties whatever; while
American vessels would still have been entirely prohibited from trading
between Great Britain and any foreign country except the United States.
Is this reciprocity?

Moreover, Great Britain, after the expiration of the convention of 1815,
(which was concluded for a limited period only,) might have imposed
whatever restrictions she pleased upon American vessels trading to the
mother country, while the United States must have continued to admit
British vessels, on an equality with their own, to every branch of their
trade except the coasting trade, or have lost that participation in the
colonial trade which was extended to them by this Act. Is this
reciprocity?

The reciprocity, then, which we offered to the United States, was a sham
reciprocity, a reciprocity only in name. Instead of requiring
concessions from America only equivalent to those which we offered in
return, we demanded privileges for our vessels which we withheld from
hers, and which if we ceased to withhold from hers we should by that
alone, as her law actually stands, obtain for ourselves without
difficulty.

The navigation laws of the United States are founded on perfect
reciprocity.[†] No nation which does not impose restrictions on American
vessels, has any restrictions imposed upon its own. But Congress did not
think it fair reciprocity that our vessels should be relieved from all
restrictions, while restrictions continued in this country on the
shipping of America; our ministers did. This was the radical and
incurable difference of opinion, which Mr. Canning held it to be beyond
the power of negociation to remove.[‡] And certainly any minds which
were capable of for a moment entertaining such an opinion as that
professed by our Edition: current; Page: [139] ministers on the subject,
might be very well presumed capable also of holding that opinion, in
spite of any arguments which it would be in the power of the ablest
negociator to adduce in opposition to it.

Thus far, it will probably be admitted, that the state of the case, as
we have represented it, has not tended to place the conduct or policy of
ministers in a very advantageous light. But it may perhaps be supposed
that although the rejection, by the United States, of the conditions of
our act of 1825, might not be a sufficient reason even for withholding
from them the privileges of that Act, much less for depriving them of
that partial trade with our Colonies which they had enjoyed since 1822;
those Acts of Congress which Mr. Canning complains of as unfair and
injurious to this country, must be of a character to justify the very
strong measures which were adopted in retaliation.

It is proper, therefore, that we should give some account of these Acts
of Congress, which unquestionably, on the face of every statement yet
laid before the British public, appear highly discreditable to the
United States. Yet these Acts were not passed without sufficient cause,
although the cause has never been clearly stated in this country; and if
it were stated, it is doubtful whether it would be listened to. The
people of this country expect little wisdom in the commercial
legislation of a nation who can be persuaded to pay 25 per cent for the
pleasure of having manufactures of their own. Their preposterous
tariff,[*] contrasted with the liberal policy which has been adopted and
is still adhered to by our ministers, has prepared the most intelligent
Englishmen to consider any thing which can be said or done by the
Americans, against such antagonists as our ministers, in the matter of
free trade, as worthy of entire disregard. This prejudice, or
prejudgment, is a natural, well-grounded, and unavoidable one under the
circumstances of the case. If the people of the United States did but
know how much injury the tariff has done them, and will continue to do
as long as it exists, in the opinion of all instructed and unprejudiced
persons in this country, of all who were best able to appreciate their
character, institutions, and policy when good, and on whom they might
otherwise have confidently relied for doing them justice, and forcing
the British public to do them justice, now when they are in the
right—this alone ought to make them lose no time in blotting out this
absurd law from their statute book, and in consigning the foolish idea
of protecting manufactures to the contempt it deserves.* But, be their
commercial policy in all other respects what it may, they are entitled
to a vindication of it where it is justifiable, as we are prepared to
maintain that it has been with respect to the question between our
navigation and theirs. And the Edition: current; Page: [140] partial and
prejudiced representations which have been made to the British public on
the question, by authorities which in other respects rank deservedly
high, ought to be, and so far as depends upon us, shall be, fully
exposed.

The reader will not have forgotten, that the enactments of Congress,
which Mr. Canning resented as acts of injustice at least, if not of
special hostility, to this country,[*] were the imposition of an alien
duty on British vessels trading between America and our Colonies, and
the prohibition of the circuitous intercourse between Great Britain and
her colonies, through the United States. We shall consider these
questions separately, since they are separate in their nature.

The following extract from Mr. Huskisson’s speech in Parliament, on the
21st March, 1825, contains the history of the alien duty, placed in the
point of view in which it was convenient to our ministers that it should
appear:

The committee would perceive that, in allowing the countries of America
to trade with our colonies in their own vessels, we had, in fact,
conceded to the navigation of the United States a privilege which was
not granted to any state in Europe; and this privilege, though nominally
extended to all the countries of America, was really a boon to the
United States alone, as the other countries had as yet scarcely any
commercial marine. What had hitherto been the return made by the United
States for this indulgence? In the first session of their Congress,
which had followed the opening of this trade by our Act of Parliament,
they passed a law, imposing alien duties in their ports upon all British
ships which might trade between those ports and our colonies, to be
levied until the productions of the United States should be admitted
into our colonies upon the same terms and duties as the like productions
of any other country; meaning thereby, the like productions not of any
other foreign country, but of our own country, or of our own provinces
in North America. Whatever might have been the arguments used to induce
the American Congress to adopt this course, their real reason for making
the attempt was an impression, on their part, that we had yielded this
intercourse to necessity, and that as our colonies could not subsist
without it, they might prescribe the conditions under which it should be
carried on.*

The name of Mr. Huskisson has long been so completely identified with
liberal and enlightened principles of commercial policy, that his
reputation is national property, and we should be most unwilling to
prejudice it undeservedly, or to put any other than the most favourable
interpretation upon his words or actions. Yet the representation
contained in the above passage is so grossly unfair, the facts of the
case are so egregiously misstated, and the intentions imputed to the
government of the United States are so directly contradicted by the
whole tenor of their conduct, that the promulgation of such a statement
by Mr. Huskisson seems to argue a degree of blindness which, if
involuntary, cannot possibly be too much regretted, nor, if wilful, too
severely condemned.

Mr. Huskisson pretends, that Congress requited us for removing
restrictions from their ships, by laying restrictions upon ours. Now the
direct contrary of this is Edition: current; Page: [141] notoriously the
truth. To lay on restrictions did not happen to be in the power of the
United States; since the intercourse in British ships, being already
altogether prohibited, did not admit of being further restricted by any
act of theirs. Far from laying on, the sole intention and effect of the
Act was to take off restrictions; and all the complaint is, that it did
not, in Mr. Huskisson’s opinion, take off enough.

Could Mr. Huskisson have forgotten that, previously to the measure of
which he complains, the intercourse between the United States and our
colonies in British vessels was prohibited? And because the act of
Congress which took off the prohibition, did not also take off the
discriminating duties, which have existed by the American navigation
laws ever since 1790, and which have never been rescinded except in
favour of those nations which would extend similar privileges to the
United States, is it fair in Mr. Huskisson to represent the Act as
imposing restrictions, when all the effect it was intended to have, or
could have, was that of mitigating them?

So anxious were Congress to meet all our concessions by corresponding
ones with the least possible delay, that they began to legislate even
while our Act of 1822 was still pending in parliament. In order not to
lose even the interval between two sessions of Congress, they passed a
temporary bill, authorizing the President, on receiving satisfactory
evidence that the trade had been opened to American vessels, to open it
by proclamation to British vessels, on what he should consider fair
conditions of reciprocity.[*] The President did so, and what they had
authorized him to do by proclamation, was done in the succeeding session
of Congress by a permanent law.

It is another question, whether Congress would have done right in taking
off the duties as well as the prohibition; whether, when we removed the
interdict from American vessels, they were bound in justice, or on the
principle of reciprocity, to have taken off all restrictions whatever,
and left the trade with our colonies subject only to the general
regulations of their customs. Yet if this ground be taken by Mr.
Huskisson’s partisans, it may very properly be asked in return, had we
also taken off all special restrictions on our side? By no means. Our
Act of 1822 only opened the ports of our colonies to certain enumerated
articles, and that under high duties. Among these articles, pot and
pearl ashes, dried and pickled fish, beef, pork, bacon, whale oil,
spermaceti oil and candles, butter, and cheese, which are articles of
considerable importance among the exports from the United States, were
not included. All these commodities not only could not be imported in
American, but could not even be imported in British vessels.

Did Mr. Huskisson—did our ministry—did these patrons of reciprocity
seriously expect, that in return for the partial freedom of trade thus
conceded to the United States, entire freedom of trade should be granted
by them to Great Britain? Edition: current; Page: [142] If instead of
opening their ports to all the produce of our colonies, Congress had
opened them only to certain enumerated articles, excluding from the
number some of the most valuable staple productions of the West Indies,
this surely nobody would have thought of denying to be fair reciprocity.
And perhaps it is to be regretted that Congress did not take this mode
of limiting their concessions, to correspond with the limitation of
ours. They preferred to open their ports to all the produce of our
colonies, subject, when imported in British vessels, to a discriminating
duty. This restriction was certainly different in kind from the
restriction which provoked it; but if it was not greater in degree, it
is no ground of complaint against the United States, that being entitled
on the principle of reciprocity to withhold something, they thought
proper to be themselves the judges what they would withhold.

Such is the true history of the Alien Duty. It was not, as Mr. Huskisson
mistakenly imagined, an attempt to take advantage of our necessities,
and engross the whole trade of our colonies to the shipping of the
United States. It was adopted in perfect simplicity, as a matter of
course, arising naturally out of the system of reciprocity, which they
had uniformly and consistently observed towards us. As they had met our
interdict by another interdict, so they never dreamed of giving any
thing in return for our partial concessions, but partial concessions. In
the choice of a limitation, they were guided by their own convenience,
and by the ancient established principle of their navigation laws; never
suspecting that our government would resent their not giving up the
whole in return for a part, or that, if the nature of the restrictions
which they retained did not please us, it would deprive them, in our
eyes, of the whole merit of those they gave up.

Our ministers, misunderstanding the object of the discriminating duties,
imposed countervailing duties, of equal amount, in the ports of our
colonies, upon the shipping of the United States. And that measure,
although condemned in the first volume of this publication,[*] would
have been proper, if Mr. Huskisson’s view of the conduct of the United
States had been the true one. It was the interest of our colonies that
there should be freedom of competition between the vessels of the two
countries; and the Americans having created an artificial inequality in
favour of their own ships, our countervailing duty did no more, so far
as navigation was concerned, than restore the equality. The error of our
ministry consisted in not reflecting, that,—restrictions having been
imposed by America, only because restrictions existed in our
colonies,—to impose ulterior restrictions would not be to retaliate upon
the United States, but to create a new source of inequality, justifying
retaliation on the other side.

The following was now the comparative state of the restrictive
regulations on both sides. Their duties on our shipping were equivalent
to our duties on theirs, and so far there was reciprocity; but, on our
side, many productions of the United Edition: current; Page: [143]
States were prohibited, while all those of our colonies were admitted
into the American ports. The principle of reciprocity would have
justified them in imposing fresh restrictions; but from this they, with
great good sense and moderation, abstained: while we, who could neither
plead the principle of reciprocity nor any other rational principle for
restricting still further an intercourse in which already the excess of
restriction was on our side,—we chose rather that there should be no
trade, than this equal trade—equal as respects navigation, unequal in
other respects by our own act, and, as we imagined, in our own favour.
We interdicted the trade in American vessels; knowing all the time that
when our ports should be closed to their ships, their interdict on ours
would revive; so that not even our ship-owners, and our cherished
navigation, would gain one jot by this ebullition of national jealousy
and pique.

Perhaps, if Congress had simply re-enacted the discriminating duties,
and had evinced no disposition to consent to the abandonment of them
upon any conditions whatever, they would have produced considerably less
irritation in the minds of our government. But by offering to give up
the duties on a condition which ministers considered derogatory to our
dignity—namely, the admission of their produce into our West India
colonies, subject to no higher duties than that of Canada,*—they
rendered their case considerably worse than it could have been made by
expressing the most fixed resolution to hold fast by the discriminating
duties to the end of time.

This stipulation,—(we do not, with Mr. Canning and Mr. Huskisson, call
it a pretension;[*] for the offer of a benefit, upon conditions however
inadmissible, is no pretension; nor does there seem any peculiar
propriety in treating it as an affront,)—this stipulation, it must be
allowed, was evidently an ill considered one. It is true that what it
required from us was no more than what we ought to have had no
hesitation in consenting to; the abolition of a most pernicious and
indefensible tax, imposed by us on the West Indies, ostensibly for the
benefit of Canada, but with no effect save that of diverting the capital
of that colony to other than its natural and most beneficial employment.
However, on the principle of reciprocity, the United States were bound,
if they claimed this, to grant us the corresponding privilege, by
admitting our colonial productions into their ports, subject to no
higher duties than their own produce carried coastwise.

The United States were not indeed without plausible, and even, to a
certain extent, sound reasons, for insisting on this point. The British
North American Edition: current; Page: [144] colonies (they urged) have
by no means a large surplus produce to dispose of, and cannot export
much to the West Indies, without importing, for their own consumption,
from the United States. The trade, therefore, between the West Indies
and Canada, is in reality a circuitous trade through Canada, between the
West Indies and the United States: with this difference, that, being a
trade between one part of the British dominions and another, it is
confined by our navigation laws exclusively to British vessels. To
admit, therefore, the produce of Canada, on more favourable terms than
that of the United States, is really to admit the produce of the United
States on more favourable terms when imported in British, than when
imported in American vessels. This argument, though it does not entirely
destroy, must be admitted to weaken considerably, the force of the
objection to the supposed pretension involved in the Act of Congress.

But our ministers were destined to lose even the feeble apology which
this infringement of reciprocity on the part of the United States might,
by very partial judges, have been supposed to afford them. The
negociations of 1824, regarding, inter alia, the Colonial Trade, had
been suspended, with the understanding that they were to be renewed at
an early period. The United States had never been informed that the Act
of 1825, passed in the interval, was intended to preclude the resumption
of these discussions. This our ministers knew; and they knew moreover,
that Mr. Gallatin was actually on his way to Europe, specially
commissioned to renew this very negociation. What might be his
instructions they knew not; and therefore, probably, most persons in
their situation, knowing that they had not the ultimatum of the United
States, would have thought it expedient to wait for its arrival before
they acted upon the presumption that nothing beyond what had been
offered previously, would be granted now. Unfortunately for their
foresight, two days after the publication of the Order in Council, Mr.
Gallatin arrived, with instructions to give up the claim to an equality
of duties between the produce of the British possessions and that of the
United States. Any person may persue these instructions, by consulting
Niles’s Register for 23d June 1826, which contains the original document
signed by Mr. Clay, Secretary of State to the United States.[*] The
principal point of difference, and the only one in which the United
States were not thoroughly in the right, being thus removed, Mr. Canning
chose rather to take refuge in the pretence of an “incurable difference
of opinion,”[†] than to retract the uncalled-for interdict, or, by
resuming the negociation, to draw forth information which would have
shewn his conduct as petulant and precipitate as it was: and up to this
day it has never been stated, and is not Edition: current; Page: [145]
generally known to the British public, that Mr. Gallatin had authority
to waive the pretension characterized in Mr. Canning’s correspondence as
the ground of the interdict, and the one insuperable bar to all further
negociation.

The only measure of the United States which still remains unexplained,
is the prohibition of what is termed the circuitous intercourse: and Mr.
Canning’s remonstrances on this point are so vehement,[*] that it must
not be passed by without full consideration. We shall therefore explain
the motive which induced the United States originally to withhold, from
British vessels, the privilege of clearing out from their ports for the
British colonies.

To understand the circumstances which dictated, and sufficiently
warranted this restriction, it is necessary to remember, that previously
to our Act of 1822, all commerce in ships of either country, between our
colonies and the United States, was interdicted by the reciprocal
prohibitions of the two countries.

The means of enforcing the prohibition on our side, were simple and
obvious. We had only to declare that no American vessels should be
permitted to unload their cargoes in our colonial ports. But the United
States could not, in the same manner, prohibit British vessels from
trading to their ports; because the trade, in British vessels, between
America and the mother country, was not, nor consistently with the
treaty could be, interdicted. Not being at liberty, therefore, nor
probably desiring, to prohibit British vessels from coming to them at
all; what means had they of excluding such vessels from the prohibited
trade, except by requiring bonds that they should not take in cargoes in
America and land them in the West Indies? All the attempts of the United
States to enforce the prohibition would have been fruitless, if what
they might forbid to be done in vessels coming directly from the
colonies, they were bound to permit in the same vessels coming from any
other part of the British dominions.

It may be asked, why the prohibition of the circuitous intercourse,
adopted as being necessary to the due enforcement of the prohibition
against the direct intercourse, continued after this latter prohibition
was done away by the Act of Congress of 1823.

The reason was, because a similar restriction existed on our side.

In permitting the trade between our colonies and the United States, as
well as all other countries of America, in foreign vessels, our Act of
1822 required, that goods imported from these countries in other than
British ships must be brought and shipped directly from the country of
which they were the produce; and that goods exported to these countries
from our colonies in foreign ships must be exported directly to the
country to which those ships belonged. By this Act, therefore, no trade
could take place in vessels of the United States between that country
and our colonies, unless such vessels came directly from the United
Edition: current; Page: [146] States, and returned thither directly.
Hence it is obvious that the United States only exercised a fair
reciprocity in confining the same trade, when carried on in British
vessels, to such as came directly from our colonies, and returned
directly to them.

Mr. Canning’s attempt to shew that the one restriction did not justify
the other, because the colonial trade is, by the consent of nations, an
exclusive trade, is founded on incorrect reasoning. We may admit his
premises, and yet deny his conclusion. However widely the colonial trade
may differ from that of independent nations, yet, if we have a right to
prescribe the conditions on which we will admit the United States to our
colonial trade, they have an equal right to determine for themselves on
what conditions they will accept of it.

It is, indeed, made matter of additional complaint by Mr. Canning, that
although the prohibition of the indirect intercourse had been removed on
the side of Great Britain by the Act of 1825, no steps had yet been
taken by Congress to remove theirs.[*] In answer to this, Mr. Gallatin
could only say, that he, and (as he conceived) his Government likewise,
had been unaware that the Act of 1825 had the effect now ascribed to
it.[†] This appears, from documentary evidence, to be perfectly true.
Mr. Gallatin’s instructions, which may be perused, as we have already
observed, in Niles’s Register, proceeded upon the supposition that the
restriction imposed by the Act of 1822 still continued; and any one who
will take the trouble to read a despatch from Mr. Gallatin to Mr. Clay,
printed in the number for 6th January, 1827, of the same periodical
work,[‡] will not wonder that an enactment so confusedly and unskilfully
drawn up as our Act of 1825, should not have been understood by those
who had no access to any commentary, and to whom no official explanation
was afforded.

After all, this Act, even as interpreted by Mr. Canning, takes off only
one half of the interdict on the indirect intercourse. Foreign vessels
trading to our colonies may now export colonial produce to a third
country; but they may not import into our colonies the produce of any
other country than that to which the vessels belong.

These, and all other misapprehensions, would at once have been cleared
up, if the negociations which the United States have professed
throughout to wait for, in order that they might be guided by the
result, had been renewed. But Ministers had determined otherwise; and
when Mr. Gallatin arrived on the implied understanding that the
discussions were to commence immediately, and bearing instructions in
which almost the only disputed claim which was not given up was that
which, according to Mr. Canning, we have yielded, a participation in the
trade between our colonies and foreign countries; he is told that not
only now, but hereafter, even if the United States should grant to us
every thing which our Edition: current; Page: [147] pretended
reciprocity system demands, we will not pledge ourselves to suffer any
trade in American vessels, between our colonies and America![*]

Could we hope that Mr. Canning’s American policy had died with him, it
would be no inconsiderable advantage to set off against the evils of a
loss otherwise so deeply to be lamented. We are persuaded that no
impartial person, who takes for his standard of approval any kind of
reciprocity, except that which is jocularly said to be all on one side,
will consider that any one has deviated from the principle of
reciprocity, except our Government; or that any thing would be necessary
to bring America to reason, except to be ourselves reasonable. We wish
it were in our power to add, that the present ministers,* by the conduct
which they have pursued either before or since they came into office,
had afforded much ground for hope that they are the men through whose
agency these differences will be accommodated. That strength of
intellect which comprehends readily the consequences of a false step,
and what is a still rarer endowment, that strength of character which
dares to retrace it, are not qualities which have often belonged to a
British ministry. That the present ministers possess these attributes,
it still remains for them to prove. For us, if we can contribute in any
degree to give the right direction to the opinions of any portion of the
public on this question, we shall have effected all that we aim at, and
all that is in our power.

Edition: current; Page: [148] Edition: current; Page: [149]


NOTES ON THE NEWSPAPERS
 1834

Edition: current; Page: [150]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Monthly Repository, n.s. VIII (Mar., 1834), 161-76; (Apr., 1834),
233-48, 309-12; (May, 1834), 354-75; (June, 1834), 435-56; (July, 1834),
521-8; (Aug., 1834), 589-600; (Sept., 1834), 656-65. Headed as title.
Running titles: left-hand, as title; right-hand, as sub-titles for each
“Note.” Each month’s entries signed “A.” Not republished. Identified in
Mill’s bibliography as “Notes on the Newspapers: in the Monthly Rep. for
March 1834, April 1834, May 1834, June 1834, July 1834, August 1834, and
September 1834” (MacMinn, 38). The numbered headings for each month’s
entries have been added. In Somerville College there is a proof set of
the “Notes” for Mar., 1834, with, on one page, four corrections (which
were made): “Divorse” is corrected to “Divorce” (160.8); “when they see
a place uncovered,” is added in the margin (160.17); “ume” is corrected
to “une” (160.22); and a quotation mark is added after “boue;” (160.22).
Also in Somerville College are tear-sheets of all of the “Notes,” with
four corrections that have been adopted in the present text: “Reformed
Ministry” is corrected to “Reform Ministry” (151.17-18); “not” to “but”
(213.35); “base” to “lease” (243.26); and “acts” to “arts” (262.17).
There are two other corrections marked, perhaps not in Mill’s hand, that
have been adopted: “Alliance” is altered to “Affiance” (173n.20), and
“Pedrillo” to “Pedro Garcias” (224.7). For comment on the “Notes,” see
lviii-lix above.

Edition: current; Page: [151]


Notes on the Newspapers


NO. I, MARCH, 1834


5th February
 The King’s Speech[*]

The Session now commencing will probably decide, in the minds of the
many, who wield the physical force, the question whether anything is to
be hoped from the higher classes, and whether the people shall, or shall
not, take their affairs into their own hands.

In the first Session of the Reformed Parliament, many allowances were
made, which will not be made again: the new legislative body had the
full benefit of the reluctance to consider a first trial as final; and
the novelty of the situation was such that the public were bewildered,
and did not themselves see with sufficient clearness what ought to be
done, to render them very severe judges of their representatives for
what they left undone. The public had expected much, but did not know
exactly what. They felt sure that the Reform Bill[†] must somehow be a
great good to them, and they trusted that those who had been
sufficiently their friends to give them the Bill, would find the means
of making it have its natural effects. The first session taught them
that they were not to expect this: the Reform Ministry and the Reformed
Parliament would do no good spontaneously. The second will show whether
they are capable of doing any when they are forced. If this trial should
also fail, we live in times when mankind hurry on rapidly to ultimate
consequences; the next question will be, what is the easiest and most
expeditious way of getting rid of them.

Were Ministers in their senses, when, in so critical a position, they
opened a session, perhaps destined to be the most important in our
annals, with a speech, if possible, more unmeaning even than the common
run of King’s speeches? A speech studiously framed in such language as
to promise nothing—to commit the Government to nothing?

Ministers are ignorant of the very first principles of statesmanship.
The one Edition: current; Page: [152] maxim of a wise policy, in times
of trouble and movement, is that which Madame Roland recommended to the
Girondists: “Take the initiative!” Be you the first in the field, with
whatever purpose. Whatever you do, do it before you are forced to it: do
it while you may be supposed to have willed it, and not to have been
passive instruments of some other will. If you would not be like dead
twigs on an eminence, ready to be swept away by the first gust—if you
would be something and not nothing—could you not for once seem to have a
purpose, a plan, an idea, of your own! Could you not assume what gives
dignity even to wickedness! Do good, do even evil, but let it be from
choice. If you cannot show a worthy character, show some character: if
you cannot be loved, prithee be hated, but be not despised!

Among modern statesmen, at least in England, the wisdom of the serpent
seems even more infinitely rare than the innocence of the dove.[*] The
curse of a highly civilized state of society, are the half-honest, the
men of feeble purposes. Scarcely any one has character enough to be
either good or wicked. Give us rather a “bold bad man,”[†] a villain as
villains were of old, with a strong intellect and a strong will. Give us
for a ruler one who could and would do right whenever it was his
interest; who could and would prevent all wrong, but such as he chose to
promote: not men who, for want of courage to do either good or harm,
fold their hands and let harm come.

If the vessel is merely to scud before the wind, what need of a
steersman? We do not support a Government that we may ourselves redress
our own grievances. We want rulers who do not wait to be told by us how
we wish to be governed; men who can teach us what we should demand, who
can at least anticipate our demands, not slowly and grudgingly obey
them. We want men from whom it shall not be necessary to extort all they
give, men who shall not, instead of gaining, actually lose popularity by
every fresh concession.

We want, in short, men who on every great question will act as the
present Ministers have acted on the Reform Bill, and on that alone.

The people were anxiously waiting for the propositions of the Ministry
on Municipal Corporations, on the Poor Laws, and on the abuses in the
Church. The speech says, that the reports of the Commissioners on these
several subjects will be laid before Parliament, and will afford them
“much useful information,” whereby they will be enabled to judge of “the
nature and extent of any existing defects and abuses, and in what manner
the necessary corrections may in due season be safely and beneficially
applied.”[‡] Not even a promise to propose anything. They may have
something to propose, but their minds are not yet made up. When are such
minds ever made up? It is literally true, that the only two things to
which the speech Edition: current; Page: [153] either directly or by
implication pledges the Ministry, are, first to propose a “final
adjustment” of Irish tithes, (the extinction of which was announced by
Mr. Stanley two years ago,)[*] and this “without injury to any
institution in Church or State;”[†] secondly, not to consent to a repeal
of the Union with Ireland. On this latter point, indeed, the speech is
as explicit, and as emphatic, as heart could wish. They will resist Mr.
O’Connell even to the death. The collective energy, courage, and
determination of the entire Cabinet, have been all thrown into this one
act of what they doubtless deem antique heroism and magnanimity.

The debate which ensued, and which, as those say who were present, was
as flat and dull as if the Session had already lasted six months, made
no further disclosure of the purposes of Ministers: but in the course of
the evening it was discovered, that they intended to propose some
trifling amendment (it did not appear what) in the marriage law, and
that they hoped, but were not sure, that on the subject of English
tithes, some measure might be brought to completion in the present
Session. It has further transpired that they do not mean to propose a
registration of births, marriages, and deaths; that they have not
decided whether or not to re-introduce the Local Courts’ Bill;* but that
there are two things, besides the repeal of the Union, which they are
firmly determined to resist: any alteration in the Corn Laws,[‡] and any
separation of Church and State.

Is this the way to retain any hold on a people every day becoming more
alienated from the higher classes, and every day growing in the capacity
and in the habit of organized co-operation among themselves?

On the showing of these very men, a great change has taken place in the
structure of society, and has, through their instrumentality, been
communicated to our political institutions. Power has passed from the
few into the hands of the many. On their own showing too, the many are
most imperfectly informed, most liable to error, and likely to make a
most dangerous use of their newly-acquired power, unless they somewhere
find wiser guidance than their own. Accordingly, the Whigs deliver to
them, by word and deed, the following instructions: “We are the wisest
and most excellent persons in the world; the only persons who are fit to
govern you, as all, except Tories and anarchists, acknowledge. But do
not expect Edition: current; Page: [154] from us any thing to improve
your condition. If that is your object, you have only yourselves to look
to. We, if you would but let us alone, desire no better than to leave
every thing as it is. Some things we do not mean to give you, say or do
what you will: you shall not have cheap bread, nor be allowed to choose
your own parsons. But whatever else you ask for, you may have, by making
us sufficiently uncomfortable; for we are a liberal and enlightened
Administration, and are always ready to quit any spot as soon as it is
made too hot to hold us. Therefore, if you want us to stir, make ready
your fuel and light your fire. But as long as we conveniently can, we
are your men for upholding existing institutions. We are the pillars of
the Constitution, and it cannot be in safety if it rests any where but
upon us, because of our yielding nature. If the Tories had it, you would
storm and rave, and blow down it and them together; but we, you see, go
upon castors, and, you are aware, do not absolutely object to being
pushed from under it when we must.”

What is this but exhorting the people to incessant agitation? “We will
yield nothing to reason,” say the Whig ministry, “but every thing to
clamour.” These are the men who call Radicalism dangerous. It is
Radicalism to demand that the people may be ruled by men of their
choice; men, therefore, in whom they can confide; in whose hands they
may place their affairs, and feel at liberty to be quiet. Whig policy,
on the contrary, relies on a perennial conflict between opposite
principles of evil: on the one hand, a Government, which, never
attempting to originate any good, neither has nor claims public
confidence; and on the other, perpetual agitation.

It is policy like this which alone can render the prospects of our
country and of the world seriously alarming. The people are always eager
to follow good guidance, and the sole danger is of their not finding it.
Intelligence abounds among the English democracy; but it is not
cultivated intelligence. It is mostly of the self-educated sort; and
this is commonly more microscopic than comprehensive: it sees one or a
few things strongly, and others not at all: it is the parent of
narrowness and fanaticism. The coming changes, for come they must and
will, are fraught with hope in any case, but also with peril, unless
there be found to lead the van of opinion, to place themselves in the
front rank of the popular party, a section of the wisest and most
energetic of the instructed classes; men whose education and pursuits
have given them a wider range of ideas, and whose leisure has admitted
of more systematic study, than will, for a long time to come, be
possible, save in occasional rare instances, to those who labour with
their hands.

It cannot be but that there are such men in England; but we know not
where to look for them in public life. The present Ministers not only
are incapable of being, but do not even attempt to seem such men. They
have neither the intellect, the knowledge, the energy, the courage, nor
even the wish. They are wanting in the very first of the necessary
conditions,—faith in improvement; without which it is impossible to take
the lead in a nation which not only believes in, but demands
improvement. They have no belief that the very measures which they are
Edition: current; Page: [155] instrumental in carrying, will have any
beneficial consequences. To their minds the Reform Bill itself was but a
prudent and necessary concession to popular opinion. What can be
expected from such men, but what we find? that they will never do any
thing till they are forced, always do as little as they are permitted,
and endeavour that even that little should lead to nothing.

There is a question which a short time must solve, and on its solution
the fate of this nation entirely depends:—Can the higher classes, before
it is too late, furnish the country with ministers, who, together with
strong popular sympathies, have the capacity and the energy to lead, and
not wait to be driven?

*     *     *     *     *


6th February
 Mr. Shiel and Lord Althorp

The House of Commons have availed themselves of this affair to pay
largely that peculiar tribute to virtue, which vice, according to the
old proverb, loves to render.[*] They have made a truly edifying
exhibition of rigid morality. Mr. Shiel’s fate is a great moral lesson;
he has been made a signal example of the inconveniences of being found
out. If Mr. Shiel be guilty of what is laid to his charge,[†] a
high-minded man might look down upon him; but how, in reason, is it
possible that the present House of Commons should do so? No one does or
can despise in another person his own vices: and contemptible as a man’s
conduct may be in itself, we can never without the sincerest pity see
one man singled out from a multitude, and mercilessly immolated for
being proved to have done what all the others are known to do; made the
scapegoat of those whose only advantage over him is that of Lady
Bellaston in the novel,[‡] that nobody calls them what every body knows
they are.

Who, that knows any thing of the sentiments and conversation of public
men, is not aware, that there is hardly one of them who has the
slightest scruple in doing what is imputed to Mr. Shiel,—voting and
speaking contrary to his private opinion, for the sake of retaining his
seat? There were many present that evening, who could have pointed at
the instant to at least two hundred members, and said to each of them,
“On such a day you did so.” It is a thing so perfectly understood, that
allowances are made for it as for any other nécessité de position: men
talk of it to each other as they would of the most innocent or laudable
act of their lives. There is Edition: current; Page: [156] indeed a
tacit understanding that these things are not to be mentioned in the
hearing of the reporters: but when such conduct is spoken of in private
to their own circles, the only thing which could excite surprise or
offence would be, to pretend to be shocked at it; that would be
resented, as an attempt to impose upon themselves, to overreach the
fraternity. But the public are fair game.

If all who hear and are disgusted at such conversation were as
indiscreet as Mr. Hill, how many a curious tale would be revealed! In
the last Session it was reported to us, on undoubted authority, that an
English county member, of far greater weight in the country and in
Parliament than Mr. Shiel, after having voted on an important division
decidedly on the wrong side, (which for once happened to be against the
Ministry,) said to an acquaintance, “That vote was the dirtiest I ever
gave; but my constituents in * * * compelled me to it.” We do not
believe that this member thought he had done wrong; it was something in
his favour, that he was evidently conscious of having done what he would
willingly have avoided. We would on no account do the injustice to
another which has been done to Mr. Shiel; and we should not give
publicity to this anecdote, if we were not well assured that no one, not
already acquainted with the facts, will recognize the individual.

Since the above was written a Committee has been appointed, at the
instance of Mr. Shiel’s friends, to investigate the charges against him,
and the inquiry has terminated in his complete and honourable
acquittal.[*] His first accuser, Mr. Hill, has made all the reparation
in his power,[†] but too late to save his own credit, which has received
a shock it will not easily recover. Lord Althorp pleads guilty only of
having acted imprudently as a man and as a minister; though he
confesses, that he had given a false impression of the purport of what
his informant told him.[‡] To misunderstand and misstate facts to the
injury of another, is that only imprudence? Would it not have been as
easy to put the question to Mr. John Wood before as after uttering the
calumny? Lord Althorp will not escape so easily as he probably flatters
himself: he is more deeply culpable than he perhaps thinks, and it will
require many good deeds to obliterate the memory of this act of criminal
recklessness.

The debates on this affair will reveal to the world without, much more,
we suspect, than they previously knew, of the state of parliamentary
morality. If Mr. Shiel had really done what Lord Althorp imputed to him;
if in private society he had declared himself favourable to the Coercion
Bill,[§] while in Parliament he was speaking and voting against it; few,
very few members of parliament would have been entitled to throw the
first stone: but the act itself would have been not the less a
disgraceful one, and no electors could, without great folly, have again
returned Edition: current; Page: [157] such a man to Parliament. Yet all
those who took part with Mr. Shiel, not content with excusing the man,
exculpated the act too: it stands recorded as their opinion, that a man
whose private professions are at variance with his public conduct, does
no wrong; it was what they were all liable to. That they are almost all
liable to it is too true, and they would have felt the confession a most
humiliating one, if they were not from habit callous to their own
ignominy. Sir Francis Burdett went furthest, and was the most unabashed,
in his avowal that in the moral code of Parliament hypocrisy was no
vice.[*] This is not the first time that Sir Francis Burdett has made
himself conspicuous by uttering sentiments even more scandalously
immoral than the House is accustomed to hear: not that he is in reality
worse than the rest, but on the contrary better; for he is more
unconscious, less of a hypocrite himself, and when he speaks out what
they all think, does it in mere naïveté.

The Examiner of February 16th has commented upon the whole affair in its
best manner; taking a just and discriminating view of the case as it
affects Mr. Shiel, and reading a lesson to the members of the House,
such as they seldom receive, and still more seldom profit by.[†]

*     *     *     *     *


7th February
 The Monopoly of the Post Office Clerks

The Times announces that this complication of jobbing and vandalism is
to be abolished, and that the clerks of the Post Office, instead of
enjoying, to the prejudice of rival dealers and of the public, an entire
monopoly of the trade in foreign newspapers, and great privileges with
regard to English ones, will henceforth be prohibited from dealing in
newspapers either English or foreign.[‡]

Who will say after this that exertions for the reform of abuses are lost
labour? But six months ago, the French Postmaster General[§] was here on
a mission to negociate for the free circulation of newspapers between
Great Britain and France: but the private interests concerned in the
privileged traffic were too strong both for the influence of the French
government, and for the collective wisdom of our Ministers; who,
observe, had at the very time two Commissioners in France,[¶] to impress
upon the tardy and unenlightened understandings of the French government
Edition: current; Page: [158] the benefits of free trade. When the
failure of the negociation was announced, the press made some severe
remarks, after which the matter dropped, or seemed to drop; and now when
nobody expected to hear any thing more about it, the animadversions have
produced their effect, the obstacles have given way, and the abuse is to
be extirpated. Abel Handy was not so far wrong when, having exhausted
all possible means of extinguishing the conflagration, he reflected that
“perhaps it would go out of itself.”[*] Evils very often go out
apparently of themselves, after human exertion seemed to have done its
utmost in vain: but the evil would not have been got rid of, if the
exertion had not been made.

The Times has, in an excellent article, pointed out the further measures
which are necessary to render the destruction of the Post Office
monopoly of any avail.[†] The French Government must be invited to renew
the negociation. The newspapers of either country should circulate in
the other post free, as English newspapers do in England, or at a very
small postage duty. The arrangement should be extended to any other
country whose Government is willing to accede to it. If free trade in
silks and broadcloth is important, free interchange of ideas and
feelings is still more so, both for the maintenance of peace and
friendship among civilized nations, and for the advancement of
civilization itself, by the mutual blending and softening of national
peculiarities.

*     *     *     *     *


12th February
 Attendance in the House

Mr. Ward has obtained what it was very proper should be granted,—a
Committee to make arrangements for preparing accurate lists of the
majorities and minorities;[‡] those which now appear in the newspapers
being supplied by individual members, irregularly, and often
inaccurately. On this occasion, the Chronicle has an article, in the
main, excellent; but in which much greater stress is laid than we can
see any reason for, upon the importance of mere regularity of
attendance.[§] We yield to no one in the rigour with which we would hold
a legislator to the discharge of his duty, but we protest against
considering the constancy of his bodily presence as a test of it. So
long as the people of Great Britain do not see fit to give salaries to
their representatives, and so long as talents Edition: current; Page:
[159] and energy are of scanty growth among those who are born to
riches, the people must either renounce being served by men of talents
and energy, or consent to their withholding from Parliamentary business
as much of their time as is necessary for gaining their subsistence. A
member, indeed, who is in independent circumstances, owes all his time
to his constituents; but he does not owe it to them to waste that time
in listening to the floods of meaningless, pointless, endless talk,
which are poured forth in tenfold profusion under the excitement of a
numerous audience. The real business of Parliament is all transacted in
thin houses, and could not be got through if the members attended
regularly. A representative of the people, it is said, should be always
at his post. His post! As well might it be said that a good soldier
should be always mounting guard. The post of a good and wise legislator
is his own study: it is there that all good laws are made, all
improvements in human affairs really elaborated. To look at the present
practice, one would imagine that the government of a great nation was
performed by talking and hearing talk. It is performed by thinking. If
(not to mention Committees) seven or eight hours out of the twenty-four,
as large a portion of time as what are called the respectable classes
usually devote to gaining their livelihood, are to be passed in hearing
bad speeches—of all occupations (if occupation it can be called) the
most deadening and dispiriting; what time remains for reading, what for
meditation, for conversing with persons of appropriate knowledge, for
preparation, either by studying the great questions, or by carrying on
that general mental culture, which renders a person’s opinion worth
having, even on what he has not studied?

Were there any concert, or mutual understanding, among the faithful
delegates of the people, all the objects which it is sought to compass
by exacting attendance, would be provided for, without the endless waste
that now takes place of valuable time, which, for the interests of
constituents, might be far more profitably bestowed. There would always
be a certain number of members standing sentinels, to stop any
unforeseen mischief, by denouncing it to the public, or, if necessary,
by counting out the House. There are some, such as Mr. Hume, to whose
tastes and faculties this mode of serving the people is so congenial,
that their “post” would really be at the outposts, and they would attend
constantly. When occasions arose on which public duty required that all
should be present, either at the debate or at the divison, all would
attend. But these occasions, though of frequent, are not of daily
occurrence; and, at other times, he is good for very little who cannot
serve his country to better purpose elsewhere, than by destroying his
health and exhausting his spirits in a crowded assembly. The lives of
several valuable Members of Parliament, and almost the whole usefulness
of many more, have fallen a sacrifice to regularity of attendance. The
main question is, not how often has a member attended, but what he has
done when he did attend? However irregular his attendance, he should be
honourably acquitted if he can appeal to valuable services actually
achieved, as a proof that his time on the whole has been well expended
for the public benefit.

Edition: current; Page: [160]
These remarks will no longer apply, or at least not in an equal degree,
when for the first time common sense shall be at length applied to the
distribution of public business; when the cumbrous machinery of a
multitudinous legislature shall no longer be put in motion for purposes
for which it is manifestly unfit, and to which it never would have been
applied, but that the simple means which would be efficacious to the end
are not in existence. Can there be a spectacle more like Smollett’s vast
machine for cutting a cabbage,[*] than the two Houses of Parliament
engaged in passing a Divorce Bill, or a Turnpike Bill, or a Bill to
enable a Joint Stock Company to sue and be sued in the name of an
individual? When the numbers of the House of Commons shall not exceed
two or at most three hundred—when local representative councils, of
twelve or twenty members each, shall be constituted for the transaction
of local business—when the necessity of legislating for individual cases
shall have been obviated, to the extent it easily might, by
well-considered general laws enacted once for all—when statesmen shall
arise whose logical habits shall enable them to foresee and provide for
large classes of cases at once, instead of merely darning holes in the
laws, or laying on, as at present, when they see a place uncovered, a
little patch of law just large enough to cover it—and when the
preparation of Bills for Parliament shall be the duty of a responsible
Minister of Legislation, aided by a standing Commission of the first
jurists in the nation, an arrangement without which all the
representative Governments of Europe are in danger of making, in the
words of General Lamarque, “une halte dans la boue;”[†]—then, perhaps,
and not till then, the business of Parliament will neither, in quantity
or quality, be such as to justify any of the members in withholding
constant attendance.

*     *     *     *     *


15th February
 Lord Althorp’s Budget[‡]

The prosperity of the country has better availed the Ministry than their
own counsels. Last year they squandered a considerable surplus revenue
in remitting, not taxes, but halves and quarters and half-quarters of
taxes. They seemed to have found the secret of giving away a large sum
of money so that nobody should be even temporarily the better for it.
They left themselves with the interest of twenty Edition: current; Page:
[161] millions of new debt to provide for, and resources not more than
equal to the existing expenditure. But an increasing revenue has been to
them like a rising tide; by its assistance they have found themselves in
deep water where they had reason to expect rocks and shallows. The
revenue of the year exceeds last year’s estimates by a million and a
half; and having effected (for which we give them all reasonable credit)
further retrenchments to the amount of half a million, they have two
millions to meet the expected charge of 800,000l.; leaving a surplus of
1,200,000l.; about equal to the produce of the house-tax, which
accordingly is to be taken off. The abrogation of this tax will
certainly afford relief: this time the remission of taxation will be a
benefit to somebody; but to whom? To the most clamorous and troublesome;
not to the most overburthened.

Are the “low Radicals,” as the Times calls them,[*] altogether wrong,
when they affirm that the Reform Bill has but created what they term a
shopocracy,[†] in the place of, or rather by the side of, the
aristocracy; and that the people are still to be sacrificed for the
joint benefit of both? The first use which the middle classes have made
of their power, is to shake off their burthens, leaving those of the
working classes as great as ever. The window-tax is objectionable; but a
house-tax, honestly assessed, seems to us as unexceptionable an impost
as exists, and one of the very last which an enlightened policy would
have abandoned. Mr. Byng, indeed, “wishes to see all direct taxes
abolished:” this we suppose passes for “good old English feeling:”
English liberty has always felt itself seriously aggrieved by the visits
of the tax-gatherer: an Englishman, being free born, dislikes extremely,
not the burthen, but to see the face of the man who lays it on. If Mr.
Byng were mortally wounded by an invisible weapon, he would think he
died a natural death. Let but the “keen knife see not the wound it
makes,” he will never “peep through the dark and cry ‘hold, hold.’ ”[‡]

This is very childish; or rather like, not a child, but a hunted hare,
who thinks she escapes her pursuers by hiding her face, and managing not
to see them. Direct taxes are the best of taxes, because there is least
of juggle about them, and least uncertainty upon whom they really fall.
With taxes on commodities there is always so much doubt, or at least
such interminable dispute, who pays them, that it is impossible to agree
upon a mode of imposing them so as to bear equally on all classes and on
all fortunes. Besides, to be productive, they must be laid on articles
of general consumption, and of such the poor consume more, in proportion
to their incomes, than the rich. A poor family consumes proportionally
much more bread, more beer, more tea, more sugar, than a rich family. No
tax can be perfectly just, but a direct tax. And, where the rent of
land, the best of all sources of revenue, has been permitted to become
the property of individuals, of all direct taxes none Edition: current;
Page: [162] practically speaking is so eligible as a house-tax. It is
the best of income-taxes. What a man pays for his habitation measures
his income, not perfectly indeed, but better than any tax-gatherer can;
and makes all those allowances which an income-tax never makes, perhaps
never can make. No income-tax can be precisely graduated according to
the precariousness, the variableness, the limited or unlimited duration
of incomes: all which circumstances a fair house-tax allows for, because
they are all taken into consideration in hiring or buying a house. In
short, a house-tax (except that a miser may escape it) realizes far more
perfectly than an income-tax, the perfection of an income-tax
itself,—that of being proportioned not to what a man has, but to what he
can afford to spend.

But it was not by considerations so subtle and refined as those of the
comparative justice or policy of different taxes, that this question was
destined to be decided. When the Reformed Parliament met, the people of
England, that part of them at least who are called the “better classes,”
commenced a contest, not to reduce the public expenses, but to shift off
their burthen each man from himself upon all the rest. In this
ignominious scramble, the shoparchy have carried off the lion’s share.
The house-tax, though it did not touch the poor, was unpopular, because
it fell disproportionately upon the middle classes, and spared the
higher: and the aristocracy, having to choose between its equalization
and its abolition, made a compromise with the middle classes, and
removed the tax, to avoid paying their just share of it. The
reconciliations, like the quarrels, of the privileged orders, are always
at the people’s expense.

We should give Lord Althorp some credit for the manifest reluctance with
which he gave up this tax,[*] if we did not remember how perseveringly,
last year, he defended those inequalities in its assessment,[†] which so
disgusted the public, and which are the real cause of its unpopularity.
If instead of defending those inequalities he had remedied them, the
clamour against the tax would have been stilled. Now, it is too late.

We observe by the Chronicle report, that when Mr. Hume recommended as a
substitute for the present tax on wines, what if practicable would be so
greatly preferable, an ad valorem duty, on the ground that by lightening
the pressure of the duty on the cheaper wines, it would enable the poor
to drink wine for a shilling a bottle, the House laughed.[‡] The idea of
wine at a shilling a bottle, and poor men drinking it, altogether
overset what little seriousness nature had bestowed upon them. The House
is not aware how much it often betrays by a laugh. Tell me when Edition:
current; Page: [163] a man laughs, and I will tell you what he is. We
make no comment upon the good feeling or the good sense of this
exhibition. What we would point attention to is, its inherent vulgarity.
There has been some discussion whether the House of Commons has become
less gentlemanly in its composition since it has been said to be
reformed. This we cannot presume to decide: but, gentlemanly or not, a
more essentially vulgar assembly than it is and was, both before and
since, we sometimes think could scarcely be found in Europe.

*     *     *     *     *


17th February
 The Leeds Election

The liberal papers are exulting in the success of the liberal candidate,
Mr. Baines, yet they all overlook what forms in our view the chief
importance of the victory.[*] If Mr. Baines had been a Tory, we should
still have hailed as one of the greatest triumphs hitherto achieved by
liberal principles, the return to Parliament of a man who has gained all
his reputation and his success in life as editor of a newspaper. It is
time that the ostensible power should be where the real power is, and
that those who have long, by persuasion or by compulsion, dictated to
the Legislature what laws it should make, should no longer be thought
unfit themselves to take a direct part in making those laws.

The social position of the newspaper press in this country is altogether
anomalous. In all the circumstances by which we are surrounded there is
no more striking indication of a society in a state of moral revolution.
If there be a law in human affairs which seems universal, it is, that
the respect of mankind follows power, in whatsoever hands residing. In
England, however, the seat of power has changed, and the respect of
mankind has not yet found its way to the new disposers of their destiny.
Nobody denies that the newspapers govern the country; hitherto (it is
true) much more by making themselves the organs of opinion already
formed, than by influencing its formation; yet to an immense extent in
both modes. To mention a striking example, we affirm without fear of
contradiction from any one who has watched the progress of opinion, that
Mr. Black, the Editor of the Morning Chronicle, has been the great
proximate cause of the law reforms now in progress, and of the downfal
of that superstition which formerly protected the vices of the courts of
law and of the magistracy from the denunciations of opinion and the
controlling hand of the legislator. Sir Robert Peel first, and Lord
Brougham afterwards, have only reaped the harvest which he had sown.

Allowing, however, that the newspaper press is but an instrument, and
not an independent agent, the two Houses of Parliament have for many
years renounced Edition: current; Page: [164] all pretension to being
anything but the more or less reluctant instruments of that instrument.
Yet, a year or two ago, even Radicals would have turned away from the
proposition of returning a newspaper editor to Parliament; because
newspaper editors, as a class, have only talents, and have not rank or
fortune. Even now, we are convinced that most of Mr. Baines’s supporters
would have voted in preference for the greatest dolt among the rich
manufacturers or bankers of Leeds, if he would have professed as
strongly their political opinions. The occupation of a journalist is
under the ban of society. An individual here and there, though with
difficulty, escapes the stigma, and is placed, by personal qualities or
adventitious circumstances, as high in conventional estimation as a
barrister is placed by his mere calling. But the profession is decidedly
not a gentlemanly one. It stands about on a level with the lower
branches of the legal profession. The fact is almost universally
admitted, that an editor, and that an attorney, may be a gentleman. Nay,
many go so far as to say that some are so.

Another anomaly is, the very different degree of solicitude which
society bestows upon the training up of those who are its real teachers,
and of those who only pretend to be its teachers, having long ceased to
be so in reality. We once heard the profoundest observer and critic on
the spirit of the times whom we ever knew, dilate upon this topic.[*]
Observe, he said, what an apparatus is put in motion, what large sums of
money are expended, what a world of trouble is taken, to educate a
select individual from his infancy upwards, for the ultimate end of
placing him in a pulpit,—from whence he discourses to the people, in
language which nine-tenths of them scarcely understand, matter which has
altogether ceased (it may almost be said) to have a meaning to them;
which never reaches their intellect, their imagination, or their
affections, and has lost all power over their will. Meantime, there has
arisen a new set of instructors, who really do govern the minds and
conduct of the people, who have succeeded to the place which the clergy
formerly filled, and are, however unworthy in many respects, the sole
priesthood of our time; and the rearing up of these men, the work of
qualifying them for the highest and most dignified office to which a
human being can be called, is abandoned to chance, that is, to all
manner of demoralizing influences. The priest of the nineteenth century
struggles into existence no one knows how, and having served his
apprenticeship in some cellar or garret which society never looks into,
sets up his pulpit in a newspaper-office, and there, from the materials
which he has picked up, and the faculties which it has pleased heaven,
not society, to bestow upon him, preaches to the world how they are to
think, feel, and act; and they follow his instructions.

This parallel is well fitted to give rise to reflections, which whoever
follows up, will be led much further than he is probably aware of.

Edition: current; Page: [165]


Mr. O’Connell’s Bill for the Liberty of the Press[*]

The Radical party in the House of Commons is a rope of sand.[†] It is
not only without a head, but without members or a body. It is not a
party; the Radicals in Parliament are incapable of forming one. No body
of men ever accomplished any thing considerable in public life without
organized co-operation; and these seem incapable, not merely of
organized, but even of casual co-operation. The evil consequences of
this incapacity display themselves most of all, in the case of those who
aspire to be, and in some measure deserve to be, distinguished as the
instructed and philosophical Radicals; for they appear to be incapable,
not only of acting in concert, but also of acting singly. There is
always a lion in the path.[‡] One is too despairing; he thinks no good
is ever to be done; another is too fastidious; he will not “mix himself
up,” or “allow himself to be confounded” with somebody or something:
another is too timid, another too indolent, another too unenterprising.
With one or two exceptions at most, none of them have sufficient
strength (there needs no little) to stand alone: they will never be any
thing but ciphers, till they are grouped together with a unit or units
at their head; yet they cannot, it would seem, endure the imputation of
acting together. Not only there is no principle of attraction among
them, there seems a principle of repulsion. They do not even verify the
old story of John doing nothing and Tom helping him. They will not be
helped to do nothing. Each man is immovably bent upon doing his nothing
single-handed.

The consequence is, that the men who will neither lead nor be led, are
passed by; and those who do not wait to be led, become the real leaders.
We have heard it spoken of in a tone of complaint, that Mr. Hume, or
that Mr. O’Connell, hold themselves forth as the parliamentary leaders
of the popular party in the nation. For our part, so long as Mr. Hume
and Mr. O’Connell are the only persons who are never unprepared to stand
up for the cause, in season and out of season, whatever may be thought
of them by fine people, and to force discussions on all the great
questions, whatever may be the unwillingness of the House, we hold these
gentlemen to be the leaders of the Radicals in fact, whatever some who
allow themselves to be called Radicals may say or wish to the contrary.
And, although they may often execute the office in a manner which
compels us to wish that the people had other leaders, or rather that
those who are so good were still better, we make an immense distinction
in our estimation between those who continually Edition: current; Page:
[166] accomplish far more than any one thought there was reason to
expect of them, and those who accomplish less.*

Those who do not originate any thing, must consent to act with, and
under, those who do, or to be nothing. There are members of the House in
whose hands, far rather than in those of Mr. O’Connell, we would gladly
have seen such a question as the Liberty of the Press: but we are well
assured, from experience, that not one of them would have moved hand or
foot in the matter, if a bolder man had not led the way. We give Mr.
O’Connell the greatest credit for introducing the subject; and we now
trust, that those who have the capacity may have also the will to assist
him in rendering the very imperfect measure which he proposes as perfect
as possible.

Mr. O’Connell’s measure, if we may judge from his opening statement,
goes, as it appears to us, too far, and not far enough. He seems to have
taken nothing into his view but personal libels. He said not a word of
any provision for the free discussion of doctrines, or of institutions,
although this is, if possible, still more important than even the
liberty of criticising the conduct of public functionaries. On the
subject of religion, that on which beyond all others discussion ought
not to be restrained by law—being already restrained so much more than
is consistent with a wholesome state of the human mind, by mere
opinion—Mr. O’Connell avows his intention of not innovating on the
existing law; though, greatly to his honour, he has not flinched from
declaring, in the strongest terms, that, in his opinion, discussion on
the subject of religion ought to be perfectly free. But restrictions of
a similar nature exist on the subject of politics also, and Mr.
O’Connell has not yet said that he proposes to remove them. We cannot so
much as conceive any great improvement in the law of libel, not
commencing with a declaration that it shall be lawful to controvert any
political doctrine, or attack any law or institution, without exception;
in any manner and in any terms not constituting a direct instigation to
an act of treason, or to some other specific act to which penalities are
attached by the law. Mr. O’Connell has held out no promise of any such
provision.

On the other hand, Mr. O’Connell goes farther than we are able to follow
him, when he proposes that in all cases of private libel, truth should
be a justification. Where, indeed, the imputation is not upon the
private, but upon the public character of a public man; or where the act
imputed, though belonging to private life, is in its nature public, (for
instance, any violation of decency in a public place,) or has already
received publicity, (for instance, by the proceedings of a Court of
Justice,) we think, with Mr. O’Connell, that the truth of the charge
ought to be a sufficient defence; and we would even allow the alleged
libeller to clear Edition: current; Page: [167] himself, though the
charge be false, by showing that he had good grounds for believing it to
be true. But we would not permit the press to impute, even truly, acts,
however discreditable, which are in their nature private. We would not
allow the truth of such imputation to be even pleaded in mitigation. The
very attempt to establish the charge by evidence, would often be a gross
aggravation of the original injury. We see insuperable objections to
allowing the details of a person’s private conduct to be made the
subject of judicial investigation, at the pleasure of any malignant
accuser. We are not insensible to the prestige attaching to the word
truth, and we go farther than most persons would like, in maintaining
that it is good to speak the truth, whatever be the consequences. But it
is not the letter of the truth, it is the spirit that is wanted; and,
unhappily, the letter is all that admits of being substantiated in a
Court of Justice. Every one knows how easy it is, without falsifying a
single fact, to give the falsest possible impression of any occurrence;
and, in the concerns of private life, the whole morality of a
transaction commonly depends upon circumstances which neither a tribunal
nor the public can possibly be enabled to judge of. Let any person call
to his recollection the particulars of any family quarrel, for example,
which has come within his personal knowledge, and think how absolutely
impracticable it would be to place before the public any thing
approaching to the most distant likeness of the real features of the
case! The moral character of the transaction cannot possibly be
understood, nor even the evidence on which the facts themselves rest, be
properly appreciated, without a minute acquaintance with a thousand
particulars of the character, habits, and previous history of the
parties, such as must be derived from personal knowledge, and cannot
possibly be communicated. Any “truth” which can be told to the public on
such matters must almost necessarily be, with respect to some party
concerned, a cruel falsehood: and only the more cruel, if what tells
against the party can be proved in a Court of Justice, while what would
tell in his favour may be in its nature unsusceptible of such proof.

The proper tribunal for the cognizance of private immoralities, in so
far as any censorship can be advantageously exercised over them by
opinion at all, is the opinion of a person’s friends and connexions; who
have some knowledge of the person himself, and of the previous
circumstances, and therefore something to guide them in estimating both
the probabilities of the case and the morality of it. And even their
knowledge, how insufficient it generally is! and how doubtingly and
hesitatingly a conscientious and modest man will usually draw from such
imperfect evidence, conclusions injurious to the moral character of a
person of whose position he must necessarily be so insufficient a judge!
Is not that the meaning of the Christian precept, “Judge not!”[*] And
when the individual who is nearest, and best informed, can scarcely ever
be sure that he is informed sufficiently, it is proposed to authorize a
general inquisition into private life by the Edition: current; Page:
[168] public at large! the public, who cannot in the nature of the case
be informed but in the loosest and most defective manner, nor can be
qualified by previous knowledge to estimate the trustworthiness even of
such partial information as is in its nature capable of being laid
before them!

*     *     *     *     *


NO. II, APRIL, 1834*


21st February
 The Ministerial Resolutions on Irish Tithe[*]

It is a common excuse for people who promise little, that what they do
promise they perform. Like most other stock excuses, this plea is much
oftener made than established: one thing, however, is unquestionable,
that they who promise little ought to perform all they promise. The
King’s Speech[†] made but one promise, the settlement of Irish tithes;
and Ministers have produced a measure, which, if proposed many years
ago, might have really settled the question, at least for a season. But
concessions in politics almost always come too late. When reforms are
granted, not because they are eligible in themselves, but because it is
not considered safe to refuse them, it seems to be in their very nature
that they should always lag behind the demand for them. There seldom
arises an immediate necessity for conceding anything until the storm has
risen so high that it cannot be prevented from ultimately sweeping away
everything.

It was right to retain a land-tax equal to the present amount of the
tithe. In Ireland, where the intermediate class of farmers scarcely
exists, the whole produce of the soil is shared between the labourer and
the landlord. But the labourer in Ireland being reduced by competition
to the mere necessaries of life, which he is sure to retain as long as
he occupies the land; and the residue, whatever its amount, being the
landlord’s; all imposts charged upon the land subtract so much from what
would otherwise be paid to the landlord: it is therefore the landlord
who in reality pays them; if they were laid directly upon him, his
situation Edition: current; Page: [169] would not be altered; if they
were abolished without equivalent, he would be the sole gainer.

The course, therefore, would be very clear, if there were no existing
contracts between landlord and tenant. A tax payable by the landlord
might be substituted for the tithe payable by the tenant, and the
landlord left for compensation to the natural course of things. The
tenant would then, without any special enactment for the purpose, pay,
on account of rent alone, the same amount which he now pays for rent and
tithe: the tithe would be blended with rent, collected without a
separate process, and would cease to figure as an individual grievance;
while all the odium would be saved, of collecting from the bulk of the
Catholic population a tax expressly designed for the pockets of the
Protestant clergy. The provision for the Church would then be seen to
be, what, in Ireland, it really is; not a burthen upon the public, but a
certain portion of the rent of land, which the State has not permitted
individual landlords to appropriate, but has retained in its own hands
for another purpose.

But during the currency of existing leases, the tithe, if exacted at
all, cannot justly be levied from any but those who are at present
liable to it. If paid by the landlord, it must be recoverable from the
tenant; because the landlord cannot, until the expiration of the lease,
be indemnified by an augmentation of his rent. On this shoal it requires
no prophet to foretell that the measure will be wrecked. During the
existing leases, the present grievance will continue; and does any one
think that without far more drastic remedies the present constitution of
society in Ireland can last as long as the unexpired leases? For the
next few years the Bill does not abolish tithe, but, as Mr. O’Connell
observed, merely makes the landlord the tithe-proctor;[*] and a few
years, in the present condition of Ireland, are an eternity.

Even when the leases expire, the tithe will not merge in the rent by
operation of law, but only at the option of the landlord. Unless there
be a stipulation to the contrary in the new lease, the tithe (or
land-tax, as it is to be called) will still be kept separate from the
rent; and any landlord, whose purposes, either political or personal, it
may happen to answer, may still force the Catholic peasant to
individualize the tithe; to distinguish it from his other payments; to
be distinctly conscious on each occasion how much exactly he is paying
to a Church which he detests.

Since the above observations were written, the Bill has been printed;
and we preceive that it does not even free the tithe from the chief
objection which lies against it as tithe—its perpetual increase. By an
Act passed in 1832, the tithes of every parish in Ireland are already
compounded for;[†] and the land-tax now to be imposed in lieu of tithe,
is to be of the same amount as the composition. The Edition: current;
Page: [170] composition, however, under the Act of 1832, is not fixed,
but variable every seven years, according to the price of corn. As, in
the progress of population and cultivation, the price of corn tends
always to a rise, the new land-tax, instead of being a fixed charge,
will be augmented every seven years, and the memory of tithe will be
kept alive for ever, by the periodical readjustment of the amount. This
is an error in principle, of the first magnitude: but its practical
consequences will merge in the general failure of the measure; which
certainly will not last unaltered for seven years.

*     *     *     *     *


22nd February
 The Debate on Agricultural Distress[*]

The landowners of England are remarkable for being always in distress.
Upon no portion of the sons of men does the common destiny of our race
seem to press so heavily. This speaks but ill for their own wisdom; for
they have wielded during one hundred and forty-five years previous to
1832, the entire powers of the British Legislature, and still compose
the whole of one House of Parliament, and a majority of the other: they
have done their best indeed to possess the whole of that too, as they
compel every man, before he becomes a member of it, to make oath that he
is one of their body. Persons thus circumstanced must be either very
unskilful or remarkably conscientious, if they do not contrive to make
some other people distressed instead of themselves. If the landlords
have not effected this, it has not been for want of trying. All that
laws could do they have done to force other people to buy from them
every description of the produce of the soil at their own price. All
that laws could do they have done to secure to themselves, as borrowers,
at the expense of the lenders, the advantage of a low rate of interest.
They have exempted their land from several of the taxes. Of their local
burthens they have reserved to themselves the entire controul; for the
county rates are voted by themselves in quarter sessions, and the
administration of the poor laws is entirely in their hands. The army,
the navy, and the civil patronage of the State, belong to them almost
exclusively. The lay-tithes are theirs for their own use, the
ecclesiastical tithes for the use of their younger children. When new
land has been inclosed, it has usually been distributed, not among the
poor, but among the landlords.

Being thus accustomed to have every thing their own way, it may appear
extraordinary that they should be always complaining of distress. But is
not that the very reason? A spoiled child is always dissatisfied. No
spoiled child has all that it asks for, and the more is bestowed, the
more it is indignant that anything should be withheld. If it meet with
no resistance from human will, it is angry that the laws of Edition:
current; Page: [171] nature are not equally compliant; and so are the
landlords. Let it not be imagined that we contest the fact of the
distress. Distressed they are, for they never have so much money as they
would like to have. Most of them have not even so much as they spend.
This they feel, quite sincerely, as a grievous hardship and wrong; and
consider themselves injured men if something is not done to relieve them
from it.

Really, since they compel us to say it, there is no class whom, as a
class it would better become to bear patiently any unavoidable
diminution of their incomes, since a far smaller proportion of them than
of any other class have acquired even the smallest part of those incomes
by their own labour. Society is their creditor for every thing, and
their debtor for nothing. In return for its protection and guarantee to
their great fortunes, few indeed among them ever did any thing for
society but what they think they do by being “large consumers,” and
“spending in the country” the money which they draw from it. Their
property must be protected because all property must be protected; those
who by the accident of birth obtain the large prizes have a right to
enjoy them, but not a right to find fault with the course of nature,
because the riches they were born to, have turned out less than they
expected; especially if the true and only cause of their distress be
their own improvidence.

Because a territorial Aristocracy, a class notorious in all the
countries of the world for spending all it has, is always needy—because
people whose income is in its very nature subject to fluctuations,
greatly increased by laws of their own making, and who invariably live
up to the full measure of that income when at the highest, are put to
considerable inconvenience when a change comes, and to make their
suffering less are often tempted to make it ultimately greater, by
obliging their tenants to share it—is that any peculiar affliction, any
visitation from heaven upon the unfortunate “agriculturists?” When
Ministers, in the speech from the throne, countenanced the cry of
“agricultural distress,” they gave a virtual sanction not only to
unfounded complaints but to unjustifiable claims. Their predecessors
would not have committed such a blunder. The Duke of Wellington and Sir
Robert Peel, whether they had seen through the delusion or not, would
not have expatiated upon an evil when they did not intend to propose any
remedy.

Ministers were taunted with this inconsistency, in the debate on Lord
Chandos’s motion,[*] deservedly; and they met the taunt by a piece of
inconceivable mal-adresse. They said that the agriculturists must look
for relief to a diminution of the poor rates, and that a Bill was about
to be brought in, which would have that effect.[†] If this be the tone
in which they mean to advocate Poor Law Reform, it were better, grievous
as are the evils to be remedied, that the question should sleep Edition:
current; Page: [172] for a season. To swell their majority by a few
votes on a division which decided nothing,[*] they held forth to the
world their contemplated poor law amendments as designed for the
pecuniary benefit of the rich; which consequently, it will immediately
be inferred, must be at the expense of the poor, and must therefore be
tyranny, and to be resisted with the utmost force. For a momentary
convenience they courted popular odium for their intended measure; they
incurred the risk, first of not being able to carry it, and next of not
being able to execute it, by representing it, contrary to the fact, as a
piece of unfeeling selfishness. We know, and perfectly agree in, what
they meant to say. The administration of the poor laws, which has
produced so much evil to the poor, has produced evil to the rich too;
and the amendments which are absolutely required by the interests of the
poor themselves, will also alleviate, and wherever they have been tried
have alleviated, the burthen of poor rates. But to legislate for the
poor with that for the principal object, would be the act of a demon.
Neither Ministers nor the Poor Law Commissioners are liable to such an
accusation. The exclusive object of all which the Commissioners
propose[†] is the good of the working classes themselves; and their
recommendations ought to be adopted, even if the effect were to double
instead of diminishing the poor rates. Ministers know this, and, we
firmly believe, are actuated, in whatever changes they may propose,
principally by this motive. But do they forget that the very ground
which will be taken against any measure of Poor Law Reform, the great
engine of prejudice and calumny against its authors and promoters, will
be the assertion that it is a mere contrivance for reducing the poor
rates? Whoever chooses to affirm this, may now quote, or affect to
quote, their own authority for it. And this mischief is done to stop the
mouths of an agriculturist or two for a single night! The agriculturists
were present; the public were absent: and it was with Ministers as it is
with most persons of infirm character—the small immediate motive
prevailed over the greater but more distant one; to be out of sight, was
to be out of mind.


Mr. O’Connell’s Declaration for the Pillage of the National Creditor[‡]

Mr. O’Connell is almost the only public man now living, who is, in
himself, something; who has influence of his own, and is not one of
those whose influence is only that of the places they fill, or the class
or party of which, for the time, they may happen to be the
representatives. Almost alone among his contemporaries, he individually
weighs something in the balance of events, and though far inferior to
Mirabeau, may yet say with him “Ma tête est aussi une puissance.”[§] No
man Edition: current; Page: [173] ever exercised a great ascendancy by
personal qualities, in whose character there was not much to admire: and
in times like these Mr. O’Connell commands a far larger share of our
respect than many of whose honesty we think far more highly. It is very
true that a perfect character is the same in all ages; but our
estimation of imperfect ones must vary exceedingly, according as their
good qualities are merely those of their age, or are those which raise
them above their age. Mr. O’Connell lives in an age in which to have a
character at all is already a considerable distinction, and to have
courage to act up to it, an extraordinary one; an age in which the
rarest of all men is he “qui bene est ausus vana contemnere;”[*] in
which even a man of no very scrupulous conscience, who dares to will
great things, or at least things on a large scale, and finds in himself
and his own qualities the means of accomplishing them, extorts from us
more admiration by the contempt which he thus manifests for a thousand
paltry respectabilities and responsibilities which chain up the hands of
the “weak, the vacillating inconsistent Good,”* than he Edition:
current; Page: [174] forfeits by not having sufficient greatness of mind
to choose worthier objects or worthier means.

In Mr. O’Connell’s case we felt the more inclined to overlook much in
the politician which is objectionable in the man, because we deemed it
certain from his position (even if to his personal feelings it were a
matter of indifference) that the main direction of his exertions would
always be on the popular side, and that he would render valuable service
to the popular cause. But there are political crimes of so atrocious a
character, that whoever is accessary to them, must for the common safety
be cast out of the communion of honest men: every politician who thinks,
or even would be believed to think that in politics there is a right and
a wrong, must endeavour that the line drawn between himself and such
men, may be as broad and as conspicuous as possible. We consider the
pillage of the fundholder to be a crime of this description; and Mr.
O’Connell, having advocated it, ought to be put into political
quarantine, until he purge himself by confession and retractation.

Mr. O’Connell is much mistaken if he imagine that, by the course he has
adopted, he is serving Radicalism, or recommending himself to the better
part of the Radicals. He is playing into the hands of the Aristocracy.
The fundholder has more to fear from them than from the Radicals.
Accustomed, by their paramount influence over the Legislature, to take,
when it suits them, what is not their own; feeling that the country is
clamorous for a reduction of its burthens, and not knowing how they
should contrive to live, if deprived of the power of taxing the public
for their own benefit—the landholders are under constant temptation to
appease the anger of the public, not by restoring to them their own, but
by plundering somebody else and presenting them with a part of the
spoil. The most inveterate enemies of the fundholder are a party among
the landlords: and although the majority, we trust, would shrink from
any personal participation in the mingled folly and atrocity of a
national bankruptcy, we cannot expect from them any strenuous resistance
to it. The only tried friends the fundholder has, the only combatants
who plant themselves in the breach whenever he is assailed, who are ever
ready to peril their influence in his defence, are Radical writers. To
whom but to the Westminster Review, or Tait’s Magazine, or the Examiner,
can the fundholder look, to place the justice of his cause in a striking
light before the public? While the Quarterly Review was urging
Parliament to rob him;[*] while Earl Grey was proclaiming in the House
of Lords that the robbery was greatly to be deprecated, but that
necessity had no law, and nemo tenetur ad impossibile;[†] while Sir
James Graham was writing a pamphlet expressly to prove that 30 per cent.
ought to be struck off from the national debt and from all private
mortgages;[‡] Edition: current; Page: [175] nobody repelled these
iniquities with any thing like energy or indignation but the Radical
press.

There is much to be said for paying off the national debt by a tax on
property; treating the debt of our fathers as a mortgage upon the
property which our fathers left, and therefore a charge upon those to
whom that property has descended, and not upon unborn generations of
those who have nothing but their labour. This proposition may become a
popular one among the Radicals generally. But, if the landlords attempt
to effect a compromise with the profligate portion of the Radicals, and
save themselves who contracted the debt from paying their due share of
it, by cancelling it either wholly or partially, they must be plainly
told, that they may have the power of determining where confiscation
shall begin, but not where it shall end. Of all kinds of property, the
public funds consist the most peculiarly of the savings of honest
industry, and the pittance of the widow and the orphan. These may be the
first robbed, but let the robbers rely on it, they shall not be the
last. The people consent to bear with a most mischievous and
demoralizing inequality of fortunes, for the sake of the security which
springs from the general inviolability of property. But let that
inviolability be once seriously infringed, that security destroyed, and
it will not be, and ought not to be, longer endured that there should be
men who have 100,000l. a year, while others are starving. Ere long it
would be told to the Aristocracy in a voice of thunder, that if the
funds are confiscated to the state, the land shall follow; and, if
necessary, not only the land, but all fortunes exceeding 500l. or 1000l.
a year. Not a tenth part of the fundholders possess any thing
approaching to the smaller of these sums.

We subjoin two passages from two Radical writers, each of which contains
in a small compass some of the considerations by which the attempts of
robbery to give itself a colourable pretext, may best be counteracted.
The first is aimed directly against the proposition with which Mr.
O’Connell has chosen to identify himself—that a large portion of the
debt having been contracted in a depreciated currency, the interest
ought not be paid nor the principal liquidated in money of the ancient
standard:

The restoration of the ancient standard, and the payment in the restored
currency of the interest of a debt contracted in a depreciated one, was
no injustice, but the simple performance of a plighted compact. All
debts contracted during the Bank restriction, were contracted under as
full an assurance as the faith of a nation could give, that cash
payments were only temporarily suspended. At first, the suspension was
to last a few weeks, next a few months, then, at furthest, a few
years.[*] Nobody dared even to insinuate a proposition that it should be
perpetual, or that, when cash payments were resumed, less than a guinea
should be given at the Bank for a pound note and a shilling. And to
quiet the doubts and fears which would else have arisen, and which would
have rendered it impossible for any Minister to raise another loan,
except at the most ruinous interest, it was made the law of the land,
solemnly sanctioned by Parliament, that six months after the peace, if
not before, cash Edition: current; Page: [176] payments should be
resumed. This, therefore, was distinctly one of the conditions of all
the loans made during that period. It is a condition which we have not
fulfilled. Instead of six months, more than five years intervened
between the peace and the resumption of cash payments.[*] We, therefore,
have not kept faith with the fundholder. Instead of having overpaid him,
we have cheated him. Instead of making him a present of a per-centage
equal to the enhancement of the currency, we continued to pay his
interest in depreciated paper five years after we were bound by contract
to pay it in cash. And be it remarked, that the depreciation was at its
highest during a part of that period. If, therefore, there is to be a
great day of national atonement for gone-by wrongs, the fundholders,
instead of having anything to refund, must be directed to send in their
bill for the principal and interest of what they were defrauded of
during those five years. Instead of this, it is proposed, that, having
already defrauded them of part of a benefit which was in their bond, and
for which they gave an equivalent, we should now force them to make
restitution of the remainder!

That they gave an equivalent, is manifest. The depreciation became
greatest during the last few years of the war; indeed, it never amounted
to anything considerable till then. It was during those years, also,
that by far the largest sums were borrowed by the Government. At that
time, the effects of the Bank restriction had begun to be well
understood. The writings of Mr. Henry Thornton, Lord King, Mr. Ricardo,
Mr. Huskisson, Mr. Blake, &c. and the proceedings of the Bullion
Committee, had diffused a very general conviction, that the Bank had the
power to depreciate the currency without limit, and that the Bank
Directors acted on principles of which that evil was the natural
consequence.[†] Does anybody imagine that the loans of those years could
have been raised, except on terms never before heard of under a
civilized government, if there had been no engagement to pay the
interest or the principal in money of any fixed standard? but it had
been avowed, that to whatever point the arbitrary issues of the Bank
might depress the value of the pound sterling,—there it would be
suffered to remain.

What avails it, then, to cavil about our paying more than we borrowed?
Everybody pays more than he borrows; everybody, at least, who borrows at
interest. The question is not, have we paid more than we borrowed? but,
have we paid more than we promised to pay? And the answer is,—we have
paid less. The fundholder, as the weaker party, has pocketed the injury;
he only asks to be spared an additional and far greater one. We
covenanted to pay in a metallic standard; we therefore are bound to do
it. To deliberate on such a question, is as if a private person were to
deliberate whether he should pick a pocket.*

Edition: current; Page: [177]
The argument of our second quotation relates less to the morality than
to the political economy of the question. It is from the excellent
Catechism on the Corn Laws, by Colonel Perronet Thompson. We quote from
the seventeenth edition:

To rob the fundholders of their interest, after having spent their
capital, would, besides all the evils of breach of contract, have the
hardship of an ex post facto law, with the unique addition of being made
in the teeth of the invitation of an existing law. The nation which
should do it, would virtually declare itself incapable of contracting
any national engagement, or performing any national act. A community
must either acknowledge the possibility of being bound to-morrow by its
act of to-day, or it must disband; for if it declares its own
incompetency, it will be treated with as a community by nobody. And for
any thing that could be gained by such a proceeding, it might as well be
proposed to gain by robbing all the individuals who had red hair. The
individual robbers might gain by it, but the community could not gain;
because the red-haired men are themselves part of the community. If the
principal expended could be called back again, it would be a different
case. But nobody can seriously believe, that by what has been called
applying a sponge to the national debt, the community would be one
shilling the richer; or that by robbing one individual of five pounds
per annum in order to put it into the pocket of another, the smallest
progress would be made towards recovering the hundred which was spent
thirty years ago. A man might as well try to repair the loss of a leg,
by shifting the deficiency from one side to the other. If every
individual was a fundholder in the same proportion that he is a
tax-payer, it would be clear that the attempt was only shifting the leg.
And it is the same when the case is as it is; except that the
fundholders are the smaller party, and therefore might possibly be
robbed.

And this is not the fallacy of saying that a national debt is no evil.
It is a very great evil; and the worst thing about it is, that there is
no getting rid of it. When a million is borrowed and spent, the evil is
inflicted then; and not by the shifting of the interest from one pocket
to another afterwards. It is not the evil that is denied, but the
possibility of getting rid of it by refusing to pay the interest.

The magnitude of the evil or punishment is the same as if there had been
inflicted a judicial necessity for throwing the amount of the interest
annually into the Thames. For if the money had never been borrowed, the
man who is now the fundholder would have had the principal in his
pocket; and the tax-payer would have saved the interest, which is the
same thing to him as saving it from the Thames. But there is a special
provision of Providence that when money has been thus raised, no
possible dishonesty shall get rid of the burden. If the principal had
been borrowed from Prester John, the community might possibly gain by
cheating him of his interest. But since the interest is owed to a
component part of the community, it is in the constitution of things,
that the community, however inclined to the practice of larceny, can
gain nothing by robbing itself.

To propose that the fundholders should contribute, in their separate
character, to any imaginable object of national expenditure, is as
unjust as to propose that certain of the creditors in a case of
bankruptcy should suffer the average loss of the creditors in general,
and have a sum struck out of their original account besides. The
fundholders pay all taxes like other men, and to attack the amount of
their claims upon the public besides, is precisely the operation
supposed in the case of the bankruptcy. They make no objection to paying
at the same rate as other people, to a property-tax, or to any other.
What they object to, is being taxed and plundered too.

That people have been miserably cheated nobody doubts, but not by the
fundholders. The fundholders have lost and not gained, in their
character of fundholders; and they have borne, and do bear, their share
of the general suffering besides. How the suffering is to be Edition:
current; Page: [178] diminished nobody seems able to tell. A gone-by
Government indulged itself with an unjust war, of the expense of which
it never paid a shilling, and has left the whole for us. The immediate
defendants are out of reach; they are where nobody will go to fetch
them. All that is left for us in the way of recovery, is the possibility
of recovering something from the interests in favour of which the fraud
was enacted. And to this, if Corn Laws go on,[*] it will come at last,
though probably not till the necessity is such as to be equally
convincing to all parties.[†]

*     *     *     *     *


5th March
 Mr. Buckingham’s Motion on Impressment[‡]

It is not astonishing that in an age of barbarism men should commit
barbarities. That Lord Chatham, one of a generation of statesmen among
whom common humanity seems to have been almost as rare as common
honesty, and in an age in which nothing was esteemed wickedness by which
nobody suffered but the common people—that Lord Chatham should have seen
no harm in impressment, can surprise no one; but it is equally
unexpected and unwelcome to find Lord Chatham’s authority quoted for it
now, as conclusive, by a Reform minister.[§] Necessity! so well
described by Milton as “the tyrant’s plea;”[¶] it is also Sir James
Graham’s, and no one has yet, in our own day, or in any preceding,
carried impudence so far as to pretend that there can be any other. It
is difficult not to feel degraded by the very act of replying to so base
a pretext. Necessity! yes: to borrow the apt expression of a vigorous
writer, “it is exactly the sort of necessity which men are hanged for;”
the convenience of taking the property of other people without paying
for it, with the aggravation of its being their sole property, and the
slight additional circumstance that the entire wealth of the nation is
yours to purchase it withal, if you must have it. If the whole matter
were laid before a community of ignorant savages; if they could be made
to conceive the clamour, the indignant uproar, which rises from all the
benches of a certain assembly at the bare suggestion of laying a
sacrilegious finger upon anything which borders upon a vested right,
upon anything which by the utmost straining can be construed into
property, and then could be shown the spectacle of the same men
hallooing on their leaders to denounce and insult men for asserting the
vested right of the labourer to his own bodily powers, and calling it
injustice to knock him down and rob him, not of his purse, seeing that
he has none, but of all the property he has, his labour, in order to
save to their own pockets a fractional part of the wages for which he
would consent to sell it—would not the assembly of savages deem the
assembly of civilized Christians fit objects for a hurricane to sweep
Edition: current; Page: [179] from the earth? What would they think if
they were then told, that this same assembly had just voted twenty
millions for the redemption of negro slaves?[*] These men are not fools,
mere absolute fools they cannot be; they cannot think that kidnapping
our own countrymen, and keeping them to forced labour for the whole or
the better part of their lives, differs from negro slavery: why, every
one of the incidents is the same, down to the very cart whip! call it,
if you please, the cat. There is identity even in the wretched apologies
which are set up; the captains, or masters, are an ill used, calumniated
race of men, and free labour, forsooth, would be vastly dearer![†]

This was written last year. This year the exhibition has been
repeated,[‡] though with some abatement of the former insolence, and a
salvo to some Members of tender consciences, in the form of an
amendment,[§] which, as we learn from the newspapers, was not too
shallow to answer the purpose of an excuse for voting with the Ministry.
Sir James Graham successfully fitted his measures to his men.

The pertinacity with which the power of tyranny is clung to, even by
persons of the least tyrannical disposition, is almost incredible. We
should forget it, if we were not continually reminded of it by the
proceedings of public men.

Any person who defends slavery, is perfectly consistent in defending
impressment too. Such a person thinks, with Callicles in the Gorgias of
Plato, that the weak are by nature the property of the strong, and that
if you can, with impunity, seize a man by main force, keep him in
fetters till his spirit is broken, and compel him by threats and blows
to labour for your profit, you have a right to do so.[¶] A man may think
this, or at least practise it, without any imputation on his intellect.
He only proves himself to be a ferocious animal, who being unrestrained
by the ordinary ties of conscience or humanity, must be bound down by
cords, or manacled with chains, to prevent him from doing mischief to
others.

But the misdoings of the Whigs do not arise from the abuse of reason;
they arise from deficiency of it. Like most public men, they are often
judged with too much harshness in respect to intentions, because they
are presumed to have that qualification which is necessary to the
admission of a witness in an English court of justice: “the faculty of
distinguishing right from wrong.” Of lukewarmness in the performance of
some of their most important duties, of the want of a stronger active
principle of honesty, we fear they can by no means be acquitted. But we
believe them to be wrongfully suspected of positive knavery; because few
persons Edition: current; Page: [180] are aware how much in human
conduct that looks like knavery, is sufficiently accounted for by
defects of the intellect. There is a strong and growing impression in
the country, founded upon the conduct of Ministers on this question, and
on many others, that their denunciations of slavery, as well as their
advocacy of Reform, were tricks to get into place, or to secure
themselves in it. But this, in reality, does not follow; and to suppose
that it does, argues ignorance of the incapacity of ordinary minds,
either to feel or think for themselves. Any one who had really felt the
detestableness of slavery; whose imagination had represented to him its
horrors, or whose reason had made sensible to him its shocking
immorality, could never have thought of impressment without similar
detestation. But there are men in abundance, and most of the Whig
Ministers seem to be of the number, whose own minds never tell them
anything which is not first shouted to them by the voice of a united
world. Left to themselves, they would never have found out that there
was anything condemnable, either in impressment or in slavery: but when,
for thirty years, they had grown accustomed to hear dinned in their
ears, by men who had found it out for themselves, that negro slavery was
a blot upon our national character, an enormity, a crime, a sin, it at
last appeared so to them. In thirty years more, by an equally intense
expression of national abhorrence, their consciences might, we dare say,
be awakened on the subject of impressment too.

But what words can be found to characterise Sir James Graham’s
amendment? The grievance was, that you seized upon men by force, and
robbed them of their only property, their labour:—the remedy proposed
is, that instead of going out into the streets, knocking down the first
man you meet, and robbing him, you shall for the future draw lots whom
you will rob; the power, however, of knocking down in the streets not
being given up, but still held in reserve to be used in cases of
emergency!

It is hardly worth while to ask the question, how seamen are to be
induced to submit to a registry which they will know is intended to
facilitate catching them for the purpose of being robbed? Nor need we do
more than just allude to the vehement objection at first made on account
of the expense, to so important a public institution as a registry of
births and marriages,[*] while expense is no objection to registering
men for the purpose of robbing them.

Our indignation when we think on the lives which have been filled with
bitterness, and the noble hearts which have been broken by the pressgang
Edition: current; Page: [181] abomination, gives way to astonishment at
the quality of the understanding which can think to justify it by such
arguments, or to uphold it for a short time longer by such miserable
evasions.

*     *     *     *     *


1st March
 The Dudley Election

On personal grounds we should regret the defeat of Sir John Campbell:
there are few persons connected with office for whom we have so real a
respect. In his peculiar department he is most valuable; at once an
eminent lawyer and a strenuous law-reformer. In his general conduct he
manifests this great superiority over almost all other official people,
whether Ministers or underlings, that his opinions always seem to be the
growth of his own mind; and he therefore is not afraid to commit himself
by enunciating them. He is not one of those who, never talking but by
rote or from tradition, never know whether they may venture to assent to
a proposition which is not in their books. He has what so few men have,
reasonable self-reliance: and this quality, along with that preference
for truth and reason on all subjects which usually accompanies the
capacity for comprehending them, render the Attorney General a most
useful Member of the House of Commons, and one whose absence from it
would be a public misfortune.

But Sir John Campbell cannot fail to find, in a short time, some door
open for his readmission into Parliament; and, meanwhile, it is matter
of just rejoicing that the Ministry have received a lesson, of a kind
which they can understand. If you seek to make an impression upon a
Minister, there is a much surer method than argument; arguments serve
well enough to convince him that he is in the right; but to make him
conscious of being in the wrong, there is nothing like the loss of
votes. The present Ministry are, in this, remarkably like every other
Ministry. The way to move them is not to overthrow their syllogisms, but
to turn out their candidates. This is the only point where they are
always vulnerable; and, fortunately, it is by no means hard to be come
at. Here, indeed, lies the chief reason for preferring a Whig to a Tory
Ministry. The check operates much sooner. To defeat a Tory candidate,
the independent electors must come to the poll; to annihilate a Whig,
they have only to stay away from it, and leave the rest to the “natural
influence of property.” A Tory Ministry is in no danger, except from
great positive unpopularity; but mere indifference on the part of the
public is fatal to a Whig Ministry.

This ensures on the part of the present Ministers greater deference than
would be paid by the Tories to public opinion when actually declared. To
foresee, indeed, what will probably be the public opinion a month hence,
or what judgment the public will pronounce on any measure not yet laid
before it, is what no reasonable man will expect from them. To be
capable of this, they must be either philosophers Edition: current;
Page: [182] or men of the world; and their misfortune is that they are
neither. They are unskilled alike in books and in men. They have neither
theory nor experience.

To the world at large, the Dudley election tells only what was known
before: to Ministers, it was, we should think, a revelation of something
they dreamed not of; namely, that the nation were not perfectly
satisfied with their conduct. And, lest they should fail in drawing this
inference, their fast friends and supporters, the Times and Chronicle,
have undertaken the kind office of instilling it into their minds,
accompanied by suitable admonitions.[*] The Times reads them a severe
lecture on the folly of half-measures. The Chronicle bestows on them a
catalogue of their errors of omission and of commission,[†] and tells
them they have lost the confidence of the country. On this the Examiner
remarks:

Upon any discomfiture of the Ministry, such as the defeat of the
Attorney General at Dudley, it is very frankly told its faults by
journals which, so long as the tide flowed smoothly, have countenanced
and encouraged it in all its errors. The first deviations from the right
course are the deviations which should be closely watched and corrected;
but the supporters of Government in the daily press are silent, or
apologists, or approvers, of such declensions, till they have extended
to a broad departure from the just line, and brought Ministers to a
position of conspicuous disgrace. Which is the time to tell a man that
he is in the wrong path? when he first steps into it; or when, exhausted
and bemired, he has wandered miles from the right way? The information
may be better late than never, but it would have been better at first
than at last. The attempt, however, to correct the first false step has
been censured and resisted as an act of hostility. The angry remark has
been, “Why point out the little deviation from the right path in which
they have advanced so far, and deserve indulgence? Apply yourself to
commending their line of movement where it has been well directed,
instead of ungraciously dwelling on the present declension of some few
degrees.” Now we could never understand the kindness of not telling a
man when he was going wrong, especially when marching straight into a
slough; nor, on the score of his having travelled right up to a certain
point, could we admit that he had earned a title to lose his way, and
that it was ungrateful to admonish him that he had mistaken his course.
But this was for some time fashionable doctrine, and when Ministers were
first truckling to the Tories and adopting Tory principles, as upon
sinecures and the duration of Parliaments, and falling into divers Tory
practices, and putting forth the hacknied Tory pretences for them, our
animadversions upon these backslidings were called “attacks upon the
Ministry,” instead of attacks upon the errors which would ultimately
disgrace and ruin them. When these things have advanced to a certain
pitch, and public opinion recoils and marks its displeasure with some
rebuff to the Ministry, their former flatterers or apologists turn round
upon them, and recite the long catalogue of the faults which have been
cherished, instead of nipped in the bud. They then say, “It is now time
to speak the truth.” It was not time to speak the truth when the men
were first going wrong, and easily to be better guided; but it is time
to speak the truth when, having been cheered on in the wrong direction,
they have stuck in the slough.[‡]

There is nothing surprising in this. Ministers are treated by the
newspapers as Edition: current; Page: [183] they themselves treat the
public. They shape their conduct to the convenience of the day, leaving
the morrow to shift for itself; and the newspapers praise or blame them
by the same rule. The newspapers are a greater power than the Ministry,
but are mostly as far as they are from having any lofty conception of
the dignity of their mission. They have no particular motive to warn the
Ministers, until the evil hour arrives: why should they sail against the
stream? when the tide turns, so can they. What Ministers may expect from
them is, to be encouraged in their faults, and never forgiven for the
consequences; flattered while each blunder is in progress, and
reproached with it when it is consummated. This fair-weather friendship
answers the purposes of the newspapers very well, but those of the
Ministers very ill. A Ministry, however accustomed to the evolution,
cannot halt and wheel round with the same rapidity as a newspaper can.
Ministers are known men, with the public eye upon them, noting their
words and actions; all they say and do is remembered, and helps either
to found a reputation or to destroy it. But a newspaper-writer nobody
knows; nobody thinks about him, or inquires who he is; nobody remembers
to-day what he wrote yesterday, nor will remember to-morrow what he may
choose to write to-day. He can afford to praise a Ministry up to the
last moment, and then turn round upon them. Few, indeed, are the
journalists whose support contains in itself any guarantee of
permanency.

Fortunately a journal, like a Ministry, may be very faulty and yet very
useful. Judge the Times or the Chronicle by their faults only, and they
would be insufferable; yet, without the Times and Chronicle, what should
we do?

*     *     *     *     *


8th March
 The Debate on the Corn Laws[*]

It is vain and wearisome to beat the air with never-ending discussion of
exhausted questions. Who supposes that the landlords’ monopoly is
standing at this day for want of arguments to batter it down? All has
been said on the Corn Laws: and it is now to be proved by other means
than words, who is strongest. If the decision last night[†] does not
convince the manufacturers of this, they must be unconvincible. Argument
may be overcome by argument, but will must be vanquished by will. The
time of calm discussion is gone by, and that of agitation must commence.
The people are convinced, they are now to be stimulated. Reason is
satisfied; the appeal must now be (however little the word may be
relished) to passion. Injustice was never hurled from its throne by men
who remained cool. The people must show that when they are wronged they
can be indignant, and that the deliberate profession Edition: current;
Page: [184] of a determined purpose to persevere in wronging them, can
only be expiated by the complete loss of political influence.

Sir James Graham—who was selected as spokesman of the Ministry, solely,
we presume, because he had written a pamphlet, and published it with his
name, in which the landlords’ monopoly was condemned;[*]—Sir James
Graham placed the maintenance of the monopoly on its true basis.[†] He
said openly, that the bread-tax must be endured, because the landlords
would be ruined if it were abolished. If rents were to fall twenty per
cent., (he said,) the greater part of the landed property of the country
must change hands. The landlords, then, are so deeply in debt, that they
cannot keep their estates if compelled to live honestly; they must
therefore be allowed to plunge their hands into the pocket of every
person who lives by bread, in order to keep themselves out of the
Gazette. They cannot afford to be landholders unless we pay them for it.
We must tax ourselves to give them salaries for being a landed
Aristocracy. We thank them for nothing. Their creditors will do it
gratis.

A bolder language must be held to these people than they have been
accustomed to. The landlords have hitherto been the ruling power, and,
like all ruling classes, have been estimated at whatever value they
chose to put upon themselves. If there were a man to whom nobody dared
tell that he was not a god, he would end by believing it. Almost every
member of the House of Commons really is, and all have sworn that they
are, landlords;[‡] to such Sir James Graham was quite safe in thinking
that he had said enough, when he said that without a subsidy from the
public the landlords could not remain landlords. But what concern is it
(except as a question of humanity) of any but themselves? Are the
present landlords so much more precious to us than any other landlords,
that when they cannot live upon their own means we should subscribe to
enable them to live upon ours? If they are so deeply in debt that they
own no more than twenty per cent. of their nominal incomes, and are mere
receivers of the other four-fifths for the benefit of their creditors,
the sooner they abandon their false position, cease to pretend to a
character they have no right to, and let the real owners of the land
become the avowed owners, the better. Land is power; and power cannot be
more fatally placed than in the hands of spendthrifts by station; of men
who have to maintain the externals of a large income with the resources
of a small one; of men with the wants and habits of the rich, and the
fortunes of the poor.

One word here on the philosophy of Aristocracy. The theoretic foundation
both of Toryism and Whiggism; the moral and philosophical basis of all
the modern European aristocratical politics; the justification of that
paradox in practical ethics, the doctrine that the working bees should
be governed by the drones, is the axiom, Edition: current; Page: [185]
so dear to Aristocracy, that those who have the greatest stake in the
country are the fittest to govern it. When the doctrines of Oligarchy
are at variance with the interests of Oligarchy, we see which gives way.
Who so far from having a stake in the country as needy rich men? people
accustomed to profuse expenditure, which they have no longer the means
of keeping up; through whose hands large incomes are constantly passing,
only to be paid away to other people; to whom great wealth is constantly
shown, while nothing of it is theirs except its wants—wants which have
become unconquerable, and which they are under the strongest temptations
to find the means of supplying at whatever cost? It is false that poor
men, as such, are dangerous in a State; but those who are really
dangerous are the poor who are miserable if they are not rich. Over such
men not only the interest of others, but their own permanent interest
has no hold; it is worth their while to be ruined in two years rather
than to economize in one; they are dishonest debtors, bad landlords;
gamblers themselves, they compel all under them to be so; rather than
submit to a diminution of their rents to-day, they would run the risk of
losing them altogether to-morrow, by forcing their tenants to exhaust
the land; they are dishonest legislators; they must have a bread-tax,
and their sons and nephews must have a provision out of the other taxes.
In an age of conspiracies such men are conspirators; Catiline was such a
man.

If the class to which Sir James Graham belongs, are in the condition
which he describes, they may be an Aristocracy, but they are not a
landed Aristocracy; they are a debtor Aristocracy: an Oligarchy not of
the rich, but of the grasping and dissipated poor. Have they “a stake in
the country?”[*] No. But let the land pass from them to the mortgagees,
the real owners, there would be a landed Aristocracy; the new landlords
would have a real, not a pretended stake in the country; we should be
governed by the rich, since that is so great an advantage; and at least
the land, in which we are all so deeply interested, would be in the
hands of men, who, instead of ruining it for posterity in order to have
this year a few more pounds to spend, could afford to lay out money
without any immediate return for the increase of its productiveness at a
distant period. Though there are many reasons for desiring this change,
we are not anxious to see it; let the existing race of landlords save
themselves if they can; but it must be honestly. We will not help them
to pay their debts with a slice off the loaf on every man’s table.

We have but one observation to add. Such questions as these are tests of
the sufficiency of the Reform Bill; they gauge, if we may be permitted
the metaphor, the strength of the popular influences in the House of
Commons. When we say, that all the people’s representatives should be
elected by the people, we are told that the influence of the people, is
the influence of the numerical majority; that minorities have rights,
and that unless particular classes are allowed to have Edition: current;
Page: [186] representatives as well as the people, the majority will not
be satisfied with justice, but will demand injustice; will not content
themselves with security against being plundered by minorities, but will
insist upon plundering the minorities in their turn. Be it so. Produce
to us then a Parliament which holds the balance even; which obliges each
party to be content with justice, and allows neither to plunder the
other; and we will acknowledge that the Parliament is reformed enough.
At present it is proposed to free the immense majority from the most
insupportable of their burthens, the most flagrant of their injuries;
this is refused, avowedly for the pecuniary benefit of the present
landowners, and the refusal is backed by a majority of 312 to 155.[*]
The interest, or supposed interest of the landowners, therefore, is an
overmatch for obvious justice and the interest of all the rest of the
community together, by more than two to one. Here is a case for a
further Parliamentary Reform, which the stupidest can understand. We
demand, then, further Reform. We demand it on the ground, not of any
preconceived theory, but of the recorded failure of the present
experiment. The Reform Bill has been tried, and proved wholly
insufficient.

To Mr. Poulett Thomson, Mr. Littleton, Mr. Ellice, Lord Howick, and the
other Members of the House connected with the Ministry, who spoke or
voted in favour of Mr. Hume’s motion,[†] belongs the praise of the
seraph Abdiel,[‡]—that of submitting to temporary defeat in a cause
certain of ultimate triumph. Lord Althorp did not give his vote to the
cause, but he gave it his good word, saying, with much naïveté, that he
voted against it, but could not speak against his own conviction.[§]
Perhaps a time will come, when he will think it as impossible to vote
against his conviction, as to speak against it.

*     *     *     *     *


12th March
 Political Oaths[¶]

Mr. O’Connell has had the merit of being the first to speak out, we mean
in Parliament, what every rational person thinks, that oaths of office,
and oaths taken by Members of Parliament, are worthless formalities,
which do no good whatever, Edition: current; Page: [187] and much harm.
His declaration drew forth adhesions from several Members, in particular
an animated one from Dr. Lushington, who brought upon himself a
sarcastic reply from Mr. Stanley, by the strength of his commendations
of bold policy.[*] The lesson to Ministers was good, though the occasion
scarcely required it; where would be the boldness of abolishing these
frivolous ceremonies? It is not courage that is wanted, but common
sense.

When you require a man, before he is admitted into Parliament, or
accepts an office, to swear that he will not attempt to change the
existing form of government, or to destroy the Church, or some
particular institution in the State; is it supposed that you ever in
reality prevent the nation from abolishing their Constitution or their
Church, if they cease to think them essential to the public well-being?
It would be monstrous, if one generation could thus tie up the hands of
all succeeding ages, and impose its institutions upon the most remote
posterity, against their will. The living will never submit themselves
to the tyranny of the dead. Happily, though self-conceited legislators
may say to their own handiwork esto perpetua, it is out of their power
to make it so. As soon as it ceases to be thought worth preserving, it
will cease to be preserved. But this they may do; they may render it
impossible to make the most necessary alteration without perjury: which
is much the same thing as to establish prejury by law.

If it be of importance that there should be sacredness in oaths, or in
any solemn engagements, legislators should beware of compelling or
tempting men to bind themselves not to do, what it may possibly be the
dictate of their duty to do. Cases must occasionally occur of
incompatible obligations; cases in which, whatever course we adopt, we
unavoidably violate some moral duty, or we should rather say, some
general rule, of which the observance is important to morality. But to
all conscientious persons, except those of the strongest intellect or
the most decided character, such an alternative is extremely
distressing; and it is under cover of these extreme cases, lying exactly
on the boundary between guilt and exalted virtue, that laxity of
principle most commonly creeps in. It is of the utmost moment to the
maintenance of a high standard of moral sentiment among the mass, that
such cases of what may be termed justifiable immorality should rarely
occur, and when they do occur, should not be forced forward into public
notice and discussion. We are persuaded that the applause lavished upon
Brutus and Timoleon, whether merited or not, has had a strong tendency
to create indulgence for private crimes when supposed to be committed
from public motives. Infidelity to engagements is far more likely to
propagate itself by example than assassination. How much, then, have
those to answer for, who arbitrarily create, in the most extensive
sphere of publicity, a conflict of duties, of which this is sure to
Edition: current; Page: [188] be the result! who compromise the sanctity
of the most binding of promises, by exacting it where its observance may
possibly be a breach of obligations still more sacred! For there is no
limit to the baneful consequences which an institution may produce, if
it be not altered, when all other things are altering around it. And the
framers of the oaths have so contrived matters, that be these
consequences what they will, there shall be no means of averting them
without a previous perjury. Is it a trifle to have made it unavoidable,
that, in a contingency which is not improbable, which in a given lapse
of time is virtually certain, it shall be the study, not of bad men, but
of the best and most pure-minded, to reconcile themselves to the
intentional evasion of a solemn promise? to preach to the mass of
mankind that oaths are not binding? to invent artful contrivances for
slipping their heads out of the yoke of a positive engagement?

Such is the morality inculcated both with precept and example, by the
organs of the political Church of England. Sir R. H. Inglis avers, that
human society is built upon oaths.[*] It is built upon oaths, and in
order to stengthen the foundations, men are to be placed in such a
situation, that, in a contingency not unlikely to occur, they must
perforce disregard either their oaths or their country’s good; and that,
in proportion to their attachment to duty and ardour for the public
weal, will be their efforts to vanquish their own reluctance to perjury!
The real enemies of public morals, and weakeners of the ties which hold
mankind together, are such teachers. It is impossible even to conceive
the existence of a healthy and vigorous morality, until the reign of
such men and of such doctrines is over.*

*     *     *     *     *


15th March
 The Trades’ Unions

The Times, this morning, has an article in which it seems to urge the
Ministers to what they have by very alarming symptoms evinced themselves
to be too much inclined to; the introduction of a measure for the
suppression of the Trades’ Unions.[†]

Now it would be wise, if, before they commit themselves to a course of
policy of Edition: current; Page: [189] which they cannot doubt that the
consequences would be most serious, they would consider well the
character of the step which they are exhorted to take. It will be
received as neither more or less than a declaration to the working
people, that is, to about four-fifths of the whole population, that the
Government is their enemy; that it is determined to keep them down; to
keep them for ever poor, dependent, and servile, trampled into the earth
under the feet of their employers.

We speak not, of course, in these terms, of anything which may or may
not be done or attempted, for the more effectual prevention of violence,
threats, or personal annoyance, when employed, as by many of the Unions
they are said to be, to deter labourers from working for employers who
do not comply with their rules. Against all such infringements by a part
of the working population upon the just liberty of the remainder, the
most effectual security ought to be taken (if it does not already exist)
which is compatible with another liberty not less sacred; the right of
the working classes, not only to concert with one another, either for
raising wages, or for accomplishing any other end which they are
permitted by law to pursue individually, but also to sanction their
compact by giving free utterance to the disapprobation which it is
natural they should feel towards those whom they consider as traitors to
their caste; and the expression of which should be no further restrained
by law, than the expression of the most just horror at any undoubted
crime is restrained by the laws of most civilized countries; namely, by
not being permitted to amount to personal insult or serious molestation.

But any attempt to confine the liberty of combination among workmen
within narrower limits than these, is systematic tyranny; and the
feelings of unconquerable resentment and abhorrence which it would most
surely inspire in the whole of the labouring population towards the
governing classes and the existing institutions of their country, would
be natural and excusable. How could they view it, but as a measure of
hostility taken against them as enemies by a superior caste, whom they
regard, often most unjustly but often too truly, as actuated by the most
hardened selfishness, and by all manner of evil feelings towards them;
and whose grand object they believe to be, while living sumptuously on
their labour, to withhold from them any but the scantiest share of its
produce for which they will consent to work?

In vain would the employers, and their organs in the press or in
Parliament, put in requisition doctrines of political economy, true
indeed, but which they themselves only half understand, to this effect,
that combinations never in reality keep up the rate of wages. What then?
The working people are entitled to try: unless they try, how are they
ever to learn? You, their employers, have not been wont to show either
so infallible a wisdom, or so pure and disinterested a zeal for their
interests, that you should expect them to take the proposition on your
word, on the word of the adverse party. And we have yet to learn what
you have done to assist the cultivation of their understandings, and the
formation of vigorous intellectual faculties which should enable them to
discern without trial what modes of bettering Edition: current; Page:
[190] their condition are practicable and what are chimerical. And in
truth how could you impart what has never yet been imparted to you? Show
us an occasion on which the higher classes have ever received, except
through the lessons of bitter experience, any political truth opposed to
the suggestions of their direct and immediate interest, and we will
allow them to complain of the absence of similar perspicacity in the
labouring classes.

We cannot conceive any conduct much more discreditable, though unhappily
in perfect keeping with the mode in which the world is habitally
governed, than this: altogether to neglect the promotion, by such means
as are practicable, either of the worldly prosperity or the mental and
moral culture of the labouring classes; to use no means for
conciliating, but a thousand for alienating, their good will; to allow
them, as far as depends upon ourselves, to grow up barbarians in the
midst of our civilization; and when they, despairing of help from us,
have turned to helping themselves, and are taking the only means we have
given them of learning how to better their lot, by mutual consultation
and practical experiment, then to bear down upon them with the strong
hand of power, and close that door also against them. But it cannot be
done: there are passions aroused strong enough to effect it if it were
practicable, but it is not.

The hope that experience, when allowed freely to take its course, will
be the mother of wisdom to the operative classes as it has been to all
mankind, is already justified by an actual result. The mechanics have
discovered and recognised that strikes on the old principle, strikes by
cessation of working, are always failures. The doctrine of the Trades’
Unions now is, that when they resolve upon a strike, their course must
not be to cease working, but to work on their own account; and that the
common funds, which formerly went to support them in idleness, must now
be administered as a capital for their productive employment. Can any
thing be at once more unexceptionable and more desirable, than such an
experiment as this? Possessing the necessary funds, the labourers mean
to become capitalists, and to make actual trial of the difficulties of a
joint management. If they succeed, who will not hail as one of the most
important fruits of modern civilization, the demonstrated possibility of
arrangements of society under which the whole produce of labour would
belong exclusively to the labourers? But if, as is infinitely more
probable, they fail; is not this the very lesson which their superiors
are most anxious, and ought to be most anxious that they should learn?
When they perceive that the laws of property, which so revolt their
moral sense, by rendering the condition of the idle so often preferable
to that of the industrious, are the necessary condition of a large
production; when they find that the attempt to realize (otherwise than
with the slow progress of human improvement) the cooperative principle
as applied to the production of wealth, causes so much waste of labour
in the intricate business of management and check, and such a relaxation
of the intensity of individual exertion, that under the fairest possible
distribution there is a smaller share for each, than falls or might fall
to the lot even of the most scantily Edition: current; Page: [191]
remunerated, under the present arrangements; then, and not till then
will they patiently submit to the necessity of not moving faster than
their limbs will carry them; and instead of aiming at impracticable
changes in the general order of society, will combine with all other
honest and intelligent men, in introducing all the improvements which
the existing social system admits of.

*     *     *     *     *


19th March
 The Solicitor General’s Motion on the Law of Libel[*]

Few of the results of the Reform Bill have fallen more short of our
hopes, than the conduct of the little band of enlightened and
philosophic Radicals, whom that great change introduced into the
Legislature. Our expectations of improvement in the general composition
of Parliament, were never so sanguine as those of the more enthusiastic
reformers. The majority of the House of Commons have not much
disappointed us. We believe them to be as honest as men usually are, and
in point of intellect and acquirements a fair sample of the higher
classes of this country. The circumstances of society, and the prevalent
modes of thinking among the people, unite in preventing the electors
from seeking their representatives in the classes below the higher: and
if they did, although a greater number of conspicuous individuals might
be selected from the whole of the community than from a part, it is by
no means certain that the general mass would be improved in quality. We
doubted before the Reform Bill, we doubt still, whether the general mind
of the community is sufficiently advanced in its ideas, or sufficiently
vigorous in its tone, to furnish, even under the best system of
representation, any but a very indifferent Legislature. But we did
expect that, through the avenues opened by the Reform Bill, individuals
would find their way into Parliament, who would put forward, on every
fitting occasion, with boldness and perseverance, the best political
ideas which the country affords: and we thought we saw, in some of the
names composing the Radical minority at the opening of the Reformed
Parliament, a guarantee that our hope would be fulfilled. But the
promise has not been kept. With one or two exceptions, at the head of
which we must place Mr. Roebuck, (who, against innumerable obstacles,
some of them of his own creating, is, with signal merit, working himself
up into the station in public life to which his talents, energy, and
sincerity entitle him,) none of the new Radical members on whom we had
founded any hopes, have done enough to keep those hopes alive; and the
cause of the Movement still rests exclusively upon its ancient
supporters.

We cannot understand how men so conscientious as some of these are, can
reconcile this self-annihilation to their notions of worthiness. With
the exception Edition: current; Page: [192] of their votes, which have
been steadily given on the right side, we can name few things which any
of them have done, more than might have been done by adherents of the
present Ministry; and it was not for this, nor on the faith of these
expectations, that they were sent to that House, in preference to men
who, on any footing but that of strenuous advocates of the people’s
cause, had perhaps equal claims to theirs.

The usual excuse for inaction, that “there is no good to be done,” never
was so manifestly inapplicable. At all times there is much good to be
done, if men will but resolve to do it. But the effects of individual
exertion, though sure, are usually slow. Not so in the present state of
politics. Every well-directed attempt, even by a solitary individual, to
accomplish any worthy object, is sure of a certain measure of immediate
success. It may be true that it is impossible to carry anything against
the Ministry. But there is hardly any limit to what may now be carried
through the Ministry. Though Ministers seldom lead, they are willing to
be led. To most of the reforms which a vigorous and enlightened Ministry
would, in the present state of the public mind, venture to propose, the
present Ministers are by no means hostile. Their faults, like those of
the Radical Members, are chiefly those of omission. They do not like to
involve themselves in new questions. They have already more to think of,
more difficulties to surmount and exigencies to provide for, than they
feel the strength to cope with. When you have forced a discussion on any
subject, and compelled them to turn their minds to it, and make up an
opinion one way or another, your business is half done. From having been
anxious to stave off the question, they become anxious to settle it, so
that the discussion may not be revived. The independent Members should
take their measures accordingly. They should insist upon having all the
great questions discussed. They should not yield to the representations
which are sure to be made, which were made by the Chancellor on the
Jewish question,[*] that to be unremitting in exertion is not the way to
succeed. It is the sure, and the only way. They should let no question
sleep, and should agitate all the more important questions incessantly.

Mr. O’Connell, among whose faults inactivity is not to be numbered, did
not think that to force a discussion on the liberty of the press would
do no good; and already his motion has compelled the Government to take
up the subject, and a part of the necessary reform has a fair chance of
being accomplished in the present Session.

Since the publication of our last month’s Notes, Mr. O’Connell’s Bill
for the Reform of the Law of Libel has been printed;[†] and the
objections to which it seemed liable, from his own statement, as
reported in the newspapers, are Edition: current; Page: [193] applicable
to it in a very inferior degree to what we had supposed. It does make
provision for freedom of criticism on institutions and doctrines, with
the single exception of religion; and, in case of private libel, instead
of making truth in all cases a justification, it only allows the truth
to be given in evidence, leaving the jury to decide what weight shall be
allowed to it as a defence. Even this we continue to think
objectionable, but, undoubtedly, in a far less degree.

*     *     *     *     *


20th March
 Sir Robert Peel on the Corn Laws

In the House of Commons yesterday an incidental discussion of the Corn
Laws took place on the presentation of a petition.[*] After a speech
from Mr. Roebuck, of the great merits of which we should have remained
ignorant if we had not accidentally seen the report of it in the Morning
Post,[†] Sir Robert Peel rose. Having first accused, by implication, Mr.
Roebuck of presumption, in saying that the subject might be disposed of
in five minutes, while he, though he had spoken much longer than five
minutes, had not disposed of half of it; Sir Robert endeavoured to
supply the remaining half by a speech in which all which was not truism
was irrelevancy.[‡] Though Mr. Roebuck said, and said truly, that what
is relevant to the question might be stated in five minutes,[§] he could
not have meant that so short a time would suffice for answering all the
fallacies which may be accumulated round this or any other subject by
ingenuity or folly. Sir Robert Peel’s first argument was that of the
peculiar burthens pressing upon the land; a consideration which no one
who ever spoke or wrote against the corn laws has overlooked: but which
is a reason for equalizing taxation, not for compensating a class
supposed to be peculiarly overtaxed, by another and the worst of taxes—a
tax on the people’s food. The remainder of the speech may be thus summed
up:—That the corn laws could not be termed a monopoly, because, if the
landlords have a protecting duty, so have all classes of manufacturers.
It would take nearly five minutes to enumerate all the mistaken
assumptions included in this argument. Whoever agrees with Sir Robert
Peel must think the following things:—1. That if there are many
monopolies instead of one, they cease to be monopolies. 2. That it
Edition: current; Page: [194] is a legislative business not to do
justice, but to establish an equal balance of injustice. 3. That if A
gains sixpence by making B lose a shilling, the way to set all right is
for B to treat A in the same manner: while in the meantime C, D, and E
are robbed by both. 4. That duties on the importation of manufactures
are a benefit to the manufacturer, in the same sense as duties on the
importation of corn are a benefit to the landlord; whereas, in truth,
the landlord obtains a higher rent, but the manufacturer does not obtain
a higher profit, the protected trade being no better off as to profits
than those which are not protected. 5. That an equal benefit is
conferred on two persons, by protecting the one against a cheaper
article than his own, the other against a dearer: that it is the same
thing, in fact, to shut the door against the food which would come, and
against the cottons and hardware that would not.

When propositions which contain in a nutshell a whole Iliad[*] of error,
are put forth with an air of authority, and by a person of authority, as
if they were the dernier mot of some great question, it is lamentable
that there is no one, even of those who understand the subject, ready to
start up at the instant and present the simple truth in the point of
view in which it most vividly illuminates the fallacy, and makes its
character visible. But the union of energy and ardour with knowledge and
dialectical skill, is a combination too rare in our days to be soon
hoped for.

*     *     *     *     *


26th March
 The Ministry and the Dissenters

The principal interest of the session, thus far, has been the question
of the Church and the Dissenters. Even Church Reform, so prominent a
topic for the last two years, has almost ceased to be talked of; and the
subject now pressed upon the Legislature is the entire abolition of the
Establishment. This is a fearful truth to Conservatives of all
denominations; and even to considerate Radicals, there is matter for
very serious reflection in so striking an instance of the artificial
celerity given to the natural progress of change, by the very conduct
which is expected to check it.

If Ministers can profit by experience, they must surely by this time see
how utterly the course which they have not adopted, but fallen into, is
at variance with their own purposes. Those who most agree with them in
their ends, have most cause to complain of their means. It is not as
friends of the Movement that we lament the deficiencies of Ministers; in
that character we ought much rather to Edition: current; Page: [195]
rejoice at them; for the tide of change sets in far more violently
through this passive resistance to it. But we wish the current to be
gentle as well as rapid. We dread lest the violence of the struggle
which is so needlessly made the sole means of obtaining reforms, should
leave neither the leisure nor the frame of mind for choosing the most
considerate mode of accomplishing them. One half the good, moreover,
which we expect from the redress of grievances, will be lost, if, being
extorted from the unwillingness of the Legislature, they leave behind
them the feelings not of reconciliation but of victory and defeat.

What a commentary have the last few weeks afforded on the principles of
the King’s Speech![*] If Ministers had announced of themselves, the
intention of doing for the Dissenters all which in this short period
they have been obliged successively to promise, they would have retained
the large measure which they formerly possessed of the confidence of
that immense body, and we should not have heard, perhaps for a long time
to come, of a single petition for the separation of Church and State.
The Movement has gained several years upon them in a few weeks; while in
the same time they have let half their power of guiding its course slip
out of their hands, by teaching their surest friends to hope for nothing
from them but through the means which would be taken with enemies.

Ministers made but humble pretensions at the opening of the session, and
humble has been their conduct. They gave fair warning; they let all men
know that it was no business of theirs to stir a step in improvement
unless somebody drove them, and that whoever came with a petition in one
hand, must come with a cudgel in the other. But it was absurd to imagine
that those who had carried Catholic Emancipation, and the repeal of the
Test and Corporation Acts, could have any objection to concede the
little which is still withheld of religious liberty; and the Dissenters
feeling this, did not use the cudgel, but quietly stated what they
thought themselves entitled to demand, deeming that as they were
speaking to friends, nothing further was requisite. They waited, and
nothing came but the ridiculous Marriage Bill:[†] and they received
every intimation short of an express declaration, that this was all they
had to expect. Not because what they claimed was considered unfit to be
granted; but merely because it could be refused. Thus warned, the
Dissenters resorted to the cudgel: and now mark with what result. At
each application of the weapon, Ministers rose in their offers. First
they vaguely told the Dissenters not to conclude that nothing more was
to be done for them.[‡] Then they would “call the attention” of the
House to the subject of Church Rates, and propose, as was at first given
out, a diminution, which afterwards rose into a Edition: current; Page:
[196] commutation, and was at last announced, though not officially, as
an entire abolition.[*] Next, the Marriage Bill was virtually given up,
and several Ministers expressed their private opinion that marriage
should be a civil contract.[†] Next came a proposition for a general
registry of births, marriages, and deaths; but at first, only from a
brother of the Lord Chancellor;[‡] afterwards Lord Althorp hoped that
such a registry, by being combined with another measure, might be
introduced as a Government question; and possibly some relief might be
afforded to the Dissenters on the subject of burials also.[§] Lastly, a
petition from Cambridge for the admission of Dissenters to graduate in
that University, was presented by the Premier in the Lords, and by the
Secretary to the Treasury in the House of Commons,[¶] and warmly
supported both by them and by other leading members of the
Administration. On this occasion (because it is a small one) they at
length spoke as statesmen should speak: the tone was not that of
reluctant concession, but of earnest advocacy: as if they were not only
willing to do justice, but were glad of the opportunity.

How much more highly would they now have stood in reputation and in real
power, had they adopted this tone throughout, and from the commencement!
How much might they yet retrieve, were they even now to adopt it!

*     *     *     *     *


NO. III, MAY, 1834


16th April
 The Tithe Bill[∥]

This project appears to us no improvement upon the tithe commutation of
last Edition: current; Page: [197] year.[*] Both schemes have many of
the requisites of a good measure, but the present one is open to
objections far more weighty than those which have induced Ministers to
abandon their original proposition.

We fully concur in the principle laid down by Lord Althorp, that no
portion of the tithe must be given away to the landlords.[†] The amount
must remain undiminished, not indeed for the reason he assigns, that it
is all required for the maintenance of the Church Establishment; but to
preserve what the Examiner very properly calls the reversionary interest
of the State.[‡]

Both measures, that of last year and the present, leave the aggregate
tithe of the whole country unaltered in amount. But the former left also
to every individual tithe owner, the very sum which he had been
accustomed to receive; while, by the present bill, there will hardly be
a receiver of tithe in all England who will not either gain or lose by
the commutation. It is obvious that the poorer the land is, the less
rent it will yield in proportion to the produce. On poor lands the gross
produce may be ten times, or any number of times the rent: on some rich
lands it cannot be more than double. The tithe being proportioned to the
gross produce, must bear an infinitely varying proportion to the rent.
Yet the commutation is to be a per-centage uniform for a whole county.
If the average tithe of the county is one-fourth, or one-third of the
rent, though it may not be exactly so in any particular instance, it is
to be fixed at that proportion everywhere.

In one half the parishes of England, therefore, the tithe owner will
obtain an increase of his income, and a spoliation of property will take
place to the prejudice of the landlord. In the other half, the life
interests of the clergy will be impaired, the lay impropriators robbed
of a portion of their property, and the landowners gratuitously
presented with an addition to their rent. So extensive an invasion of
vested rights is scarcely consistent with the unbounded respect for them
professed by all English ministers.

In attempting to avoid one evil, Ministers have fallen into a worse.
Against the scheme of last year, which fixed the tithe everywhere at its
present amount, it was urged that an incumbent who had rigidly exacted
his utmost dues, would be confirmed in the possession of them, while one
who had been lenient would forfeit the right which he had forborne to
enforce. We do not think there was much in this argument, since no
injury would have been done to the more liberal incumbent by giving him
no more than he had himself adjudged to be sufficient; while the
condition of those who were under the more rigid taskmaster, would be
left no worse than it was before. However, these last would certainly
lose the chance of being more indulgently treated by a future incumbent.
There was therefore some, though but little, force in the objection. To
meet it, what have the Ministry done? Edition: current; Page: [198] That
they may not, by leaving matters just as they are, give the rapacious
man an advantage over the more moderate, they strike a medium between
the two, giving to the one more than he asks for, to the other less:
forgetting, in this clumsy attempt to make legislation the agent of
distributive justice, that if there are inequalities in the rigour with
which the tithe is exacted, there are also inequalities, and greater
ones, in the tithe itself; all which are to be stretched and clipped to
the Procrustes-bed of a uniform proportion.

In most other respects the bill is deserving of praise. It removes all
complication and annoyance in the collection of tithes, by making the
demand no longer from the tenant, but from the proprietor; and allowing
him the option of redeeming it, on terms sufficiently easy to induce all
who have the means, to avail themselves of the permission. It also takes
the tithe off the consumer, and lays it upon the landlord. Tithe will no
longer operate as any discouragement to cultivation. It will no longer
be one of the expenses of production, which the price must be sufficient
to repay; but a fixed proportion of the rent, that is, of the surplus
after the expenses are paid. It will be liable indeed to increase, but
only as the rent increases, and can never, under any circumstances, be
any thing but a deduction from the rent.

This, however, opens a view of the subject in some other of its
bearings, which have not yet attracted the attention of those most
interested. We see the landowners apparently taking a burthen off the
shoulders of their customers the bread-eaters, and placing it on their
own. What is the meaning of so unlandlordly a proceeding? It is, that
they reckon upon being able to maintain the Corn Laws. While those laws
subsist, the landlords will escape the consequences of the measure to
which they are about to give their consent. This will appear from a very
brief explanation.

If all the food consumed in England were grown on our own soil, the
effect of abolishing tithe would be a fall of price. The consumer and
not the landlord would reap the benefit; and if a charge in commutation
of tithe were laid upon the rent, the landlord would be out of pocket by
the entire amount. But this fall of price cannot take place while the
Corn Laws last. As long as we are an importing country, the price must
depend upon the cost of production abroad, not upon the cost of
production here; and nothing which can be done here will lower it, while
we continue to derive any portion of our food from abroad. Unless,
therefore, the stimulus given to cultivation at home by taking off the
tithe, be sufficient to render us entirely independent of foreign
supply, the sole effect of relieving the agriculturist from the burthen
is, that we shall grow more corn, and import less. The landlord,
therefore, will pocket the whole amount of the tithe; and by laying an
equivalent burthen upon him in the form of a rent-charge, he will be
left, while the Corn Laws continue, in the exact position in which he is
now.

This suggests one most serious objection to the present measure, and to
any commutation of tithes not accompanied by a corresponding reduction
of the duties on foreign corn. It adds to the injustice of the Corn
Laws. It increases the artificial premium upon raising food from the
soil instead of importing it. We are perpetually Edition: current; Page:
[199] told, and it is true, that if we tax our own corn, we must lay an
equal duty on that which comes from abroad. Equally true is it, and for
precisely the same reason, that if we tax foreign corn we must levy an
equal duty on that which is grown at home. If tithes are a reason for
retaining corn laws, corn laws are a reason for retaining tithes. If we
relieve English corn from tithes without relieving foreign corn from
corn laws, we create a new factitious inequality; we hold out a fresh
motive to a disadvantageous employment of labour and capital; and
besides, we encourage the breaking up of lands which will be thrown out
of culture, and the expenditure of capital which will become useless, as
soon as the Corn Laws shall be repealed.

Happily that period is near at hand; and happily, too, this is so
obvious, that although the landlords, as a body, will, by fair means or
foul, do all they can to avert it, neither landlord nor farmer will like
to risk much of their own money upon the chance. We do not believe,
therefore, that much extension of cultivation will take place. The
uncertainty of the Corn Law has long paralysed all such speculations,
and will continue to paralyse them as long as any bread-tax exists.

*     *     *     *     *


17th April
 National Education

The declarations of Mr. Spring Rice on Monday, and of the Lord
Chancellor yesterday,[*] amount to a promise of the very greatest
benefit which could be bestowed upon any country at so small an
expense—the establishment of Normal Schools. Ministers will atone for a
thousand faults by this admirable measure, if the care and pains devoted
to superintending its execution, correspond to the good intentions which
dictate its adoption.

Doubtless it is important, that additional schools should be
established, a greater number of children taught. The diffusion even of
merely nominal education has been greatly exaggerated; few persons are
aware how large a portion of our people are still destitute of any means
of instruction whatever. But the mere quantity of teaching is a
secondary consideration to the quality; and that we believe to be, for
the most part, more thoroughly bad, than any one without facts before
him would dare to conjecture. We believe this to be true of all ranks,
and all branches of education alike. The youths who attend the London
University, must be at least a fair selection from the grammar schools,
public and private, in the country; and we have heard from teachers in
that institution, things which have perfectly amazed us of the ignorance
in which the great majority come to them, of all things which are
professed to be taught in the schools at which they have been brought
up. The Edition: current; Page: [200] elementary schools for the
children of the working classes, are still worse. They scarcely even
profess to aim at anything more than teaching words; and words out of a
book. No attempt is made to communicate ideas, or call forth the mental
faculties. The mind of the teacher is never once brought into contact
with the mind of the child. An automaton could do all that is done by
such teachers, and all that they are qualified to do. Among the
enthusiastic promoters of education who direct the two great School
Societies, there are doubtless many who are more or less sensible of the
deficiencies of their system, and would gladly amend them; but the
material is wanting: teachers, who even know what it is to teach, are
not to be had. School-houses may be had, or money to build them; all the
“properties,” the mere instruments of teaching, may be complete; even
books, though of them there is a sad deficiency, may be provided: if one
good book is written, copies may be multiplied without limit. But it is
not brick walls, nor instruments, nor books, nor dead matter that is
wanting; mind must be taught by mind. Most true is the maxim of the
Prussian system, “what the teacher is, that will the school be.” Even if
we were to think with the vulgar, that any one who knows a thing can
teach it—even so the bulk of the existing schoolmasters could teach
nothing, for they know nothing; no thing, no words even, except the very
words set down in their books. They cannot make their scholars, what
they themselves are not. Ask them any question, in geography or history
for instance, out of the narrow round of questions they are accustomed
to put, and you will find them as ignorant as the most untaught of their
scholars. Is this doubted? Put it to the proof.

Is it not extraordinary that Lord Brougham, in his speech of yesterday,
and in that other speech which he delivered last session against a
National Education,[*] should have built up what seemed to him a
conclusive argument, out of a mere numerical statement of the increase
of schools, and proved to us the sufficiency of individual and
undirected exertions, by mere arithmetic? Are all schools alike, then?
Is it enough that there are places called schools, that there is
something called teaching? Is it of no consequence what is taught, and
how? We know not why education should be so highly lauded if this be
education. What, in itself, is it, to be merely able to read? But the
children do not at present even learn to read. What proportion of those
who have been taught reading can read fluently? or have had the meaning
of half the words they laboriously spell out, explained to them? Put a
book into their hands, and see how many of them will answer that they
can only read in the book they are accustomed to. And is this the
teaching, the multiplication of which has rendered a national education
unnecessary?

Mr. Roebuck, whose advocacy of education, as of every thing else, is
that of a person really in earnest about it, has announced for next
week, a motion similar to that by which he did so much good last
year.[†] But a more important motion still, Edition: current; Page:
[201] and one which we trust we shall see him introduce—for of any other
of the professing friends of education we have small hope—would be one
for an address to the crown, to appoint a commission for ascertaining
and reporting upon the quality of the instruction at the various
existing schools. Anything less than a public investigation, embracing
the whole country, would not suffice. Cases resting on private authority
will not do; they will be denied, or represented as exceptions selected
to make out a case. The abuses of the Poor Laws would have been so
represented, if there had been no Poor Law Commission. But when an
inquiry was set on foot, with a real desire to make it an effectual one,
the evils which we had heard of as occasional, perhaps even frequent,
were found to pervade the whole country; and what proved to be the rare
and scattered exceptions, were the cases of good, not those of bad
administration. An inquiry is wanted into the state of education, as
searching and as comprehensive as that into the administration of the
Poor Laws. Until there has been such an inquiry nothing will be done,
nor will the public feel the necessity of doing anything, to bring the
education of the people generally, under a more active and intelligent
superintendence.

Meanwhile the Ministers will deserve high praise, if they are serious in
their purpose of establishing Normal Schools. This is at once the most
important step towards a national system, and a good in itself of
inestimable value. If a scheme for the education of the whole people had
already received the sanction of the Legislature, its execution must
have waited until an improved race of schoolmasters could be raised up;
but if even without founding any schools of our own, we educate teachers
for the existing schools to a standard greatly exceeding the present
average, we shall, by this single measure, change the whole character of
the education of the country. The great school societies would, it is to
be hoped, supply themselves with schoolmasters from the Normal Schools;
and private teachers not trained at these institutions, could only stand
their ground by showing qualifications equal to that high standard which
the public would learn to exact.

Normal Schools, sufficient for all the wants of the country, might be
founded and carried on at a very moderate expense; and the Chancellor’s
objection to a national provision for education, that it would put a
stop to private subscriptions,[*] would not apply. If the contribution
of 20,000l. towards building school-houses, has called forth individual
subscriptions to more than double the amount, a still greater stimulus
would be given to private beneficence if the State were to supply, what
is so much greater a desideratum than a place to teach in, masters fit
to teach.

Lord Malmesbury, good man, objects to Normal Schools, because “the
founders of charity schools always take care to supply them with proper
masters.”[†] We admire the noble Lord’s unsuspecting innocence, and are
curious to Edition: current; Page: [202] know where he has lived. A
suspicion never crossed his ingenuous mind that an inadequate teacher is
to be found in the whole country. Any one probably is fit for a
schoolmaster according to his ideas, who is able to read. We imagine
most of them could stand that test. Meanwhile Lord Malmesbury’s dictum
should stand upon record, that posterity may know what the House of
Lords was like. We hope historians will not forget to inform them that
he was by no means its most ignorant member. There cannot be fewer than
two hundred of their Lordships who are decidedly more ignorant still.

*     *     *     *     *


18th April
 Mr. Roebuck and The Times

The Times,—which of all newspapers is the most swayed by personal
enmity, and which looks upon every one as an enemy to whom it has ever
behaved ill, especially every public man who has the impertinence to be
successful after it has attempted to ruin him,—has a snarling article
this morning upon Mr. Roebuck’s motion, which, like all the rest of its
conduct towards him, will be remembered as an example of its malice, but
not of its power.[*] No one who compares the present position of Mr.
Roebuck in the House of Commons, with that which he occupied a year
ago—or who can appreciate the complete victory which, by a good use of
the advantages of a better cause and a superior knowledge of his
subject, he has just obtained over the most redoubted debater in the
House[†]—will imagine for a moment that his upward career can now be
retarded by a hostility, obviously arising from personal ill-will. A
young, and till then obscure individual, coming into Parliament with
neither money, rank, connexion, nor previous reputation, allying himself
with no party, neither compromising a single opinion, nor courting the
favour of one human being, but often injuring himself by giving needless
offence—he already occupies a station of honour and importance, both in
the House and in the country; he had defied alike Whigs, Tories, and
demagogues, yet has extorted respect from them all, and he alone of the
young members is rapidly rising in estimation. Having conquered so many
obstacles, and achieved the first and most difficult part of a
successful career, without aid from any newspaper (most of his speeches
are scarcely reported,) and against the undisguised enmity of so
powerful a journal as the Times, he can well afford to disregard that
enmity, until it ceases of its own accord; that is, until the Times
thinks him of sufficient consequence to be worth courting. It is of
excellent example, that he should continue to afford a demonstration of
the sufficiency of energy and courage to Edition: current; Page: [203]
command success in that House, against the opposition of the press, as
well as against every other possible disadvantage.


The Proposed Reform of the Poor Laws

It is creditable to Ministers that the measure which Lord Althorp
yesterday introduced into the House of Commons,[*] departs so little
from the recommendations of the Poor Law Commissioners. Wherever it does
deviate from them the change is for the worse; nor do we believe that
any change would be for the better. The proceedings of that Commission
are an example, unique in our history, of sagacity and skill in
investigating the innumerable details of a most extensive and
complicated subject, and wisdom in devising, for evils which seemed
insuperable, remedies which promise the most unhoped-for success.

Lord Althorp’s statement, as we are informed by persons who were
present, was unusually clear and cogent. Little or no opposition was
made in any quarter; and from the reception which the House gave to the
proposition, there is little doubt that it will pass without material
alteration. A considerable part of the press has, however, declared
hostility to its leading provisions, and in particular the Times; which
has more than once touched upon the subject, in a tone calculated to do
much mischief, and which has probably had a large share in deterring the
Ministry from adopting the recommendations of the Commissioners in their
full extent.[†]

The foundation of the Poor Law Report, is the principle upon which all
good government, and all justly-constituted society rest; that no person
who is able to work, is entitled to be maintained in idleness; or to be
put into a better condition, at the expense of the public, than those
who contrive to support themselves by their unaided exertions. Any
infringement of this principle, whether by rich or poor, is not only
immoral, but nine-tenths of the immorality in the world are founded on
it. The desire to live upon the labour of others, is at the root of
almost all misgovernment, and of most private dishonesty. The inquiries
of the Poor Law Commission have afforded melancholy evidence of the
extent to which this desire, and the facilities afforded for gratifying
it by the administration of the Poor Laws, are demoralizing our rural,
and a large portion of our town population; accustoming them to rely for
support, not on their own efforts, but on assistance to be afforded them
by the administrators of a common stock, from which they endeavour by
all sorts of fraudulent contrivances to draw as much, and to contribute
to it by their labour as little, as their ingenuity and good luck enable
them.

To arrest this demoralization, before the labouring population shall be
entirely corrupted, and the whole produce of the country swallowed up by
the poor rates, is Edition: current; Page: [204] the object of the
Commissioners; and they have been able to imagine no means but one; nor
(as must be evident) are any others possible. The condition of a pauper
must cease to be, as it has been made, an object of desire and envy to
the independent labourer. Relief must be given; no one must be allowed
to starve; the necessaries of life and health must be tendered to all
who apply for them; but to all who are capable of work they must be
tendered on such terms, as shall make the necessity of accepting them be
regarded as a misfortune; and shall induce the labourer to apply for
them only when he cannot help it, and to take the first opportunity of
again shifting for himself. To this end, relief must be given only in
exchange for labour, and labour at least as irksome and severe as that
of the least fortunate among the independent labourers: relief,
moreover, must be confined to necessaries. Indulgences, even those which
happily the very poorest class of labourers, when in full employment,
are able occasionally to allow themselves, must be rigidly withheld.

These objects the Commissioners seek to accomplish, by granting relief
to the able-bodied (as a general rule) only within the workhouse; relief
at their own houses being an exception, never to be made but upon
special grounds. The reason assigned for this, and borne out by the
evidence, is, that anywhere but in a workhouse it is quite impossible to
make pauper labour efficient. Parish work, as at present conducted, is
notoriously, universally, and by the necessity of the case, very much
the same thing as total idleness. Even when set to work on the roads, a
kind of labour susceptible of more easy and efficient superintendence
than most others, it is found impracticable to exact from the paupers
much more than nominal work. In the workhouse alone can the life of a
pauper, consistently with an ample supply of necessaries, be rendered
other than enviable, as compared with the hard labour and poor fare of
those who find their own subsistence. Yet against this fundamental
principle of all Poor Law Reform have the Times and other papers raised
the cry of inhumanity. They call it treating poverty as a crime. It is
but making pauperism no longer a piece of good fortune.

The spirit manifested by the newspapers is exactly similar to that which
the Commissioners say they have met with in almost all the parties to
whom they addressed their printed queries. They found every where the
bitterest complaints of the present system, the most alarming
predictions of universal ruin if it be persevered in, and the most
vehement objections to the adoption of any remedy. People seemed to
expect that evils, which were threatening the subversion of society,
should be extirpated without causing the most trifling, the most
momentary inconvenience to anybody. The newspapers expect the same
thing. They look for ends, and will consent to no means. Thus, the Times
assents to the principle that the independent labourer must be better
off than the pauper; and yet accuses the Commissioners of making
proverty a crime, for proposing simply this very thing. How, we beg to
know, is the independent labourer to be better off than the pauper, and
yet the pauper no worse off than the independent labourer? If Edition:
current; Page: [205] pauperism is to be made undesirable, that may
always be called treating it as a crime. Not one hint does the writer in
the Times give, of any other means of making pauperism undesirable, but
those which the Commissioners suggest. He must have known that they did
not make the suggestion lightly. When men of rare acquirements and
talents, with unlimited access to information, have employed more than
two years in the most diligent examination and study of the subject in
all its bearings—one who does not pretend to know more of the subject
than we all know, is at least bound, if he disputes their conclusion, to
be prepared to answer their case.

The Ministry, however, have been so far influenced by these unreasonable
objections, as to depart in some degree from the propositions of the
Poor Law Report. The Commissioners proposed, that, after a certain time,
say two years, relief to the able-bodied, anywhere but in the workhouse,
should, as a general rule, be unlawful;[*] and, in the mean time, the
Central Board were invested with the power of erecting workhouses, to
receive such persons as from choice or necessity should remain paupers
after that period. Lord Althorp’s Bill fixes no time after which
out-door relief is to be prohibited: it gives indeed to the Central
Board, the power of prohibiting, or regulating the conditions of, such
relief, but not the power to erect workhouses, except with the consent
of the parish. On the other hand, the Bill provides (which the plan of
the Commissioners did not) that the allowance system, i.e. relief in aid
of wages, shall cease on the 1st of June, 1835. On that day, therefore,
a very large proportion of the labouring population will have to make
choice, either to go off the parish entirely, or to become, not inmates
of a workhouse, for there will perhaps be neither workhouses to receive
them nor power to send them thither, but paupers receiving out-door
relief. Very few would have made their voluntary election for the former
kind of pauperism; very many, it is to be feared, will have no objection
to the latter. The reform which it is hoped to accomplish in the habits
of the rural population, will thus be indefinitely retarded; the
difficulty of subsequently abolishing out-door relief, probably much
augmented; and the measure exposed to much local unpopularity, by
producing, as it will at first, an increase, perhaps, instead of a
diminution of the poor-rates.

Against these evils, our sole reliance is on the extent of discretionary
power still confided to the Central Board; even pared down as that power
has been, in deference to a short-sighted clamour against what is really
the hinge upon which the whole measure turns. Would not one imagine that
it had been proposed to invest some body of functionaries with new and
unheard-of powers? instead of merely placing under the controul of a few
conspicuous, responsible, and carefully selected officers, free from
local interests, and inaccessible to local intimidation, the very powers
which are now exercised without controul by several thousands of petty
jobbing local bodies, under every temptation to abuse which the case
admits Edition: current; Page: [206] of, without any acquaintance with
the principles of the subject, and virtually irresponsible even to an
effective public opinion? Without a Central Board, the framing and
administering of a new system would be left, to whom? To the very
authorities whose mismanagement has rendered a new system necessary. The
very people who did the mischief would be the chosen instruments for
administering, and in part devising, the remedy! But this is the spirit
of that liberty, which, being different from that of any other people,
is called “English liberty.” An English patriot of the old school
reserves all his jealousy of power, for power in hands of the general
government: he is terrified at the thought of confiding to them, or to
persons appointed by them, functions, of which he sees every day,
without indignation, the most wanton and flagrant abuse by some paltry
knot of incapable or interested persons in his own neighbourhood. A
jobbing corporation, or a jobbing vestry, may systematically plunder the
public to give lucrative contracts to their own members; and when it is
proposed to place any check upon these malversations, we are gravely
told, that English liberty requires the people to manage their own
affairs; management by the people meaning management by a little section
of the people; and management of their own affairs being management of
the affairs of some thousands of other persons. Happily, these
prejudices, which but lately were nearly universal, are rapidly wearing
away: and we may soon hope to see acknowledged, what it is wonderful
should ever be denied; that if France errs by too much centralization,
we err as grossly by having too little; and that no country can be well
governed, unless every branch of its local administration, by whomsoever
carried on, is closely and vigilantly looked after by the central
government, itself duly responsible to the nation at large. Because in
England it is no part of the business of the central government to keep
any functionaries to their duty, except those appointed by itself; and
because it does not appoint those by whom the far greatest part of the
real government of the country is performed; therefore are we, in
proportion to our degree of civilisation, the very worst administered
country in Europe. Where there is a free press, and a well-constituted
representative body, the danger is not in giving too much, but too
little controul, to the functionaries who are under the eye of the
general public, over those who are not. If there is a principle in
politics which all experience confirms, it is this—that popular controul
never acts purely, intelligently, or vigorously, except on a large
scale.

*     *     *     *     *


19th April
 Government by Brute Force

This country is threatened at present with almost the only danger by
which its safety and tranquillity can, in the existing aspect of the
times, be seriously Edition: current; Page: [207] compromised—an absurd
interference with Trades’ Unions. The newspapers, with their usual
recklessness, have laboured to create an excitement on the subject; and
though the Government have not announced any definite intentions, a
hundred little symptoms have shown the animus by which they are
possessed, and which needs only last a little longer to prepare them for
any folly. There are a kind of persons who, when once they begin
inflaming one another, will go any length, and talk themselves up to any
pitch of irrationality.

The uncalled-for interference of the Admiralty, on the occasion of the
coopers’ strike, was of little importance in itself, but of much from
the spirit which dictated it. If, in a country where the poor and the
rich never know each other but either in the relation of charity or in
that of hostility, any government could possess the confidence of the
working people, that confidence would have been justly forfeited by this
single act. When different sections of the community have clashing
interests, and are ranged under hostile banners, the proper place of a
government is not in the ranks of either body, but between them. A
government which abdicates its legitimate office of a mediator and
peace-maker, and assumes that of an auxiliary on either side, no matter
in how innocent a manner or in how limited a degree, not only steps out
of its province, but unfits itself for its proper duty; precludes itself
from being listened to as an impartial and unprejudiced friend; and can
no longer interfere with effect at all, unless by throwing its sword
into the scale of one or other party.

Immediately after this unthinking proceeding, and Sir James Graham’s
defence of it,[*] came the sentence of seven years’ transportation upon
six Dorsetshire labourers, under a sleeping statute,[†] which nobody
dreamed of, and which was not known to be applicable to the case. The
attempt to prevent any demonstration of public opinion in behalf of
these poor men, by hurrying them out of the country, has signally
failed. Petition succeeds petition, and meeting succeeds meeting, in
their behalf. Their case has become the popular question, the
inflammatory topic of the day.

And now, in defence of the conduct of Ministers in not remitting the
sentence, comes a speech from Lord Howick, in a more reprehensible and a
more dangerous spirit than all that went before.[‡]

Report characterizes Lord Howick as an intelligent and a well-meaning
man: we should not have inferred him to be either from this specimen of
his statesmanship. His speech amounts to a declaration of open
hostilities. A member having alluded to the melancholy conflict at
Lyons, as an example of the consequences of Edition: current; Page:
[208] attempting to coerce Trades’ Unions,[*] Lord Howick said that he
derived from those occurrences a directly opposite lesson; that he saw
in them the fatal consequences, not of interference, but of being too
tardy and backward in interference.[†]

Lord Howick may have any private theory he pleases about the events of
Lyons. No person’s individual absurdities are any concern to the public.
But if a government, which, like that of France, absolutely prohibits
all combinations among workmen; which but the other day made a law to
put down all societies whatever, not licensed by its own police;[‡]
which had just before condemned some Paris operatives to three years’
imprisonment for belonging to a Trades’ Union; and which has now brought
upon the second city in the empire the horrors of a five days struggle
of life and death, by attempting to punish the leaders of a strike,
after the strike was terminated;—if the government which did this, did
not, in the opinion of our Ministers, interfere enough; if they erred by
not taking their measures earlier, or more vigorously; if our Ministers
have taken warning from them, and are resolved not to be guilty of a
like error;—why then it is time for every Englishman, who has the means,
to provide himself with a musket: for there is no knowing how soon the
consequences of such a policy may leave him destitute of any other
protection.

Whoever is to blame for the Lyons’ catastrophe, it most deeply concerns
the Ministry that no similar one should take place here. Government by
the sword will not succeed in this country. England, like France, may,
by the imperiousness of power, or the desperation of cowardice, be
plunged into civil war, but not, as in France, with impunity.

Our Ministers never, surely, had their equals in the art of converting a
small difficulty into a great one. They had only to let the Trades’
Unions alone. It was well worth the partial stoppage of two or three
branches of trade, to let the experiment be tried fairly, what Unions
can do. They have at present no ulterior designs; and if they had, would
be utterly powerless for carrying those designs into effect. But, give
them a grievance; let them have cause to believe themselves injured; let
them be bound together by a sense of wrongs, and taught to regard the
overthrow of existing institutions as the means of obtaining a fair
field for pursuing a just end by just means—and they will be formidable
indeed.

We do not pretend that they ought to be tolerated in using compulsion,
either against employers or fellow-workmen. If, as we believe often
happens when outrages are committed, the reluctance of the operatives to
inform against each other renders it impossible to bring the
perpetrators to justice, this is a valid ground Edition: current; Page:
[209] for enforcing such restraints, of the nature of police
regulations, as may render the commission of such offences more
difficult, or detection more easy.

Anything more would be wholly unjustifiable. There has been much cant
about tyrannizing over masters, because the workmen chose to annex
conditions to the contract by which they agreed to labour for the profit
of others. The conditions might be foolish, or they might be wise; but,
whatever they were, the men had a perfect right to insist upon them, as
long as they neither had nor sought any means of enforcing the
requisition but by exercising their undoubted right of refusing to work.
If they had said they would not work for less than five hundred a year
each, it would have been silly enough, but surely no tyranny. The
language in which the demands of the Unions were made, is said to have
been, at times, overbearing. This is neither more nor less foolish or
reprehensible, than an equally offensive style when used by employers.
From vulgar minds in either rank, we must expect vulgar pretensions. But
until, in the progress of cultivation, insolence shall become an
unfrequent accompaniment of power, we ought to rejoice that one side has
no longer the monopoly of it. Any relation is preferable to that in
which one party may inflict, and the other must bear. When both can
presume, both are near to feeling the good of forbearance.

To suggest the proper precautions against the offences liable to arise
from Trades’ Unions, local experience is requisite. One regulation which
could not fail to be useful, would be the enforcement of publicity. We
see no reason why all associations should not be declared illegal, whose
statutes are not registered in some public office. The enactment under
which the Dorsetshire labourers were convicted, was, we think, a
salutary one. The hardship was in not remitting their sentence, when the
trial had given the requisite publicity to the law. Promissory oaths are
bad enough when imposed for state purposes, and by the authority of the
Legislature. It is out of the question that individuals should be
permitted to impose upon others, even with their consent, a religious
obligation to persevere in conduct of which their consciences may cease
to approve. But the Unions are not wedded to these mischievous
ceremonies. It was enough to promulgate the fact that they were illegal.
The trial at Dorchester has acted as a promulgation, and the word has
gone forth throughout the country to discontinue the oaths. The only
rational object of the sentence has been attained; yet the cry of the
people for a remission of the sentence is unheeded.

Lord Howick argues that though the labourers may not have known of the
particular statute, or of the penalty, they knew that they were doing
wrong; else why did they take an oath of secrecy?[*] If it is upon such
logic as this that unoffending peasants have been torn from their homes,
and doomed to the punishment and to the fellowship of the refuse of
gaols, those who sent them richly deserve to take their place. Is Lord
Howick so ignorant of the rudiments of the Edition: current; Page: [210]
subject on which he presumes to talk, as not to know that, although the
Trades’ Unions were never before brought under one general organization,
the Unions themselves existed, and their regulations were adopted, at a
time when the very fact of belonging to a Union, or being concerned in a
strike, was an offence by statute?[*] Need we ask a member of the
British Legislature if laws are always abrogated the moment the reason
for them has ceased? Yet, a man who could not make this obvious
reflection, sets up a shallow conceit of his own against the general
belief of the whole country that the members of Trades’ Unions did not
know, did not believe the oaths to be illegal. Illegal or not, that they
believed them to be wrong, a person’s mind must be in a curious state
who can surmise: and even if they did, are you to pounce upon men
unawares with legal penalties, on the assumption that they know they are
doing wrong? Then all ex post facto penal laws are justified; for no one
dared ever propose such a law, unless he thought, or affected to think,
that the nature of the offence itself was a sufficient warning of its
criminality.

We cannot quit the subject without adverting to a flagrant
misrepresentation in the Times, respecting the strike now taking place
at Derby; on which there has been some controversy between that paper
and Mr. Robert Owen.[†] It is generally known to those who have attended
to the subject, though not perhaps to the public, that, in the present
instance, the suspension of work was not the act of the workmen, but of
the manufacturers; a numerous body of whom, on learning that a Trades’
Union had been established, agreed to refuse employment to all who were
members of it. The Times, however, in direct contradiction to the fact,
represents the strike as having originated with the men. “A considerable
body,” says that journal, (14th April,) “of the workmen of Derby struck
for wages which their masters could not grant. They were accordingly
discharged, as belonging to the hostile Union, and other persons were
found willing to occupy their places at the wages which they refused to
take.” This being denied by Mr. Owen, the Times reiterated the
assertion, and affirmed that, on inquiry, he would find that before the
masters resolved upon discharging all men belonging to the Union, an
attempt had been made by that body to impose conditions on the masters.
We found it difficult to believe that such an assertion would have been
made without some foundation in fact, and we therefore applied for
information to a Derby manufacturer,[‡] who is not a party to the
combination of the masters, and whose workmen, though they belong to the
Union, have not ceased to work. He states positively that no advance
Edition: current; Page: [211] of wages has been demanded; that the
turn-out was solely by the masters; and that the “printed tariff of
wages, and list of other conditions,” which the Times speaks of, never
existed as an act of the Union, nor, to his knowledge, at all. He also
(though this is of less importance) contradicts another assertion of the
Times, that the masters “gave their workmen a considerable time to
consider the steps which they were taking, before they invited other
hands from the country to supply their place.”[*] The new hands were
invited immediately, though, of course, some time elapsed before they
could arrive.

We do not attempt to account for this perversion of the truth. It is
difficult to imagine any sufficient motive in the case, for being guilty
of it wilfully. The assertion was probably made at first rashly and in
ignorance, and the writer afterwards had not candour to own that he had
been in the wrong.

*     *     *     *     *


22nd April
 The Church-Rate Abortion

During the first week after the reassembling of parliament, Ministers
were beginning to regain some of their lost reputation; but they have
not known how to keep it long: yesterday has swept it away. In spite of
many good deeds, their character is always bankrupt. The moment they see
a balance accumulating in their favour, they make such large draughts
upon it, that they have soon overdrawn their account. Lord Althorp’s
astonishment at the ill reception of this emanation of his legislative
wisdom by the organs of the Dissenters in the House, was curious
enough.[†] Could a person live in England, and look round him, and
expect any thing else? But when Lord Althorp looks round him, he sees
only a few Whig families, and his officials in Downing-street. In every
other street in London it would be considered self-evident, that when a
government waits and does nothing until the whole country is preparing
to refuse a tax, taking off only half the tax will no longer do.

This is no fiscal question: it is not pecuniary relief that is demanded.
The Dissenters object to being taxed at all, for the support of a
favoured sect: they do not complain of paying too much, but of paying
any thing. Was it likely, then, that because a part of the tax, which
was expended, it seems, on mere superfluities, is to be remitted, they
would submit, not only to paying the remainder, but to having it fixed
upon them for ever, and losing the power of controuling it by their
votes in the vestry, or even by a vote of the House of Commons? Mr.
Stanley says, if there Edition: current; Page: [212] is to be a Church
Establishment, the churches must be kept in repair by the State; for (he
actually said it) keeping the churches in repair, is the meaning of
having a Church Establishment.[*] If that be true, it will be no injury
to the Church Establishment not to pay the clergy; who we hope will give
up their revenues, and in return we will engage to vote as much for
repairing the churches as will give Mr. Stanley full satisfaction. But
while the Church retains those national endowments, the possession of
which is every day more and more strongly contested against her, the
least which the people will be content with, even as a temporary
compromise, is that she shall not ask from them any thing out of their
own pockets besides. She must pay her expenses out of her own funds,
which are amply sufficient to afford it; or, if that be contested, it is
a poor compliment to the Church, if, while the Dissenting sects
willingly maintain without any compulsion each of them its own Church
Establishment, the sect to which almost all the richest families in the
country belong cannot raise by voluntary offerings even a small
supplementary contribution towards the support of theirs. If such be the
fact, the established sect must be the feeblest and least numerous of
the sects; and is convicted of only making up its account of numbers, by
crediting itself with the great multitude of those who care for no
religion at all.

The minority against the Ministerial project was 141; and the debate was
one of the most spirited of the session. Mr. Whittle Harvey’s
denunciation of the trimming policy of Ministers was highly
effective.[†] Mr. Gisborne, one of the most consistent and earnest
reformers in the House, and one who is not, like many of the liberal
members, afraid to utter a word which may be unpalatable to the enemies
of his opinions, made a simple, straightforward, and unpretending
declaration of hostility to the principle of a Church Establishment.[‡]
We wonder when any of the little knot of philosophic radicals, those of
them we mean who really are of Mr. Gisborne’s opinion, will have the
courage to say as much. We believe they will be nearly the last men in
parliament to avow publicly the opinion which they were perhaps the
first to adopt.

*     *     *     *     *


24th April
 The Beer-Houses

We have not been sparing of animadversions upon a speech of Lord Howick,
in a former page of these notes:[§] it is the more imperative on us to
acknowledge that he Edition: current; Page: [213] yesterday spoke the
first few words of common sense which have been uttered this year, upon
a subject on which, during the whole session, Whigs, Tories, and
professed Reformers, have vied with one another in loathsome cant, and
truckling to interested clamour. Most truly did Lord Howick say that if
there is a real wish to raise the morality of the labouring classes, the
way to do it is to retrace that course of bad legislation and bad
administration, by which, for the last thirty years, we have
systematically demoralized them; and of which the prime authors and
agents have been the unpaid magistracy, who now, because the beer-houses
are not under their arbitrary power, have raised a hue and cry against
their pretended immorality.[*] When we have surrounded a whole people
with circumstances which, unless they were angels, must render them
immoral; when, by the administration of the Poor Laws, we have placed
them in a position in which none of the ordinary motives to good conduct
can act upon them; when we have deprived them of almost every innocent
amusement; when, by stopping up foot-paths and inclosing commons, we are
every year excluding them more and more even from the beauties of
nature; when, by our savage punishments for killing the game we tempt
them with for our amusement, we have made our gaols little better than
what the bitter patrician sarcasm of Appius Claudius termed the Roman
prisons, the domicilium plebis;[†] when, by whatever we have attempted,
for them or against them, well meant or ill meant, we have been
constantly labouring to alienate them from us, it is with a good grace,
is it not, that, after letting loose the torrent, we attempt to dam it
up with a straw? Make the people dishonest, make them disaffected, and
then fancy that dishonesty and disaffection will be at fault for want of
a place to meet in! With one hand turn virtue out of doors, and with the
other try to refuse an entrance to vice!

We admit to title in a government like ours, or in higher classes such
as ours, to legislate for the morals of the people. They do not know
enough of the people. They do not feel enough with the people. Nobody is
qualified to be a censor over the morals of persons whose ways of
thinking, whose feelings, whose position, whose very means of living and
daily occupations, he does not understand. All the judgments of our
higher classes respecting the working people, are made in ignorance of
the essential circumstances. Nine out of ten of those judgments, though
clothed, even to the parties themselves, with the disguise of morality
and conscience, originate in some interest or some fear relating not to
those whom they persuade themselves that they are concerned for, but to
the higher classes themselves. Their attempts to exercise a guardianship
over public morals by acts of parliament, always end in some curtailment
of the people’s liberty, never in any improvement of their morality.
Does not even the Chancellor propose, and think Edition: current; Page:
[214] himself extremely moderate for proposing no more, that the poor
shall be excluded from the pleasures of social enjoyment, by being
prevented from drinking their beer in the only place where they can ever
meet for social purposes, the place where they buy it?[*] We can
conceive few regulations more exasperating, to any population not
accustomed to be trampled on and treated like dirt, than that which Lord
Brougham recommends, and claims credit for having always advocated.

We object altogether to these attempts to be religious and moral at the
expense of the working people. Let us first mend our own ways. Let us
enable ourselves to stand erect without shame in the presence of the
immorality which we complain of, by washing our hands of all
participation in producing it. Let us cease to make vice by wholesale,
and we may leave off this silly skirmishing with it in detail. Make it
the labourer’s interest to be frugal and temperate, and you will not
need to make his cottage his prison, in order to keep him from wasting
his wages and getting drunk. Accustom him to look to himself and not to
you for his means of subsistence, and he will not go out at night,
either from his cottage or from the beer-house, to fire your stacks
because you do not give him enough. But continue to sow tares and you
need not expect to reap wheat. Go on teaching the labourer that his
wages are to be regulated by his wants, not by the market value of his
labour, and he will consider you a robber and an oppressor if your wants
are better cared for than his. Let him know that if he spends all you
will give him more, if he saves anything you will give him nothing, and
he must be a fool, on any worldly calculation, if he denies himself any
indulgence within his reach. We do not say, reform all your dealings
with the poor; we are not such visionaries as to expect it: we say,
reform the Poor Laws alone; try the effect of that for two or three
years, and, in heaven’s name, a truce with the beer-house purism for
that period.

*     *     *     *     *


25th April
 Repeal of the Union

The first person who drove a coach with six horses, was thought a
wonderful man; and so was the first person who spoke for six hours. But
after him of the coach-and-six, came he of the coach-and-eight; and
coaches and six became very ordinary phenomena. So true is it, that man
has never yet done that which man may not hope to surpass! No one has
yet tried the daring experiment of an eight hours’ speech, and it is
still a problem whether mortal ears can stay and listen for so long. But
Lord Brougham’s achievement has been now proved to be nothing
extraordinary.[†] He has met with his equals in Mr. O’Connell and Mr.
Spring Edition: current; Page: [215] Rice, and no unworthy rival even in
Mr. Emerson Tennent.[*] The two former gentlemen spoke each an entire
night, the latter two-thirds of one. We know not if all the rest of the
debate is to be upon this scale, or if the remaining 103 Irish members
intend to bestow an equally large share of their wisdom and eloquence
upon the House. If so, we shall not have to trouble our readers with any
more Notes for several months to come. In the mean time, we will venture
on a few words, which we are certain will not be said by any one who
will vote either for Mr. O’Connell’s motion, or for Mr. Spring Rice’s
amendment; and which, although they can be said in less than six hours,
are, we think, more to the point than any part of what it took each of
the above gentlemen all night to say.

The object of those who call for a repeal of the Legislative Union is,
to have all the advantages of being united with England and Scotland
without paying any part of the price. They wish to be defended by
British money and British troops; to have their produce admitted duty
free into the British market, while that of all other nations is
excluded; to have all the rights of citizenship throughout the British
dominions; to have all offices and honours open to them in the more
powerful country; to have their indigent population subsisted, and found
in money to pay their rents, with the bread which they take out of the
mouths of British labourers; all this they want to have, and along with
it the power to vote no more taxes than they please, and govern
themselves as they please, without our having any right to be consulted.
Now, these are not terms which will suit us: we must decline bearing all
the burthens of the connexion, and leaving to Mr. O’Connell and his
associates all the benefits. We are ready for either extreme, only this
unhappy medium will not do for us. Great Britain and Ireland shall
either be one country or they shall be two countries; only they shall
not be the one or the other according as it suits Mr. O’Connell. They
must be one people, united under one legislature and one executive, or
all connexion must cease, and England and Ireland become as foreign to
one another as England and France. If we were wise, we should prefer the
latter side of the alternative for our own sake; if we were honest, we
should choose the former side of it for the sake of Ireland.

We have never been able to understand the vast benefits which Great
Britain is supposed to derive from her connexion with Ireland. Her
commerce we should have, if the two countries were separated; the
interests of the Irish landlords would not allow them to deprive
themselves of the principal vent for their produce. Financially we not
only gain nothing by the connexion, but it is the heaviest of the
burthens we have to bear; half our army is kept up solely on account of
Ireland; a full third of it is constantly stationed in the country. If
it be as a military post that the possession of Ireland is deemed
important, it would cost us less to conquer the Edition: current; Page:
[216] island at the beginning of every war, than it costs us in a very
few years to govern it in time of peace.

But we have no right to keep a nation in leading-strings till she has a
giant’s strength, teach her by our perverse treatment all quarrelsome
and rebellious and ungovernable propensities, and then let her loose to
do herself a mischief. We have been far too guilty in our treatment of
Ireland, to be entitled to shake her off, and let her alone abide the
consequences of our misconduct. We are bound not to renounce the
government of Ireland, but to govern her well; if indeed we are too weak
or too base for that, rather than continue to govern her as we have
done, we ought to leave her to herself. And perhaps we have let the time
slip away. By governing Ireland ill for so many centuries, we have made
it so difficult to govern her well, that we may be compelled to renounce
the attempt.

When one country, and, as the case implies, a less civilized one, falls
under the power of another, there are but two courses which can
rationally be taken with her. She is either fit to be incorporated with
the more powerful country, to be placed in a state of perfect equality
with her, and treated as part of herself, or it is best for her to be
governed despotically, as a mere province. Either Ireland was
sufficiently advanced in civilisation to be fit for the same kind of
government for which we were fit, and if so she ought to have been
treated exactly like Scotland or Yorkshire; or she was in that stage of
advancement at which absolute subjection to a more civilized and a more
energetic people, is a state more favourable to improvement than any
government which can be framed out of domestic materials; and if so, she
ought to have been governed like India, by English functionaries, under
responsibility to the English Parliament. She would then have been
habituated to government on fixed principles, not by arbitrary will;
would at an early period have obtained security to person and property;
would have rapidly advanced in all the arts of life; would have known
the protection of law, and learned to value it. She would have become
civilized, would have acquired all those qualifications for
self-government she now has not, and would long ere this have either
achieved her independence by a successful contest like the United
States, or been admitted to real, not nominal, equality, as an integral
part of the kingdom of Great Britain.

But we, as usual, took that middle course which so often unites the
evils of both extremes with the advantages of neither. We did not govern
Ireland as a province of England, but we did put the military force of
England at the disposal of an indigenous oligarchy, and delivered to
their tender mercies, bound hand and foot, the rest of the people. We
did not give the people, in lieu of their savage independence, the
despotism of a more cultivated people; we left them their own barbarous
rulers, but lent to those barbarians the strength of our civilisation to
keep the many in subjection. In this one pervading error, not to call it
crime, lies the philosophy of Irish history. A country may be improved
by freedom; or it may be improved by being brought under the power of a
superior people: the greater part of Edition: current; Page: [217] the
Roman empire was raised from a comparatively savage state by being
brought under Roman dominion. But there is not an instance in history of
a native government supported by foreign force, which did not become a
curse to its subjects. The best government which the mind of the nation
can produce, may be a very bad one; but if it be relieved from the only
check upon a bad government, the dread of its subjects; if it be propped
up by the military strength of a more powerful people, who allow it to
govern as it pleases, and only step in to shield it from the
consequences, there is generated a prodigy of odious tyranny, such as in
no other combination of circumstances could possibly exist. It is so
found in the native states of India, a country in many respects bearing
no slight resemblance to Ireland; and that it has been so found in
Ireland, the whole of Irish history, and the habits of the whole Irish
people, high and low together, bear witness.

By persisting in this wretched system from century to century, we have
lost the opportunity of preparing the Irish nation for self-government.
They have not acquired that experience of lawful rule, and that
reverence for law, without which no people can be any thing but,
according to their physical temperament, savages or slaves. In England,
notwithstanding the defects of our laws and of their administration, the
law, if thought of at all, is always thought of as the shield of the
oppressed. In Ireland it has never been known but as an additional
engine in the hands of the oppressor. This is not declamation or
exaggeration, but a matter-of-fact statement of the feeling which is in
the people’s minds. What they want is, what they have never yet had,
protection for the weak against the strong. When they have had this for
a sufficient time, they will be ripe for every other political benefit;
but that is the condition which must precede all others. That benefit
they would even now most readily obtain, if they were treated as an
English province; if all the powers of government in the island were in
the hands of functionaries responsible to England alone, and not one of
whom should be an Irishman.

But this cannot be. Though the habits of civilisation, and its powers,
are far from always propagating themselves by proximity, its aspirations
do. We have managed to prevent Ireland from being ripe for
self-government; we have not been able to prevent her from demanding it.
Communication with England has stimulated the democratic spirit to a
premature growth, before the country had reached the point of
advancement at which that spirit grows up spontaneously. And we, instead
of employing our opportunities to hasten forward the civilisation of
Ireland, have, by our deplorable misgovernment, left her far more
destitute of the feelings, ideas, and modes of conduct of a civilized
people, than she probably would have been if we had managed her avowedly
as an estate for our own benefit. We now find her in that unhappy state,
quâ nec mala nec remedia ferre potest;[*] unfit for freedom, yet
resolved to be no longer enslaved. And in that state we seem Edition:
current; Page: [218] likely to leave her; for as there appears no
prospect, for a long time to come, of our finding statesmen who can
apply intellects above those of babies to the government of a country
which, like ours, could go on almost without any government at all—it is
vain to hope for such as shall redeem a people for whom every thing is
still to be done, for whom every thing has first to be undone; among
whom opinion and conscience and habit, instead of doing, as with us,
much more for the ends of government than government itself, are more
obstacles than helps; a people whose national character has run wild,
and in many of its most important elements has yet to be created; and,
to crown all, who have (and no wonder if they have) the strongest
prejudices against the only rulers from whom any kind of good
government, of which in their present state they are susceptible, can
easily come.

It will be far rather the good fortune of Ireland than our merit, if a
connexion, hitherto so unprofitable to both countries, shall be able to
subsist until a new wisdom shall arise in the councils of England, and
the means of rendering our influence in Ireland a blessing to the Irish
people shall be sought with sincerity, and with a determined purpose
that when found they shall be employed.

*     *     *     *     *


NO. IV, JUNE, 1834


1st May
 The Press and the Trades’ Unions

Whatever may be the case in other matters, in politics we believe that
mankind are oftener led into danger by being afraid of it, than by being
careless about it: to escape the tiger, they fly into the tiger’s mouth.
Most empires have been lost through over-anxiety to keep them: most
revolutions have been provoked, by conduct dictated by the fear of
revolution. But bodies of men seldom learn wisdom from the errors of
their predecessors: the same blunders are repeated, whenever the same
circumstances recur. The middle classes of this country, whose opinions
and sentiments are represented by the daily press, are repeating the
very same series of errors by which almost all governing bodies have
been ruined.

By the present institutions of England, the powers of government reside
in the people of property, to the exclusion of those who are said to
have no property; being dependent for the whole or the chief part of
their subsistence on bodily labour. Of this power, which is shared among
the people of property, the people of large property had formerly
engrossed nearly the whole, and have still much more than their just
portion; whereby they are enabled to keep up for their own benefit, many
bad institutions and bad practices, injurious both to the people of
small property and to the excluded class, the people of no property,
viz. those whose principal property consists in their bodily faculties.
The liberals among the people Edition: current; Page: [219] of small
property, are those who think, not that property, but that large
property, should not confer so much power as it does at present. Now, as
the most numerous and poorest class has also an interest in reducing the
exorbitant power which is conferred by large property, since by doing so
they would get rid of the abuses, such as Corn Laws and the like, with
which they are oppressed, not for the benefit of the owners of property
generally, but of a small minority of that number; this constitutes a
common object, for which all classes, not directly interested in these
abuses, might advantageously co-operate, adjourning the settlement of
their own separate differences until after the victory.

It is very natural, however, that the working classes, even at this
early stage in the developement of their collective intellect, should
feel that their real position in society depends upon something far
deeper than the redress of any of the grievances which the majority of
their superiors have in common with them. It depends upon the relation
which may be established between them and the people of property
generally. It depends, not upon the manner in which their superiors
share the powers of government, they being excluded; but upon whether
they themselves have power enough, by political institutions or
otherwise, to secure due consideration for their interests on the part
of those, be they great proprietors or small proprietors, who make the
laws and appoint officers for their administration.

A person must be a poor judge of human affairs, who can fancy that this
point has been attained now; that the labouring multitude have now more
than sufficient weight in the commonwealth to secure a just attention to
their grievances; and sufficient to warrant a fear that their supposed
interests or their opinions, will be allowed unjustly to prevail over
those of any other part of the nation. On the contrary, they have
notoriously but just emerged from a state in which they had no power of
claiming attention from any one; in which laws were made, avowedly to
prevent them from taking the commonest means of improving their
condition; in which their education was reputed dangerous to church and
state; in which they were actually kept at home, like cattle belonging
to a master, for their very emigration was illegal;[*] in which no
legislative measure ever passed merely for the good of the working
classes, when no powerful section of their superiors had an interest in
it; in which their opinions were never appealed to but when some party
of the aristocracy wanted a popular cry. We are not so far from this
state yet. The shadow of it is still upon us. When we see indications
that the working classes are beginning to be counted for too much in the
calculations of politicians, we shall think it time to take precautions
against that danger. At present we should as soon think of looking out
for a substitute against the time when the coal fields shall be
exhausted. The people of property are the stronger now, and will be for
many years. All the danger of injustice lies from them, and not towards
them. Nothing Edition: current; Page: [220] but the progressive increase
of the power of the working classes, and a progressive conviction of
that increase on the part of their superiors, can be a sufficient
inducement to the proprietary class to cultivate a good understanding
with the working people; to take them more and more into their councils;
to treat them more and more as people who deserve to be listened to,
whose condition and feelings must be considered, and are best learned
from their own mouths; finally, to fit them for a share in their own
government, by accustoming them to be governed, not like brute animals,
but beings capable of rationality, and accessible to social feelings.

But this is a mode of treatment which ruling classes never yet could
reconcile themselves to adopting voluntarily, with those who are subject
to them. When they see a power growing up, which is not wholly under
their control, their first impulse always is, fear; their second, anger.
The middle classes of London, through their organs the London
newspapers, are now manifesting both these feelings, on the subject of
the Trades’ Unions.

The Trades’ Unions attempt to raise wages; and must fail in the attempt.
What then? Surely it is highly desirable to raise wages. If it cannot be
done by the means they adopt, teach them better means. But when were
persons who had committed no crime, ever remonstrated with by any one
who meant them well, in the manner which the Times has adopted, for
instance, on the Tailors’ Strike?[*] Is that a tone in which to point
out to people who are pursuing a desirable end, that the means by which
they are pursuing it, cannot succeed? It is obvious that the writer of
the article in this morning’s paper, is not roused to such excess of
indignation because the means which the people are trying cannot
succeed; he would be ten times more angry if they could succeed. He
actually compares the Unions to the landlords’ monopoly, and complains
that the rise of wages, if they could obtain it, would be a tax on the
consumer! Why, so much the better. Let there be no force or fraud, but,
within the limits of an honest bargain, we are altogether for the bees
against the drones. If a person who has a commodity to sell, can,
without shutting out competitors, by mere voluntary agreement with those
competitors, fix his own price, why should he not? certainly it is no
reason, that the sellers in this case are nine-tenths of the community
in number, are (to say no more) the least favoured part of it in the
present distribution of the produce, and are those who, by their labour,
produce all commodities whatever. But the misfortune is, that they
cannot, by any such contrivances, raise the price of their commodity. No
combination can keep up the value of an article, when the supply exceeds
the demand. But instead of teaching them on what their condition
depends, those who ought to be their instructors rail at them for
attempting to better it. They say, indeed, that it is only for using
wrong means; but so, from slave-traders upwards, those who wish to keep
their fellow-creatures in a degraded condition, always say.

The tone which we condemn, may be in a great measure the result of
thoughtlessness, but it is not the less the index to a habitual feeling.
This feeling Edition: current; Page: [221] must be got rid of, or the
next generation, perhaps the present, will severely suffer for it.

*     *     *     *     *


2nd May
 Sir Robert Heron’s Motion, and Mr. Bulwer’s Amendment[*]

The proposition of Sir Robert Heron, for giving to the King the
nomination of a certain number of members of the Legislature, by
annexing seats to various offices, outrages the first principle of a
Representative Government; it is pro tanto a return to the system of
nomination boroughs, though without its fraudulent pretences; and is
both really and ostensibly a mere contrivance to save Ministers from one
of the immediate inconveniences of unpopularity. The disfavour naturally
attaching to such a proposition, has undeservedly extended itself to Mr.
Bulwer’s Amendment, which is no infringement of the representative
principle, but an important auxiliary to it, and only errs by not going
far enough. That any but the representatives of the people should have
votes in the legislature, should help to make up a majority for enacting
a law, or voting away the public money, is totally inadmissible: but the
presence of all the great officers of state in both Houses, to answer
for their measures, to be called to account for their conduct, and to
give promptly the information which Parliament may require, and which
can be given on the spot by no persons but those practically conversant
with the public business, would be not an encroachment upon the
privileges of Parliament, but an extension of them; and would add to the
securities for good government, by ensuring a more thorough probing of
the measures and acts of the government, and by making the struggle
which may decide the fate of a ministry a conflict of principals, not
subordinates.

In France, where the framers of the constitution, having an altogether
new system to construct, were not restricted to the choice of means
already sanctioned by usage, all cabinet ministers, whether peers or
commoners, are entitled to be present and to speak in both Houses,
though not to vote in either unless they are regularly members. It is
not found that this regulation diminishes the desire of members of the
ministry to obtain the suffrages of electors; every minister who is not
a peer, always presents himself to some constituency, and succeeds
sooner or later in becoming a member of the representative Chamber. But
the manner in which the rule works is this: The real head of each
department is enabled to be present in whichever House his conduct is
under discussion; to answer questions, and defend his own measures. Lord
Grey himself would be obliged to undergo the “badgering” of a popular
assembly in person, and not merely by deputy. In every Edition: current;
Page: [222] branch of the public service the principal would have to
make his own defence, instead of having it made for him (worse, or
perhaps better, than he could make it) by a comparatively irresponsible
subordinate.

There is another peculiarity in the practice of the French Parliament,
which has a beneficial effect. Whenever any measure is brought forward
by the Government collectively, the Government may, for the purposes of
that one measure, be represented by whomsoever it pleases. Any number of
persons may be named King’s Commissioners for the debate on that
particular bill, and if so named, may be present during its discussion,
along with the Ministers, and with the same privilege of speaking but
not voting. What is gained by this is, that the real framers of the
measure, those officers of Government who are most conversant with the
details of the subject, and to whose suggestion every part of the bill
except its leading principles was probably due, are present to give
their own reasons for their own propositions; not as with us where those
reasons come before Parliament and the public at second hand, through a
minister, probably altogether ignorant of the minutiae of the question,
until crammed by that very subordinate, who is not present to state the
considerations which influenced him with the freshness and the clear
convincing decisiveness belonging to one who knows the subject by his
own knowledge. It is pitiable to see how, for want of some such
regulation, the discussion of great public questions is often mismanaged
in our Parliament, from the imperfect manner in which heads of
departments understand or are able to state the grounds of their own
measures. This is perhaps inevitable, overburdened as they are with
variety of business. If so, there is the greater reason to allow them
every attainable help for stating their case fully and with effect.

The subject however is of no pressing exigency. It is sufficient that
the suggestion has been put forth. The degree of attention it has met
with, will help to familiarize the popular mind with the novelty; on a
second discussion it will be no longer strange to the public; and when
the reasonableness of a proposition, without any pressing demand from
without, shall be a sufficient motive to a legislative assembly for
adopting it, this principle will be introduced into our parliamentary
law. A subject of so little importance compared with a hundred others,
can afford to wait.

*     *     *     *     *


8th May
 Loss of the Registration Bills[*]

The defeat of these important improvements in the law, now for the
second time Edition: current; Page: [223] repeated, is one of the most
lamentable proofs yet afforded of the spirit of our legislature, when
left to itself, and not taken out of itself by the force of a strong
popular feeling. If there ever was a proposition recommended by the most
obvious expediency, and to which it was difficult for imagination to
conjure up even the shadow of objection, it is a measure which goes
simply and exclusively to giving publicity to all future contracts
affecting land; so that when, in the course of a generation or two, the
change shall have come into full effect, every one may know before
buying land, whether the land really belongs to the person who sells it,
and every one may ascertain before lending money on the security of
land, that the land is not already mortgaged beyond its value. The
publicity which would be given by registration, is of the same kind and
degree, which is already given to wills by the registry in Doctors’
Commons; and any one but those who are personally interested, and
therefore entitled to correct information, would be as little likely to
gratify idle curiosity by prying into the records of the one registry
office, as of the other. From the greater certainty which would be given
to all conveyances, the saving to the landowners, in annual law
expenses, would be greater than any one can conceive, who is unaware how
great a percentage every landlord now pays out of his annual rental for
the vices of the law. And hence, as well as from the increased security
to purchasers, the market price of all land would be most materially
increased. Yet the landlords, the very class who are principally, who
alone are directly interested in supplying this strange hiatus in our
legislation, are the persons who (with the aid of that large class of
members who depend for the management of their elections upon provincial
attornies) have twice rejected by a large majority, not the details of
any particular bill, but the very principle of Registration.

On the part of the landowners there are but two motives possible for
this dereliction of one of the first duties and strongest interests of
honest men. The worst of these motives is, a desire for the power of
making fraudulent sales, and fraudulent mortgages: the best is, the
pitiable weakness of not liking that other people should know the extent
of their incumbrances. Most fortunate would it have been for hundreds of
families now inextricably involved, if they had not been able to conceal
the early stages of their embarrassments. It was the puerile desire to
go on deceiving their neighbours, and keeping up the appearance of an
income they no longer possessed, which prevented them from retrenching
when retrenchment would have come in time to save them; and which has
brought the whole class into a state, in which their champion, Sir James
Graham, avers that the subtraction of twenty per cent. from their
incomes, would be their absolute ruin.[*]

On the part of the provincial attornies, who thrive by the litigation
caused by defective titles to land, and who derive all their consequence
from the management, which they now hold in their hands, of the
pecuniary affairs of the whole landed aristocracy, the motives to oppose
the publicity as well as the Edition: current; Page: [224]
simplification of titles, are more obvious, and we have no doubt, far
more consciously dishonest. The attorney, who under good laws and a good
system of judicature would be nobody, is now the most influential
personage in every small place: and the landowner, whose secrets he
knows, and whose affairs (of which the landowner himself is tremblingly
ignorant) he alone is competent to manage, is held by him in a state of
the most slavish dependence. As the soul of the licentiate Pedro Garcias
was interred with his money bags,[*] that of an English landowner,
intellect, conscience, and all, is folded up in his title deeds, and
kept in a box at his attorney’s office. He dares not call his soul his
own, for he dares not call his estate his own, without the leave of his
attorney.

It is by the influence of this pernicious class, the only one, perhaps,
whose interest as a class is radically irreconcilable with the public
good, (being indissolubly linked, not with the perfection but with the
imperfection of all the institutions for the protection of property)—it
is by this class that all the well-intended measures of the present
ministry, for straightening the crookednesses of the law, and bringing
justice home to the people’s doors, are, and will continue to be,
thwarted. In the particular instance before us, their baneful spell has
enslaved the mind of the minister to whom we owe the Reform Bill. It is
well understood that Sir John Campbell, when he became connected with
the ministry, yielded to a higher authority in giving up the
Registration Bill, while he retained and carried through all the other
law reforms which he had originated as the organ of the Real Property
Commission.[†] Earl Grey is understood to be a fanatical opponent of
Registration; as well as a fanatical adherent of the Corn Laws and of
the Usury Laws.[‡]

We cannot leave the subject of Registration, without giving due honour
to the Times for the service which it has rendered to that important
principle by its powerful advocacy.[§] That advocacy, it would be
injustice not to admit, is, on almost all questions of immediate
interest, usually given to the cause of rational improvement; and when
given, never without rendering a service to that cause, such as no other
of the periodical commentators on public affairs have it in their power
to render. The hostility of the Times to the Poor Law Bill, is an
exception to its usual soundness of practical judgment, and will be
found, we doubt not, as injurious to its own as to the public interest.
Whatever may be the merits and Edition: current; Page: [225] demerits of
the Times, there can be no question of its being by far the most potent
organ of the Movement; which, at the same time, it does not blindly
hurry on, but is incessantly pointing out to Ministers, and to the
influential classes, the means by which, while yielding to the tide of
change, they may rationally hope to temper its violence. The Times is
without doubt one of the great powers in the State. It would not be so,
if either Ministers or Opposition had the energy, the strength of will,
or the knowledge of the world, by which that journal has acquired the
ascendancy naturally given by those qualities in an age which, without
much of the exaggeration of a satirist, may be termed the age of cowards
and fribbles.

*     *     *     *     *


13th May
 Lord Brougham’s Defence of the Church Establishment

The Lord Chancellor is curiously destitute of consistency. We do not
mean by consistency, the Tory virtue of being always wrong because you
have been once wrong; we mean that quality of the intellect and of the
moral perceptions, which prevents a person from holding two conflicting
opinions at once. It was but the other day that Lord Brougham declared
himself against a National Education, because it would put an end to
voluntary contributions.[*] And now, without owning any change of
opinion, he maintains that voluntary contributions are good for nothing,
and that the State must do all.

There were some wants which the animal instincts of nature left safely
to encumber us, since they were sure of being provided for; because
hunger and thirst and other purely animal necessities, would of
themselves compel us to take means to relieve ourselves of their
pressure, and the more we felt them the more sure we were to endeavour
to provide for them; but it was not so with wants of a more refined, and
he might say nobler kind,—it was not so with respect to education; he
did not mean religious, but common secular education. On the contrary,
the more ignorant we were, the less we knew of the use of learning, and
the less we should bestir ourselves and take means to ensure the
advantages to be derived from its acquirement.[†]

This was to prove that the State ought to provide an endowed
ecclesiastical establishment: and of course, we presume, ought to
furnish common secular education also.

We subscribe to Lord Brougham’s premises, and strongly recommend them to
his own consideration. He shall hear of them again if he ever repeat his
declaration against a national provision for elementary instruction. But
adopting his principles, we differ altogether from the conclusion he
draws from them, in favour Edition: current; Page: [226] of a Church
Establishment, taking that term in its received meaning. What he said
last year in favour of the voluntary principle,[*] and what he says this
year against the voluntary principle, are at complete variance, and we
hold him to be most felicitously wrong in both.

We hold, with Lord Brougham and all other rational persons, that the
only objects fit to be undertaken by the State, which derives the
principal part of its pecuniary resources from compulsory taxation, are
those which either cannot be accomplished at all, or not so well, by the
voluntary principle. Instruction, meaning by that term the systematic
culture of the intellectual faculties, we hold to be one of these; and
to be a most proper subject for a State provision. We do not except
religious instruction; though we consider it as, of all branches of a
general course of instruction, that which least requires such a
provision, and in which the influence of Government is least likely to
be of a salutary kind. The extension of secular education thousands are
anxious to impede, and few comparatively are willing to give themselves
any trouble to promote it; but all are abundantly eager to inculcate
religion, and we may count by millions those who either by purse or
person are actively engaged in propagating their religious opinions
through all channels. On other subjects almost any teaching which could
emanate from the State, would be an improvement on what exists: on that
one subject the voluntary principle already provides, in ample measure,
instruction quite equal to any which our present statesmen seem to have
the capacity to conceive.

As to Church Establishments, such as exist in Europe, and even such as
are conceived in the abstract, by all mankind except a few closet
philosophers; we deny their claim to the title of institutions for
religious instruction. Their objects we conceive to be of a quite
distinct character, and such as not only may safely be left to the
voluntary principle, but cannot justly be provided for in any other
manner.

The Clergy, indeed, are, in a certain measure, teachers of religion, and
it is easy to conceive a clergy of whom that might be the sole office.
But the leading feature in the conception of a clergyman, in the minds
of the majority of believers in Christianity, is that of a person
appointed, not to teach them, but to go through certain ceremonies with
them; in the Catholic church to perform for them, in Protestant churches
to assist them in the performance of, the religious observances which
they consider as means of obtaining the favour of the Supreme Being. Now
this is, if anything ever was, an individual and personal concern. If
any one deems a particular kind of observances to be conducive to
salvation, and the assistance of any other person to be necessary for
the performance of them, it is for him, or those who share his
persuasion, to defray the expense. If aid be afforded by the State, it
ought to be afforded impartially; each should be assisted to support the
worship he voluntarily prefers. But in principle, this is not one of
those wants of individuals Edition: current; Page: [227] which the State
is called upon either to awaken or to relieve. It is not a matter in
which society is concerned, either by its interests or by any call of
duty; though doubtless, in the choice of a mode of worship, individuals
are determined by the general state of their intellectual and moral
nature, and in that, society has the deepest interest. Let society then
go to the fountain-head, and address itself to the cause, not to the
symptom. Let it provide adequate means, and adequate encouragement, for
the mental culture of all classes of the people, leaving it to them to
provide themselves with all helps necessary for their individual
devotions. Let it instruct the people: we do not say educate; that task
must necessarily devolve upon the family; a State never educates, except
by the general spirit of its institutions. But it can instruct; and by
instruction it can not only form the intellect, but develope the moral
perceptions.

We know of no branch of the general culture of the mental faculties,
which is not a fit subject for a State provision. People may be trusted
to themselves to learn whatever is necessary for gaining their daily
bread. The instruction which is intended to form, not human beings, but
tradesmen and housewives, need not, except to the very poor, be afforded
by a State establishment. Professional instruction may be left to the
competition of the market; if we except a few professions, such as
physicians, and schoolmasters, in which the purchaser is not a competent
judge of the quality of the article. But all instruction which is given,
not that we may live, but that we may live well; all which aims at
making us wise and good, calls for the care of Government: for the very
reason given by the Lord Chancellor; that the majority have neither the
desire, nor any sufficient notion of the means, of becoming much wiser
or better than they are.

*When we say that instruction of all kinds, connected with the great
interests of man and society, ought to be provided by the State, we by
no means (as we have already observed) except religious instruction. We
see, indeed, in the present state of the public mind, formidable
obstacles to including in any course of public teaching, such religious
instruction as shall not be worse than none. But difficulties arising
not from the nature of the case, but from the literal and dogmatic
character and sectarian spirit of English religion, must not hinder us
from asserting in speculation, if we cannot realize in practice, a great
principle. An important, if not the most important part of every course
of public instruction, is that which is intended to awaken and to
enlighten the conscience, or principle of duty. This essential part of
national instruction must either be omitted entirely, or it must be such
as does not clash with the moral convictions of the majority of the
educated classes. A country must be in a wretched state, in which the
best moral instruction Edition: current; Page: [228] which can be
afforded consistently with this condition, is not better than none at
all. But in all Christian countries, the prevalent moral convictions,
the best conceptions popularly entertained of the rule of life, are
thoroughly interwoven with, and in great part founded upon, religion. To
exclude religious instruction, is therefore to exclude moral
instruction, or to garble it, and deprive it of all systematic
consistency, or to make it of a kind decidedly objectionable to the
majority of the educated classes.

It is true mankind differ widely on religion; so widely that is
impossible for them to agree in recommending any set of opinions. But
they also differ on moral philosophy, metaphysics, politics, political
economy, and even medicine; all of which are admitted to be as proper
subjects as any others for a national course of instruction. The falsest
ideas have been, and still are, prevalent on these subjects, as well as
on religion. But it is the portion of us all, to imbibe the received
opinions first, and start from these to acquire better ones. All that is
necessary to render religion as unexceptionable a subject of national
teaching as any of the other subjects which we have enumerated, is, that
it should be taught in the manner in which all rational persons are
agreed that every other subject should be taught—in an inquiring, not a
dogmatic spirit—so as to call forth, not so as to supersede, the freedom
of the individual mind. We should most strongly object to giving
instruction on any disputed subject, in schools or universities, if it
were done by inculcating any particular set of opinions. But we do not
conceive it to be the object of instruction to inculcate opinions. It is
the grossest abuse of the powers of an instructor, to employ them in
principling a pupil, (as Locke calls it in his Essay on the Conduct of
the Understanding,)[*] a process which tends to nothing but enslaving
and (by necessary consequence) paralyzing the human mind. An enlightened
instructor limits his operations in this respect to apprizing the
learners what are the opinions actually entertained; and by
strengthening their intellects, storing their minds with ideas, and
directing their attention to the sources of evidence not only on every
doubtful, but on every undisputed point, at once qualifies and
stimulates them to find the truth for themselves. Let the teaching be in
this spirit, and it scarcely matters what are the opinions of the
teacher: and it is for their capacity to teach thus, and not for the
opinions they hold, that teachers ought to be chosen. The most
enlightened pupils have often been formed by the most mistaken teachers.
We repeat, it is a total misunderstanding of all the objects of teaching
to suppose that it has anything to do with impressing the teacher’s
opinions. These may be all true, and yet not only may be, but if the
inculcation of them be what the teacher considers his duty, probably
will be, so taught as to have no effect upon the understanding but to
contract and fetter it; while, on the Edition: current; Page: [229]
contrary, we are so far from apprehending any bad effect from teaching
even the falsest religion, in an open, free spirit, that we should
hardly object, under a good method of teaching, to a professorship of
astrology.

All this, we grieve to say, is (not we trust) useless, but, with respect
to any hope of immediate application, wholly unpractical. We hold it
utterly unavailing, in the present state of the national mind, to hope
for any national religious instruction, not calculated, in a most
eminent degree, to narrow and pervert the intellect and feelings. In
Prussia, such things may be; for not only does the spirit of free
inquiry pervade both the institutions of that people, and the popular
mind, but there is no exclusiveness, because there is no literalness in
their religion; no German values dogmas for their own sake, nor cares
for any thing in a religious system but its spirit. In Prussia,—will an
Englishman believe it?—the two great divisions of the Reformed Church,
the Lutheran and the Calvinistic, in the year 1817, by a voluntary
agreement, actually united themselves into one church.* This most
astonishing fact speaks of a state of religion, to which that which is
almost universal in our own country, presents, unhappily, a diametrical
contrast.

To speak no longer of Prussia, or Utopia, or any other purely ideal
model, but of England; looking at the English Ecclesiastical
Establishment as an existing fact, as part of the present machinery of
society, which must either be made available for the purposes of
society, or swept away; and considering, not whether we would establish
such an institution if we had to begin de novo, but in what manner we
would deal with it now when it exists; we should not press for its
abolition, if either in its own councils or in those of the State we saw
the faintest glimpse of a capacity to perceive and understand the real
religious wants of the country. That moral influence of the State over
the clergy, which has been used solely to purchase the sanction of
religion for existing political institutions, and even for existing
Ministries might, by an enlightened Government, be made largely
available to improve the spirit of the popular religion. By bringing
forward into stations of dignity and influence those among the clergy in
whom religion assumed the most generous and the most intellectual form,
a Government in whom the people had confidence, might do much to
unsectarianize the British nation. But this is supposing a Government
far wiser than the people, and it is much if we can hope that ours will
not be inferior to them. The Establishment, in its present state, is no
corrective, but the great promoter of sectarianism; being itself, both
in the exclusiveness of its tenets, and in the spirit of the immense
majority of its clergy, a thoroughly sectarian institution. Its very
essence is subscription to articles, and the bond of union by which it
holds its members together is a dead creed, not a living Edition:
current; Page: [230] spirit. We would rather not have any changes which
left this unchanged; and any change in this we shall not see.
Generations would be required to reform the principles of the Church; to
destroy it will only be the work of years.

We have wandered far from our original topic, the Lord Chancellor’s
speech. That speech is itself the strongest of confirmations of the
hopelessness of any improvement in the Church through the influence of
the State. Here is a man, confessedly of mental endowments far superior
to any other of the ministry, perhaps to any one who is likely to be in
the ministry; and he, in a discussion involving the very existence of
the Church Establishment, a discussion so naturally suggesting every
topic connected with the religious condition of the country, the
tendencies of the age in respect to religion, and what is to be desired,
or may be done, in respect to any of those tendencies—what does he find
to say? Nothing but the veriest common places, familiar to every
schoolboy, on the advantages of some Establishment or other. Not a word
either of general and comprehensive theory, applicable to all times, or
of statesman-like estimation of the exigencies of the present time.
Neither the philosophy of the question, nor its immediate practical
policy.

The Primate followed, with a speech of which naïveté was the most
prominent characteristic. He wondered how it was that “while Churchmen
entertained the most friendly feeling towards Dissenters, and addressed
them in a friendly spirit, the Dissenters should manifest such personal
hostility to Churchmen.” It was true that Churchmen thwarted the
Dissenters in all their wishes, but then it was entirely for their good.
He, for instance, and most of the other bishops, had resisted the repeal
of the Test and Corporation Acts: “not,” however, “from any feeling of
hostility towards Dissenters, but because they conceived the measure
would be productive of injury as regarded the general policy of the
country.”[*] The Dissenters, however, dislike being trampled upon, even
when it is from such laudable and disinterested motives. As to the
question, which side feels most resentment, we see no proof that the
most hostile feeling is on the side of the Dissenters, but we should
feel neither surprised nor indignant if it were so. The Archbishop is
probably the first who ever thought it wonderful that the party in
possession should be in the better temper. When one brother has given to
the other the outside of their father’s house, and taken to himself the
inside, it is amusing to see him look out of his warm place upon the
other who is shivering with cold, and profess to be astonished at so
much unbrotherly feeling.

*     *     *     *     *

Edition: current; Page: [231]


14th May
 Mr. William Brougham’s Bills for a Registry of Births, Deaths, and Marriages[*]

There are people who would have all aggrieved persons and classes
measure their demands, not by what they are entitled to, but by what it
suits the convenience of Ministers to give. The course of events is now
affording a series of most signal discomfitures to such counsellors. The
Dissenters had scarcely a chance for the removal of their minor
grievances, until they commenced agitating against the greatest
grievance of all. Now, most of the little boons to which they were
advised to limit their pretensions, are flung to them en masse in a sort
of panic, and they are most rapidly hastening on their final object, the
equalization of all sects by the abolition of a Sectarian Establishment.
Yet there are people, and Dissenters too, who still call upon them, for
their own sake, to be “moderate,” and to ask for no more than is
“attainable;” forgetting that what is attainable, altogether depends
upon what is demanded; that the Tories and high Churchmen will not be
“moderate” if the Dissenters are so; that Ministers are between two
contrary impulses, and are sure to yield to the stronger pressure. The
Dissenters are wise enough to know, that to a compromise there must be
two parties, and that he must be a poor dupe who asks for an inch while
his adversary takes an ell.

The Registry which will be provided by Mr. Brougham’s Bill, will supply
a grievous defect in our institutions, and one which concerns the whole
community as well as the Dissenters, though, as in most cases, if no
powerful class had been especially aggrieved by the evil, we might have
waited long enough for a remedy.

The Registers, it seems, are to be kept by the collectors of taxes. We
do not foresee any inconvenience from this arrangement, except a slight
tendency to render the Registry unpopular. But the fact is strikingly
illustrative of the total absence of machinery for the conduct of
administrative business. In France the registres de l’état civil, as
they are called, are kept by the mayor of every commune, an unpaid
officer, usually one of the principal inhabitants, who is selected by
the Crown from a Municipal Council chosen by the people. These officers,
and the préfets, who are the more direct delegates of Government, are an
agency ready prepared for collecting any information, for executing any
law, or for transacting any local business which the Legislature may
impose upon them. They are also a fit agency to look after the
performance of all duties, which the Legislature may delegate to any
other class of functionaries. But in England, when Edition: current;
Page: [232] local inquiries are to be conducted, or local business done,
which the Legislature are in earnest about, they are forced to create
special officers and grant separate salaries. Even a Factory Bill cannot
be executed without appointing Inspectors:[*] and the registration of
voters under the Reform Bill, was turned over to illiterate overseers;
revising barristers being afterwards appointed at considerable expense,
to rectify their blunders. For want again of local authorities to whom
the immediate control of all these temporary or special officers could
be confided, they make their reports directly to the Home Office; which
is thus overburdened with business of the most multifarious and
distracting kind, is unable both from the quantity and variety to give
reasonable attention to any part of it, and a “centralization” is
created of a different, but scarcely a better kind, than that which
Napoleon established in France.

Mr. Brougham’s Marriage Bill will, we presume, supersede the unfortunate
abortion produced by Lord John Russell. It is an improvement upon its
predecessor, but it goes a very little way towards placing that
important contract on its true foundation. The validity of the civil
engagement is still to depend upon the performance of a religious
ceremony, by a recognised Minister of some, though it may now be a
Dissenting, sect. The Bill merely provides for registering the
performance of the religious ceremony.

This imperfect measure may satisfy the consciences and stay the clamour
of a large portion of the Dissenters; but it is impossible that such a
settlement can be final. The following intelligence, which we extract
from a Nottingham paper, and which is not the first of its kind, is an
example of the opinions and feelings which are growing up in the country
on this subject:

At Laurence-street chapel, Birmingham, on Sunday last, after the service
was over, the congregation was desired to stay, when four Dissenters
took the marriage affair into their own hands, in a very short manner.
Charles Bradley rose up and read the following document:

“Before this congregation, I, Charles Bradley, jun. give you, Emma
Harris, this ring to wear as a memorial of our marriage, and this
written pledge stamped with the impressions of the United Rights of Man
and Woman, declaring I will be your faithful husband from this time
forward.

(Signed) Charles Bradley, jun.”

Emma Harris then in turn read as follows:

“Before this congregation I, Emma Harris, receive this ring to wear as a
memorial of our marriage, and give you, Charles Bradley, jun., this
written pledge, stamped with the impressions of the United Rights of Man
and Woman, declaring I will be your faithful wife from this time
henceforward.

(Signed) Emma Harris.”

The same ceremony was gone through by Roger Hollinsworth and Mary Louisa
Bradley, after which the papers were signed by several witnesses, and
thus the marriage contract was made without the intervention of either
priest or clerk. It should never be forgotten that two Edition: current;
Page: [233] sisters, who married without a priest at Calverton, were
incarcerated in the county jail of Nottingham, by the unrelenting
severity of the ecclesiastical court, for more than twelve years. They
were in released in 1798. We opine, that the ecclesiastical court will
not serve Mrs. Bradley and Mrs. Hollinsworth in the same way.[*]

*     *     *     *     *


17th May
 Sir Edward Knatchbull’s Beer Bill[†]

It is scarcely credible that in the second year after Parliamentary
Reform, the reformed Parliament should, by an immense majority,[‡] be
actually setting itself to undo what a Tory Parliament had done towards
the enfranchisement of the working classes;[§] reimposing that
censorship over the social enjoyments of the rural population, which
public indignation at the purposes to which it was perverted, had wrung
out of the hands of the county magistracy, to whom it is now again
proposed to be confided under another name and with a different
machinery.

Sir Edward Knatchbull’s proposal is to make the opening of a beer-house
depend upon the production of certificates from six ten-pound
householders, in favour of the petitioner; which certificates must be
renewed annually. These certificates are not attestations to character,
which may be demanded in the manner of subpœnaing a witness; but may be
given or withheld at pleasure; and though in populous towns any person
of creditable character would probably have little difficulty in
obtaining them, in a rural district the small number of ten-pound
householders, together with the known sentiments of the landed gentry,
render the exaction of such a condition tantamount to the entire
suppression of beer-houses. We regret to see Lord Howick chiming in with
the prevailing false sentiment; though the amendment he proposes would
be far less mischievous than the original proposition.[¶] His plan is,
not to interfere with the opening of beer-houses, but to empower the
vestry to close them, by a majority of two-thirds, on a representation
from a certain number of householders that any particular beer-house is
a nuisance. This is perhaps the least exceptionable form in which the
discretionary power of interference, proposed to be created, could
exist; and if by a clause in the Bill, the keeper of the criminated
place of entertainment were secured a public hearing in his defence, and
the right of cross-examining his accusers, with the benefit of an appeal
to the judge of assize, or to the local court when such shall be
established, Lord Howick’s proposition might not be seriously
objectionable.

Edition: current; Page: [234]
But there is in the Bill, even if it were thus amended, one fatal
provision, with which Lord Howick does not propose to interfere, and
which brands the whole measure with the double stamp of tyranny and
hypocrisy. We allude to the clauses which prohibit the houses from
selling beer to be drank on the premises.[*] The debate on this subject
was replete with cant; for the expression even of just feelings deserves
the name of cant, when the party expressing them would be confounded by
being merely taken at his word. Mr. Buckingham said that if beer is a
necessary of life, the labourer might surely fetch it home and drink it
there, for he ought not to wish to have his enjoyments separately from
his wife and from his children.[†] Very fine certainly; but we detest
fine sentiments which are never meant to be acted upon. Do we find Mr.
Buckingham, or any other supporter of the Bill, proposing to prevent all
houses from taking in labourers to drink with one another, apart from
their families? No; the object is to permit one set of houses and to
forbid others; to let the houses licensed by the magistrates retain this
obnoxious privilege, and to take it away from the remainder; to create a
monopoly of the evil they complain of, in favour of the landlords’
houses. The obvious effect, doubtless by many of the promoters of the
bill clearly foreseen and calculated upon, is to confine the sale of
beer to the landlords’ houses. The labourer, as every person of common
sense must foresee, will generally prefer the place where he can obtain
rest as well as refreshment, and where alone he can have the excitements
and the pleasures of society. Scarcely a member opened his lips in
favour of the measures who did not think it decent to disavow any wish
of restoring the former monopoly: is it possible that any one of all who
made the disavowal, should not see, that whether this be the purpose or
not, it will certainly be the effect?

We, too, detest, probably as much as these careful guardians of other
people’s morality, the selfishness with which the demoralized and brutal
part of the working population squander their earnings on their own
separate debaucheries, leaving their families in want. But if to provide
against this evil were the real object, it could be effected, not by
restraining the just liberty of the one party, but by giving a remedy to
the other. Upon proof that too much of a labourer’s earnings was spent
from home, his wife ought to have the power of demanding that a suitable
proportion of his wages should be paid, not to him, but to her, for the
support of herself and of her children. Supposing this done, we know not
why the legislature should enact, either directly or indirectly, that a
husband should have no society except that of his wife: the misfortune
is, that the privilege is not reciprocal; and it is another misfortune
that mere defects of physical arrangements prevent the married poor from
having their social as well as their domestic life in common. A time
will come, when the more general application of the co-operative
principle in Edition: current; Page: [235] household economy, will
enable the poor to command, without the equivocal instrumentality of
public houses, many of those facilities for social enjoyment, even in a
refined form, which have hitherto been the exclusive portion of the
opulent classes. The attention of all real wellwishers of the poorer
classes should be turned to this most important topic. But in the mean
time, we protest utterly against making the labourer’s cottage a place
of confinement, by refusing him shelter or harbour elsewhere.

*     *     *     *     *


19th May
 My Grandmother’s Journal

We seldom see the Morning Herald; but the number for this day
accidentally fell into our hands; and of six articles printed in large
type, the following was the purport of five. One was a twaddling defence
of the pretensions of the Church to superiority of numbers over the
Dissenters; this was the least ridiculous of the five; another was a
defence of Lord Wynford’s Sabbath-day Bill;[*] another of Sir Edward
Knatchbull’s Beer Bill. A fourth was a philippic against the Poor Law
Bill, and its “bashaws;” the fifth, a philippic against omnibuses, with
a demand that they be prohibited east of Temple Bar.[†] All this in a
single number. Any one of these opinions, except, perhaps, the last,
might singly be held by a person not absolutely destitute of reason;
each is among the extravagancies of some particular creed, when pushed
to its utmost; but no one except “My Grandmother,” could have united
them. That personage has made up her budget of opinions out of the
separate anilities of the sillier part of every existing party or
persuasion.

*     *     *     *     *


22nd May
 Death of Lafayette

There would, in any circumstances, have been something solemn and
affecting in the separation of the last link which connected us with the
dawn of American Independence and the youthful enthusiasm of French
liberty; in the extinction of the sole survivor among the great names of
the last age. But this feeling must assume a deeper character when he
who has departed from us, was the one man who stood before our eyes, and
might, it so seemed, have stood for many years Edition: current; Page:
[236] longer, the living representative of whatever was best and purest
in the spirit, and truest in the traditions of his age. Lafayette not
only had lived for mankind, but every year of his existence was precious
to them, and grievously will he be missed. His was not the influence of
genius, nor even of talents; it was the influence of a heroic character:
it was the influence of one who, in every situation, and throughout a
long life, had done and suffered every thing which opportunity had
presented itself of doing and suffering for the right, and who was ready
to repeat the same course of doing and suffering, or a severer one,
whenever called upon by duty. Such an example, in so conspicuous a
station, is ever most valuable, seldom more needful than now.

If a life made up of the most extraordinary vicissitudes, and a soul on
which prosperity and adversity vainly exerted all their most corrupting
influences, be the materials of an inspiring biography, the life of
Lafayette would be one of the noblest subjects for a writer of genius.
Even in the simplest narrative, it is in itself a heroic poem. The
different epochs of his existence would afford the finest scope to a
biographer. There would be, first, the opening period, when, at twenty
years of age, he left the attractive and brilliant life of the French
Court, to serve as a volunteer in the apparently desperate cause of the
revolted colonies of America; and when, having seen the efforts of the
noble constellation of patriots, with whom he had associated himself,
successful, almost against all hope, and not without having materially
contributed to that success, he returned, and we see him first the idol
of the people, heading the enfranchisement of his own countrymen, but
strenuously, and at all personal hazard, opposing himself to every
excess; and three years later deliberately staking life, liberty,
fortune, and the love of his countrymen, and losing all except the
first, to arrest the precipitate course of the revolution. We next
follow him to the dungeon of Olmutz, where for five years the vengeance
of an infuriated despot[*] retained him in secret captivity, without
communication by word or writing with any who loved him, or tidings from
that external world where so tremendous a drama was then enacting. Here
he remained, and remained with spirit unbroken, until, by the treaty of
Leoben, his release was made by his country part of the price of her
mercy to his unrelenting oppressor. But his country then fell upon evil
days: he could in nothing serve her, and he retired into the obscurest
private life. He reappeared at the restoration, stood once more at the
head of the friends of liberty, and was revered as their patriarch. He
saw America once more, on the fiftieth Anniversary of her liberation,
and his presence was, from one end of the Union to the other, a national
jubilee. He saw the infant people which he had nursed in the cradle,
grown into one of the mightiest empires of the earth: he lived to taste
all the enjoyment which the heartfelt gratitude and love of ten millions
of human beings could bestow. He returned to preside at another
revolution; gave a king[†] to his own country; withdrew from that king
Edition: current; Page: [237] when he abandoned the principles which had
raised him to the throne; bore up, even against the bitterness of
disappointment; and died with his hopes deferred, but not extinguished.

Honour be to his name, while the records of human worth shall be
preserved among us! It will be long ere we see his equal, long ere there
shall arise such a union of character and circumstances as shall enable
any other human being to live such a life.

*     *     *     *     *


23rd May
 Lord Althorp and the Taxes on Knowledge

Lord Althorp’s defence for voting against his recorded opinion on the
subject of the Newspaper stamps, is truly characteristic, both of the
man and of the ministry.[*] Mr. Bulwer and Mr. Roebuck, the proposer and
seconder of the motion,[†] introduced it to the House as a question of
the highest public policy, or rather above all policy, since it concerns
the ends to which government itself is but a means. They referred the
question to the interests of civilization. Lord Althorp refers it to the
interests of the revenue. The tax yielded £500,000 (or some such sum) a
year. That was his first averment. His second was, that the House did
not force him to abolish the tax, and therefore he would not. This is a
favourite argument with the leader of the House of Commons. That the
House does not force him to do his duty, is always with him a sufficient
plea against the propriety of doing it. The other day, on the subject of
the Danish claims, a question of simple pecuniary honesty, a judicial
question whether the claimants were or were not entitled to certain
monies, did not Lord Althorp tell the House, that since, contrary to his
expectation, he saw they were desirous to be honest, he was willing to
be so too?[‡] He will most uprightly do justice between man and man,
provided he is compelled.

This predicament of finding their honesty lagging behind that of the
House, is one in which Ministers are now well accustomed to find
themselves. An example of it was their ignominious defeat on Mr. Lyall’s
motion respecting the sixpences taken from the wages of merchant seamen
to support Greenwich Hospital.[§] It is scarcely credible that so
despicable a motive as dislike of the trouble of finding so small a sum
as £22,000 elsewhere, should induce men of creditable character to
volunteer, in defence of so gross an iniquity, excuses of even a grosser
iniquity Edition: current; Page: [238] than the abuse itself. The
merchant seaman may enjoy the benefit of Greenwich Hospital! Yes, if you
rob him; yes, if you kidnap him; make him a slave, and keep him in your
service by force, for wages below the honest price of his labour, until
he is lamed and made useless, and an object of charity: and, in
anticipation of this injury which you intend to inflict upon him, you
make him pay beforehand (whether or no he be the unfortunate person on
whom the misfortune will fall) a tax out of his earnings, to pay for his
maintenance when you shall have disabled him, and rendered him unfit to
gain a livelihood. The House was not base enough to let itself be
influenced by such arguments: they left Ministers in a miserable
minority; and Ministers, no longer finding themselves in the position in
which Lord Althorp was on the Danish claims, before he was forced to be
honest, have found it necessary to give way.

*     *     *     *     *


24th May
 Progress of the Poor Law Bill

The Ministry have held out, with a firmness little usual with them,
against the prejudiced hostility to Poor Law Reform. They have
compromised none of the essential principles of their measure, and their
concessions as to the details have till now been either entirely
unimportant, or positive improvements. Among the latter we must rank the
discretion given to the Commissioners of suspending the operation of the
clause by which the payment of wages out of rates is prohibited after
the 1st of June 1835.[*] The success of the whole measure might in many
places be greatly endangered, if the alternative were offered to the
pauperized population of coming entirely upon the parish, before the
introduction or improvement of the workhouse system shall have given
them adequate motives to prefer to the life of a pauper the condition of
an independent labourer.

We however observe, in the debate of last night, a tendency to a
concession of a decidedly mischievous character: we allude to the
willingness expressed by Lord Althorp, to limit the duration of the
Central Board to five years.[†] The effect of this limitation would be
to encourage all who are either prejudiced or interested in favour of
the old system, to thwart the operation of the measure; since it affords
them a hope, that if they can contrive, during the five years, to make
out a plausible case of failure against the Bill, they will be permitted
to revert to the old system, and mismanage the poor as before. There is
nothing whatever gained by the limitation; it will not buy off a single
opponent; and in principle it is absurd for Edition: current; Page:
[239] Parliament to enact that something shall terminate in five years,
which Parliament may put an end to in one month if it see cause. The
proviso will only operate in one way; as a declaration to the country,
that Ministers and Parliament are not sure they are doing right; that
they are preparing for a possible change of opinion, which is tantamount
to a warning to the friends of Ministers, not to confide in them, not to
suppose that they have duly considered the subject; and an invitation to
the enemies of the measure, by no means to relax their opposition.

The idea of limiting the duration of the Central Board is, we conceive,
erroneous in principle. The expression, “a temporary dictatorship,”
unguardedly used by some of the advocates of the Bill, was singularly
infelicitous in its application. In the first place, (as the Chronicle,
we think, observed,) who ever heard of a dictatorship under the control
of Parliament? But the Central Board may be and ought to be defended,
not as an expedient for a temporary purpose, but as in itself the best
and only proper principle of administration for a system of Poor Laws.
Assume that the Board will continue until the existing evils are
remedied, and the management of the poor thoroughly reformed: what,
except the prolongation of the same superintendence, is to prevent
affairs from relapsing by degrees into as bad a state as before? Acts of
Parliament? Declarations of the Legislature that the abuses shall
hereafter be illegal? But they have always been illegal. They have crept
in gradually in spite of the law, because the local functionaries had
strong immediate motives to introduce them, none of which motives an Act
of Parliament will or can take away; and because there was no authority
to which they were forced to submit their proceedings, and whose duty it
was to keep them within the law. And this very state of things will be
restored from the first moment that the Central Board shall be
discontinued; and will be attended of course with the same consequences.
The diffusion of sound principles, which will be the natural effect of
the present temporary reform, will retard, no doubt, this inevitable
progression, but the inroads of abuse, if more slow, will not be less
sure.

The opposition to the Bill has been feeble beyond example. We never
remember a public measure in the discussion of which every rational
argument was so completely confined to one side. We may add, that we
remember none in which the party in the wrong has been more strangely
reckless of its own reputation, both in its arguments or in its facts.
Who, for instance, would have expected to be told (as in the Times of
the 14th of May) that this Bill renders fruitless the “protracted
struggle from which the British people never ceased, until they had
succeeded in making it part and parcel of their constitution, that the
meanest subject in the realm should neither be subjected to any taxes,
nor amenable to any rules of conduct, except such as should be imposed
by the joint consent of King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament
assembled.”[*] Does the Times mean that the Poor Rates are now voted by
King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament assembled? or that the Edition:
current; Page: [240] rules which regulate relief are made by Parliament,
and not by the Magistrates and Vestries? Is it credible that any person,
not drunk with anger or intoxicating liquors, could have penned such an
assertion? It is valuable however, in one respect, as bringing into a
strong light the truth and value of constitutional clap-traps. It is
not, it never was, nor ought it to be, part and parcel of the
Constitution of any people out of Bedlam, nor was it ever dreamt of in
England, that no one should be empowered to raise money from the people,
or make rules to bind them, except Parliament. What is part of the
Constitution, is that no one can do these things except in the manner
and to the extent which Parliament may authorize; which is only saying
what we all know, that Parliament is the Sovereign.

The Times finds it very absurd to argue that the Commissioners will be
responsible, and asks, where is their responsibility if a civil action
lie not against them for injury to individuals?[*] We ask, where is the
responsibility of Ministers, or any other constituted authorities? In
the certainty of their losing their offices at the discretion of
Parliament; and the probability, if public opinion, through the
customary channels, calls for their removal. What must be the good
faith, or the discernment of a writer, who deems this no responsibility,
and who at the same time considers the magistrates responsible, because
about once a year or less, for some very gross abuse of authority, some
magistrate is called to account in the King’s Bench, and let off (for
the most part) entirely unharmed?

The Times has discovered that republicans are the principal supporters
of the Poor Law Bill, and that they support it as a means of
disorganizing society, and getting rid of King, Lords, and Commons.[†]
The present Poor Law Bill is undoubtedly approved by most of those who
judge of public measures from a consideration of means and ends, and not
from blind traditions: and if such are generally republicans, that is no
compliment to King, Lords, and Commons. But as far as we know anything
of English republicans, and there are few who have had more extensive
opportunities of knowing their sentiments, it is far truer of them that
they are republicans for the sake of such measures as this, than that
they wish for such measures because they are republicans. We have hardly
ever conversed with any English republican, who was not almost
indifferent to forms of Government, provided the interests of the mass
of the people were substantially cared for, in the degree which he
considered adequate; and if among the educated and philosophical
reformers, to whom the Times seems more particularly to allude, there be
any who desire extensive alterations in the Constitution, we believe we
may say with some confidence, that there is not one in whom that wish
does not originate in despair of seeing an effectual reform in the
inward structure of society, except by a previous bursting asunder of
its external framework. Any Edition: current; Page: [241] Ministry which
should deal with all our social evils, as the present Ministers are
dealing with one of the principal of them, by probing the evil to the
very bottom, and cutting away, cautiously but unsparingly, all that is
pernicious, would convert all the philosophical republicans: by
practically demonstrating the possibility of carrying the same practical
measures in the same efficiency, under a monarchy as in a republic, the
basis of their republicanism would be taken from under them; for the
Times, and most of those who have written against these people, utterly
mistake their character and spirit. Instead of wishing that the present
system should work ill, in order that they may obtain one, founded, as
they think, on better speculative principles, their habit is to
disregard even to excess, the nominal principle and spirit of a nation’s
institutions, provided the immediate and definite practical interests of
society are provided for by such laws, and such organs of
administration, as are conformable to their views.

*     *     *     *     *


25th May
 Honours to Science!

The Examiner, in its number of this day, (the best which has appeared
for several weeks,) denounces with a proper feeling the slavish spirit
of a correspondent of the Times, who, after a long preamble on the
importance of showing honour to science, sets forth as a distinguished
instance of it, that the King spoke to Dr. Dalton at the levee.[*] There
is something, to our minds, unspeakably degrading to the literary and
scientific men of this country, in the eager avidity with which they are
laying themselves out for the paltriest marks of court notice: those,
even, which have become ridiculous to all men of the world, and for
which they are competitors, not with the aristocracy, but with those
whom the aristocracy laugh at and despise. Think of the pitiable vanity
with which so many of these people have allowed themselves to be dubbed
Guelphic Knights. With this abject spirit in our intellectual men, who
can wonder if honour is not shown to intellect? They have put their own
value upon themselves, and have rated it at the smallest coin current in
the market.

It is a vain and frivolous notion, that of showing honour: the honour
which is worth showing is that which is felt; and that shows itself, not
by some one premeditated demonstration, but as a pervading spirit,
through the whole conduct of those who feel it. Who says it is not
important that those who are at the head of the State should have
reverence for intellect? But will they ever have that reverence until
intellect shall be the source of their own elevation? The consideration,
which is gained by nobleness of character, men of science and letters
have the same Edition: current; Page: [242] opportunities of acquiring
as other people,—the only other source of consideration is power. Do
what we will, where in any state of society the power is, there also
will the honour be. Society, with regard to the source of power, may
exist in two different states: in the one, what confers power is
intellect; in the other, wealth and station; the former state has never
yet been realized, though some societies have approached nearer to it
than others, and all are tending towards it, in proportion as they
improve; the latter, exists in England, and in most countries in Europe.
Now, is it a rational expectation that while power shall still accompany
wealth and station exclusively, the honour which always goes with power,
can be diverted from it, and become an appendage of intellect? And is it
not a mean ambition in persons of intellect to desire a merely reflected
honour, derived from the passing notice of people of wealth and station?
Precisely the same kind of honour which poets enjoyed when they were
domestics in the household of great men.

There are but two stations in the affairs of the world, which can,
without dishonour, be taken up by those who follow the pursuits of
intellect. Either intellect is the first of all human possessions, that
which in its own nature is fitted to rule, and which for the good, not
of its possessors, but of the world, ought to be exalted over the heads
of all, and to have the sole guidance of human affairs, all persons
being ranked and estimated according to the share they possess of it;
either this, or it is a mere instrument of the convenience and pleasure
of those to whom, by some totally different title, the direction of the
world’s affairs happens to belong, and is to be rated at the value which
they put upon it, in proportion to the use it is of to them, and to its
relative importance among the other things which conduce to their
gratification. Whoever deems more highly of wisdom than he deems of
rope-dancing, or at most of cotton-spinning, cannot think less of it
than that it ought to rule the world; and, knowing that to be its proper
station, he will, on the one hand, by the conscientious use of such
power as it gives him, do the utmost which an individual can do to place
it there; and, on the other, he will never, by any act of his,
acknowledge the title of any competitor; far less put up a petition that
a nod or a civil word from the usurper may be occasionally vouchsafed to
the rightful prince. The State ought to yield obedience to intellect,
not to sit in judgment upon it, and affect to determine on its
pretensions.

So long as no conventional distinctions are conferred upon intellect,
the State abstains from putting any value upon it, and leaves it to
assume its proper place, without deciding what that place is: but when
it affects to confer a distinction, and confers the very lowest in the
conventional scale, it does set a value on intellect, and rates the
highest honour which is due to intellectual attainments exactly on a par
with the lowest which can be claimed from any adventitious circumstance.
Is this the “honour to science” which scientific men should be desirous
of?

There is but one thing which Government, as at present constituted, can
do for scientific men, and that is the one thing which is not thought
of. It is absurd in the Edition: current; Page: [243] State to confer
upon them what it calls honours; but it may afford them the means of
subsistence, not as a reward, but to enable them to devote themselves to
their scientific pursuits, without hinderance from those petty
occupations which they are mostly obliged to follow for their daily
bread. Every person of scientific eminence, whose genius and
acquirements, destined at the best to perish so soon out of the world,
are in a great measure lost to it while he is living, for want of some
small provision which would keep him independent of mechanical drudgery:
every person of distinguished intellectual powers, whom society has not
sense enough to place in the situation in which he can be of the
greatest use to it, is a reproach to society, and to the age in which he
lives. It is here, if any where, that improvement may be hoped for; and
we hope it is here that we shall, in time, see it contended for.

*     *     *     *     *


28th May
 The Change in the Ministry

We have had little faith hitherto in the impression which generally
prevailed, of divisions in the Ministry, amounting to a decided
difference of principle between two sections of it. We had been so much
accustomed to find members of the Cabinet who were reputed the most
liberal, making themselves the organs of whatever was most illiberal in
its practical policy, that the present schism in the Cabinet has taken
us almost by surprise. We confess ourselves mistaken. When a body breaks
to pieces, and the parts fly off in contrary directions, there must have
been a previous tendency of each part to move in the direction in which
it is impelled the moment it is set at liberty. It is evident that one
portion of the Ministry must have been worse, and another portion must
have been better, than their collective conduct.

The Ministry will now have a new lease of popularity. If they so please,
all past errors will be considered as cancelled, and in two months from
this time they may have acquired a new character. If their future
conduct show vigour of purpose and a strong spirit of improvement, all
that they have done ill, will be imputed to Mr. Stanley and Sir James
Graham; all that they have done well, to themselves. From us, and we
believe from all the enlightened reformers, they may expect, until they
shall have had a fair trial, not only no hostility, but the most
friendly encouragement and support. They must now throw themselves upon
the people. All their strength is there; and it will not fail them.

The names which are talked of to replace the retiring Members of the
Cabinet, are of good augury. In Lord Durham and Sir Henry Parnell, the
ministry will have two men more devoted to popular objects, than almost
any other public men not decidedly numbered among radicals; and in Mr.
Abercromby, one of the most upright, strong-minded, and unprejudiced of
the members of the old opposition, and one who is thoroughly alive to
the spirit of the times.

Edition: current; Page: [244]
The change is a decided progress of the Movement, and will carry all the
great public questions several steps in advance. But what is more
important perhaps than even the change itself, is the immediate cause of
it; the general expectation that Mr. Ward’s resolution for reducing the
Temporalities of the Irish Church,[*] would have passed the House of
Commons, even in opposition to the Ministry. It is well understood that
this was what determined the retirement of the more Conservative section
of the Ministry.

*     *     *     *     *


NO. V, JULY, 1834


2nd June
 Abolition of Patronage in the Church of Scotland

Alone among all Protestant churches, the Church of Scotland for some
time was the people’s church; not the church of the aristocracy, kept
for them at the people’s expense. This privilege the Scottish people
possessed themselves of, not without a battle of several generations,
against their own aristocracy first, and next against their own and our
aristocracy combined. In the conflict, as much heroism, both of action
and endurance, was displayed, as has probably signalized any cause since
the beginning of the eternal war between right and wrong. For a century
this battle lasted, and for a century more the fruits of it were
enjoyed. The prize was kept, for about as long as it took to acquire.
But corruption crept in; the Church of Scotland proved no exception from
the evil tendencies of human affairs in general, and of the age in
particular; the tendency of power to concentrate itself in few hands,
and of what originally was sufference, to convert itself into a right,
and the tendency of the institutions of this country, since the
Revolution, to become more and more aristocratic. The appointment of the
ministers of religion gradually became private property; the Church of
Scotland followed, though at a considerable distance, the steps of the
Church of England, and progressively (for degeneracy as well as
improvement is gradual) became the laird’s church, no longer the church
of the people.

Dissent from the Church of Scotland took its rise with this departure
from the voluntary principle. The Seceders seceded from the abuses of
the Church, not from its tenets: when the ministry of religion became a
place for a great man to give away, it ceased to be a ministry for them.
But dissatisfaction spread much further than avowed dissent; and now at
length, aided by the spirit of the times, it has prevailed over the evil
influences opposed to it, and enforced a reform.

It is the good fortune of the Scottish Church, that its government is
not a Edition: current; Page: [245] monarchy or an aristocracy, but a
democracy; it depends not upon a bench of bishops, but upon a
representative assembly; and one, moreover, in which the laity as well
as the clergy have a voice. In the Scottish Church, the power to root
out evils resides in the sufferers from them, not in those who are the
creatures of the evils, and who profit by them. Accordingly, no sooner
was the evil generally recognized as an evil, than it has been forthwith
remedied. By the regulation just adopted by the General Assembly, no
patron will hereafter have the power of presenting any clergyman to a
living, whose appointment is disapproved of by a majority of the heads
of families in the parish.[*]

It is thus that a Church is to be saved, if any of the Churches can be
saved from the storm which is now, and not prematurely, rising against
them. A national endowment for the support of teachers of religion might
still be preserved, if the people, for whom the Church exists, the
people, who are the Church, were allowed even a negative voice in
determining by what body of persons, and by what member of that body,
religious instruction should be imparted to them. But the people will no
longer receive their religion from a corporation of priests, imposed
upon them as teachers by their political superiors. And, as the ruling
powers in the Church of England are incapable of opening their eyes to
this truth, that Church, as a national institution, is tottering to its
fall.

*     *     *     *     *


4th June
 Mr. Rawlinson and the Man of No Religion

In the Chronicle of to-day we read the following paragraph:

Yesterday, at Marylebone office, a poor man, far advanced in life,
suffering under the dreadful affliction of a paralytic affection, which
has deprived him of the use of one side, applied to the sitting
magistrates, Messrs. Rawlinson and Hoskins, for an order to be admitted
into Marylebone poor-house. The old man stated that he had lived in
Marylebone parish upwards of thirty-one years; and that, during the
greater portion of that period, he had been master of a flourishing
business, and spent thousands of pounds in bringing up his family. His
trade, however, went gradually to decay; and, to crown his misfortunes,
he had, in his old days, been seized with paralysis, which deprived him
wholly of the means of obtaining a livelihood, and he was now in a state
of great destitution. In this extremity he had applied to the parochial
authorities to be admitted into the workhouse, which had been refused.
Mr. Rawlinson asked Mr. King, (one of the parish officers in
attendance,) why the man had been refused admittance. Mr. King replied,
that it was in consequence of his having refused to say where his wife
was; as the Board had decided that they could not receive one without
the other. The old man said that she had run away from him, and that he
did not know where to find her. Mr. Rawlinson directed that he should be
sworn to that fact. The old man accordingly took the book in his hand.
Mr. King. “Are you a Catholic?” Old Man. “I was bred in that persuasion,
but have abjured it.” Mr. Rawlinson. “What are you?” Edition: current;
Page: [246] Old Man. “That is best known to my Maker: I am of no
religion at all.” Mr. Rawlinson. “Then I shall not compel the officers
to relieve a man of no religion. Go about your business.” He accordingly
quitted the office, sighing as he limped away.[*]

From long experience, we expect nothing from the London magistrates but
subservience to the worst feelings and lowest prejudices of the
vulgarest part of the community: and never was there a more signal
instance in point than this of Mr. Rawlinson.

If the man had been a convicted felon—an outcast from society; if his
life had been spent between the hulks and the house of correction,—if he
had been convicted at the Old Bailey, of every crime short of such as
could bring him to the gallows; and, after suffering his sentence, had
come before Mr. Rawlinson in a destitute state, claiming to be supported
by his parish, Mr. Rawlinson would not have dared refuse an order for
relief: he would have known that a magistrate is appointed to sit in
judgment, not on men’s moral characters, but on their legal rights; that
there is no statute empowering him to dispense with the laws, when they
award something to a person of bad character; and he would have resented
the very attempt to raise the question, as an irrelevancy, a cruelty
towards the unfortunate, and an insult to the understanding of the
magistrate. Such would have been his conduct if this poor man had been a
convicted criminal; but against a “man of no religion,” all is fair. An
unbeliever has no rights: the whole vicious part of the community may be
let loose with impunity to injure him: the law promises him its
protection; but the law can only act through those who administer it;
and, in his favour, it shall not be administered.

If Mr. Rawlinson thinks at all, (it is an undeserved compliment to one
who can thus act in such times as ours, to suppose him capable of
thinking,) he would most likely defend himself by saying that “a man of
no religion” must be a man of no virtue; for he will scarcely, we should
think, plead guilty to what is probably the fact, that he had no motive
but a wretched antipathy to a person who disbelieves something which he
flatters himself he believes. Here, then, on the most favourable
statement which can be made, a poor man has been treated, on a mere
presumption of immorality, in a manner which would not have been
tolerated if his guilt, instead of being presumed, were proved, and were
of the blackest kind which a person could commit, and be suffered to
live.

Let us go one step further, and notice the profound ignorance of the
world, (the most fatal kind of ignorance to a person in Mr. Rawlinson’s
situation,) which is manifested by those vehement presumptions so
readily made by vulgar minds, of all sorts of immorality, from the
absence of religious belief. We will not be so uncharitable as to
surmise that such people as this police magistrate, judge of others from
themselves; and finding that their own natural inclinations are towards
all kinds of evil, or what they regard as such, cannot believe that any
person could Edition: current; Page: [247] be prevented from being a
scoundrel, except by the slavish and selfish terror of hell-fire. We
will not press this. But we will appeal to facts. Does Mr. Rawlinson
know anything whatever of the state of opinion among the lettered, or as
they are called, educated classes? If so, he knows, that not less than
one-fourth or one-third (at a moderate computation) of all the persons
whom he meets at dinner, are either actual unbelievers, or have only the
faintest and most doubtful belief; though they do not chuse, by avowing
their sentiments, to expose themselves to martyrdom. Now, is there any
perceptible difference between the conduct, in every relation of life,
of this portion of Mr. Rawlinson’s acquaintance, and the remaining
three-fourths or two-thirds? Would he himself, on any occasion requiring
confidence, place one particle less of it in them, than in the average
of the remainder? Certainly not; nor is it possible for religion to
exercise less influence over the lives and characters of actual
unbelievers, than it does over the vast majority of professing
Christians. If there be any difference, it is not in favour of those who
call themselves Christians; for the speculative homage paid to a rule of
life which they never for one half-hour sincerely endeavour to act up
to, has rather a perverting than an elevating effect upon the character.
Unbelievers, if they have not the direct influences of Christianity,
have reason and natural feeling, and by those aids may, and generally
have, worked out for themselves some moral convictions, by which they
may really govern their conduct; but Christians who live in the world,
and do as the world does, that is to say, who lead a life the main
objects of which are such as Christianity either makes light of, or
actually condemns, and in which nothing, except a certain small number
of acts and abstinences, either flows from religion, or reminds them of
it; such persons have perpetually to reconcile conduct of one kind, with
a creed of a quite opposite kind; they cannot with any satisfaction to
themselves, reflect on morality, or question themselves on their own
moral state; all their moral perceptions become dim and confused; they
acquire the habit of sophisticating with themselves, and paltering with
their notions of duty: Christianity is practically disregarded, except
on new or peculiar exigencies; and they live, if of a cautious
character, according to respectability, and the breath of men; if
incautious, by mere impulse.

Compared with such Christians, he who has the manliness to speak out,
with simplicity and without ostentation, the fact of his unbelief, is a
religious man. And he is turned out to starve—while they, possibly, are
on the very bench which condemns him.

*     *     *     *     *


6th June
 Business of the House of Commons

It is just now beginning to be found out that the House of Commons has
too much to do, and does it in a clumsy manner. The schoolmaster is
certainly Edition: current; Page: [248] abroad;[*] intellect is on the
march; it will soon be discovered, after due investigation by a
commission or a committee, that two and two make four, and that the sun
is the cause of day. The Business Committee of the House of Commons has
passed the following resolutions:

1. Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that with a view
to promote the convenience of members, and to facilitate the dispatch of
private business, it is expedient that certain measures which, under the
existing laws, must be brought separately under the consideration of
Parliament, should be provided for by general enactments, enabling
parties interested therein to proceed to their accomplishment without
having constant reference to the special sanction of the Legislature.

2. Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that if possible,
a General Inclosure Act should be passed, which may enable parties
having an interest therein, to enclose lands, subject to such provisions
as may secure the rights of all concerned, without subjecting themselves
to the heavy expenses which are now incurred.

3. Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that powers of
providing for paving, macadamizing, watering, draining, and otherwise
improving cities, towns, and places, should be vested (under certain
conditions and regulations) in the inhabitants, to be carried into
effect without the necessity of appealing to Parliament.[†]

Why stop here? Does the self-evident general principle involved in the
first resolution, include no cases but those of inclosure bills, and
bills for local improvements? Are these even the fittest cases to begin
with? Is it not absurd, that from the clumsiness of the law of
partnership, every numerous association for commercial purposes requires
a special act to entitle it to one of the simplest of the privileges
which ought to belong to all joint-stock associations, that of being
treated in all legal proceedings as a single person?* Why should a
turnpike bill, more than a bill for paving and watering, occupy the time
of the Legislature? Would not all, or almost all local matters, be best
provided for by “parties having an interest therein;” the Legislature
interfering only where national as well as local interests are
concerned, and are in danger of being compromised by the supineness of
the local authorities? To ascend to higher matters: what can be more
monstrous than that there should be such things as divorce bills? Is it
not self-evident, that what is good for a small number of the higher
classes, must be good for the whole community; that the grant of a
divorce ought to depend upon something else than length of purse; that
there ought either to be (as is, to us, obvious) a general law of
divorce, or else no divorces at all?

In regard to the particular points for which the Business Committee
recommends that provision may be made, there is another recommendation
which should Edition: current; Page: [249] have preceded. They should
have recommended that the House do immediately commence the organization
of an efficient representative system of local government. Till then, we
should be afraid to trust the local authorities with any new powers;
especially and powers of encroaching on the rights of the poor. Who
would tolerate, that the men who have stopped up, literally, every path
in some of the most populous counties of England, should have the power,
without passing the ordeal of Parliament and the public, to confiscate
remorselessly the vested interest of the poor labourer in the free air
and the pasturage, and the vested interest of the whole people in the
enjoyment of the beauties of nature?

It is something that the House of Commons will now no longer pass
Bucklebury and Kingsclere Inclosure Bills.[*] These were considered as
cases of pecuniary injustice to the poor. But there are other kinds of
injustice, besides pecuniary; injustice to the whole nation, as well as
to the poor. Is it too much to expect from those who vote away 11,000l.
of the people’s money for two Correggios,[†] that they should show some
value for the people’s tastes and enjoyments, as well as for what are
called their interests? Hampstead Heath, it is said, is now on the point
of being enclosed; the Sir Thomas Maryon Wilson, whose cupidity is the
motive to this sacrilege, has already enclosed Charlton Wood, and
stopped up every, or almost every, foot-path between Blackheath and the
Thames. The writer of this, who has been a pedestrian in the
neighbourhood of London for about ten years, has, during that time, had
to lament the loss of the two finest pieces of natural scenery within
twelve miles of the capital,—Penge-wood, between Dulwich and Beckenham;
and the Addington hills, near Croydon. The first, an inclosure bill[‡]
having been obtained by a man named Cator, who has a house in the
neighbourhood, is now in preparation for being cut up into citizens’
boxes and bits of garden ground. The Addington hills, one of the most
remarkable pieces of heath and forest scenery in the south of England,
have been usurped by the Most Reverend Father in God, Doctor Howley,
Archbishop of Canterbury, the author of the famous “prostration of the
understanding and will,”[§] and of the doctrine, that the King, not in
legal fiction merely, but in fact, can “do no wrong.”[¶] When Dr. Howley
was appointed to the archbishopric, to which a house and park adjoining
these beautiful hills are unfortunately appended, one of his first acts
was to obtain an order of two magistrates, for stopping a public road
which ran along the summit of the hills; and, this being effected, he
immediately enclosed nearly Edition: current; Page: [250] the whole
tract with a paling seven or eight feet in height. By this the people of
Croydon have lost their most frequented walk, and the people of London
and the neighbourhood, the most beautiful scenery to which they had
ready access. It is some comfort to think, that the ground which has
thus been added to the primate’s domain, will in a few years, with the
rest of the church property, be at the disposal of the State. When the
time comes, and it will come, when we shall see the people of Croydon
sally out with axe in hand, and level the fences which have been set up
to exclude them from what was morally as much their birthright as any
man’s estate is his—then, and not till then, we shall feel that the
Reform Bill has done its work, and that the many are no longer
sacrificed to the few.

*     *     *     *     *


14th June
 The Tom-foolery at Oxford

We know not if the sow ever mistakes the squeaking of her own pigs for
the voice of the whirlwind; but the Tory aristocracy certainly mistake
the voices of their sons and their sons’ toadeaters for the “spirit of
the age.”[*] The present exhibition wonderfully exemplifies that great
fact in human nature, the importance of a man to himself. From Doctor
the Duke of Wellington down to poor Lord Encombe, every character in the
farce felt so solemnly persuaded that he was, or at least looked like, a
hero or a martyr! while in reality he only looked like a fool. It is
really too simple of the Tories to fancy that any one except themselves
cares for, or so much as thinks about, what Oxford says or does. We all
knew already that it is the hot-bed of Toryism, and that the clergy of
the Church of England and the youths whom they educate are sure to be
Tories. We know no more now. Tories they are, and Tories let them be. As
they were the last Jacobites in the country, so will they be the last
Tories. The only remark (beyond an occasional interjection of contempt)
which we have heard from the lips of any Radical on the affair, was an
expression of regret that a place pretending to be the fountain-head of
morality and religion, should teach its youth to cheer a Lyndhurst and a
Wynford; as if the youth of the London University should toss up their
hats for Mr. Wakley or Mr. Whittle Harvey.

Oxford was powerful once; but even the prestige of its power has passed
away; it is as effete as the Pope, also an important enough personage in
his day. But what has once been powerful, usually lives on until it
becomes ridiculous; and that evil day has arrived for Oxford. Peace be
with it! for it can now do no harm.

*     *     *     *     *

Edition: current; Page: [251]


17th June
 Parliamentary Monstrosities

Lord Bacon recommends that in studying the nature and laws of any
principle or element of the universe, we should observe it where it
exists in the greatest abundance and strength, and is least counteracted
by the presence of any adverse element.[*] We think this a good rule;
and in obedience to it, we shall exhibit from time to time such
specimens as offer themselves, of the characteristic vices of some
institution or some state of mind, carried to the monstrous. Two such
have presented themselves within the last few days.

1. What a Bishop is:—In the House of Lords, on a petition for removing
the civil disabilities of the Jews,[†] some one remarked, that as they
tolerated Socinians, they might as well tolerate Jews, who were not one
whit greater blasphemers, (such at least seemed to be the spirit of the
noble lord’s remark.)[‡] Dr. Grey, bishop of Hereford, and brother of
the Prime Minister, hereupon observed, “The Socinians were a set of
persons whom he held in utter abhorrence—as a Christian he could not do
otherwise;” but yet he must say that the Socinians, though they rejected
the divinity of our Saviour, believed him to be the Messiah, while the
Jews affirmed the Lord Jesus Christ to be an impostor.[§]

Pious soul! As a Christian he could not do otherwise than hold a large
body of his fellow-creatures “in utter abhorrence,” because, though they
acknowledge the same revelation with himself, they differ as to some few
points of its interpretation; yet, even these people whom he utterly
abhors, he thinks it but just to protect from being confounded with
those who acknowledge only a part of the same revelation: for these
last, “utter abhorrence” is not enough; we know not what words he has
reserved to express the bitterness of his feelings towards them.

Protect us from such Christianity! If this be the figure under which
Christianity is to continue to be exhibited by its recognized teachers,
there needs no prophet to predict, that, as the religion of the people
of this country, it will not last two more generations. The religion
which men shall ever again reverence, and shape their lives by, will be,
Dr. Grey may depend on it, another kind of religion than this.

2. What a Landlord is.—In a debate, a highly important one, raised on
the Edition: current; Page: [252] Emigration clause of the Poor Law Bill
by Mr. Whitmore,[*] who took that opportunity of pressing upon the House
those enlightened views of colonization, which are about to be, for the
first time, realized in the formation of a new colony, Major Handley
called upon all supporters of the corn laws to oppose emigration, saying
that the principle was exactly the same, for the people “ought to stop
at home and eat the corn grown in this country.”[†]

The principle is exactly the same, being no other than that the whole
people of England are the live-stock of the English corn-growers. And
we, in imitation of Major Handley’s naïveté, but reversing the terms of
his proposition, call upon all who do not think it the duty of all
English people to “stop at home and eat the corn” grown for them by
Major Handley, to vote for the repeal of the corn laws: for it is mere
twaddling to affect to see any difference between the two pieces of
tyranny.


The Ministry

In common with the remainder of the liberal press,[‡] we augured no good
from Lord Grey’s filling up his cabinet with mere stop-gaps, promoted
from the lower ranks; the resistance of the modified cabinet to Mr.
Ward’s motion;[§] and that unfortunate letter to Lord Ebrington,
deprecating what constitutes the sole strength of a reforming ministry,
a “constant and active pressure from without.”[¶] But our anticipations
have been materially changed by Mr. Abercromby’s accession to the
cabinet, and by Lord Grey’s noble speech on the Irish Church.[∥] How the
Times and the Examiner could possibly see in that speech a truckling to
the Lords,[**] passes our comprehension: we see nothing in it but a
defiance to the Lords; and the Lords, we are fully persuaded, see it in
no other light.

To say that the Tories had the majority in that House, was merely to say
what Lord Grey could not possibly be supposed to be ignorant of. To say
that he knew it, and that knowing it, he should steadily pursue his own
course, and that they, not Edition: current; Page: [253] he, had
anything to dread from a collision, was not only no cowardice, but the
most triumphant refutation of the charge of cowardice; the distinctest
proclamation that, let them do their worst, he feared them not. Lord
Grey’s speech was the bravest act of his ministerial life, next to the
framing of the Reform Bill. He said everything which could have been
wished or asked for—everything which it had been the reproach of the
ministry that it had not dared to say. We were not to expect that he
would declare himself an enemy to Church Establishments; there is no
reason to doubt that he is a sincere friend to them. Short of this, what
did he not say that could have been said on the occasion by the most
determined reformer? He avowed principles which went to the root of the
whole subject. He declared, that if the endowments of the Protestant
Establishment exceed the wants of the Protestant population, it is the
right and duty of the State to apply the surplus to the general purposes
of moral and religious instruction. He declared that if, when those
purposes were fully provided for, a further surplus remained, it was the
right of the State to take that further surplus, and apply it to any
purpose which it deemed most advisable. He declared it as his deliberate
conviction, that, in the case of the Protestant Church of Ireland, after
the religious wants of the Protestant population were fully supplied,
there would remain, not only a surplus, but a large surplus. And he
distinctly affirmed, that upon these principles, he, as a minister, was
prepared to act. Nor did he, as is the practice of some of his
colleagues, say bold things so timidly, that the impression left is of
spiritlessness, and not of boldness. The tone of his speech was wholly
in accordance with its substance: the style was that of a dignified
determinedness of purpose, and by no means, as it has strangely appeared
to some of our contemporaries, querulous and dejected.

What matters it, if Lord Lansdowne or Lord Brougham used language[*]
which did not come up to the mark of Lord Grey’s speech? The principles
of a ministry are the principles of the minister who is at its head.
Lord Grey is a man who weighs his words: every word with him means all
it seems to mean. Lord Brougham’s words are thrown out at random; he
never speaks twice of the same thing in the same tone.

Few things could have been more solemn and impressive than the warning
addressed by Lord Grey to the assembly—addressed to them on an authority
so imposing to them as that of Napoleon—that he, the conqueror of
Europe, had fallen, not by the strength of his enemies, not by his wars
or his imprudences, but because he had opposed the spirit of the
age—that the Bourbons who succeeded him, and all the old governments of
Europe, would perish from the same cause—and that every government, and
the order to which Lord Grey belonged, and which he was as desirous as
any one to maintain, unless they profited by the example, would share
the same fate.[†] That such truths should be spoken to that Edition:
current; Page: [254] assembly, by an English prime minister, was what,
very few years ago, would have been deemed impossible. The Lords have
never received such a lesson; they will never forget it, though they
will never profit by it; it will ring in their ears till the day of
their fall.

After Lord Grey’s speech, we were not surprised at Mr. Abercromby’s
acceptance of a cabinet office; and we do not doubt that he had grounds
for what he is represented to have said to the electors of Edinburgh,
that “he has become a member of the administration, because he believes
it now to entertain views more consonant to his own, and because he has
a strong hope that its measures will henceforth more decidedly attack,
and more completely remove abuses; and that thus our institutions, being
thoroughly renovated, will more surely tend to accomplish the good of
the whole community.”[*]

Almost all that we have hitherto observed of the conduct and
declarations of Ministers, since the debate on Mr. Ward’s motion, has
been of a kind to justify our hopes. We must particularly commend the
feeling which they manifested, and which, it must in justice be said,
was manifested by the whole House, on the subject of national education,
when brought before them by Mr. Roebuck.[†] An excellent committee has
been appointed, and there is now reason to hope that on that grand
subject something not inconsiderable will be done.

The only bad symptom which we have yet discerned is, their declared
purpose of renewing the Irish Coercion Bill.[‡] On this subject we
suspend our final judgment until the bill is brought in. The military
tribunals, which Mr. Abercromby, before he was in office, steadily and
uncompromisingly opposed, were the principal blemish in that bill; and
we would fain hope that his influence may now induce his colleagues to
provide a substitute for that odious jurisdiction. It is not in the
least necessary to the efficiency of the bill; and is the great cause of
its well-merited unpopularity. To deliver men to be tried for their
lives to-day, into the hands of the very men who were fighting against
them yesterday, and who come fresh from the excited passions of a
life-and-death struggle, to judge people who have been attempting to
kill them—is so dreadful a principle, that no person of common justice
or common feeling should on any human consideration vote for a bill
containing such a provision.

*     *     *     *     *

Edition: current; Page: [255]


20th June
 The Beer Bill

This odious measure has passed through the committee: and the
meritorious efforts of Mr. Warburton[*] to obtain the omission of one of
its worst clauses, that which prohibits beer from being sold to be drunk
on the premises, have been unsuccessful. It is some satisfaction to
think that the tyrannical purpose will be easily frustrated, as the beer
will be sold in one house, and drank in another. The Act, however, will
remain a memorable example of the spirit of our legislature; which, with
all its pretended regard for vested interests, when they are the
interests of persons who have an interest in those two houses, will have
deliberately sanctioned a more extensive confiscation of vested
interests than has almost ever, within our recollection, been
deliberately and undisguisedly propounded in a bill introduced into
Parliament.*

*     *     *     *     *


NO. VI, AUG., 1834†


21st June
 The Alleged Increase of Crime‡

It is recorded that King Charles the Second, in one of his merry moods,
requested the Royal Society to explain the fact that a fish has no
weight when weighed in its own element. The philosophers laid their
heads together, and Edition: current; Page: [256] thought of a variety
of explanations, but forgot to verify the fact itself, which was a mere
invention of the jocular monarch.[*] A similar blunder appears to us to
have been fallen into by the House of Lords last night, and by many
others among those who occupy themselves with public affairs. They are
all quarrelling over conflicting theories as to the causes of the
increase of crime, and actually debating whether the increase is caused
by education! forgetting, meanwhile, to ascertain whether crime has
increased. We have never seen or heard of any evidence of increase which
appeared to us deserving of the slightest regard. It is astonishing, not
only how little pains mankind will take to get at the truth, on matters
which are every body’s concern, and not theirs peculiarly, but also how
little evidence contents them, in such a case, as ground for believing
assertions the most deeply implicating the highest interests of their
country and of their kind. A somewhat greater numerical account of
commitments or convictions during two or three years, will prove to
them, beyond a doubt, that the labouring classes are becoming fearfully
demoralized; and if you presume to suspend your judgment, and desiderate
further proof, you are reputed a disregarder of “facts.” Facts! no: it
is not facts we disregard, it is unfounded inferences from them. Grant
that convictions have increased,—grant, even, that the increase is
permanent and not temporary, arising from general and not local causes;
does it follow that more crimes are committed? May it not be merely that
a greater number are detected, or that a greater number are prosecuted?
Though, perhaps, most criminals at some period of their career undergo
punishment, the immense majority of crimes go unpunished. It has been
calculated by solicitors, the best authorities on such a subject, that
in London a youth who begins business as a thief may reckon upon not
less than six years of impunity before he is removed by legal process.
Here is Edition: current; Page: [257] “ample room and verge enough”[*]
for a large increase of convictions without any increase of crime.

Some years ago a worthy city-magistrate distinguished himself by
extraordinary activity in the performance of the duties of his
mayoralty. He gave, at the same time, a corresponding energy to the
police of the city, and the consequence was that a greater number of
cases by several hundreds were brought before him than was ever known to
have been investigated by any other chief magistrate. Such is the habit
of looking to these returns alone [the returns of commitments and
convictions] as showing the state of crime in any given district, that
we have seen it charged in print, and heard it mentioned by public men,
as a reproach to this magistrate, that more crime had been committed in
the city during his mayoralty than during any other.*

Again, have there been no circumstances to diminish the reluctance of
injured persons to prosecute? Has not the severity of punishments within
the last few years been greatly mitigated? Is it not by an innovation
introduced within the last few years, that prosecutors are allowed their
expenses? Many increased facilities of other kinds have also of late
years been afforded to prosecutors and witnesses. Has not a notion grown
up within a few years, (we believe a very false one,) that the increased
mildness of prison-discipline has made our gaols not only no longer the
dens of horror they were, but places where the prisoner is actually too
comfortable, and too well off? and has this opinion no tendency to
weaken the scruples which good men felt about sending a fellow creature
thither! One principal chapter of the criminal calender,—juvenile
delinquency,—has grown up almost entirely of late years; not because
boys did not formerly steal apples, but because formerly when they stole
them they were whipped and sent home, while now they are prosecuted and
sent to gaol. This change is probably owing to increased mildness of
manners; men can no longer bear to convert themselves into executioners;
yet, if there have been any increase of crime, here is as likely a cause
of it as any other: for the child, whom a brief though severe punishment
immediately following the offence might have deterred from a repetition
of it, usually comes out of gaol irreclaimably corrupted.

But though there is no sufficient reason to believe that crime has
increased, nobody in his senses can doubt that it will increase, if we
do not carefully watch and promptly remove everything in our
institutions which operates as an incentive to it. Persevere in the
present administration of the Poor Laws, and the whole of the
agricultural population will, in a few years, be converted into
criminals. What else can you look for, when you shall have completely
succeeded in obliterating from Edition: current; Page: [258] the minds
of the agricultural labourers, all traces of any line of demarcation
between what is theirs, and what is other people’s; and persuaded them
that they have a right to whatever their wants require—they being the
best judges of their own wants? Whether crime have increased or not, the
administration of the Poor Laws is a grand source of future increase
which must be removed. Another, is the inadequacy of our
police-arrangements; which have not kept pace with the growth of wealth
and population, but afford less protection to property than any
police-system in Europe, and that too in the country where there is most
to protect. What wonder, again, if crime should be found to increase,
when, after gradually ceasing to inflict, we have at last ceased even to
threaten, capital punishment, except for a few of the most odious
offences; while, by the admission of every competent witness, from Lord
Liverpool formerly to Earl Grey now,[*] we have no secondary punishments
but what are almost worse than none at all. Lord Liverpool admitted the
evil and let it alone; perhaps feeling as Louis XV did, when he talked
of the fine things he would do if he were Minister. An English Minister
seldom considers himself as Minister for the purpose of doing any useful
thing which he is not obliged to do. Something better might have been
hoped from the present Ministers; but they are (we say it without
presumption) too ignorant; they have neither read enough, nor reflected
enough. The most accomplished man among them, without question, is Lord
Brougham; and is it not truly deplorable, after all that has been given
in evidence, and argued, and written on the subject, to find Lord
Brougham still advocating the maintenance of transportation as a
punishment, and Lord Denman supporting him?[†] Both these law-lords
pledge their professional experience that transportation is dreaded.
Yes; but by whom? Transportation is like death: a terrible punishment to
the innocent, a most severe one even to the almost innocent; but to the
criminal by profession, an object of almost entire disregard.

If the Lord Chancellor will not read Mr. Bentham, or Archbishop Whately,
or any of the philosophical writers on the theory of punishment, he can
surely find time to read a work of less pretensions, Mr. Wakefield’s
Letter from Jack Ketch to Mr. Justice Alderson, a pamphlet which may be
purchased for threepence of Mr. Effingham Wilson, and which all who have
threepence to spare ought to read.[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [259]


Debate on the Universities Admission Bill[*]

It is not a favourable symptom of the state of the public mind, when a
great noise is made about little things. What is it that the Dissenters
want? Is it education? or is it that their sons should herd with lords’
sons? If the former, they ought to know, and by taking the proper means
they may know, that Cambridge and Oxford are among the last places where
any person wishing for education, and knowing what it is, would go to
seek it. No one goes to Cambridge or Oxford for the education he expects
to find there. The sons of the aristocracy go because their fathers
went, and because it is gentlemanly to have been there. Those who are to
be clergymen go, because it is very difficult otherwise to get into
orders. Those who are to be barristers go, because they save two years
of their apprenticeship by it, and because a fellowship is a
considerable help at the outset of their career. No one else goes at
all.

One of the most important objects, certainly, with which Parliament or a
Ministry could occupy itself, would be to make the Universities really
places of education; to clean out those sinks of the narrowest and most
grovelling Church-of-Englandism, and convert them into reservoirs of
sound learning and genuine spiritual culture. But is this what the
Dissenters are striving for? Nothing of the sort. The place remaining as
it is, all they solicit is, permission to subject their children to its
pernicious influences.

Unless we would become a nation of mere tradesmen, endowed institutions
of education must exist. There must be places where the teachers can
afford to teach other things than those which parents (who in nine cases
out of ten, think only of qualifying their children to get on in life)
spontaneously call for. There must be places where those kinds of
knowledge and culture, which have no obvious tendency to better the
fortunes of the possessor, but solely to enlarge and exalt his moral and
intellectual nature, shall be, as Dr. Chalmers expresses it, obtruded
upon the public.[†] And these places must be so constituted, that they
shall be looked up to by the public; that parents who are too
narrow-minded to see of themselves what is good, shall believe it to be
good because it is there taught. In order that benefits which we
estimate so highly may not be lost; in order that the means may still be
preserved of maintaining places of education, which shall not be the
subservient slaves of the opinions and desires of the vulgar—we would
have those means rescued from the hands of men who render the very idea
of resisting the spirit of the age at once odious and contemptible—men
who differ from their Edition: current; Page: [260] age chiefly by
wanting its good points; who combine the worldly spirit of the present
times with the indolence of monks, and the bigotry and sectarianism of
two centuries ago. The first scholar in Great Britain, and the only
clergyman of the Church of England who has acquired a European
reputation, has just been ejected from his lectureship in the most
liberal college of the most liberal of the two Universities, for
asserting in a printed pamphlet, that the University does not give
religious education;[*] an assertion which every member of the
University knows to be true. And Dissenters would send their sons to be
educated by these men! Rather, if their sons had been already there,
they ought to have indignantly withdrawn them.

But the degrees of the Universities are of importance for professional
purposes. Be it so: there, then, lies the evil; there apply your remedy.
Abolish the monopoly of the Universities. Until public opinion shall
have ripened for a reform in the places themselves, the law which should
be enacted by Parliament is not one for admitting Dissenters to degrees,
but one for rendering degrees no longer necessary for the enjoyment of
any civil privileges. The title for exercising a profession should be a
good education, wheresoever acquired: not the fact of having been
educated at a certain place, least of all at a bad place. The
certificates of Oxford and Cambridge should pass current only at their
intrinsic value; and those of every other place of education should do
the same.

In the debate last night, Mr. Ewart, of Liverpool, an active and
valuable Member of Parliament, had the courage to say that the education
of our higher ranks is below that of some other countries.[†] This
notorious truth having excited a murmur, Mr. Ewart defended himself by
the instance of Germany, and by rather an unfortunate one, that of the
United States. We have always understood that in America there is still
less of sound literary and philosophical instruction than even here, and
that the superiority of that country consists in the superior education
of the poorer classes, not of the richer. Mr. Ewart might have said
“Germany and France.”

If Mr. Ewart exhibited one kind of courage, two members for Universities
exhibited another kind. Mr. Estcourt held up Oxford and Cambridge as the
two great causes of the prevalence of Christianity in this kingdom. “He
would say, Do not disturb us; allow us to go on as we have done,
launching into the world young men perfectly capable of carrying that
religion into every relation of life.”[‡] Mr. Goulburn adjured every
parent, who had sent his son to a University, to “reflect Edition:
current; Page: [261] what he [the son] might have been, had not his
passions been subdued by daily and regular devotion.”[*] This is rather
a bold offer to let the tree be judged by its fruits. Will Mr.
Estcourt’s and Mr. Goulburn’s constituents bear out their
representatives in this challenge? Will they allow judgment to pass upon
the Universities according to the practical regard paid by the majority
of the pupils to Christianity, considered as enjoining them to subdue
what Mr. Goulburn is complimentary enough to call their “passions?”
Solvuntur risu tabulæ.[†] We admit that those venerable places succeed
in inspiring the young men with highly friendly feelings towards
religion, in common with the other institutions of the State, and a very
proper respect for the Deity, as one of the constituted authorities.

*     *     *     *     *


4th July
 The Chancellor’s Declaration against the Taxes on Political Information

A good aim (how often it has been remarked) is seldom lost; if the good
object aimed at be not furthered, some other of perhaps equal value is
so. Mr. O’Connell’s motion for the reform of the law of libel[‡] will be
the destruction of the taxes on knowledge.[§] That question, after being
discussed and apparently lost for the session, was referred to the
Committee on the Law of Libel. Lord Brougham attended that Committee as
a witness, and said and unsaid all manner of liberal and ultra-liberal
things on the libel question; but when interrogated as to the taxes on
newspapers and political tracts, he delivered a firm, steady, and
well-reasoned opinion in condemnation of them.[¶] Last night he repeated
this opinion in the House of Lords, and intimated his intention of
bringing the subject before Parliament.[∥] There is little doubt that
these taxes will be taken off at the beginning of the next session; for
this is one of the subjects on which there is reason Edition: current;
Page: [262] to believe the Chancellor to be really in earnest; and we
see that he now considers the time to be come for carrying his opinion
into effect.

There will now, therefore, be vastly greater facilities than were ever
before known for the diffusion of important truth among the people, and
also of mischievous error. But up to this time error has had the field
to itself. Truth will now, for the first time, have its natural chances
of superiority. In the immensely increased number of readers which will
be the effect of the cheapness of newspapers and political tracts, any
writers of talent may hope, whatever be their sentiments, to find the
quantity of support necessary for a moderate degree of success, without
prostituting themselves to the hired advocacy of the opinions in vogue.

*     *     *     *     *


5th July
 The Irish Tithe Bill[*]

This will not do. Sir Robert Peel last night uttered a sentiment which
is the bitterest censure upon many of the acts of the present Ministry:
“Of all the vulgar arts of government to which a Ministry can resort,
the solving of political difficulties by putting their hands into the
public purse is the most vulgar.”[†] That is the art by which the
Ministry are attempting to solve the difficulty of Irish tithe.

For centuries the English oligarchy have billetted their own priesthood
upon a hostile nation, until that nation positively will not bear the
insult and injury one hour longer. No appeal to reason, justice, or even
the fear of ultimate consequences, has been hearkened to. The Irish
have, therefore, taken the only means which were left them; they refuse
to pay. The English oligarchy, Whig and Tory, through their organ Lord
Grey,[‡] and through all their other organs, proclaim that this is all
the fault of agitators; that the Irish would have gone on paying the
hostile priesthood for ever, if it had not been for O’Connell; and that
O’Connell is a demon, for having, on their own showing, accomplished
what no person recorded in history ever did without being reputed by
posterity a hero. After having thus exhaled unavailing resentment
against O’Connell, the Ministry proceed to give up to him the object he
contends for. The tithe is no longer to be appropriated exclusively to
the use of the un-Irish Church. But it is not convenient to make up
their minds this year, to what purpose it shall be appropriated. For the
sake of six months’ ease to Ministers, two-fifths of the tithe are to be
flung away. If the landlords will only be so good as to collect it for
us, they may keep forty per cent., Edition: current; Page: [263] and we
will only ask them for the remaining sixty. This is rather a large
discount to give for present payment.

Why so eager to save all we can this year, as if next year the whole
would have evaporated, or fallen into the sea? The entire produce of the
land will be there next year as well as this year, and may be laid hold
of by taxation then as well as now, for any purpose to which the
sentiments of the people are not violently opposed. If the new
appropriation meditated for next year be of a kind not obnoxious to the
people, the whole tithe will be as readily paid by them as three-fifths
of it. If the contrary be the case, it will be as impossible to levy
three-fifths, or even one-fifth, as the whole. It is not to the tithe,
as tithe, that the Irish people object, but to the payment of it to a
hostile priesthood. Let that cease, and you may secure the whole fund
with ease. Let that continue, even one year longer, and you will never,
during the currency of existing leases, realize another farthing. In any
sense it is absurd, permanently, and under the pledge of the national
faith, to abandon to the landlords two-fifths of what they will gain in
their rents, on the expiration of the present leases, by the abolition
of tithe. What harm if no tithe at all is paid this year? Wait till the
next. To support the incumbents for one year, there will be no
difficulty in raising a sum by loan on the security of the future fund.

*     *     *     *     *


18th July
 The Ministerial Changes

The ministry has lost its chief, and is about to go on with little other
alteration. The change, however, is not a trifling one. The occasion
seems insignificant, compared with the magnitude of the result; but so
seemed the division on the Civil List, which turned out the Wellington
Ministry.[*] In both cases, what seemed the cause was but the pebble in
the road, which shook to pieces the already crazy vehicle.

Lord Grey could not long remain Minister after the Reform Bill. He was
the man to carry through a Reform Bill, not the man to execute it. We
say this not in disparagement, but, on the contrary, with the most
unfeigned respect. Lord Grey is a far braver man, a loftier man, a man
of greater dignity of character, with more of the heroic in his
composition, than any member of what is now the Ministry, or than all of
them put together. But he is of the old school; they are willing to be
of the new. Lord Grey has principles, they are men of shifts and
circumstances; but his principles are unfit for these times, and he
cannot change them. He is the very man he was in 1789. Age has neither
corrupted him nor brought him wisdom.

When Lord Grey, in early youth, adopted Reform principles, the people of
England were mostly satisfied with the main features of their
institutions, and Edition: current; Page: [264] complained only of
extravagant expenditure and a few superficial abuses. If Reform had been
carried at that time, these would have been remedied, and the social
machine generally would have remained untouched. The people would not
have had their eyes opened to the great and rapidly-increasing vices of
their social polity in general. Government would have been cheap and
bad, and so it would have remained until the mere progress of
philosophy, unaided by any previous alienation of the people from the
ruling classes, had convinced them of its defects. This might have
required centuries. Times are altered now; but Lord Grey is still of the
same mind. He still sees no evils in our social condition, but those
which the people then saw; and if he had his way, Reform would now lead
to no consequences but those to which it would then have led. But fifty
years of public discontent, though they have made no changes in Lord
Grey’s opinions, have made a wonderful revolution in those of mankind.
The people are now possessed with an opinion that their institutions, en
masse, are in many respects bad, and a cause of evil to them. Lord Grey
partly perceives and recognises as a fact, the prevalence of this new
opinion, but without any perception of its justice; and his object—his
conscientious object—is to prevent the new opinion from having its way;
to stem the current which has set in towards change. A man who thus
resists the just and necessary tendencies of his times is not fit to be
Minister. It may be very fit that those tendencies should be moderated,
but by their friends, not by their enemies.

Lord Grey has recently, in a most forcible manner, expressed his sense
of the folly of those who resist “the spirit of the age;”[*] nor would
he have opposed any obstinate or rash resistance to that spirit; but
being at heart its foe, he would have done his utmost to discountenance
it, and would have embroiled himself with it in his own despite; as this
very affair of the Irish Coercion Bill, which has broken up the
Ministry, exemplifies.

It was believed, even before the late disclosures, that the renewal of
the Coercion Bill had been forced upon the other Members of the Cabinet
by Lord Grey. It is well known that to Lord Grey are to be attributed
all the foolish ebullitions of the Ministry, in King’s Speeches[†] and
otherwise, against Mr. O’Connell. This could not but be. Irish agitation
and Mr. O’Connell, must appear in a quite other light to Lord Grey than
to Reformers of a less antiquated school. To others they may seem the
exceptionable, and even dangerous, but most efficacious, instruments of
the accomplishment of a great public good: to him they cannot but appear
as noxious influences, which, by bringing a country to the verge of
anarchy, force upon Parliament the adoption of measures, which, although
justifiably conceded to necessity, are in themselves wholly to be
deprecated. Let Mr. O’Connell be what he will, to us he is the enemy of
evil, to Lord Grey he is the Edition: current; Page: [265] enemy of
good. Lord Grey therefore regards him with aversion, and would pass
Coercion Bills to restrain his operations. The other Ministers perhaps
think no better of the man, but they probably think quite as much good
as evil of the effects of his influence.

In losing Lord Grey the Cabinet has lost the greater part of such weight
of personal reputation as it possessed; it will now have little
strength, save that which it may derive from its measures. We fear it
has lost most of its real strength of character also; it will now be a
mere straw on the surface of the waters; it will drift forward with the
current, or backward with the eddy; it will be more afraid of the
people, but also more afraid of the Peers. In Lord Grey, what seemed
fear of the Peers was, we believe sincerely, fear for the Peers; he
could not bear that their obstinacy should ruin them; he threw himself
between them and the people, and spared them the shock of a conflict
with public opinion, by bearing the brunt of it himself. The present
Ministers will do nothing of this sort. Truckle to the Lords they may,
if the people will let them; but (except Lord Lansdowne and perhaps one
other at most) we doubt if there is a man among them who, if he thought
circumstances required it, would not turn the whole order out of doors
without a pang.

The people, therefore, have their cause in their own hands. Let them
make it less trouble to quarrel with the Lords than with them, and their
object, whatever it be, will quite surely be gained.

*     *     *     *     *


23rd July
 Lord Brougham’s Speech on the Poor Law Amendment Bill[*]

We have never studied to direct the reader’s attention to the
infirmities of individuals; and we are least of all inclined to dwell
upon those of the Lord Chancellor; because, with many weaknesses, and
even some littlenesses, we believe him to have higher and better
aspirations, and a more genuine sympathy with mankind, than any other
man in power, or who has held power in England for many years. We shall
therefore, of all his recent exhibitions in the House of Lords (by which
he little knows how grievously he has lost ground in public estimation,)
confine ourselves to the most recent, that on the Poor Law Bill; and to
this we shall advert solely for the purpose of disconnecting that Bill
from the speculative opinions in disapprobation of Poor Laws in general,
with which Lord Brougham, on his own showing most unnecessarily, and as
we conceive most mischievously, thought proper to encumber it. As might
have been expected, the advantage thus Edition: current; Page: [266]
given has been eagerly seized by the enemies of the Bill. The Times
exclaims, that the truth has come out at last, and that the real object
of the Poor Law reformers is now visible.[*] Whether The Times asserts
this factiously or ignorantly, it is probable that many, who have no
opportunity of being better informed, will share the impression.

Now, if there be any thing which may be predicated with certainty of the
Poor Law Bill it is this, that if carried into effect in the spirit in
which it is conceived, it will leave no excuse whatever for attempting
to abolish Poor Laws. It affords the means by which society may
guarantee a subsistence to every one of its members, without producing
any of the fatal consequences to their industry and prudence, which
though arising only from the manner in which the law has been
administered, have been erroneously supposed to be inseparable from its
principle.

We hold a public provision for the poor to be an indispensable part of
the institutions of every civilized country. To put the least dignified
consideration first, it is necessary even as part of a system of police;
for where such a provision does not exist, there must be unbounded
toleration of mendicity, the very worst species of pauperism next to
that which now exists in the southern counties of England. Besides, it
is impossible to refuse to an innocent person in want, that subsistence
which you will be obliged to afford to him as soon as he becomes a
criminal. Let mere poverty be attended with consequences equal to the
most terrible of your punishments, and the chances of crime will be
preferred to the certainty of starvation.—Secondly, Poor Laws are
necessary on still higher grounds of public policy; as the only means by
which an alliance can be established between the pecuniary interest of
the rich and the comfort and independence of the poor.—Lastly, Poor Laws
are required by the plainest dictates of justice; since it is monstrous
that human creatures, who exercised no choice in being born, should be
starved for the fault of their progenitors. There is food enough on the
earth for all who are alive, and society has motives, short of capital
punishment, by which it can enforce, when enforce it must, any necessary
restraint upon the increase of the numbers of mankind.

The anti-poor-law doctrine is now almost universally exploded among
political economists, though political economy still continues to be
most unjustly burthened with the discredit of it, and though Lord
Brougham doubtless thought he proved himself a master in the science by
professing one of its discarded errors. Of the prudence of perking in
the faces of mankind opinions abhorrent to them, on an occasion when
those opinions were perfectly irrelevant, we say nothing, as we think
with The Chronicle, that statesmen are not to be very severely
reproached for sincerity;[†] and we are well pleased to find that Lord
Brougham, after so many years of public life, has at last, for once,
lain under that reproach.

Edition: current; Page: [267]


The Rich and the Poor

A certain Major Pitman, a magistrate of the county of Devon, having been
convicted before a bench of magistrates in Petty Sessions, of a series
of most brutal assaults, committed, with scarcely any provocation, upon
his maid-servant,[*] accompanied with the grossest and most disgusting
abuse, and continued through two days; the following was the decision of
the Bench:

From the very difficult situation in which we are placed with a brother
magistrate, we could have wished that we had not had the case to decide.
The Court, however, is unanimously of opinion that this case is not of
sufficient importance to be sent to the Sessions; they do consider the
assault proved, and do adjudicate the full penalty of five pounds to be
paid by the defendant.[†]

Assuredly all persons in England, of whatever sex or age, who happen to
be weak of body, have abundant reason to be grateful for the mildness
and humanity of modern manners; for it is now proclaimed to the world
that any person of property and station, who is sufficiently a brute in
his own nature, and is not ashamed of being considered so by others, may
beat and kick his female servants to any pitch, short of danger to life
or limb, and may insult them with any degree of contumely, without
incurring from the justice of his country the slightest inconvenience.
Suppose that this girl had a brother, or a lover, who had resented the
injury to her, let us say only by knocking down the wretch who committed
it; was there a man on that Bench who would not have thought him most
leniently dealt with by being sent for only a month to the tread-mill?
And these dastardly creatures would be the foremost, probably, to
inveigh against the insubordination and against the immorality of the
poor. Why, if the English people, being a brave people, were not also a
most obedient, peaceable, and moral people, these men would not have
dared show themselves in the streets without an escort of soldiers after
delivering such a judgment.

The Chronicle says it cannot doubt that the matter will be investigated,
and that if the facts stated are correct, Major Pitman will be dismissed
from the magistracy.[‡] Alas! no. Who ever heard of a magistrate
dismissed for oppressing the poor, or tyrannizing over the weak? It is
not for such trifles, that Chancellors and Home Secretaries will be
uncivil to a gentlemanly man. If Major Pitman had even done any thing
really ungentlemanly; if he had refused to pay a gaming debt, or shown
the white feather in an affair of honour; even then, though a minister
might cut him, no minister would think of turning him out of the
Commission of the Peace. He would retain the power of imprisoning and
transporting his fellow creatures until he happened to be hanged or
transported himself.

But these things will not last much longer. Every such occurrence is but
another Edition: current; Page: [268] kick to the ball which is rushing
down hill with perpetually increasing velocity. The magistracy of
England, with the rest of our aristocratic institutions, will, in a few
years, have ceased to be.

*     *     *     *     *


27th July
 Flogging in the Army

The late disgusting exhibition at Charing Cross Barracks has excited a
feeling in the public, which has compelled the Secretary of War to
promise that a commission shall be issued to revise the whole of our
military system. In the speech in which he made this announcement, Mr.
Ellice declared that since public opinion has so greatly restricted the
punishment of flogging, military discipline has greatly relaxed; that
acts of insubordination have become much more frequent than before, and
that in the last year one-fifth of the whole army have been subjected to
charges of different kinds.[*] The Examiner hints that there has been
another cause of the relaxation of discipline; that a spirit of hatred
between the soldiers and the people has been sedulously cultivated by
their officers:

We suspect that the truculent spirit boastfully manifested by the
officers towards the people has had some effect on the actions of the
men. Military outrages against the people have been looked upon by the
officers with an indulgent eye, and hence, doubtless, an increase of
such offences; and misconduct in one direction begets misconduct in
another, and the solider who has spurned the civil law, under a superior
provoking the transgression which he seems to chide, soon ventures to
trespass also against the military law. We could mention cases in which
there has been mixed a violation of military and civil law, and in which
the wrong against the people seems to have redeemed, in the eyes of the
military judges, the infraction of military rule, for the punishment
allotted in consideration of both offences has been far short of what it
would in all probability have been had the military offence been
unmingled with the other. We have put a question thus to military men:
What would be the punishment of a party drunk on their march, who used
their troop-horses for the sport of women picked up on the road
side?—And the sentence supposed in the answer has far exceeded the
punishment which was actually awarded in such a case—with this
(excusing) addition, that the sword was drawn upon people who manifested
their disgust at the most indecent and brutal conduct. The remark which
will not want examples in various quarters in this—that offences against
the discipline of the army, which would be severely punished if solely
offences against discipline, are more leniently dealt with if mixed up
with offences against the laws of the land. The people of the lower part
of Westminster will bear testimony to the truth of this observation. But
there is not only an indulgence for military riot at the expense of the
public peace, but a direct defiance of the civil law is occasionally
taught to the soldiery; thus a commanding officer lately ordered the
barrack-gates to be closed against a constable with a warrant for the
apprehension of one of the privates. Whatever insubordination there now
is in the army, is the natural effect of the spirit and Edition:
current; Page: [269] countenance of its officers since the agitation of
the Reform Bill. The license of the soldiery has extended, as license
always will do, beyond the intention of those who were pleased to relax
discipline for a particular object.[*]

We fear there is much truth in these remarks. But we conceive that the
root of the matter lies still deeper. It is a vice inherent in an army
or a navy exclusively officered by gentlemen, that the soldiers and
sailors must be treated like brutes. If indeed the commanding officer be
a man to whom those under him can look up with reverence, that reverence
renders his mere displeasure so severe a punishment, that he is able to
dispense with corporal torture. Nelson needed it not, nor Collingwood,
nor Sir Alexander Ball; and never were ships’ crews so admirably
disciplined as theirs. Whether in a regiment, a ship, or a school, those
only govern by torture who have not the virtue necessary for governing
by personal influence. When the scourge is needed, it is always the
fault and often the crime of the superior. But from almost all
superiors, faults, and from many, crimes, are to be expected. No army or
navy is officered with Nelsons and Collingwoods. These were rare men.
The discipline of an army or navy cannot be left dependent upon the
qualities of individual men; it must be provided for by the general
system of military and naval rewards and punishments.

Now rewards, in the English army, there are none; for no soldier can
rise beyond the rank of a sergeant. As for punishments, for the greater
military offences only three are possible: 1st, The offender must be
shot; or, 2dly, Flogged; or, 3dly, Dismissed from the service. Now this
last, which in almost all other armies is a punishment of extreme
severity, with us is a reward. The soldier is but too happy to get his
discharge, and would commit offences purposely for a very slight chance
of obtaining it. Until this is remedied, discipline in the army never
can by possibility be kept up but by shooting or flogging. The men will
be either shot, flogged, or undisciplined, until dismissal from the army
shall be a punishment and not a privilege: and a privilege it will be
until the pay of the common soldier be raised beyond what any taxes
which the British people will pay afford the means of, or until, as in
France or Prussia, every common soldier shall have the possibility
before him of rising to be colonel of his regiment.

Now, as the people of England have neither the passion of equality which
distinguishes the French, nor the passion of justice which has hitherto
distinguished no nation, this most desirable result will only be brought
about through the passion of humanity; which, by not allowing soldiers
to be either shot or flogged, will compel recourse to the only means of
government fit for rational beings; and will secure, at length, for that
important portion of the people the privileges of men, by not tolerating
that they should any longer be treated like brutes. We therefore rejoice
from our souls that the public loathing at the practice of flogging is
becoming too intense to be resisted, and we most earnestly hope that
every word Edition: current; Page: [270] which fell from Mr. Ellice on
the insubordination of the army is literally true. We trust that the
army is, and will progressively become more and more undisciplined,
until the time comes when from sheer necessity, on the failure of all
other means of keeping the soldiers in subjection, the oligarchy must
perforce loose their hold of what will be the last and most cherished of
their monopolies. They will part with it as with their life’s blood, but
ere many years shall have passed over their heads, they may rely upon
it, it will be theirs no longer.

*     *     *     *     *


NO. VII, SEPT., 1834


2nd August
 Lord Melbourne’s Reason for His Religion

In the debate of last night on the admission of Dissenters to the
Universities, Lord Melbourne took the trouble of stating to the assembly
of which he is an hereditary member, that he is an adherent of the
Church of England.[*] We could have guessed as much of any Prime
Minister, without his assurances: who expects him to profess any thing
else while it is yet only the eleventh hour, and one entire revolution
of the minute-hand is yet wanting to the final doom? However, it has for
some years past been customary for Prime Ministers to take occasional
opportunities of protesting that their devotion, their reverence, their
respect, their fidelity, &c., (we are not masters of the whole
vocabulary,) continue unimpaired towards that venerable establishment,
&c., to which, under God, &c., pure form of Christianity, &c., bulwark
of the Constitution, &c., barrier against sectarianism, &c., and
infidelity, &c.; in all which they are probably as sincere as in any
other of their speculative opinions; and as much so as they are capable
of being, in any creed, or world-theory, or abstract principle. In spite
of which, what, philosophically considered, do all these assurances, so
perpetually repeated, mean, except that by the reckoning of him who
keeps the ship’s log, it still wants some minutes to the dreaded hour?

Lord Melbourne, however, did not merely say that he was an adherent of
the Church of England: he even said why. In the first place, he did not
pretend to understand all the doctrines of the Church of England, but so
far as he did understand them he thought them true. This, however, was
not all:

He would say further, though he was well aware that he should expose
himself to the censure of some persons by making the declaration—he
would say further, that he was attached to the Church of England, and
would support it to the best of his power, because it was the religion
of his forefathers, and because it was the religion of his
country.—(Loud cheers from the Opposition benches.)

Edition: current; Page: [271]
We consider this declaration as quite invaluable. It is a naïve
statement of what an average English gentleman really feels. They
believe in their religion, not as any thing involving truth or
falsehood, or in which their own eternal welfare, or that of mankind,
are concerned; but as part of the duty they owe to their country, as
English gentlemen, to uphold what they find in existence. That the
sentiment found a ready echo in aristocratic breasts, was testified, not
only by the “loud cheers” already alluded to, but by the speech of the
succeeding orator, Lord Caernarvon, (better known as Lord Porchester the
poet,) who expressed his warm approbation of the reason which the noble
lord had given for being of the Church of England, and his regret that a
sentiment in every respect so worthy of that (the Tory) side of the
house, should not have been delivered from it.[*]

What a reason for being of a religion! It was the religion of his
forefathers, meaning his father and grandmother, (omitting the forty
generations of Catholics, and the forty times forty of pagans;) and it
was the religion of his country, meaning about half, or less than half
of the people of his country. Are these such reasons as any one would
assign for believing any thing which he cared about the truth of? Would
he believe in geometry because it was the geometry of his forefathers,
or in history because it was the history of his country? If a religion
were to be believed because of its truth, who would ground his belief of
it upon a consideration which militates so much more strongly in favour
of Brahma or of Fo? But when belief is made a matter of family
affection, or social obligation, the case is altered. Then, as the
Englishman or the Chinese are required by patriotism to serve different
countries, so they may be bound by religion to worship different gods.
Lord Melbourne’s religion is an affair between him and his family, or
between him and his country, nowise between him and his God; the Deity
alone not being a party concerned in the religious belief or observances
of his creatures. But this is a genuine representation of the feeling
really entertained. In an ordinary conservative gentleman’s scheme of
religion, the part assigned to the Deity is by no means a dignified one.
He is to be believed in, for his existence is implied in several of the
thirty-nine articles;[†] and such honours are to be paid him as the
Church has been accustomed to render: but as for believing their
religion because it comes from Him, that is out of the question in their
case: as the “religion by law established,”[‡] it comes to them, with
the rest of their social obligations, from Parliament; though doubtless
they would admit that it comes from God too. But the truth is, that to
them God comes from it.


Lord Althorp and the Beer Bill

To their indelible disgrace, the Ministry have adopted Sir Edward
Knatchbull’s Edition: current; Page: [272] Beer Bill as a Government
measure; and this act of real insult and injury to the industrious poor
will pass into the statute-book under their auspices,* as a companion to
the Poor Law Bill, and an index, as too many will be apt to think, to
the real animus of this last.

We have so often, in these Notes, exposed the pretences of the
beer-house suppressors, that we return to the subject only to notice, in
a speech of Lord Althorp, an observation of almost miraculous
shallowness. The bill, it seems, gives an appeal to the Quarter-Sessions
against the decisions of individual magistrates: and this not being
deemed by some persons a sufficient remedy, Lord Althorp declared that
he “looked upon an appeal in open Court to be as sure a protection to
justice as trial by jury; at all events, in cases such as occurred under
the present bill. The magistrates who tried appeal cases came from
distant and various parts of the country, unfettered by previous
pledges, and devoid of any local prejudices.”[*] Very true; but
sheepstealers also “come from different parts of the country,” yet if we
merely set one gang of them to watch another, it will fare but ill with
the flock. As a chairman of Quarter-Sessions, Lord Althorp ought to have
known better what his brother justices are made of. What if they be
“devoid of local prejudices?” Are they not all magistrates, and country
gentlemen? and among what class, not excepting even the clergy, exists
there so intense an esprit de corps as among these? “Ask my brother if I
am a thief,” says the proverb; but Lord Althorp would think the brother
an unexceptionable referee if he were only a half-brother. Of what avail
has been the power of appeal to the Quarter-Sessions against the
stopping up of paths? Even between man and man there is notoriously not
a tribunal in the country, exposed to the public eye, where grosser
injustice is constantly committed than at the Quarter-Sessions. There
are exceptions, where a man of weight in the country, who happens to be
laborious, and a lover of impartial justice, fills the chair. But these
are exceptions. The contrary is the general rule.

*     *     *     *     *


9th August
 Major Pitman’s Dismissal

In our comments on this discreditable case in last month’s Notes, we
expressed our persuasion that the Ministry would not remove Major Pitman
from the Commission of the Peace.[†] It is, therefore, doubly incumbent
upon us to make our acknowledgments on behalf of the public, to the Lord
Chancellor, for an act of Edition: current; Page: [273] justice which,
obvious as it is, no former Chancellor would have thought it incumbent
upon him to perform.

We cannot, however, bestow the merited commendation on this proceeding
of Lord Brougham’s, without at the same time remarking, that if justice
has been done, it is no thanks (to use a familiar expression) to the
Morning Chronicle. Our worthy cotemporary, who, though his paper has
become a regular Ministerial organ, will always have our best wishes and
our most perfect respect, inserted an article on the 5th of this month,
which fully prepared us for a whitewashing of Major Pitman.[*] Though he
might be a brute in his family, that did not, the Chronicle argued,
prove him unfit for the bench; since he might be able to command his
temper there, though not elsewhere. Yes, doubtless; and to read moral
lectures from the bench on command of temper and pass sentence, most
imperturbably upon poor and ragged people, for offences not grosser than
his own, and infinitely more excusable. We are sure that the excellent
editor of the Chronicle had no hand in this miserable sophistry. It was
not in this spirit that he conceived those memorable articles, which
made the country ring with the offences and follies of the country
magistracy, and did more than has perhaps been done by any single
individual to bring down the oligarchy of England.

*     *     *     *     *


10th August
 The Government of Departments

There are facts occurring, we might say constantly occurring, which
necessitate one to believe, not only that the Whig Ministry is
altogether a government of departments,—that the collective will, or the
collective understanding of the Cabinet, is hardly ever brought to bear
upon anything,—that any single Minister commits the Ministry to the most
important acts, without consulting with his colleagues,—but even more
than this: we must believe that their ignorance of each other’s
proceedings is systematic and designed, and has for its object, that
when one of them does an exceptionable thing, and the question is put to
another, he may wash his hands of it. What a disclosure has just taken
place in the affair of the Brighton Guardian!

The participation of Government, in that most censurable prosecution, by
a previous engagement to pay its expenses, (a fact studiously withheld
from the public when the affair was undergoing discussion in
Parliament,)[†] was blurted out by Mr. Sergeant Doyley, at a meeting of
the Sussex magistrates, on some day in Edition: current; Page: [274] the
week ending July 19th; for, on Sunday, the 20th, the Examiner founded
upon the sergeant’s statement, the following just and forcible remarks:

In the course of the discussion, a fact transpired, most disgraceful to
the Government. . . . Who can be safe, if the public purse may be
secretly applied to attempts to crush him? The prosecutors in this case
(their expenses being guaranteed) have nothing to lose; while the
prosecuted party, supposing him to escape a verdict under the unjust
libel law, may be ruined by the costs. We look upon this transaction as
a conspiracy between certain gentlemen and the Home Office, for the ruin
of Mr. Cohen. “If you will stand forward and prosecute, we will pay,”
was the disgraceful bargain of the Government. But the Minister for the
Home Department did not choose, in his gentle mercies, to overwhelm the
defendant by employing the Attorney-general. The employment of the
Attorney-general is apt to recoil, and not always to overwhelm the party
whose destruction is aimed at. Governments have suffered as much by
Attornies-general as defendants; and, doubtless, Lord Melbourne
remembered that the Grey Ministry, at its onset, had not overwhelmed Mr.
Cobbett. There are more reasons than reasons of mercy for the
forbearance of Government from prosecutions for libel; but it is for the
interest of the public, that whatever Government does in prosecutions,
it should do openly, and by responsible functionaries. There should be
no underhand maintenance of prosecutions,—no secret subsidy for a war
against the Press,—no encouragement of the vindictive feelings of
individuals, by the promise to pay privately the price of their
gratification. Such practices are most malignant and most dangerous; and
it is the duty of the public to take care that the powers of its purse
shall not have so vicious an application. Willing as we have been to
think well of Lord Melbourne, it is with no common regret that we find
so foul a blot in his administration of the Home Office.[*]

The public money was thus prostituted to support a proceeding, by which,
as some newspaper has forcibly remarked, Mr. Cohen was tried for a libel
on the magistrates, before a bench of magistrates, and a jury of
magistrates. And it has since transpired, from a letter published by Sir
Charles Blount, (who has retired from the magistracy, disgusted with
this transaction,) that “the magistrates were all of opinion that no
opportunity should be lost to suppress the Guardian newspaper.”*

Now, here is an act of Government, of so much importance at least, not
to say of so questionable a character, published to the world in the
middle of July, by one of the parties concerned,[†] and made the subject
of severe strictures by the Press immediately afterwards; and of this
act, Lord Althorp, (by whose department it Edition: current; Page: [275]
must have been sanctioned,) on August the 4th, the question being put to
him by Mr. Hume, denied that he had any knowledge.[*] Mr. Francis
Baring, the Secretary to the Treasury, added that, neither had he any
knowledge of it; and Mr. Spring Rice volunteered his testimony, that he
had been Secretary to the Treasury at the time of the prosecution, and
that, to the best of his knowledge, no such act had taken place.[†] The
very day after, Lord Althorp returned to the subject, admitted the fact,
and justified it![‡]

Now, mark the singularity of these facts. An act of so much importance
as a prosecution for libel, is authorized, and the public money drawn
upon for the purpose, by the Home Minister, and of course through the
Treasury. All the Sussex magistrates knew this; but two Cabinet
Ministers, whose peculiar department is the expenditure of the public
money, and one of them the organ of Government in the House of Commons,
have never heard of it. A motion, in condemnation of the prosecution, is
made and discussed in the House of Commons,[§] and still these Ministers
have never heard that the Government are concerned in it. But at length,
when they must have heard of it,—when the other parties concerned have
published the fact,—when it has been carried through all England by the
newspapers, and made the subject of severe censures upon the Ministry by
their political opponents for three whole weeks—not even curiosity
prompts these singular specimens of rulers of the nation to step across
Downing-street and ask their colleague whether the assertion is true. Is
it possible not to believe that they voluntarily refrained from asking
the question, in order that, when it was put to them, they might be
unable to answer it? They did, however, answer it,—answered it with a
virtual denial; which they were forced to change the next day into an
admission and vindication.

As to the vindication, we shall leave the Examiner to deal with it:

In admitting the fact, Lord Althorp coolly observed, that the
circumstance was not new, and that several instances were on record. No
doubt; it would be difficult to strike out anything new in misgovernment
or abuse of powers, after the long course of Tory sway; but we were
promised, under the Reform Ministry, a renouncement of these old ways.
If the present Ministers are to justify acts of oppression, simply by
saying that the Tories did the same before them, we should like to know
in what respect they are better than the Tories, in whose steps they
follow; and why their government should be preferred? Mr. Warburton
expressed his conviction that the noble lord would not, on principle,
defend such a case. Edition: current; Page: [276] What matters it, if he
pleads practice as a sufficient justification? The plain fact is, that
the Home Office conspired with the Sussex magistrates to ruin Mr.
Cohen.[*]

*     *     *     *     *


12th August
 Defeat of the Irish Tithe Bill

The Lords have been most felicitous this year, in the occasions which
they have chosen for opposing themselves to the opinion and will of the
popular House. They have played into the hands of their enemies most
dexterously, though not exactly in the manner which the Ministerial
prints ascribe to them.

It would be very absurd to aim at the abolition of the House of Lords,
merely because (as the phrase goes) it is bad in the abstract—because it
is not such an institution as a wise man would establish if he were
framing a constitution for a new country. We have it, and such are the
inconveniences of constitutional changes, that if we could get on
passably well with it we ought to keep it. But it is impossible, in an
age of Movement, to get on with a legislative body which will never move
except upon compulsion; and as we knew that this would be the case with
the House of Lords, we, from the first, felt that they would render it
necessary to thrust them aside. With this conviction, then, we know not
what other or better political boon we could have prayed for, than that
they should so steer their course as to make the most offensive display
before the nation of the animus which actuates them, with the least
possible retardation of important measures. We know not by what other
means they could have contrived to accumulate so great a heap of obloquy
on their own heads with so little harm to the country, as by throwing
out the Jew Bill, the Universities’ Admission Bill, and the Irish Tithe
Bill.[†] The first two measures would not, if passed, have effected one
atom of practical good, while, being rejected, they involve the House
which rejected them in the whole odium of setting itself against civil
equality and religious liberty; and the loss of the Universities’ Bill,
by so immense a majority, throws the whole of the vast and powerful
Dissenting body into the arms of the popular party. The rejection of the
Irish Tithe Bill is a positive good; but it has been rejected on grounds
which place Edition: current; Page: [277] the Lords in direct hostility
to the great principle to which the Ministers have newly been forced to
commit themselves; the alienability of ecclesiastical property.

We feel for the Irish clergy, whom this act of their pretended friends
consigns to something like starvation. Most of them, however, are
relations or hangers-on of the Aristocracy, and these must be supported
by their families or their patrons. For the remainder, we trust that
those who have doomed them to indigence are prepared to subscribe
liberally. In every other point of view we rejoice that the Bill, which
gave away for ever to a class of the most useless, selfish, and
unfeeling drones in human shape who live and kill game on the surface of
the earth, two-fifths of the collective estate of the Irish nation
called Tithe, has met the fate it deserved.

This act of prodigality and folly will not, we trust, be repeated. The
question will have altered its shape before the next session. Nobody, we
should think, indulges the fond hope that a single shilling of tithe
will ever again be collected in Ireland. Thus, on the one hand, the
great problem of rooting out the Irish Church will be brought to a
speedier solution, while, on the other, the tithe, being no longer paid
to the Church, will fall into the hands of the landlords by the mere
force of circumstances, without any interference of the legislature. The
whole tithe being thus added to the rent, and the hands of Parliament
not being tied, as they would have been if the Bill had passed, by a
bargain with the landlord, Parliament may step in when it pleases, and
impose upon the landlords at its pleasure, without their having any
right to complain, a land-tax equal to the whole tithe.

*     *     *     *     *


15th August
 The Chancellor’s Doctrine of Appeals

It is a practice of Lord Brougham to bring in some Bill on an important
subject at the very end of a session, whereby he goes off the stage with
éclat, and retains the power of silently dropping the measure if it
should not suit his convenience to proceed with it in the year
following. There are some advantages, even of a public kind, in this
mode of proceeding, and we by no means hold it up as in all cases to be
condemned. The Bill which he laid on the table of the House, on the last
day but one of the session, is laudable in its object, which is to
supersede that mockery of the administration of justice, the appellate
judicature of the House of Lords.[*] The Chancellor took great pains to
impress upon their Lordships that the Bill does not interfere with their
privileges; nor does it, any more than a King’s privileges are
interfered with, by the appointment, with his consent, of a Regent: but
the measure Edition: current; Page: [278] is simply to appoint another
court of appeal, to whom the House shall hand over the causes as they
arise, to be by them decided; and this is a pretty effectual
supersession, though not an infringement of their judicial authority.

Lord Brougham’s notions of appeal, however, which have always appeared
to us to be very imperfect, have manifested themselves with all their
imperfections in this Bill, and in the speech by which it was prefaced.
He laid down two principles: one, that an appeal should never lie to one
judge, but always to several; the other, that a judge of appeal should
always be, at the very same time, acting as a judge in an inferior
court. What should he be worth, he asked, as an appeal judge, were it
not for the forensic strepitus in which he is constantly involved?

Now, both these principles we hold to be fundamentally and absolutely
erroneous. We consider it to be of the first importance in all
judicature, whether supreme or subordinate, that the judge should be
one. It is a rule which holds true in all affairs, public or private,
that what is one person’s business is better done than what is the joint
business of several. One judge relies only upon himself, several rely
upon each other. One judge feels that the whole merit and the whole
responsibility will lie with him; one of several knows that he had only
his aliquot part, and “responsibility which is divided is destroyed.”[*]
When four judges are set to try one cause, (as in the Common Law Courts,
and in Lord Brougham’s proposed Court of Appeal,) the best that happens
is, that one judge really decides, using the others as screens, and
occasionally as drudges: while it too often happens that not even one of
the four gives his whole mind to the subject; and, perhaps, from the
carelessness in making appointments, which is likely to prevail in
nominating not a judge but a fourth part of a judge, not one of the four
has a mind which he can apply, with any prospect of advantage, to a
difficult cause.

A good judicial establishment would consist only of local courts, and
one great Court of Appeal, in the metropolis, composed of a sufficient
number of the most experienced and skilful judges. Each judge should sit
separately to hear causes, but when a point of law has to be settled,
then, to secure uniformity of decision, all the judges of the Court of
Appeal should sit together.

And then, touching the forensic strepitus which Lord Brougham thinks of
so much importance;[†] is there any meaning in this loosest of all
terms, and what is it? Surely not, that noise and bustle conduce to
excellence, in the operation which, of all others performed by human
beings, most demands that the mind be in a cool and collected state. If
it be meant that, in the present state of English law, the judge cannot
pick out the law applicable to the case without learned lawyers on both
sides of the cause to suggest it to him, we grant it; but of such
strepitus there will be as much, indeed more, in the highest court, the
court of last resort, than in the inferior ones. What is wanted in a
judge, besides knowledge of the law, is skill in Edition: current; Page:
[279] judging of evidence. As this skill can only be the result of
experience, it is most important that a judge in the supreme tribunal
should have been a judge in one of the courts below, but nowise that he
should be so. If he be fit for the higher duty, it is a mere waste of
capacity to set him to work in a narrower field, and under correction
from a superior. The judges who can be trusted without a superior over
them, are not so numerous that the nation can spare any part of their
time for acting under other people.

We abstain from comment on the very unexpected eulogium, (as we think it
must have been to those who were the objects of it) which Lord Brougham
pronounced upon the House of Lords, as the amenders of the absurd
legislation of the House of Commons.[*] We have not been observers of
Henry Brougham for fifteen years, to learn now, that when once his lips
are unsealed he never knows where to stop. When his cue was to assail
the Lords, he could not restrain within the bounds of dignity his fatal
facility of sarcastic language; this time, that they might not be
alarmed at his meditated encroachment on their judicial functions, his
cue was to cajole them, and neither in this, when he once began, could
he stop short of the bounds of truth or of discretion. He is a slave to
his own flux of words. His tongue governs him, not he his tongue.

*     *     *     *     *


16th August
 The Prorogation

At length the session has closed, and closed with a most characteristic
speech from the throne. Not a word was said in it of Ireland, or Church
Reform, or the claims of the Dissenters, subjects on which even any
allusion to the past, much more any suggestion concerning the future,
might have been inconvenient. In lieu of such, the whole glories of the
session were passed in review: and these did not require a long
enumeration. Silence was observed on the subject of the Beer Bill. They
had passed the Poor Law Bill; and—they had enlarged the jurisdiction of
the Old Bailey![†] Macte virtute, generose puer; sic itur ad astra.[‡]

With a lurking consciousness, possibly, that the expiring session, with
the exception of the Poor Law Bill, makes but a sorry figure in the way
of legislative amendments, Ministers have drawn upon the session to come
for anticipated renown, and have exhorted Parliament to apply itself to
the consideration of “our jurisprudence,” and “our municipal
corporations.”[§] If we may augur from this that Ministers will
themselves do what they bid others do, and will meet Edition: current;
Page: [280] Parliament next February with their minds made up, and their
measures already matured, though it be only on those two subjects, we
shall hail such a change in their practice as one of the most laudable
symptoms they can evince of minds at length alive to the exigencies of
the times, and to the serious nature of their duties. We trust that the
proposed amendments in “our jurisprudence,” will be not merely some
trumpery consolidation of statutes, or mitigation of penalties, but that
at least a bill for local courts, and local registration in all
departments, will accompany the bill for a well organised local
administration, which would be the fulfilment of the pledge for a reform
of the municipal corporations.

Edition: current; Page: [281]


THE CLOSE OF THE SESSION
 1834

Edition: current; Page: [282]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Monthly Repository, n.s. VIII (Sept., 1834), 605-9. Heading and running
titles as title. Unsigned; not republished. Identified in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article headed ‘The Close of the Session’ in the
Monthly Repository for Sept. 1834” (MacMinn, 42). There are no
corrections or emendations in the copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville
College. For comment on the essay, see lix above.

Edition: current; Page: [283]


The Close of the Session

at the termination of the first session of the Reformed Parliament, a
radical reformer, hearing some one make the complaint, so often made at
that period, that the session had accomplished nothing, made answer, “Do
you call it nothing to have completely discredited the Reform Ministry?
Could this, in the course of nature, have been accomplished in a shorter
time than one session?”

Subsequent events have proved that this reformer did not err in his
estimate of the great step which was achieved in the session of 1833.
Another session has now concluded; and the cry is even stronger than
before, that in this session also, nothing has been accomplished. We
hold that in every session something is accomplished; and in this one in
particular, more than in any other since the Revolution, save only that
which witnessed the birth of the Reform Bill.

In measures of actual legislation the present year has not been
fruitful. If reforms were not to be weighed but counted,[*] the first
session of the Reformed Parliament was a prodigy of activity compared
with the second; for during it the Parliament did a greater number of
things ill, than have been done well by all the Parliaments of the
present century. The present session has realized no more than one
measure of any note, the Poor Law Bill: that, however, is of far greater
practical importance than all the Slave Bills and East India Bills of
the preceding session,[†] and was, moreover, distinguished from them all
in this, that what was intended to be done, was done; there was no
bungling, no botching; the subject was not trifled with: the whole of
what was needful to be done, and not a part only, was aimed at, and the
means chosen were really adapted to the end. Even if the value of a
session consisted solely in its positive enactments, the session which
has produced only this great measure has not been ill spent. We had no
such expectation from the Reform Bill, even in our most sanguine
moments, as that in two years from its passing into a law, one of the
greatest social reforms which this country needed, or for which any
country could be indebted to its government,—one, too, which was not
clamorously demanded by public opinion—would be, so far as depends on
legislative enactments, completed.*

Edition: current; Page: [284]
But in these days of Movement, the place which any session, or any
single event, will occupy in history, depends not upon the intrinsic
importance of the event, or value of the Acts of Parliament which have
passed during the session; but upon the far greater consideration, how
much it has helped forward the Movement, or contributed to hold it back.
The question is not what village, castle, or city is our halting-place
for the night, but how much lower down the stream, our day’s journey has
landed us. Look back, then; measure the interval between the point we
started from and that which we have reached, and see if we have not made
as much way in a given time, as might satisfy any rational person’s most
impatient desires.

By the passing of the Reform Bill, the instrument seemed to be obtained,
by which all the evils of our political condition could be remedied, and
all who had grievances could, or thought they could, get them redressed.
But an instrument is nothing without somebody to work it. The new
instrument of government could be worked either by Ministers or by the
people. Those who made the machine, seemed the likeliest persons to be
able to work it; at least, it seemed fair that they should have a trial.
They had their trial; and after handling their tools as never workmen
did before, and turning out such pieces of work as would disgrace a boy
in the second year of his apprenticeship, they threw up the task, and
said to the nation, You must work the machinery yourselves, we are only
fit to oil the wheels. The nation have taken them at their word. During
the first year of the Reformed Parliament the people were passive; they
stood by, that Ministers might act: this year the people have acted.
Last year was spent in showing what Ministers could do; and the result
seems to have satisfied both themselves and the public that they could
do little or nothing. This year has shown what the people could do.

In the Notes on the Newspapers, for last March, we said,

The session now commencing, will probably decide, in the minds of the
many, who wield the physical force, the question whether anything is to
be hoped from the higher classes, and whether the people shall, or shall
not, take their affairs into their own hands.—The public had expected
much, but did not know exactly what. They felt sure that the Reform Bill
must somehow be a great good to them, and they trusted that those who
had been sufficiently their friends to give them the Bill, would find
the means of making it have its natural effects. The first session
taught them that they were not to expect this: the Reform Ministry and
the Reformed Parliament would do no good spontaneously. The second will
show whether they are capable of doing any when they are forced. If this
trial should also fail, we live in times when mankind hurry on rapidly
to ultimate consequences; the next question will be, what is the easiest
and most expeditious way of getting rid of them.[*]

As we expected, so has it proved. The people have taken their affairs
into their Edition: current; Page: [285] own hands. Ministers and
Parliament, who, in being expected to think for themselves, had been put
upon a task they were nowise equal to, have had a new trial upon an
easier tenure, and have got through it much better. The second session
has, as we anticipated, decided the question whether they are capable of
doing good when compelled by the public voice. They can do good when
they are forced. They have even proved, that when not opposed by the
interests or prejudices of any powerful class, they can, as in the case
of the Poor Law Bill, do good spontaneously. For this we give them due
honour: we thank them for it as for a great service past and done. But
there are no services of like importance remaining to be rendered, at no
cost to the peers, or the clergy, or the landlords, or the lawyers, or
the manufacturers, or the shipowners, or any other kind of persons who
are accustomed to be kept at the public expense, and who are able to
fight hard for the privilege. We have, therefore, little expectation of
further unforced service from Ministers and their adherents. But we now
know that they will yield to gentle violence. What wishes they have, are
now on the people’s side. When the Movement left off waiting for them to
lead the van, its onward pressure bore down all those among them who
would not move, or who would only move at their own pace. None remain
but those who always go with the stream, and those whose preference is
for the cause of improvement, although they were wanting in courage to
head the contest for it. Not only are these the men now in place, but
until a better and nobler race of public men shall arise, none but such
as these, it is now evident, can be in place.

With these the people will carry by peaceable means, whatever they are
bent upon carrying. The pike and the bayonet will not be wanted in this
country. What the ten days of May, 1832, rendered probable, the session
of 1834 has made certain; that the English revolution will be a
revolution of law, and not of violence. The resistance will give way
before the moral force of opinion. The experiment was fairly tried on
Lord Grey’s resignation. That two years ago the Tories were not allowed
to step in between the people and the great constitutional change which
they so ardently desired, cannot so much be wondered at: but after the
Reform was safe, and no measure which the people cared about was in any
immediate jeopardy, the Ministry broke down by its own imbecility; the
Conservatives had such a chance as they can never again have; yet even
then, Tories and Conservative Whigs were alike rejected; and even out of
the ruins of the same shattered Cabinet, a still feebler one was patched
up, because the only Ministry which could exist, was a Movement
Ministry, and because, just at that time, no better Movement Ministry
could be formed. And until the phrase shall cease to have a meaning, and
Reformer and Conservative shall be a distinction in history alone, a
Movement Ministry and no other will govern England; or rather, will be
governed by her.

If we be asked, then, what has been gained? our answer is, Circumspice.
Is not the general aspect of politics quite altered since the opening of
the session? Is not the very air we breathe of another quality? The
contest, whether the Reform Bill Edition: current; Page: [286] was to
have its consequences, or another and a more drastic Reform Bill was
necessary to our deriving any benefits from the first—this contest had
not commenced when the session opened: the battle has now been fought,
and the good cause has triumphed. Then, there was a dead calm; now, the
wind has risen. We breathe an atmosphere of movement; and it is speeding
us forward on our course.

It is no abatement from what has been gained, that the seal has not yet
been put upon any part of it by an Act of Parliament. When the
ministerial manifesto, last year,[*] boasted of the great things which
the Ministry had done, the Examiner said—What care we for what you have
done? It is the spirit of what you have done, that we care for. All you
can do, until the public mind is more matured, would amount, if you were
the wisest statesmen in the world, to a very trifle.[†] What we want to
know is, what a Minister says.—And the Ministers had said nothing. They
had put forth nothing which either committed themselves, or prepared the
public mind: they had not announced a single principle. This year the
case is reversed. They have done for the popular cause, on their own
showing, nothing: but their sayings have been most valuable doings. They
have made themselves the heralds of the victory which the national voice
has now finally achieved over the combined strength of the supporters of
bad institutions. They have proclaimed, and with impressive solemnity,
that the power, be it what it may, which sets itself against the spirit
of the age, must fall. And they have identified themselves with that
spirit, on the great question which, first of the many which are
impending, will be brought to a practical issue. They have declared the
indefeasible right of the State, if the Church property exceeds what can
usefully be applied to ecclesiastical purposes, to apply the residue to
other purposes; and on this principle they have announced that it is
their resolution to act.

This satisfies us. They who will do thus much, will do more when the
time comes. One question at a time is as much as the public mind can be
occupied with; and the enemy’s country can be equally conquered whether
we invade it on one point or on several. We now know that he cannot keep
the field against us, and it matters little which of his fortresses we
first besiege. But there is none which more invites an assailant than
the Church Establishment; for it is the most vulnerable point in the
whole line of defence, and yet, as the whole force of the enemy will be
collected in it, and as it will hold out to the death, its fall will
throw the whole country into our hands.

The curtailment of the Irish Church will be the Reform Bill of the next
session: to be fought for by a union of the Ministry, the House of
Commons, and the people, against the House of Lords. More slowly, but as
certainly, the Church Edition: current; Page: [287] Establishment of
England will share the fate which awaits all bodies who pretend to be
what they are not, and to accomplish what they do not even attempt. And
the fall of the Church will be the downfal of the English aristocracy,
as depositaries of political power. When all the privileged orders
insist upon embarking in the same vessel, all must naturally expect to
perish in the same wreck.

Edition: current; Page: [288] Edition: current; Page: [289]


POSTSCRIPT TO THE LONDON REVIEW, NO. 1.
 1835

Edition: current; Page: [290]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London Review, I (equivalent to London and Westminster, XXX) (Apr.,
1835), 254-6. Heading and running titles as title. Signed “A.” Not
republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “The Postscript to No.
1 of the London Review” (MacMinn, 44). There are no corrections or
emendations in the copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville College.

Edition: current; Page: [291]


Postscript to the London Review, No. 1

since our article on the political state of the country was sent to
press,[*] the experiment which, when that Article was written, was but
in an early stage of its progress, has been completed. By the result of
that experiment, it is ascertained, first, that even with all the
defects still inherent in our representative system, the crown and the
aristocracy can no longer force upon the nation a ministry against its
will; and, secondly, that the nation will not endure a conservative
ministry. The time, indeed, is not come for a ministry of thorough
Reformers; and the Tories, as little as the Whigs, now profess
themselves thorough anti-reformers. Tories may grant reforms; and Whigs,
as the people well know, will often refuse them, or pare them down into
insignificance. But there is this difference between the two parties:
the Whigs at least profess to love reform; the spirit of examination and
change which is abroad is no subject of lamentation to them; they
declare themselves gratified by it, and take credit to themselves for
having helped to produce it. The Tories, on the contrary, look upon that
spirit with avowed suspicion, most of them with absolute terror; they
make no pretence of sympathizing with it; and whatever concessions they
are willing to make to it are made avowedly to necessity.

By such persons the nation has now declared, in a manner not to be
misunderstood, and which has carried conviction to the minds even of
those to whom such a fact is least palatable, that it will not be
governed. It will not have for ministers men who confess that their
hearts are not in the cause of reform—who lay claim to support, not for
what they will, but for what they will not, do, to forward the amendment
of our institutions. Men who would govern this country from henceforward
must not be men who thought our institutions perfect five years ago, and
who declare that their opinions have not changed. They must either have
the sincere belief, or the decent pretence of a belief, that those
institutions were and are imperfect—that there are changes, which are
not merely necessary evils which the people unthinkingly demand, but a
good in themselves.

This is a lesson, not without its value to those who still needed it. In
all other respects, the prospects of the nation appear to us, after this
change, exactly as they Edition: current; Page: [292] appeared three
months ago. The progress of reform appears to us certain; and we know
full well that it will be slow. Any ministry which can be formed out of
the scanty and inefficient materials afforded by the present houses of
parliament will leave much to be desired—much to be criticised—much to
be pardoned. We do not call upon the thorough Reformers to declare
enmity against them, or to seek their downfall, because their measures
will be half-measures, often not more than quarter-measures; nor even
because they will join with the Tories in crying down all complete
reforms, and will fight the battle of half-reform with anti-reform
artillery. This the thorough Reformers are prepared for, and we believe
they will disregard it. But we do implore them not to implicate
themselves in the responsibility of a half-reform policy. They may
support a ministry, where it deserves support, with far greater effect
out of office; and they will retain the inestimable advantage of being
at liberty to advocate what, as members of a cabinet, they would not
have it in their power to carry into effect. Let them not allow
themselves to be circumvented by the time-serving doctrine, that it is
imprudent to propose anything which has no chance of immediate success.
All great things which have ever been accomplished in the world, since
Opinion became the ruler of it, have been accomplished by attempting
things which for years, or generations, or ages after the first attempt,
had not the remotest chance of success. Whoever, as a statesman, acts
upon any other maxim, aims not at the glory of himself exercising any
influence over the fortunes of his country or of mankind, and aspires
only to register decrees, in the framing of which he voluntarily
declares himself unworthy to have any voice.

If the ambition of the thorough Reformers be not limited to this paltry
object, they will penetrate themselves with the conviction, that it is
for others to consider what can be carried through the House of Commons;
but that they are there to stand up for what is good in itself, let who
will be minister, and however small a portion of the House may go along
with them.

From the ministry we neither expect nor demand all this; nor has the
time yet come when so manly a course would be consistent with their
remaining a ministry. But there is one thing which is not too much to
require of them. We cannot expect that they will propose measures which
are in advance of the House of Commons; but, unless they would be
utterly contemptible, let them not, this time, confine themselves to
such as they trust will be agreeable to the House of Lords. That this
was the principle, the systematic principle, of Earl Grey’s ministry, we
have the public testimony of Lord John Russell, in a speech to his
constituents in Devonshire; and Lord Melbourne’s answer to the Derby
address was in the same spirit.[*] If the new ministers act upon a
similar principle; if, as often as they believe that the House of Lords
would throw out a measure of improvement, they Edition: current; Page:
[293] mutilate it, or refuse absolutely to introduce it, and perhaps
even assail it when introduced by others; if they again place themselves
as a barrier between the Lords and public odium, and, to shield the real
culprits, take upon themselves the responsibility of withholding from
the nation its just demands,—their administration will assuredly not
last one twelvemonth. Recent events are proof more than sufficient, if
proof had been wanting, that it is impossible to please the Tories and
the people both. The people will not have the Tories, even on a promise
to act like Whigs; and ridiculous indeed would the expectation be, that
they would tolerate Whigs who should again make it their avowed
principle to act like Tories.

Edition: current; Page: [294] Edition: current; Page: [295]


PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS OF THE SESSION
 1835

Edition: current; Page: [296]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London Review, I (July, 1835), 512-24 (equivalent to London and
Westminster, XXX). Headed as title. Running titles: 512-18, as title;
519-24, “Municipal Reform Bill” (change keyed by the paragraph beginning
“The destructive part . . .,” 303). Signed “A.” Not republished.
Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “The article entitled
‘Parliamentary Proceedings of the Session’ in the same number of the
same work”; i.e., as “Tennyson’s Poems” (MacMinn, 45). There are no
corrections or emendations in the copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville
College.

Edition: current; Page: [297]


Parliamentary Proceedings of the Session

in the postscript to the first Number of this Review,[*] published while
the Melbourne Ministry was in the process of formation, we explained why
that portion of the House of Commons, who are entitled to the
appellation of thorough reformers, ought not to connect themselves
officially with any ministry which could be composed from the materials
now existing in public life; and we described the attitude of support,
but of qualified and distrustful support, which it appeared to us most
consistent with the principles of the thorough reformers, and most
conducive to their usefulness, that they should maintain towards the new
administration. We believed that the Whigs would propose, on one or two
important questions, measures considerably more extensive, and better
calculated to facilitate further improvements, than would be proposed by
any Tory ministry. On this ground, we wished that the Whigs should
remain in office. That they were prepared to concede any improvements
but those so urgently demanded by the public, that no government, raised
to power by the public will, could refuse them without the immediate
loss of office, we did not believe; nor, with regard to the greatest
part of the evils which affect our social state, did we believe that the
Whigs were, less than the Tories, attached to the evils, or less
terrified at the remedies.

The course which we recommended has been that which the thorough
reformers, both in the press and the House of Commons, have adopted. And
that it was the advisable course, the conduct of the ministry has ever
since been affording fresh proofs. To say nothing of minor matters, the
Ministers have afforded us an opportunity of judging of them in regard
to four great questions: the Corporations, and the Irish Church, the
Ballot, and the Taxes on Knowledge. On the first two subjects their
conduct has given ample reason why the complete reformers should support
them; on the two latter, ample reason why that support should be, as we
have already expressed ourselves, qualified and distrustful.

We are more desirous, on the present occasion, to dwell upon the
favourable, than upon the unfavourable side. Yet, before we enter into
an examination of the two measures which constitute the claim of the
present Cabinet to the support of Reformers, we must make a few
observations on the two other great questions just Edition: current;
Page: [298] alluded to; because we deem it important that the Reformers
should be under no mistake concerning the probable duration and limits
of the co-operation which is practicable between themselves and the Whig
Cabinet.

We shall begin with the Taxes on Knowledge,[*] because it is the subject
on which all we have to say will be soonest said.

This great question the former Melbourne Government left as a kind of
legacy to the present. It was understood, and, by a distinguished member
of that Government, proclaimed on more than one public occasion, that
the ministry intended to take off the newspaper stamps.[†] The subject
has been strongly pressed upon the present ministers since their
appointment; numerous petitions against these taxes have latterly been
presented to parliament; but, to all interrogations on the subject,
ministers have returned evasive answers.[‡] The people ought to make
them understand, that by their conduct on this question they will in a
great measure be judged, and that the sentence is only suspended until
their budget is produced. The language which they have as yet held on
the subject is little honourable either to their sincerity as reformers,
or to their discernment as statesmen. They are told that these taxes are
the grand hindrance to what no one will look his fellow-creatures in the
face and deny to be the very most important end which any persons in
public trust can aim at—the instruction of the people. They are told
that, by reason of these taxes, the people, who are willing to be
instructed, cannot get instruction, and those who are willing and
desirous to instruct the people are debarred the means of giving them
instruction. Now, to such a proposition placed before them upon such
grounds there are several answers which they might have returned. One
was, “It is right; let us do it:” and this would have been the wisest
and most virtuous answer. Another was, “It is not right; let us not do
it:” and this might have been an honest, and would not have been an
absolutely silly answer. Our ministers have contrived to find a third,
different from either: “It is right; but we do not know whether we will
do it or not.” Mr. Spring Rice expressed his agreement in all the
doctrines of those who object to the tax; but the glass-manufacturers
also wanted to get their tax taken off, whereby we may drive a thriving
trade in glass with all Europe; and the question must lie over until Mr.
Spring Rice can decide which is best, an export of glass, or an
instructed people.

What kind of statesmanship is this? The taxes on the diffusion of
knowledge are either a positive good, or their existence is a violation
of the first duty of a government; the most sacred claim of a people.
Satisfy yourselves which of the two it is, and act accordingly; but for
very shame, give over treating the question of Edition: current; Page:
[299] the civilization of your people as a question of revenue—a
question where the government is to find 400,000l. And this when, in
four years, five millions of far less objectionable taxes have been
taken off.

Before our next publication, ministers will have been forced to explain
themselves categorically on this subject. For the present, we shall say
no more upon it.

Ministers have declared their unabated determination to resist the
Ballot. We view this declaration in a very serious light; and we think
the importance of it will manifest itself more and more to all eyes.

A government which is determined to oppose the ballot must end by a
coalition with the Tories. Without the ballot there will, in two or
three years more, be a Tory parliament. We are unable to conceive how
the evidence of this can be resisted. The majority of the electors, both
in the old and in the new constituencies, are in a state of complete
dependence upon the wealthy persons of their neighbourhood. Of these
wealthy persons, a vast majority are Tories. The Reform Act did not
change human nature. It did two things: it introduced into the
constituency a large body of new electors, not yet corrupted by the foul
influences; and it inspired the electors with an enthusiasm, which
induced them very generally to brave those influences, and disregard the
mandate of those who could do them good or ill. So stood the case in
1832: but in 1834? In two years, this effect of the Reform Bill had so
spent itself, that the Tories, and those who were willing to act with
the Tories, obtained within thirty of a majority of the Reformed House.
The elections of Devonshire, Staffordshire, and Inverness-shire, were
subsequent to that time. This the Tories call re-action. We call it the
natural working of the constitution established by the Reform Bill; a
constitution, which enables the people to carry all before them when
driven by any violent excitement; but compels them, through the
publicity of the suffrage, to exercise that power under pains and
penalties, which prevent it from being ever exerted on common occasions,
or in quiet times.

What did Lord John Russell and Lord Howick, the two ministers who made
themselves spokesmen against the ballot, say to this?[*] They said, it
was true there had been intimidation, gross intimidation, and, in the
election which had just taken place, that of Lord John himself,
intimidation beyond all former precedent; if it were let alone, however,
perhaps it would cease of itself! Public opinion, and the growth of
intelligence, would in time restrain, nay, according to Lord Howick, had
already restrained, and were restraining, the intimidation, every day
more and more. A hopeful and cheering view of human affairs, truly; but,
like most of the maxims of the Whigs when they are talking like Tories,
they have been somewhat late in finding it out. Why abolish the rotten
boroughs? Why not trust to the growth of intelligence, and the power of
public opinion, which were acting upon the Edition: current; Page: [300]
boroughmongers, every day more and more? Why turn out Sir Robert Peel?
Would public opinion, and the progress of intelligence, have been
without effect upon that minister? What need of a police? What need of
laws, and courts of justice? Cannot you rely upon the growth of
intelligence, and the influence of public opinion upon the thieves? What
need of an army or navy? Why not disband our forces, and trust for our
protection to the public opinion of Europe?

It is time to have done with these propositions for giving uncontrolled
mastery over the people to an irresponsible few, and trusting to public
opinion to prevent them from abusing it; these fond anticipations, that
men will not do what is in accordance with their interest, and with the
opinion of all those whom they care for, out of deference to the opinion
of those for whom they do not care. Intimidation in elections will
increase, not diminish. It will be greater in the next general election
than in the last, as it was greater in the last than in any preceding.
Not the intimidation, but the feelings which make men resist
intimidation, will diminish. He who has once voted against his
conscience, will have less and less sense of degradation in so voting,
every successive time. There are persons who believe that a great and
salutary effect will be produced upon the parliamentary elections by
Corporation Reform. We believe that it will produce some, but nothing
like a decisive effect. Though the corruption and intimidation, hitherto
exercised by corporations, were to cease, there are ample means both of
corruption and intimidation in other hands, and by these the municipal
elections themselves may be perverted, and through them the corporation
property again brought into corrupt hands. If Corporation Reform
strengthen the ministry at elections, it will be chiefly by rekindling
some sparks of the expiring enthusiasm; an effect which is in its nature
evanescent, and cannot be reproduced. No ministry can continue exciting
the people to a fresh fit of enthusiasm every year.

We repeat, then, that without the ballot we shall speedily have a Tory
parliament; and that the present ministers will have to decide, whether
they will support the ballot, or abandon office to the Tories, or
coalesce with the Tories on their own terms. The exact time when this
decision must be made it is impossible to foresee, but by no power can
it be postponed for more than a year or two. When it comes, which course
will the ministers choose? Probably they will not all of them make the
same choice. The problem will then be reduced to its simplest terms: Who
is for the aristocracy and who for the people, will be the plain
question. Ought the government, or ought it not, to be under the
complete control of the possessors of large property? Those of the
ministers who think that it ought, with nearly the whole of the Whig
aristocracy, will combine with the Tories in a determined resistance to
all further extension of popular influences. Those who think that it
ought not, together with two-thirds of those members of the House of
Commons who now support the ministry, will form a powerful Opposition
party, resting upon the people. The contest will then be short and
sharp, between the two principles which divide the world, the
aristocratic principle and the democratic; Edition: current; Page: [301]
and in such a “stand-up fight,” he is an indifferent prophet who cannot
foresee that the victory will be with the side where the strength is
growing, not with that where it is waning.

In the debate on Mr. Grote’s motion,[*] the complete reformers made an
exhibition of boldness, concert, and parliamentary talent, which greatly
raised their character in the House, and ought to convince them what a
power they might wield, if they, who are the most instructed portion of
the House, were not, unhappily, (with some meritorious exceptions,) the
least enterprising and energetic. The votes showed a considerable
increase in the number of the avowed supporters of the ballot, since the
last division two years ago. But a still more encouraging symptom, to
those who were present, was the temper of the House: the manifest favour
with which the proposition was received, by all except the Tories and
the immediate adherents of ministers; and the tone of confidence in
their strength, we might almost say of triumph, assumed by its
supporters. Though the question was lost, it might have been supposed
that they knew it was about to be carried, so completely were all the
signs of conscious superiority on their side.

We shall now state, as briefly as possible, our sentiments on the two
great measures of reform to which the ministry have, in our opinion
rightly, postponed for the present session all minor questions. We mean,
of course, the Municipal Corporation Bill,[†] and the Bill for reforming
the Irish Church.[‡]

We regard both these measures as, in point of principle, of the very
highest moment; and from one of them we expect important practical
benefit. The importance of the other consists chiefly in the principle
which it recognises.

We regard the Irish Church Bill as the final blow to the superstition
(once so strong, but which has of late been so rapidly wearing out) of
the inalienable character of endowments, and, in particular, of
ecclesiastical endowments. For the first time, the popular branch of the
legislature has sanctioned the principle, that, saving all existing
life-interests, Parliament has the right, paying a reasonable, and no
more than a reasonable, regard to the original purposes of endowments,
to deal with the surplus as it deems most expedient. The House of
Commons have once deliberately announced this principle in a solemn
resolution,[§] and are about to pass a bill in which the power so
claimed by them is actually exercised.

Considered with regard to its direct object, as a measure for reducing
the sinecure church establishment of Ireland, the bill has two great
defects. The first is, that it is a bill for the reduction of the
sinecure church, and not for its total Edition: current; Page: [302]
extinction. A measure of that extent, we believe, would not have been in
advance of the public mind. No rational supporter of a church
establishment now attempts to justify an inconsiderable minority in
imposing their church upon the majority, or one nation in imposing
theirs upon another nation. Even to attempt it is such an act of
tyranny, as no nation ever submitted to but from the fear of the
bayonet. Nothing can justify retaining the Irish Church, even on the
most moderate scale, unless all other sects are to be established and
endowed likewise.

From the present ministers, however, we looked for no measure beyond a
diminution of the monstrous establishment: nor do we blame them for not
proposing what the House of Commons probably would not have passed. But
the bill they have proposed curtails only one part, and that the least
overgrown part of the establishment: it reduces the number and
emoluments of the parochial clergy, but leaves the bishops and the deans
and chapters untouched. Ten bishops and two archbishops seem rather a
costly instrument of superintendence for the religious instruction of
eight hundred thousand persons. Several English bishops, a body whom few
persons consider to be either overworked or underpaid, have singly the
charge of dioceses containing much more than that number of
communicants. If there is to be an endowed Church of Ireland, one
bishop, with a fitting number of archdeacons, would be an amply
sufficient allowance of superior clergy for such an establishment.

If, however, to make the reduction include the hierarchy as well as the
parochial clergy, would have endangered the success of the bill in the
House of Commons, ministers are not to be blamed for stopping short
where they did. The contest at present is not for the details, but for
the principle. The battle is to be fought with the House of Lords, and
any ground, if it be but of tolerable width, will do well enough to
fight that battle upon. The Bill is a challenge of the House of Lords to
mortal combat. We believe that the challenge will be accepted, and that,
though the struggle may be protracted, this victory will be the final
one.

On the Bill for the reform of Municipal Corporations our remarks will
extend to greater length, because the subject is of greater complexity,
and is one of those on which details are all-important. In dealing with
the Irish Church, or with the taxes on knowledge, there is a straight
path before us: only deal destruction sufficiently wide, and you cannot
be wrong: there is a simple test to judge what measure is the best; it
is that which destroys the most. But on the subject to which we are now
about to advert, Parliament have not only to destroy, but to rebuild:
they have to construct a local government: a task the execution of which
involves most of the leading principles of the art of politics—a work
not very dissimilar in its nature, and only second in its importance, to
that of framing the constitution of a state.

It has fared, however, with ministers in this instance, as it usually
fares with the statesmen of this generation when they attempt to be
reformers. The destructive part of their measures is almost always good,
but the constructive part bad. This has been the remark made by the best
judges on most of the Whig reforms. It is Edition: current; Page: [303]
remarkably applicable to the Reform Bill itself; and it is applicable to
the Slave Bill; to the East-India Bill, to the Bankruptcy Bill,[*] and
in general to all Lord Brougham’s law reforms,[†] which have swept away
much that is bad, but substituted nothing which, in the opinion of those
most competent to judge, is fit to stand as part of an improved system.
The reason is obvious. Public men have now a work to perform, requiring
far greater study and preparation than the works which devolved upon
their predecessors, and this study and preparation they have not
bestowed. They come to their task with minds not properly furnished.
They can destroy, because to destroy is easy; even to perceive what
deserves to be destroyed is generally not difficult; though this they
seldom see until all the world is crying shame upon them for not seeing
it. But to rebuild is a work of science; it demands a comprehensive
survey and philosophical analysis of ends and means; and as they never
have made any such survey, or performed any such analysis, they have no
rule to go by but the rule of all unscientific craftsmen, the rule of
thumb. By that, accordingly, they regulate themselves, and do, with as
little alteration as possible, what others have done before them.

The destructive part of the Municipal Corporation Bill is of signal
excellence. It tears down, with no unsparing hand, the old abomination.
In the constructive part there is also one point of great merit—the
liberal measure which has been dealt out of popular privilege. The
ministry have shown no foolish distrust of the people. For the extension
of the suffrage to all householders they are entitled to great praise;
and if to this had been added the ballot, the responsibility of the
town-councils to those whose interests are committed to their charge
would have been nearly as complete as could be desired.

While, too, the town-councils are chosen by, and amenable to, the
community, all other town-officers, except those intrusted with the
administration of justice, are chosen by the town-councils.* This is
judicious. In local, as in general government, we are of opinion that
the people should elect the body which is to control the executive, but
should not elect the executive functionaries themselves; for all
executive duties require some peculiar capacity (appropriate aptitude,
as Mr. Bentham was accustomed to style it),[‡] of which the people
cannot judge Edition: current; Page: [304] previously to trial; and the
fittest person may possibly not present himself, unless it is the
special duty of somebody to search him out.

We have now mentioned the principal points which appear to us worthy of
commendation, in the municipal constitution provided by the Bill. We
proceed to the less pleasant duty of pointing out the cases in which,
for want of accurate and comprehensive principles, previously known, and
well-digested in their heads, ministers have only been the servile
copyists of the errors of their predecessors.

Local government consists of two parts—administration and judicature.
There must be a provision for the management of the collective interests
of the local community, and there must be a provision for the
administration of justice. The provision made in this Bill for local
administration consists of the mayor, the town-clerk, and the
town-council; the provision for justice consists of the mayor, the
magistrates, and the recorder.

To begin with the administrative body—the first thing that strikes us
is, that instead of a committee for the dispatch of business, ministers
are creating in every considerable town a debating club. Such is the
necessary effect of making the council so numerous—reaching from sixteen
to (in the case of Liverpool) the number of ninety members. This is
courting the very mischief which the greatest pains should have been
exerted to keep out. In parliament, the evil of long speeches must be
submitted to; for this reason among others, that it is part of the
office of parliament to be an arena for the promulgation and mutual
collision of political opinions. But the town-council-room is meant to
be a place of mere business, and business of a very commonplace kind:
the members therefore should not exceed the number who can discuss and
transact business by conversation round a table. We think they ought
never to exceed thirty.* If the body is much more numerous,
non-attendance will be the general rule, and the most important business
will often be left in the hands of the few whose assiduity is stimulated
by some private interest; while, on any occasion which brings the whole
body together, its time will be wasted in declamation, and the real
business of the town will be done carelessly, or not done at all.

We should have preferred that the election by wards had been universal.
Requiring the electors to vote for the whole body at once, almost
ensures their adopting the list tendered to them by some active and
stirring junto in the town; or if they attempt to choose for themselves,
they will choose carelessly, and give a vote to any one who asks for it:
for men will take the trouble to make a conscientious selection of one
or two persons, but not of twenty or fifty. Another consequence, which
has been pointed out by several members of the House,[*] is, that when
there Edition: current; Page: [305] are two parties, the weaker of the
two will be deprived of all influence in the formation of the
town-council. And an additional inconvenience, incident to this, is,
that if, in the interval between one election and another, the stronger
party becomes the weaker—a revolution which parliamentary elections
prove to be of frequent occurrence—there will be a sudden and abrupt
change of the whole body, to the interruption, so far as they are
concerned, of all public business. It is, probably, to avoid this evil,
that the plan has been hit upon, of partial renewals, one-third of the
council going out every year—a most infelicitous juste milieu, which
unites the inconveniences of a long and those of a short period—annual
elections, and only triennial responsibility.

The mayor is not to be the mere chairman of the town-council, but has
important administrative (not to mention judicial) duties devolving upon
himself. If this be right (and, with respect to the administrative
duties, we do not say that it is not right), it appears to us most
injudicious that the mayor should be changed every year. This is blind
imitation of the corporation of London, and most of the old
corporations. It is a contrivance for having the chief administrative
officer always in leading-strings, never out of his apprenticeship. As
soon as he begins to understand his business you dismiss him, and bring
in another who is still raw, and fit to be a screen for the town-clerk:
who, on this system, will pull the strings of the puppet, who is to be
called the mayor, but whose sole office will generally be to shelter the
town-clerk from responsibility.

The provision made for the administration of justice is more faulty
still. It is a considerable improvement, doubtless, on the old system;
but it has most of the defects which we are accustomed to see in the
judicial institutions of our country, and it has them for no reason that
can be perceived, except that we are accustomed to them.

What is wanted for purposes of judicature, is a local judge, transacting
(under appeal to a properly-constituted tribunal in the metropolis) all
the judicial business of the district, and no part of the administrative
business. Judicial and administrative duties should never be united in
the same hands; for they are different sorts of business: they require
different qualities, different kinds of men: the mode of choice suitable
to the two kinds of officers is different—so are the checks, and the
kind of responsibility; and the experience of all nations testifies to
the importance of keeping those to whom the business of judicature is
intrusted free from intermixture in the other affairs of the world, that
the administration of justice may be pure, not only from the reality,
but even from the suspicion, of partiality.

The principle of the separation of judicial from administrative duties
is adopted in part by the Bill, but in so limited and inconsistent a
manner as shows that the framers have no due sense of its importance.
And the provision for judicature is altogether insufficient.

There is to be a local judge, under the name of a Recorder, wherever the
town-council express their desire for one, and their willingnes to pay
him a sufficient salary. This is so far good. What did the ministers
next? They looked Edition: current; Page: [306] round, to see what
provision for local judicature had been made by the wisdom of our
ancestors; and they found, that it consisted of a court, which decided
no civil, and only some classes of criminal cases, including neither the
greatest nor the smallest, and which sat only once a quarter. Without
looking any farther, our ministers determined that the local judge whom
they are about to create shall decide only these same sorts of criminal
cases, and that he also shall only sit once a quarter. But why, if a
local tribunal be useful in one sort of criminal cases, will it not be
useful in another? and if useful in criminal cases, why not also in
civil? and if it be good that justice should be accessible once in three
months, why not on every day of the year? Why must the redress of wrongs
be delayed, and why must innocent people linger in prison, while the
Recorder who is to try them at the next sessions is practising as a
barrister in London? These are questions which the framers of the Bill
have not asked themselves. They would have found them not only asked,
but answered, in the writings of Mr. Bentham, the great teacher in this
department of practical politics. There are many branches of the art of
government on which sufficient light has not yet been thrown; there are
others, on which the best ideas which exist are scattered through a
hundred writers: but procedure, and judicial establishment, are subjects
of which the alpha and omega are to be found in Mr. Bentham; and it is
perfectly disgraceful to any one who, in this age, attempts to legislate
on those subjects, not to be familiar with his views on a branch of
politics, the philosophy of which he may be said to have created.

So far as respects civil justice, and the higher criminal cases, the
Bill leaves matters as it found them, and recourse must still be had to
the courts in London, or to the judges of assize. For those cases,
again, which are considered too small to be tried by the Recorder, the
Bill provides a class of judges called magistrates, who are to have the
powers of justices of peace, except those usually exercised by the
quarter sessions. These magistrates are to be selected by the Crown,
from a number of persons to be recommended by the town-councils. We
would suggest a more distinct explanation in the Bill of the cases in
which magistrates are to be liable to removal. They should be removable
by the Crown, on an address from the town-council.

The powers of these magistrates, like those of all persons who, in
England, are called by that name, or by the equivalent one of justices
of the peace, are a monstrous jumble of administrative and judicial
functions. They have summary jurisdiction in small cases. They have the
power of committing prisoners to take their trial at the Sessions or the
Assizes; a function, stupidly classed in common language under the head
of Police, but which is strictly judicial. It is a preliminary trial of
the prisoner, for the purpose of ascertaining, not whether he is guilty,
but whether there is sufficient presumption of his guilt to require that
he be put upon a more formal trial. And the consequence of an
unfavourable verdict, on this preliminary investigation, may be the
infliction of a severer sentence, in the form Edition: current; Page:
[307] of imprisonment previous to trial, than would be inflicted on
proof of guilt, for some serious offences. These preliminary
investigations are, therefore, acts of judicature, in the strictest
sense. They require judicial qualities, as exalted as any other kind of
judicial business, and ought always to be performed by a person called a
judge. The only functions which are really of police are the simply
executive ones, the enforcement of the laws by interposing before an
offence is committed, and the apprehension of the offender afterwards.
Of the heterogeneous functions of the magistrates, these are the only
ones which require a distinct set of functionaries. The judicial
business of the magistrates, whether of conviction or of committal,
should be turned over to the Recorder, converted into a local judge
always resident on the spot. It is a rule of the utmost importance, that
no one is fit to try the smallest cases who is not fit for the greatest;
for the small cases are quite as difficult, concern a much larger
portion of the community, and are far more liable to be neglected, or
slurred over, because they attract so much less of the attention of any
but the parties immediately concerned.

The proposal, that the mayor should be ex officio a magistrate, and that
he should be the local judge in the absence of the Recorder, is so
monstrous, that we cannot believe it will be persevered in. It is a
complete departure from the principle which the Bill to a certain extent
adopts, that of withdrawing all judicial powers from the functionaries
who carry on the local administration. The mayor is the very head and
front[*] of the administration: in all the business of the town-council
he is a principal party, and he has many administrative duties peculiar
to himself. To crown all, this union of public functions of the most
difficult and important kind is delegated to an officer who is to be
changed every year; and in the smaller towns, to which the Crown is not
to give magistrates except on special application, the mayor will often
be the sole magistrate. We cannot easily conceive a worse. It will be,
in reality, some mitigation of the mischief, that a permanent officer,
the town-clerk, will generally dictate to the mayor all his acts,
himself screened from being answerable for them.

The above are, we conceive, the principal objections to the detailed
provisions of the Bill.* Amendments have been placed on the order-book
of the House of Commons, calculated to force the discussion of almost
all these points; and we trust that the complete reformers, many of whom
are well acquainted with the Edition: current; Page: [308] subject, will
not let slip such an occasion for impressing upon the public many of the
most important principles of organic legislation. That there are those
among them who will not neglect the opportunity, we have reason to be
assured.*

But, after every abatement which the above considerations call upon us
to make, from an estimate of the merits of this measure, it is still
entitled to the character of being one of the greatest steps in
improvement ever made by peaceable legislation in the internal
government of a country. And we would rather waive the assertion of any
or all of the objections to which it is liable, than expose the Bill
itself to any jeopardy. But we fear no such result. On the contrary, we
are convinced, that the more decidedly the reformers show that this Bill
is not their ultimatum, and does not come up to all their wishes, the
safer it will prove from mischievous defacement in the Tories’ House.
Were the Reformers to let the Tories believe that with the present
measure they are fully satisfied, it might tempt them to try whether we
may not be satisfied with less. It is the safest, as well as the most
direct and plainest course, to evince to the enemy that the improvement
this Bill gives us is barely enough, and that there is not a particle to
spare.

Edition: current; Page: [309]


POSTSCRIPT: THE CLOSE OF THE SESSION
 1835

Edition: current; Page: [310]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London Review, II (equivalent to London and Westminster, XXXI) (Oct.,
1835), 270-7. Headed: “POSTSCRIPT. / The close of the Session.” Running
titles: “Close of the Session.” Signed “A.” Not republished. Identified
in Mill’s bibliography as “The article entitled ‘Close of the Session’
in the same number of the same work”; i.e., as “De Tocqueville on
Democracy in America [I]” (MacMinn, 45). There are no corrections or
emendations in the copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville College.

Edition: current; Page: [311]


Postscript: The Close of the Session

the transactions of which human life is made up, fall mostly into
natural cycles or revolutions, which are commenced and completed within
the compass of a year. The return of most periodical events, which are
important or interesting to man, accompanies the return of the seasons.

In each of these cycles there is some one point at which, rather than at
any other, it is natural to pause, and survey the course which has been
run since the corresponding period of the preceding year. In the circle
of agricultural operations, this point is the close of the harvest. The
labours of the year have then been brought to their natural conclusion:
the ground has been ploughed, the seed sown, all the chances of
destruction or damage have been more or less victoriously left behind,
and the fruits of the toil and anxiety of the past year have been, in a
more or less perfect condition, gathered in and stored up to supply the
wants of that which is to come.

What the close of the harvest is in the agricultural year, the close of
the session is in the political. It is then that we are most inclined to
look about us and observe what has been gained in the year previous. We
are then entering into a period of comparative quiet, during which the
laws of nature are working for us as surely as before, but are now
working chiefly below the surface.

At this period of annual retrospection, a period at which our estimate
of what has been, and of what is still going on, is likely to be more
comprehensive, and less disturbed by passing influences, than at any
other, there are two things which, for several years past, have struck
upon us yearly with increasing force, and which are in every respect the
most remarkable among the political features of the present time.

One is, the unexampled and almost miraculous rapidity of the march of
public opinion. The movement of the public mind is no longer like that
of the hour-hand of a clock, invisible to the passing eye, and making
itself known only by its effects at long intervals. We may now almost be
said to see it move. For however short a time we lose sight of it, when
we next turn to it we find it farther on; and for some years past it has
made annual strides, each of which distanced all anterior calculation,
only to be itself surpassed by the next which followed it.

When they who are now thirty years of age were just old enough to take
interest in public affairs, the adoration of everything which existed in
England—church, Edition: current; Page: [312] law, judges, commercial
and colonial monopolies, rotten boroughs and all—was, to appearance, as
deeply rooted in the national mind, as at any former period of history.
This degrading superstition must even then have been secretly much
weakened; no outward sign, however, had yet betrayed its inward decay.
Within a few years afterwards, the first deadly wound was given to the
sordid sinister interests, of which this country had been till then the
unresisting prey. The cause of Free Trade became a gained cause, little
as had then or has even yet been done to give practical effect to it in
our legislation. The irrevocable triumph of freedom of trade dates from
the failure of the attempts to overset the Huskisson policy after the
panic of 1826. At that time, the spirit of Law Reform had also had a
beginning; and in 1827 Mr. Brougham’s celebrated speech[*] gave it an
impulse which has carried it onward ever since, even during the
temporary suspension of the public interest in it, from the more
exciting subjects with which the general attention has been engrossed.
But in 1827 the principle of religious tests was still the recognized
doctrine of the constitution, and it was part of the established
laudation of Mr. Canning that he had given the death-blow to Radicalism.
The year 1828 saw the disabilities of the Dissenters, and the year 1829
those of the Catholics, disappear, in law and in fact. The eyes of the
nation were then instantly unsealed on the subject of political
religion; and those who had predicted that these great measures would
bring up the rear-guard of civilization, and awaken the inert mass who
had slept since the accession of the House of Hanover (disturbed only by
bad dreams during the era of Pitt) to the change of times and
circumstances—these prophets saw their predictions fulfilled, in a
shorter time than they had even dared to anticipate. In the summer of
1830, it just began to be remarked, that the majority was diminishing
against giving representatives to Birmingham and Manchester. On the 25th
of July, the man whom of all now alive Toryism has most reason to curse,
issued the famous Ordinances:[†] and in the November following, Toryism
in England had ceased to reign.

It is not necessary to trace minutely the subsequent progress. No one
need be reminded what was the magnitude of the next step. That step gave
us an instrument of government, which wanted only two things to make it
adequate to most of the purposes for which Reform in Parliament was
sought: the protection of the ballot, for electors in dependant
circumstances; and to be freed from a House of Lords, determined to
render the Reform of the House of Commons a nullity. The meeting of the
first Reformed Parliament found a ministry in office, of whom it was the
collective determination to make their policy subservient to the
prevention of these two things. The first session which followed lost to
this ministry the people’s Edition: current; Page: [313] hearts, the
second flung them out of office. We are now at the conclusion of the
third.

Not for the sake of counting minor gains, but to see how much further we
are advanced in the great movement, let us consider what this third year
has done for us.

A last desperate attempt of the Tories to creep back into power as
semi-reformers, despairing of it as anti-reformers, has been promptly
crushed: and has had for its principal result, to lay bare to the
people’s eyes the extent of the aristocratic influence which can still
be exercised over the composition of the House of Commons under the
present mode of voting; and to place us at one stroke several years
nearer to the ballot, than if that blunder of the king, or of the king’s
secret advisers, had not been committed.

This was visible to all eyes in June last, when Mr. Grote brought
forward his motion.[*] That question, which has since slept, will, when
it awakens, be found where it was then left; or rather, it will have
moved noiselessly still further forward, for the silent progress of
opinion is not less remarkable in the present times, than the changes
which loudly proclaim themselves. Meanwhile, the current has made a bend
in its course, and is now beating against the opposite side of the
channel, preparing to carry away the other of the two great obstacles
which resist its peaceful progress towards calmer seas. The great
question of the approaching year will be the reconstitution of the House
of Lords.

And now, whoever would seek for a test by which to estimate the present
rate of the progress of public opinion, let him look at this. The first
shock to the traditional attachment to the existing constitution of the
House of Lords was given by their conduct on the Reform Bill. When that
measure became law, it was thought that all was gained; and those who
talked of reforming the House of Lords preached to deaf ears. This state
of feeling had much altered two years ago; every reformer was then
anxious for a creation of peers. Now, observe the difference. Not a
voice is raised to suggest such an insignificant measure. The House of
Lords is given up, as too bad to mend. No infusion of new blood would
now save it. An entire change in its constitution is cried out for from
the remotest corner of the three kingdoms; and few would be satisfied
with any change short of abolishing the hereditary principle.

We said that two things appeared to us chiefly deserving of remark in
the present condition of this country; and that the unexampled rapidity
now apparent in the advance of public opinion was one of these. We have
next to mention the other; which, in its way, is equally remarkable.
This is, the insignificance of the men who are the visible instruments
and the only apparent agents in this great change.

The revolution, for such it is, although pacific, which is marching
onward with Edition: current; Page: [314] such velocity among us, is a
revolution without leaders. Not only has it no leaders in the cabinet,
but it has none in Parliament. Not only has it no leaders in Parliament,
but it has none in the popular press. Scarcely a person can be found who
has done, or is doing, or is so much as attempting to do any thing more,
either towards accelerating it or towards guiding it, than any other
person.

If there is something elevating in the conception of the great results,
which are daily shaping themselves forth under the plastic power of that
irresistible Necessity, wrought by the natural laws of human
civilization; and if there is much that is both gratifying and
encouraging in that high average of comparative improvement among the
people at large, evidenced by the gentleness and steadiness with which
the mighty movement is thus far going on, without the application of one
superior mind in any commanding station to prepare the way for it, or to
guide it into the salutary course; there is, it must be confessed,
something at once humiliating and disheartening in the individual
insignificance of the men, who are in the positions which would enable
them to modify the general tendency by some idea or impulse of their
own, but who universally content themselves with yielding to the force
by which they are pressed on from behind. For the first time in the
recorded history of great political changes, not one man of commanding
talents, not one homme à grand caractère, has shewn himself in any
conspicuous part of the field of action. Those among our conspicuous
public men or influential writers who have the head to conceive any
thing better to be done, than to let the current of events float them
down and land them wherever it will, are few indeed; and of those few,
it seems that there is not one who, with the head to conceive, has also
the heart to execute it.*

When we look around us, the only figure which stands erect and
prominent, the only man who himself weighs for something in the balance
of events, is Mr. O’Connell; and his influence, though it could not have
been acquired but by a man of talents, and, above all, of activity, does
not belong to him so much in himself, as because he embodies in his
single person all Ireland. Mr. O’Connell does nothing whatever to guide
the movement, but he does something to accelerate it; and accordingly we
have lately seen him, with all his disadvantages, carrying off the
undivided harvest of that popular favour, of which any one member of the
now Edition: current; Page: [315] numerous radical party in the House of
Commons, having the acquirements, abilities, character, and station in
society which belong to many of them, might have reaped, by very
ordinary exertion, a far larger share than he.

These are melancholy facts. Circumstances cannot always continue to do
what men will not, or are not capable of. Circumstances are blind
guides. The use of intellect is never with impunity abandoned in the
affairs of nations. We imagine it is hardly supposed that things will
always continue to go perfectly right of themselves; that the people
will always, without being taught, know and demand of their own accord
whatever is best for them; that they will never fall into any errors
requiring to be corrected; that cultivated wisdom can suggest nothing
more perfect, in reorganizing the whole social condition of a people,
than is struck out spontaneously by the collective intellect of the
uninstructed. It cannot be supposed, in short, that there are no longer
any great things to be performed for mankind: we are reduced, therefore,
to the necessity of concluding that no one of the present generation,
who has yet met with the opportunity, esteems himself capable of
performing them.

The causes of this absence of greatness, this small intellectual and
moral stature of the men of the present day who have it most in their
power to render their mental endowments serviceable to their
fellow-creatures, must be sought in considerations more remote from
common observation than would admit of being satisfactorily entered into
in this place. They would be found, no doubt, to be partly connected
with our social arrangements, and partly with the peculiarities which
mark the present stage in the progressive advancement of the human mind.

Without looking any further into the subject at present, one or two
observations remain to be made, more peculiarly applicable to the
passing moment.

A compromise appears to have tacitly established itself, between the
ministry, and the thorough reformers in parliament and in the press.
What has been given up on both sides for the sake of the alliance, we
can only infer from what we see. The concession made by the ministry
seems to be, that instead of shaping their conduct so as to avert public
indignation from the Lords, by never giving those careful guardians of
the public weal any good measures to reject, they shall occasionally
bring forward propositions acceptable to the people, allow the Lords to
do their worst in spoiling them, and content themselves with splitting
differences afterwards; thus taking upon themselves a part only, and not
the whole, of the discredit attached to niggardly measures of reform.
This seems to be the price which the ministers, placed as they are in a
state of absolute dependence upon the support of the Radicals, are
willing to pay for it. What they get in return is, that no measure is to
be proposed which they do not like, no principle enunciated which may,
even indirectly, reflect upon their conduct; and that any one who
dislikes anything which they say or do, is to keep his disapprobation
confined within his own breast. We think the ministers have the best of
the bargain.

We do not wish the Radicals to attack the Ministry; we are anxious that
they Edition: current; Page: [316] should co-operate with them. But we
think they might co-operate without yoking themselves to the ministerial
car, abdicating all independent action, and leaving nothing to
distinguish them from the mere Whig coterie, except the memory of their
former professions. As little do we see why the liberal press—not
content with bedaubing the Ministry with fulsome adulation for all they
do, whether it be what those papers have been just before recommending,
or the very opposite—should be so tremblingly afraid of giving insertion
to a single line which may lead a chance reader to think they have an
opinion of their own—should seem to think all lost if their columns
contain anything but a probable anticipation of what the Ministry will
next day propose. It is a fact that it was far more usual, before there
was a reform ministry, to see reform opinions, of a stronger kind than
were held by the Whig leaders, advocated in the liberal newspapers, than
now when circumstances are so much more propitious to liberal ideas. To
give one specimen among hundreds: we remember no period for the last ten
years, when such an exposure as our last Number contained of the jobbing
in the English army for the benefit of the great families—of the manner
in which our military establishment is systematically made an engine for
extracting large annual sums from the people under false pretences, to
give to the sons of the rich—would not have been laid hold of by nearly
the whole liberal press, and beaten into the people’s minds by
successive blows, until they all rose up as one man, and demanded that
the iniquity should cease. In the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-five, for the first time since the word Reform ceased
to be opprobrious, not one of the daily papers professing liberal
principles dared say a word in condemnation of one of the grossest, most
palpable, and most costly abuses remaining in our public expenditure.
They knew not how their masters would relish the exposure.

If their object be to benefit the Ministry, this is not the way to do
it; and stone-blind with self-conceit must the Ministry be if they fancy
it is. One journal which, while it generally supports a ministry,
occasionally condemns some of its words or actions, is worth more to it
than a hundred which dare not call their columns their own, nor give
currency to an opinion or a sentiment which they do not believe to be
acceptable to the givers of good things. When the Times supported, first
the Wellington and then the Grey ministry, its support carried
authority; not because any one believed in the honesty of the Times then
more than now, but because it was known to have an independent judgment.
It had not wedded itself to any ministry for better for worse. It did
not commit the tasteless blunder of praising all they did. When it
supported them, therefore, there was a concurrence of two opinions; the
Times coinciding with the Ministry—not the voice of the ministry merely
echoed back, by people who only struck into the same tune because their
prompters had commenced it.

It is the daily press chiefly which has laid itself open to these
strictures: the Examiner, the Spectator, and others, though perhaps of
late rather more panegyrical than necessary, cannot be accused of having
compromised their Edition: current; Page: [317] pristine independence.
But the daily press, unfortunately, is exactly six times as powerful as
the weekly press; for the power of all newspapers consists in
repetition, and a daily paper can repeat the same thing six times as
often as a weekly one. It is therefore in the same proportion more
important that the power it wields should be usefully directed; and, by
the course now spoken of, that power is at the best wholly thrown away.

One important function the liberal newspapers are now executing; and it
is of such magnitude, that, in its behalf, we willingly, for the time,
forgive them their shortcomings in all other matters. They are serving
as instruments to collect and concentrate the public indignation, and
direct it in one jet against the House of Lords. They have, with some
spirit, placed themselves at their proper post in the front rank of that
battle. This is, we trust, significant of the inclination of the
Ministry. That, however, is of trifling importance: where the public
voice is strong and unanimous, the Ministry must now go along with it.
If the Tories imagine, from the truckling of the Ministry and of the
majority of the Radicals on the Corporation Bill, that their tampering
with that measure was a coup de force, and a victory, they will find to
their cost that it is the last triumph they are destined to enjoy. It is
the last straw on the back of a patient people. They are at present in a
happy unconsciousness of the mischief to themselves which they have set
a-going; but their state is one of somnambulism, and the shock which
will awaken them will be the apparition of the House of Lords Amendment
Bill.

Edition: current; Page: [318] Edition: current; Page: [319]


STATE OF POLITICS IN 1836
 1836

Edition: current; Page: [320]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, III & XXV (Apr., 1836), 271-8. Headed:
“Art. XII. / state of politics in 1836.” Running titles: 271, 272, 274,
276, 278, “Commencement of the Session”; 273, 275, 277, “Progress of
Reform.” Signed “A.” Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography
as “An article entitled ‘State of Politics in 1836,’ and headed
‘Commencement of the Session’—‘Progress of Reform,’ in the same number
of the same review”, i.e., as “Civilization” (MacMinn, 47). There are no
corrections or emendations in the copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville
College.

Edition: current; Page: [321]


State of Politics in 1836

the opening of the Session has been auspicious. The year 1836 promises
to be not unfruitful of important improvements in the details of our
laws, while it has already afforded new and hopeful indications not only
of the rapidity, but of the tranquility with which the nation is
travelling towards the attainment of the best government to which in its
present state of civilization it can aspire.

The advantages are generally much overrated, which this country has
derived from her possession of the forms of popular government, for a
long period, during which the other nations of Europe were more
destitute of the forms than even of the substance. But among these
otherwise overrated advantages, is one which it is hardly possible to
overrate: public opinion has acquired, has irrevocably acquired, the
means of expressing itself peacefully. Whether the nation is of one
opinion or another, does not, as in all other European countries, remain
questionable until the sword decides it. A country in which there were
no public meetings, no liberty of association, and, except at Paris,
practically no liberty of the press, had to fight for three days before
it could get rid of a dynasty which had scarcely an adherent left; and
the world cried wonder at so great a revolution accomplished with so
little bloodshed. The English effected a much greater change—gave the
mortal stroke to one of the most powerful aristocracies in
existence—accomplished a revolution equal to those for which, in former
days or in other countries, generations of human beings have been swept
away—overcame (we take from the lips of the Tories the catalogue of
their forces) the King, the Lords, the Church, and the Land; and
accomplished this, merely by assuming so imposing an attitude, that the
warrior of Torres Vedras and Waterloo was either not bold enough, or not
remorseless enough, to lead the charge against them.

The passing of the Reform Bill was our taking of the Bastille; it was
the first act of our great political change; and like its precursor, it
is a sample of the character of all that will follow. As the one was
bloody, and the beginning of a bloody revolution, so does the pacific
character of the other almost guarantee the peacefulness of the changes
yet to come.

This reflection, which must have occurred to many at that remarkable
period whose spirit-stirring events gave occasion to it, has been,
perhaps, too much lost sight of in the succeeding four years. The
resistance which the course of reform has since encountered, created an
exaggerated impression of the difficulties which still Edition: current;
Page: [322] remained for it to overcome. It was to be expected, that the
defeated army would rally after the first overthrow; that they would
mistake the fatigue of their victorious adversaries, and the momentary
hesitation what point next to attack, for a reaction in their own
favour; would indulge hopes that the strength which levelled them to the
ground was the result of a temporary exaltation, and that when it
subsided, things would quietly return to their former course. Defeated
aristocracies have always been prone to such vain hopes. The royalists,
during the first French Revolution, were in weekly expectation of some
change which was to restore their ascendancy; nay, the Carlists of
France indulge such expectations even now. But the English aristocracy
is preserved from the fate which usually attends on such illusions, by
causes with which their own discernment has little to do: they cannot
foresee, but it is not possible for any one, living in this country, not
to see. They foresaw nothing during the two years’ discussion of the
Reform Bill; but when the moment came, they saw their weakness and
quailed. They foresaw not, when Sir Robert Peel came in, nor even when
he was turned out, that their attempt to maintain a Tory ministry with a
reformed Parliament must, for the time at least, be unsuccessful. But
their demeanour in the present session proves that they see it now. If
they did not, would they have abstained, as they have done, from
opposing Ministers in the House of Commons in almost any one of their
measures? or would the implacable Orangemen have been driven to disband
themselves by a word?

The spirit of the Tory party is broken. They will rally again; and the
power which, with the present constitution of society in England, so
long as the protection of the ballot is refused, they can always, except
in times of universal enthusiasm, exercise over the elections, may
enable them more than once to rally in considerable strength. But all is
in vain; for it is becoming obvious to everybody else, and at each
defeat it will become so to more and more among themselves, that if the
time comes when their defeat cannot be accomplished without the ballot,
it will be accomplished by the ballot.

Meanwhile, the strong minority which the Tories for a time possess, has
produced for the present a closer union, and a consequent increase of
moral strength, among the opposite ranks. And this result, in itself so
desirable, has not been effected, as we feared it would be, by
compromises of principle on the part of the thorough Reformers. The
thorough Reformers have met the Whigs half way; but it is only half way.
The Ministers have, this session, evinced an activity in the work of
reform, and a disposition to make its spirit penetrate into various
branches of our institutions yet unvisited by it, which prove that they
are, in some measure, awakened to the necessities of their position; and
entitle them, while such conduct continues, to the strenuous support of
the more vigorous Reformers—though not to the kind of support which
ministries are most prone to demand, and, we grieve to say it, most
accustomed to receive—the suppression of the utterance of any opinion
which it is not convenient to them to go along with.

Edition: current; Page: [323]
Among the measures, either introduced into Parliament, or promised to be
introduced, for which commendation cannot be refused to Ministers, we
will enumerate the following.

First, the Marriage Bill.[*] This is entitled to a praise which can
rarely be bestowed upon the attempts of English statesmen in the
character of Reformers. Though it deals with only one branch of an
extensive subject, it is, within the limits of that branch, a complete
measure; it leaves no relic of the grievance which it professes to
remedy. All former bills for the same ostensible purpose had one of two
grievous defects; they either exacted, as the condition of the validity
of a civil contract, the performance of a religious ceremony, or they
made a distinction between the clergy of the established and those of
the dissenting sects, degrading to the latter.[†] By the present bill,
nothing, in the ceremony of marriage, is required by the State, but that
with which alone the State is concerned, the due execution and
registration of the civil contract; while, at the same time, the
religious ceremony, though legally imposed upon no one, is allowed, at
the option of those who prefer it, to have, when duly registered, the
force of a civil contract; and this equally, with whatever formalities,
and by a clergyman of whatever persuasion, the ceremony is performed.

With this measure is combined a plan for supplying one of the
innumerable desiderata in our legal arrangements, a registration of
births and deaths.[‡] The application of the machinery of the Poor Law
Unions to this purpose, is a striking example of the manner in which one
well-considered reform facilitates others. Having now, by the effect of
Poor Law Reform, rural districts of the convenient size for municipal
purposes, and local representative bodies of a tolerably popular
character (the Boards of Guardians), we trust that we shall gradually
see the whole of the local business (the administrative business we
mean, not the judicial) turned over to these representative bodies. But
a distinction must be made, which the framers of this measure have
overlooked. The Boards of Guardians are fit bodies to Edition: current;
Page: [324] conduct all, or almost all, the business of local
administration, but the Central Board is not the proper body to
superintend it all. The Central Board has quite as much as it can do in
superintending the administration of the Poor Laws. To watch over other
local business, other central boards, or central single functionaries,
are requisite; the Boards of Guardians corresponding with each on the
business of its own department. If everything which the local boards
might conveniently do, were to be done by them under the control of the
Commissioners of the Poor Laws, those Commissioners would become the
Home Minister. There should be a controlling board, or a controlling
officer, for every leading department of local administration, and a
home minister, besides, to appoint these various officers, and hold them
to a proper responsibility.

Next comes, as bearing some relation to the subject last noticed, the
bill introduced to consolidate the Turnpike Trusts, and place them under
a central board.[*] No reform is more urgently required, and the
principle of the measure is excellent; but its details are
ill-considered. The roads are not placed, as they might advantageously
be, under the superintendence of the Boards of Guardians; and the
Central Board almost seems constituted in imitation of that prodigy of
imbecility and jobbery the Record Commission, upon the incompetency and
abuses of which, the exertions of Mr. Charles Buller and other
meritorious persons are now throwing so much light.[†] A board composed
of numerous members, some of them persons of too many occupations or of
too much dignity to attend to the business, becomes a mere screen[‡] for
the misconduct of the one, or the two or three, individuals, into whose
hands the management really falls.

We shall next advert to the Irish Corporation Reform Bill;[§] and most
satisfactory it is, that the destructive part of the bill, which in
this, as in most of the reforming measures of our Ministers, is the most
important part, even the House of Lords will not venture to deny to us.
Not a Tory has dared to say a word in vindication of the existing
corporations; and those nests of all that is sordid in jobbing, and
odious in sectarian animosity, will be swept without further delay from
that earth which they contaminate. We go the full length with those who
assert the claim of the Irish to popular local institutions, as the most
efficient of all instruments for training the people in the proper use
of representative government. Edition: current; Page: [325] But this
benefit ought to be afforded to the whole kingdom, and not merely to the
inhabitants of a few towns. Whether or not the constructive parts of the
present measure be rejected by the House of Lords, the Ministers should
give notice, for next session, of a general measure for the creation of
provincial representative assemblies throughout Ireland.

The Church Reform which is announced, (for the recommendations of the
Church Commissioners may be considered as those of the Ministry,) has
one point of excellence, and it is a considerable one.[*] By diminishing
the number of sinecures, and increasing the restrictions on pluralities
and non-residence, it renders the good things of the Church by so much
less valuable to the aristocracy, and so far tends to deprive the
institution of what principally upholds it in its iniquities. Other
merit than this the measure has none; for the endowment of the clergy of
a particular sect with national property, and with civil or political
privileges denied to other sects, is intrinsically a mischief, which may
be extirpated, but can scarcely be palliated; and the only inducement by
which any person worthy of the name of a statesman in these times, could
be induced to uphold the Church, would be the hope of unsectarianizing
it. With this view the elevation of one man to a post of dignity in the
Church, who was the friend and not the enemy of free inquiry, and who
was known to estimate others according to the spirit of their religion,
more than according to its dogmas, would be better entitled to the name
of Church Reform than a hundred measures like the present. But this road
will not be tried till it is too late.

The Tithe Bill,[†] though liable to serious objections, which have been
very forcibly stated in the Morning Chronicle,[‡] is deserving of praise
as an honest attempt to settle an important and most difficult practical
question. In the adjustment it seems impossible to avoid doing injustice
to somebody, and all that can be hoped is to render the injustice as
little as possible. The average for a certain period of years, should
obviously be the measure of what existing incumbents, at least, should
hereafter receive. For apportioning the payment among the different
estates of the parish, there are but two principles which seem possible:
to assess each estate in proportion to its value, or according to the
amount hitherto paid by each. Either system requires that there be
somewhere a power to relieve extreme cases; and if we are not ripe for
making this relief a charge prospectively upon the Edition: current;
Page: [326] Church property itself, the best mode of affording it would,
perhaps, be a pro rata assessment upon all the other estates.

Lastly, we must not overlook, among the beneficial measures in progress,
(notwithstanding the niggardly half-measure with which it is attempted
to satisfy us on the important subject of the newspaper stamp,)[*] the
improvements announced in our system of Taxation.[†] Much gross
inequality of pressure, bearing, as is invariably the case, hardest upon
those who can least afford it, will be remedied or greatly alleviated by
the general revision of the stamp laws; and some partial relief from one
of the most burthensome of our monopolies, that which taxes us from a
million to a million and a half a-year for the privilege of buying bad
timber from Canada instead of good from the Baltic, has been declared to
be in immediate contemplation.

There are not wanting, to set against these subjects of commendation,
serious grounds of complaint. The discreditable exhibition of Sir George
Grey on Mr. Roebuck’s motion respecting the Mauritius;[‡] the navy
increased, on pretexts such as can never be wanting, and which were
triumphantly exposed by Mr. Hume,[§] (the real cause being, according to
general belief, that Ministers are smitten with the epidemic disease of
Russo-phobia;) the reduction of the army (and the abolition of the
privileges of the Guards, so obnoxious to the army itself) resisted, in
the exact tone and spirit in which all reforms used to be resisted in
the old Tory times, namely, not by argument, but by insolent assumption,
and denial of facts generally notorious, or resting upon official
evidence. We receive these and similar things, as a salutary warning how
much of the old leaven still remains in the present Cabinet, and how
little can be trusted to their own inclination towards good, when not
acted upon by a little friendly compulsion. That compulsion must be
applied, and, moreover, must be yielded to, if they would hope to retain
the support of the real reformers beyond the present session. For by the
measures now in progress the budget of Whig reforms is almost exhausted;
and they must either join with the Tories in resisting, or with the
Radicals in carrying, improvements of a more fundamental kind than any
but the latter have yet ventured to identify themselves with.
Fortunately for Ministers, they have the immense field of Law Reform
from which to gather a harvest of popularity; and they have had the good
sense to provide for themselves, in the present Master of the Rolls,[¶]
a Edition: current; Page: [327] coadjutor, whose zeal in the work will
need no quickener, but will be a most salutary quickener to theirs, and
of whose capacity it is sufficient here to say, that no man living is so
thoroughly acquainted at once with the ends to be aimed at, and the
means of attaining those ends with the least possible inconvenience.

The Radical party in Parliament has, with few exceptions, preserved its
accustomed torpidity. Those who had formerly done something, have done
more than usual; but those who were accustomed to do nothing, have done
it still. Among the meritorious few, Mr. Hume may, as usual, be
numbered; and it may be permitted to this Review to commemorate the
fact, that several younger members, in whom it can claim a peculiar
interest, have been active in asserting in Parliament the principles
which they promulgate here.[*] This is not, we know, anything to boast
of; but were the fact otherwise, there would be disgrace.

Among the features in the present session, which ought not to be passed
without notice, is the great multitude of Private Bills—bills for
authorizing the expenditure of capital on public undertakings of all
sorts, but especially on internal communication. The rage for projects
has taken that direction more decidedly than any other, and has reached
a height which the famous bubble year, 1825, scarcely surpassed. It
seems only needful for a surveyor and a parliamentary agent to lay their
heads together and invent a new line of railroad, and their share list
is almost immediately filled. This subject well deserves that the
attention of the legislature should be bestowed upon it, more
comprehensively and systematically than it has yet been.

There is no one but must wish for means of cheap and rapid conveyance
from one of the great centres of commercial operations to another; and
all must be satisfied that such means will, in no long period, be had.
But no one can wish that lines of railroad should be more numerous than
necessary; because, in the first place, it is far from desirable that
this island, the most beautiful portion perhaps of the earth’s surface
for its size, should be levelled and torn up in a hundred unnecessary
directions by those deformities; and next, because the test, the
unerring test, of the usefulness of a railroad is its yielding a profit
to the subscribers; a result which the undue multitude of railroads must
necessarily frustrate, as to most, if not as to all of them. For
example—we do not ground our opinion on any peculiar knowledge—on the
face of the matter it seems absurd to suppose that both the Great
Western Railway, and the London and Southampton, can pay; though it is
just possible that either of them might, if the other did not exist. Nor
is it desirable that the choice of a line should be determined by no
better test than the judgment of an irresponsible engineer, and the
parliamentary influence happened to be possessed by the private
interests which expect to be Edition: current; Page: [328] benefited or
injured by it. No railroad schemes ought to receive the sanction of
Parliament, until, by a general survey of the country, it shall have
been ascertained what are the shortest and most convenient lines for a
general system of railway communication, to connect all the important
points. If this were done, all railways on those lines would, sooner or
later, be profitable, and their construction ought to be permitted on
those lines only; the nation stipulating for as large a share of the
profits as the competition of rival companies might assign to it. Then
might we hope for some, though but a distant approximation to the good
fortune of the States of Pennsylvania and New York, each of which will
speedily defray the whole expenses of its internal government from the
profits of railroads constructed at the public expense.

We must add one other consideration. In the choice of a line it is
disgraceful that not one thought should be bestowed upon the character
of the natural scenery which is threatened with destruction. It is
highly desirable that there should be a railway to Brighton; scarcely
any one which could be constructed would be convenient to such a
multitude of persons, or is likely to be so profitable to the
subscribers. But of the five rival lines which have been proposed, two,
if not three, and particularly Stephenson’s, would, to a great degree,
annihilate the peculiar beauty of a spot unrivalled in the world for the
exquisiteness, combined with the accessibility, of its natural scenery:
the vale of Norbury, at the foot of Box Hill. Yet into the head of
hardly one Member of Parliament does it appear to have come, that this
consideration ought to weigh one feather, even on the question of
preference among a variety of lines, in other respects probably about
equal in their advantages. Yet these men have voted £11,000 of the
people’s money for two Correggios, and many thousands more for a
building to put them in,[*] and will hold forth by the hour about
encouraging the fine arts, and refining the minds of the people by the
pleasures of imagination. We see, by this contrast, what amount of real
taste, real wish to cultivate in the people the capacity of enjoying
beauty, or real capacity for enjoying it themselves, is concerned in
this profuse expenditure of public money; although two-thirds of these
men would shout in chorus against “political economists” and
“utilitarians” for having no imagination, and despising that faculty in
others. The truth is, that in this country the sense of beauty, as a
national characteristic, scarcely exists. What is mistaken for it is the
taste for costliness, and for whatever has a costly appearance. If the
Correggios could have been had for as many pence as they cost pounds,
our precious aristocracy would have scoffed at the idea of their being
worth purchasing.

Edition: current; Page: [329]


WALSH’S CONTEMPORARY HISTORY
 1836

Edition: current; Page: [330]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, III & XXV (July, 1836), 281-300. Headed:
“Art. I. / sir john walsh’s contemporary history. / Chapters of
Contemporary History. By Sir John Walsh, Bart. / Second Edition.
[London:] Murray, 1836.” Running titles: left-hand, “Sir John Walsh’s
Contemporary History”; right-hand, “Tories, Whigs, and Radicals.” Signed
“A.” Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An article
headed ‘Tories, Whigs, and Radicals’ being a Review of Sir John Walsh’s
‘Chapters of Contemporary History,’ in the London and Westminster Review
for July 1836 (No 6 and 49)” (MacMinn, 47). There are no corrections or
emendations in the copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville College.

Edition: current; Page: [331]


Walsh’s Contemporary History

sir john walsh sat in one short Parliament, as the representative, we
believe, of one of the rotten boroughs which the Reform Bill has spared.
In his legislative career we have not heard of his signalizing himself
by anything remarkable; but the general verdict of the Tory press has
assigned to him the character of the first pamphleteer of their party.
For this reason, together with some others to be hereafter noticed, we
have chosen his latest production as a text for some remarks which we
desire to promulgate respecting the same circle of topics. We could have
wished for another kind of antagonist; for it is more agreeable to us to
cope with the rational arguments, than with the vulgar fallacies, of our
opponents. We can discern in the pamphlet nothing of the ability which
has been attributed to the writer; but, on the contrary, a remarkable
incapacity both for thinking and for the expression of thoughts. We are
willing to rest this opinion upon a single specimen; being able to
produce one which, by exhibiting multum in parvo of the character of Sir
John Walsh’s mind, will enable us to be content with such further
exemplification of it as may arise incidentally from our own course of
remark.

I have always thought, [says Sir John,] that, in answer to the
sophistries of those who so perpetually confound innovation and
improvement, there is a very natural and obvious view of the subject
which has not been frequently brought forward. It is common to say that
innovation is not improvement; but we may carry out the position
farther, and assert that innovation is always in its nature opposed to
improvement. (P. 73.)

Sir John’s is not, as he flatters himself, a new view of this matter. He
will find it in the celebrated Noodle’s Oration;[*] and there is not a
noodle of his acquaintance who will not tell him that innovation and
improvement are the most opposite things in nature; improvement the
best, and innovation the worst thing conceivable. And why not? They are
as contrary as praise and blame; as a good and a bad name for the same
thing. What is the meaning of Innovation? Something new. And
Improvement? Something new likewise. What then is the difference between
Improvement and Innovation? Improvement means, “something new, which I
like;” Innovation means, “something new, which I do not like.” Sir John
Walsh’s discovery, put into plain English, reads thus: “It is common to
say that [a new thing which I do not like] is not [a new thing which I
do like]; but we may carry out the Edition: current; Page: [332]
position farther, and assert that [a new thing which I do not like] is
always in its nature opposed to [a new thing which I do like].”

We had not thought that the murkiest corner of Noodledom could still
send forth a person capable of delivering this truth as a profound maxim
of political wisdom, now first promulgated by himself to an admiring
world.

Sir John has been misled into thinking himself the author of the maxim,
by being really the author of a remarkably silly commentary upon it.

He shall have the advantage, if it be an advantage, of stating his
meaning in his own words.

Innovation—I mean the substitution of a new and untried system for an
old one—must generally be advocated upon the ground that we have been
long in error,—that we have made many steps in a false direction, that
we have blindly wasted and misapplied our time and efforts. Should the
error be proved, it must be corrected; when we are convinced that our
course is a mistaken one, we must retrace our path, but the necessity is
dispiriting. The very conviction that we have been deceived when we
believed that we were right, the very proof of our fallibility, is of
itself a discouragement to attempts in a new track. We feel that we have
wasted time and power, that we were buoyed up by a delusive belief that
we were advancing; and we have at last to learn that we have lost our
labour. We have been wrong, therefore we may be wrong again. What better
security have we now than we had before? The improvement obtained by the
mere rectification of error is of a negative and unsatisfactory nature.
Substantial improvement, real progress, is gained by adding truth to
truth, and building on the foundation which is already laid. If the
foundation should prove unsound, or the plan defective, all may have to
be begun again; but we do not commonly call this advancing. Apply this
reasoning to some other science than politics. Let us take the
discoveries of Newton for example, which shed undying glory on the
country which gave him birth, and which raise human nature itself to a
higher scale in the creation, to a more intimate knowledge of the scheme
and the attributes of its mighty Author. When, by the great law of
gravity, the immortal philosopher explained all the wonderful mechanism
of planetary motion, certain slight irregularities caught his attention,
trifling vacillations which he was unable to account for upon his
system, and which he was disposed to consider as exceptions attributable
to the little caprices of nature.

The later observations of the eminent French mathematicians, and their
use of new and refined methods of calculation, proved those apparent
deviations to be strict results of an extended application of his
principles. They discovered that these disturbances, as they are called,
were the effects of the reciprocal action of the gravity of the
different planetary bodies upon each other, and farther, that by a
beautiful nicety in the adjustment, they balanced each other, so as
never to introduce any permanent irregularity into the system. Here,
then, is progress, wholesome, sound, indisputable progress—a principle
satisfactorily explaining new facts, and the new facts corroborating the
truth of the principle. Suppose now that we had found in La Place or La
Grange a radical reformer in astronomical science—that their ingenuity
had detected a flaw in the reasoning of the Principia[*]—that the
immortal discoveries of Newton had been reduced to the level of the
whirlpools of Des Cartes,[†] or any other fanciful and exploded theory,
would this have been advance? How we Edition: current; Page: [333]
should have regretted the overthrow of that noble and lucid system—how
we should have mourned that our mental vision, which had been extended
almost to embrace infinity, should have again been contracted to a
narrow span![*] How painfully and reluctantly should we have surrendered
the high and pure thoughts, the splendid prospect of the economy of the
universe, which this proudest achievement of human intellect had spread
before us! and with what a cold scepticism as to the reality of truth in
anything—with what a mortified sense of the fallibility of our powers
should we have recalled our absolute belief in a theory, which, while it
enables the imagination to wing its loftiest flight, rests upon reason’s
firmest basis. (Pp. 74-6.)

Here is, at last, something like a meaning, gradually evolving itself:
and we need nothing more to justify the opinion we have declared of Sir
John Walsh’s intellect, than this meaning, together with the manner in
which it is expressed.

For, first, as to his power of expressing his own meaning; look at his
attempt to compress it into a logical definition. “Innovation—I mean the
substitution of a new and untried system for an old one.” Would this
enable any one even to guess what distinction the writer is about to
draw? A person whose ideas are clear, uses words which make them sink
into the mind, instead of letting them slide off it on the well-worn
surface of a rhetorician’s stock phrases. What Sir John would say, as we
gather from the remainder of the passage, is this: “Innovation is
something new, which, if right, implies the supposition that something
old was wrong; Improvement is something new which does not imply that
supposition.” These two, he says, are contrary; and the former a direct,
and the greatest possible, hinderance to the latter.

Now, admitting that it is one thing to change from wrong to right, and
another thing to do something right which does not imply that we had
previously done wrong, is it not in either case equally our business to
do right now? And is there not something inconceivably pitiful in the
attempt to insinuate that it is not quite so good a thing to do right in
the one case as in the other? It deserves notice, moreover, that
although in speculative inquiries (from which, with great
inappropriateness, Sir John’s illustration is taken) we may sometimes
add truth to truth without finding ourselves out in any error; in
practical matters we hardly ever adopt anything new, without giving up
something old which is superseded by it. By an invention in machinery,
an article can be produced at half the cost: if you purchase the new
machine, and use it together with the old, it is improvement; if you
discard the worthless instrument, then, according to Sir John Walsh, it
is innovation. Your servant is lazy, dishonest, and a drunkard: you hire
a new one; if you also retain the rascal, it is improvement; if you
dismiss him, the benefit is “negative and unsatisfactory,” and the
change no better than an innovation. You inherit a fine estate, but in
so unwholesome a situation that you cannot live in it: if you can afford
to buy another estate, retaining the old one, according to Sir John
Edition: current; Page: [334] Walsh you may; but if you sell the old
estate to buy another, you do that which is not only not improvement,
but “is always in its nature opposed to improvement, and of which the
single tendency is always to suspend, often to retard it.” If we had
time for verbal criticism, we might ask how that which is suspended can
fail to be retarded?

Even after allowing himself so wide a scope for the choice of his
illustration, he cannot use it without its recoiling upon himself. He
tells us, with that inflation of language by which writers of no
imagination fancy they give additional dignity to the great results of
science, that La Place’s discoveries would have given him less pleasure
if they had proved Newton to be wrong; but that proving him as they did
to be right, here was “progress—wholesome, sound, indisputable
progress.” What, then, thinks Sir John of Newton himself? Did he not
prove his predecessors to have been in the wrong? Or were his
discoveries no “progress;” and will Sir John Walsh say of them too, “we
do not commonly call this advancing?” Are they not, on the contrary, the
era from which alone any real advance became possible?

Sir John, with a candour which is no very arduous virtue while confined
to generals, acknowledges that “should the error be proved, it must be
corrected.” Then why profess so much dislike to correcting it? Men do
not usually harp so much upon the painfulness of an operation which they
are very sincerely desirous of seeing performed. “The necessity,” it
seems, “is dispiriting,” and “the proof of our fallibility” (we quote
his very words) “is a discouragement to attempts in a new track.” This,
then, is the objection to innovation—that it is an acknowledgment of our
fallibility. Sir John undertakes to prove that “innovation is always in
its nature opposed to improvement.” And how does he substantiate the
assertion? By saying that he dislikes to correct an error,—can the
reader imagine why? because it proves to him that he is capable of
committing one! a fact which, apparently, he would not otherwise have
entertained a suspicion of.

We must tell Sir John Walsh, that when he says that detecting ourselves
in an error disturbs our confidence in our own infallibility, he
ascribes to it an effect which, by the consent of moralists,
philosophers, Christians, and persons of common sense in all ages, is so
far from being undesirable, that until it is accomplished neither wise
thinking nor wise conduct is so much as possible; and that the
discovery, instead of being one which ought to plunge us into dismay, is
a necessary condition of all rational confidence in our own strength, or
in the soundness of our own opinions. If Sir John Walsh were right, the
discoveries of Bacon and Newton, instead of being the periods from which
we reckon the improvement of physical science, should have struck a
sudden damp into it, and chilled the heart of every scientific man with
a “cold scepticism as to the reality of truth in anything.” Is such the
historical fact? Speak, O contemporary historian!

If this writer had not been held up by the Tory critics as one of the
great rising ornaments of their party, we should not have thrown away
time and space upon a controversy in which we are neither called upon to
say, nor to answer, anything Edition: current; Page: [335] requiring
thought, anything not absolutely trite. But the character of Toryism is
better seen in Sir John Walsh and his class, than in men of some
originality and power of mind. Nothing has given us a lower opinion of
the Tories as a body, than to observe on what class of their advocates
it is that their applause is lavished. Let the young and ambitious
adventurer, who would rise by Toryism notwithstanding the disadvantage
of a clear head, observe whether what we say is not true. The man whom
they recognise as their champion is never he who gives to Toryism (what
can be given to it, though not to Whiggism) something like a philosophic
basis; who finds for their opinions the soundest, the most ingenious, or
the most moral arguments by which they can be supported; but invariably
the man who, with greater fluency or a more daring manner than ordinary,
gets up and vents their most shattered and worn-out absurdities. There
is another cause for this besides the greater adaptation of the latter
class of arguments to the general calibre of their understanding. No one
can make speculative Toryism a thing that will bear the light, without
cutting off many of the most lucrative parts of practical Toryism. We
never knew a Tory of any power of mind, who did not, either secretly or
openly, give up the Irish Church. But the Tories in general deem this
too high a price for a small improvement in their argument, and a great
one in their character for honesty. Sir John Walsh for them. He throws
his mantle over all. Even Irish Toryism is not too shocking a thing for
him.*

Edition: current; Page: [336]
Having now assigned the class of writers to which Sir John Walsh
belongs, it is but just to add that he is one of the best of the class.
His language is not only decorous, but respectful to his opponents. They
are not all of them, in his eyes, demons, or profligate adventurers, or
sciolists and coxcombs. At least, he does not call them so; though he
affirms of them things hardly reconcilable with any other supposition.
But we are not to look for consistency in a partisan’s description of
the opposite party. There is no want of candour in Sir John Walsh. He
always states Edition: current; Page: [337] fairly the principles and
arguments of opponents, so far as he knows them; but what he knows is
very small. Almost the only authorities he cites are the Morning
Chronicle and the Globe; and these only since they became slavishly
ministerial. He has, nevertheless, the modesty to conclude, that because
he knows no more of the sentiments of the Reformers than these sources
supply, there is therefore nothing further to be known. He charges the
Reformers in good set terms with having no purposes of their own, and
says roundly, that their only principle is to follow the popular cry;
though in the very next page (p. 103) he says that this popular cry is a
creation of theirs, artfully got up by them for their own purposes. It
puzzles us to think how these two assertions can both be true: that they
may both be false, we assure him that on proper inquiry he would find.
He calls upon them to state the ends they propose, and the evils they
desire to remedy (p. 110); and seems to be sincerely persuaded that
these are matters which have not yet been disclosed. A person who
undertakes to answer others should be better instructed in what they
say. Cicero tells us that he always studied his adversary’s side of the
question, if possible more intensely than even his own.[*] We will not
require so much from Sir John Walsh: to discover all that his opponents
might say would be a task beyond his capacity; let him only make himself
acquainted with what they have said. There are some parts of it, not
unworthy of a politician’s attention in these days. Meanwhile, we must
allow Sir John Walsh the credit of having made one or two admissions, of
which we intend availing ourselves, and of having told about an equal
number of wholesome truths to the Parliamentary and ostensible leaders
of our own party. These are merits; and they are the only ones which we
have been able to discover in the pamphlet.

Edition: current; Page: [338]
In what follows we shall regard Sir John Walsh, not as Sir John Walsh,
but as what he evidently desires to be considered, the representative of
the opinions of his party; namely, that of which Sir Robert Peel is the
head, and which may be defined as the more worldly-wise portion of the
Tory faction. There need be no hesitation in admitting him as their
organ, as we have not discovered one opinion, one sentiment, or one
expression in the pamphlet, which might not just as well have been
uttered by any other individual of the set.

The book professes to contain the Tory view of contemporary history. Sir
John begins his history with the Reform Bill. As might be expected, his
view of that measure differs considerably from that entertained by
Reformers. Let us look at it. The time is never lost which is employed
in understanding the state of mind of our opponents.

According to Sir John, the cry for reform was not produced by any real
or supposed grievances; the people had no complaint against their
governors, nor even thought they had. Complaints, though of the vaguest
possible description, had indeed been made, and even, it would seem,
believed. “We have heard, till reiterated assertion is taken for proof,
of a century of misgovernment, a long monopoly of power, the
perpetration of abuses, the rankness of corruption, the venality,
extravagance, and incapacity of former ministries.” (P. 31.)

Sir John, however, attributes the demand for the Reform Bill to no such
cause, but either to “the appetite for speculative innovation” (p. 3),
or to “the desires of the body of the people for a more active and
direct participation in political power” (p. 2). We say either, because
Sir John does not always adhere to the same theory. Whichever of these
views, however, he adopts (and he seems to adopt them alternately), in
one point he is consistent: in affirming that the increased power which
the Reform Bill gave to the democracy, was desired not as a means, but
as an end; that this great constitutional change was effected, and the
further organic changes of the Ballot, Triennial Parliaments, Reform of
the House of Lords, &c., are now sought, for their own sake, and not for
the sake of any improvement to be thereby wrought in the actual
management of public affairs. It was the love of meddling in their own
government, not the desire of being better governed, that actuated the
people. The class of persons who were eager for “practical reform” (by
which he means improvement in the actual working of the government, as
distinguished from changes in the constitution of the governing body)
were those whom the Reform Bill found in power, and displaced; namely,
the Tory aristocracy, whom Sir John compliments with the appelation of
“the educated classes” (p. 76). These, indeed, were actuated by a
burning zeal for all improvement. “Every enlarged view of political
economy, every judicious mode of retrenchment, every practical reform”
(p. 77), found in them zealous advocates. A body possessed by such an
ardour of reformation, and which had so long held in their hands full
power to give effect to their wishes, naturally left nothing to reform.
Accordingly, Sir John Walsh triumphantly announces that Edition:
current; Page: [339] no abuses have been detected or remedied since the
Reform Bill passed. To have justified the expectation of its supporters,
it ought, he thinks, to have been the means of bringing to light some
undiscovered mystery of iniquity. This, indeed, would have appalled Sir
John.

Had the recent changes drawn the curtain aside which veiled political
profligacy and corruption, I should have experienced the mortification
of discovering myself the most egregious of dupes; I should have felt
the most depressing of all sensations, that of discovering the
worthlessness and deceit of what had been the cherished object of my
earliest veneration, which had long commanded the homage rendered to
excellence and virtue. (Pp. 33-4.)

A person who so candidly confesses the extreme mortification with which
he abandons any idea which has been instilled into him by his nurse, is
not exactly fitted for a public teacher in an age of revolutions. Sir
John, however, did not experience this humiliation.

Let it be remembered that Lord Grey and his colleagues held office four
years—that, after having triumphantly carried the Reform Bill, they
still, at the head of an overwhelming majority in the House of Commons,
conducted affairs during two parliamentary sessions, and brought forward
two ministerial batches of measures. Where were the corruptions
detected—where were the abuses exposed—where was the prodigality
checked? What materials of power and popularity would they not have
acquired, if they could have denounced and held up their predecessors as
political delinquents? (P. 31.)

If the Constitution under which we were born, and the system under which
we have passed the larger portion of our lives, were in reality but one
mass of abuses, but one vast conspiracy against the interest and
happiness of the community, how does it arise that so complete a reform,
that so entire a change of men, has thrown no light upon the concealed
iniquities? (P. 33.)

Such is the Tory statement of the origin, progress, and character of the
spirit of reform. And we have been thus explicit in setting it forth,
for the purpose of giving to it, in behalf of our countrymen, a solemn,
absolute, and indignant denial. It is not true that the demand for
parliamentary reform had anything to do either with any general theory
of government (which would have been no imputation) or, which would have
been a great imputation, with the mere passion for the exercise of
power. So far from having no connexion with practical grievances, it was
and is directed solely against practical grievances. There is no passion
in England for forms of government, considered in themselves. Nothing
could be more inconsistent with the exclusively practical spirit of the
English people. There is no hostility to aristocracy in England; the
people would far rather be governed by their superiors than by their
equals. Like all other nations, they had the partiality of habit for the
institutions under which they had grown up; and the artifices of a whole
century had wrought up this partiality into one of the most obstinate of
prejudices. Of this prejudice the majority of the Reformers have had
their full share; and it only yielded to a long and bitter experience of
practical grievances, combined with irresistible evidence, which forced
itself upon the most unreflecting among them, Edition: current; Page:
[340] of the connexion between every one of those grievances and the
sinister interest of some portion of those whom Grattan emphatically
called “the proprietors of Parliament.”[*]

Had we not repeatedly been startled by the shortness of men’s memories
as to the events of their own time, it would astonish us that even a
Tory should have forgotten what was the main occupation of the public
mind during the ten years preceding the Reform Bill. It was, to a degree
unparalleled in our history, and with constantly increasing intensity,
engrossed, not with theories of government, but with the exposure and
denunciation of practical abuses. Before that time the assailants of the
existing constitution of Parliament had had the weakness to rest their
case mainly upon generalities; upon the received theory of the House of
Commons; upon history, and the ancient practice of the Constitution.
Accordingly they preached to deaf ears, until the Cartwright school of
reformers died out, and others of a more “practical” kind succeeded, who
bade adieu to abstractions, and insisted upon judging the tree by its
fruits. The movement which gave existence to the Reform Bill, dates in
reality from the period when Mr. Hume commenced his memorable exposures
of the almost inconceivable profligacies of our public expenditure.[†]
He was soon aided by writers (among whom Mr. Black, of the Morning
Chronicle, and Mr. Fonblanque, of the Examiner, were the most
conspicuous) who, by their repeated exposures, made the people sensible
of the enormities in the administration of justice, especially those of
the unpaid magistracy. Was there not during all the same period a
growing disapprobation of the corn-laws? of the game-laws? of slavery?
of the restrictions on industry? of tithes? of corporation abuses? of
the vices of the law? of the inefficiency and extravagance of the Church
Establishment? of the atrocious principle of holding Ireland in
subjection by foreign bayonets to the most profligately tyrannical of
native oligarchies? Sir John Walsh should have carried his readings of
the Morning Chronicle further back. A Contemporary Historian should know
something of contemporary history.

From the eager zeal for the redress of all grievances, which, according
to Sir John, animated the whole of the ruling classes previously to the
Reform Bill, joined to the fact that none of the evils which we have
enumerated were redressed, or had any prospect of being so, during the
continuance of their ascendency, we can only infer that these, in the
opinion of Sir John, were not grievances. And this, indeed, is no
unlikely opinion to be held by Sir John; but we cannot quite reconcile
it with the credit he takes to the Conservatives for concurring in the
reform of some of these very grievances since the Reform Act, and for
their readiness to reform Edition: current; Page: [341] others which are
yet uncorrected. This readiness, according to him, is no new quality of
theirs. They were as eager to make these improvements formerly, when
they had the power and did not, as now, when it no longer depends upon
them:

We are no reluctant, tardy, insincere converts to the cause of practical
reform. We do not yield a constrained and interested acquiescence to an
overpowering necessity. We are not inconsistent with ourselves. The
great body of the Conservatives in the empire would have supported as
heartily all Sir Robert Peel’s proposed measures of last session ten
years ago as they would now. (Pp. 78-9.)

Indeed! But Sir Robert Peel, if we mistake not, was in office ten years
ago: if “the great body of the Conservatives” were all eagerness to have
these measures proposed, why did not that recognised leader of the
party, and Sir John Walsh’s model of a statesman, propose them? And
when, for instance, the Unitarian Marriage Bill,[*] which gave to one
particular class of Dissenters a partial and scanty relief from that
burden on their consciences which Sir Robert Peel last year proposed to
take off entirely—when this Bill was thrown out by the House of Lords at
the instigation of Lord Eldon[†] and the Bishops, the motive was
doubtless an impatient frenzy of reformation, which would take no
“instalment,” and regarded anything but the removal of the entire
grievance as a compromise with iniquity. Or is Sir John’s statement (for
it is ambiguously worded) satire in disguise; and does his assertion
that the Tories would have supported the measures of Sir Robert Peel as
heartily ten years ago as they would now, mean that they would give no
more support to those measures now than they would have given formerly?

Sir John is more rational when he begins to treat not of past things,
but of present. In this part of his discourse we are sometimes able to
concur in his sentiments, and even to adopt his language.

For example, we agree with him when he says that the nation is rapidly
arranging itself into the two divisions of Reformers and Anti-reformers,
or, as he proposes to call them, Conservatives and Radicals: that these
two parties (though the latter, as far as organization is concerned, is
not a party) are both of them gaining strength, at the expense not of
each other, but of the Indifferents and the juste milieu: and that there
will soon be no middle party, as indeed what seemed such had long been
rather an appearance than a reality.

“I believe,” says Sir John—and this is one of the admissions, of which,
to employ a French phrase, nous prenons acte—

That, of what may be strictly called reaction, there has not been a
particle. We have been strengthened by the accession of many neutrals,
by the awakened energy of the timid and the Edition: current; Page:
[342] careless, by the discovery of many in the ranks of our opponents
that their position was a false one. We have not yet gained one inch
upon the democratic spirit; on the contrary, the very same causes which
have strengthened us, have strengthened it in a nearly similar ratio. .
. . As the struggle becomes closer, and the objects less disguised and
more apparent, each party will receive additions to its numbers up to a
certain point; but a period may shortly arrive when almost every
individual will have made his election between the two principles, and
when these fluctuations will be rarer. (Pp. 83-5.)

Sir John is equally right in his character of the Whigs, which has
excited such a storm of indignation from the Edinburgh Review.[*] They
were, and are, a coterie, not a party; a set, confined to London and
Edinburgh, who commanded a certain number of seats in Parliament, and a
certain portion of the press, and were accepted by the Reformers as
leaders, because they offered themselves, and because there was nobody
else. When any man appeared in Parliament (they were too ignorant of
their age ever to look beyond) whose talents qualified him to act a
conspicuous part, they courted him, and if he was willing to become one
of them, admitted him into the circle. They thus adopted Horner, and
Romilly, and Brougham. By this means they always kept themselves
apparently at the head of all that part of the public who professed
liberal opinions. But their leadership was ostensible only. Since the
questions arising out of the Hanoverian succession had been set at rest,
the term Whig had never been the symbol of any principles. So long as
popular dissatisfaction was directed against men, not things—against the
particular acts of particular ministers—the Whigs, as being the men who
were to replace those ministers if the people succeeded in turning them
out, continued to be an essential element in the contest. Not so when
the questions which divided the public came to be those which related to
the reform of our institutions. The Whigs, who were a portion of the
privileged class, and were under the full influence both of the
interests and of the prejudices of that class, at once took up a
position hostile to any thorough reform. This position the Liberals of
the empire have never chosen to participate. They did not repudiate the
Whigs; but as little did they repudiate what the Whigs repudiated. They
were neither Whigs nor Radicals; they were Reformers. They had not
predetermined how far parliamentary reform should go; but they were
disposed to carry it as far as, on trial, should be found necessary for
obtaining good government. They were not for the ballot, or annual
parliaments, because the opinion did not generally prevail among them
that nothing less would suffice; but they had no prejudice against
either, if an extension of the suffrage, with septennial or triennial
parliaments, should fail to give them a government of which the
pervading spirit should be a regard to the public good.

This was the state of mind of the body of Reformers, down to the passing
of the Reform Act; and for them it was essentially a sound and wholesome
state. Those only who have qualified themselves by a greater degree of
study and experience Edition: current; Page: [343] than has fallen to
the lot of most, are entitled to have a confident opinion on the extent
to which it may be necessary to carry a political change, previously to
trial. The people, however, not having made up their minds, when the
Reform Bill passed, whether any further constitutional change would be
requisite or not, they naturally, where they were free to choose, chose
mostly, as their first representatives, men whose minds were no more
made up than theirs were: and hence that absence of any marked character
or tendency, which our author notices in the new men who were then first
introduced into public life (pp. 38-41). Sir John even states this less
emphatically than it might be stated. He mistakes when he says (p. 10),
“the elections of December 1832 returned two-thirds of the whole number
decided Whigs.” They were neither Whigs, nor decided; they were the
essence of everything that is undecided. They were that parti du ventre
(as it was styled in the French Convention) which has existed in most
countries, at most critical periods; men who have no principle of
guidance but the fear of extremes; who are constantly “betwixt two
minds,” and when they have made a step one way, make a step the contrary
way for the sake of compensation; who have no confidence in any leaders,
but having still less in themselves, are swayed by every breath, and may
be driven even into the things they are most terrified at, by “pressure
from without.”[*]

It was by practising upon the weakness of such men, that the Stanley
Cabinet (for the conduct of that ministry took its character from its
worst member) was enabled for a session and a half to carry on the
system which one of its members has since avowed that it deliberately
pursued—that of proposing nothing in the Reformed House of Commons but
what was agreeable to the Tories. This system could not last. The people
became alienated, not because the Whigs did not propose further organic
changes, for the experiment had only just commenced which was to
convince the people that such were necessary; but because their
“practical reforms,” their “course of improvement in details,”[†] were
shaped to the taste of those who were of Sir John Walsh’s opinion, that
no abuses existed previously to the Reform Bill. The Whigs became
unpopular, not because they wished the Reform Bill to be a “final
measure,”[‡] but because, rather than risk a “collision”[§] which might
prevent that wish from being realized, they were willing to abandon all
the ends to which the Reform Bill was intended as a means.

This it was that ruined the Whig Ministry, and for ever extinguished the
policy of which they were the representatives. “When the Ministry,” says
Sir John, and Edition: current; Page: [344] we fully concur in the
assertion—“when the Ministry of Lord Grey was broken up, first by the
secession of Lord Stanley and his friends,[*] and subsequently by the
Premier’s own resignation, it was not a cabinet which was dissolved, it
was a system of government which was overturned.”(P. 1.)

The Grey Ministry represented one system of government, and fell because
they would not abandon it. The Melbourne Ministry are the
representatives of another system of government, one remove only from
the former: and they too must soon make their election, to abandon it,
or to fall.

The Grey Cabinet, as a body (though against the wishes of some of its
individual members), acted on the principle not only of resisting any
further Parliamentary Reform, but of not originating or supporting
reforms of any kind, which, by producing a “collision,” might possibly
lead to that result. The Melbourne Ministry, as a body (also, it is
believed, against the wishes of several of its members), has abandoned
only one-half of this policy, retaining the other. It resists, with as
much obstinacy as its predecessors, not only any proposition for a
further increase of the popular control over the legislature, but the
bare idea that such can be rendered necessary by any conceivable
prolongation of the struggle against good government. The difference
between the policy of the Grey and that of the Melbourne Ministry is,
that the latter, though they deprecate “organic change,”[†] do not, as
the former did, make the prevention of it the grand business of their
government. To save the Lords from themselves is still their object, but
no longer their sole object. They do not shield the Lords from the odium
of rejecting good measures, by taking that odium upon themselves; they
propose what they think good, and what is acceptable to the House of
Commons, and let the Peers reject it at their peril.

Such a policy does not preclude, in the same manner as Lord Grey’s did,
the possibility of a co-operation between the Ministry and the more
decided Reformers. But it limited greatly the class from which Lord
Melbourne could recruit for his Ministry. In a cabinet constituted on
such a principle, no Reformer could be included, whose convictions would
not allow him to join in a determined resistance to all further organic
changes. And this category now included every man of rising talent among
the Reformers, except Lord Howick and perhaps one or two other scions of
the great Whig families. Lord Melbourne was thus compelled to fall back
upon those families, and upon the obscurer members of the old coterie;
for all who were conspicuous by talents or reputation had been taken
off, either by death or the progress of events. And hence that absence
of individual weight of character and talent, which enemies and friends
equally remark in the Melbourne Ministry. For it deserves notice as one
of the signs of the times, that the Whig Edition: current; Page: [345]
coterie is not renewed. There are no young Whigs. The vacancies which
death makes in their ranks are not filled; and their ministry must
henceforth be recruited from persons not of the clique.

Another effect of the adherence of the Whigs to that part of Lord Grey’s
policy which consists of resistance to further organic change, is, that
they are now the weakest of the three parties in Parliament. Without the
systematic support of the Radicals, they could not exist for a day. Of
that great numerical majority in the country who were undecided as to
the sufficiency of the Reform Bill to produce good government, a
preponderating portion have now made up their minds. Since the last
election, the Radicals in the House of Commons exceed the combined
strength of the personal adherents of Ministers and the parti du ventre.
Nor does any one doubt that were a general election to take place just
now, whether the Tories were reduced in number or not, the Radicals
would gain still further upon the Whigs.

A momentous question follows. Thus undisputedly the predominant section
of the party in power—holding the fate of the ministry in their hands,
and being the body to which apparently the country must look for the men
who are hereafter to direct its counsels—why are the Parliamentary
Radicals making no exertions to prove themselves worthy of this exalted
destiny? Instead of taking the lead, as belongs in all combinations to
those who hold the most decided opinions, why have they sunk into a mere
section of the supporters of the Whig ministry? Why is all their
Parliamentary conduct passive, not active? Except an occasional motion,
to which the reputation of some individual among them is pledged, and
which he could not without disgrace abandon, why do they originate
nothing, but content themselves with supporting what the Ministers
originate? Why do they not bring forward a succession of matured and
well-digested reforms, which, being sent to the House of Lords, might
compel that body to choose between the adoption of them and its own
ruin? Why do they let slip every opportunity not only for acting, but
even for speaking, like men in earnest about their opinions?

It is painful that some of the severest things said by Sir John Walsh of
the Parliamentary Radicals are those which can least be gainsaid by
their friends and supporters.

How much has the strength of this party been increased! It now numbers
from 160 to 170 members; and if it is not in office, it holds the fate
of a weak Ministry at its disposal. All this, however, has been
accomplished for the parliamentary party, and not by them. The power of
the press and the instincts of the democracy have shoved these 160
members into the House, but they seem to have arrived there merely
because they were nearest the door when it was opened. (P. 60.)

There was abundant encouragement for all the more ardent and adventurous
spirits to flock to their ranks. Their side was evidently the rising
one. Its places of distinction were as yet unoccupied. Their designation
was no longer a nickname associated with the ideas of the Edition:
current; Page: [346] Rotunda and Orator Hunt’s blacking van. The weight
they had acquired in the scale, and the prospect of power, had given
respectability to the term of Radical. And yet, with all these
inducements, with so fair a field, no new candidate appeared qualified
for the post of leader of the English Movement.

It is a favourite theory with political philosophers, and one which is
entitled to consideration, that the occasion creates the man—that as, if
a gentleman wants a butler or a bailiff, he advertises for one and finds
him, so that, when society and the circumstances of the times require a
Cromwell or a Napoleon, the Cromwell or Napoleon is forthcoming. If this
be true, certainly English society had no need just then of a Radical
statesman, for no democratic Pitt or Fox started forth, a ready-made
head of the Movement. Mr. O’Connell was the only person qualified, by
his talents for debate and his general ability, to perform the part; but
the English members were reluctant to enrol themselves in the list of
his followers, and he restricted himself to his peculiar province. Had
the metropolitan boroughs or the Scotch constituencies been able to lay
their hand upon a Mirabeau, I do not know where he might have carried
us; but no such Coryphæus appeared, and the chords which might have
responded to his touch remained mute. (Pp. 56-7.)

In the following passage Sir John Walsh hits the nail on the head:

It may be that what the Movement party had gained in the respectability
of its more prominent supporters, it had lost in the power derived from
congeniality of feeling and active sympathy with the masses without, who
are the sources of its strength. . . . That party which enumerated among
its adherents the varied information of Mr. Warburton, the ingenious
philosophy of Mr. Grote, or the high literary talent of Mr. E. Lytton
Bulwer, could not be stigmatized with coarseness or vulgarity. But if it
was less displeasing in these respects to the fastidious, it was
deficient in the enthusiasm, in the impetuosity which would have
developed its full power, in vigour and earnestness of purpose. A man
armed with a club may put himself into all the graceful positions of a
fencing-master, but, if he desires to make the most of his weapon, he
must grasp it in both hands, and lay about him without regard to rule.
(Pp. 58-9.)

That any one of the three gentlemen who are here mentioned, or of
several others who might be added to them, could singly have
accomplished in the last four years more than has been done in that time
by the whole body of Parliamentary Radicals, no one who knows them can
doubt. If any one of them had put forth his whole strength, in how
different a position would he have now stood! What corresponding energy
he would have called forth in many who now have been quiescent! and how
different a place would the Parliamentary Radicals have by this time
occupied in the public eye! Why have these men not shown themselves
equal to the emergency? Why are they allowing the destinies of the
country to slip through their hands? Because “they are deficient in the
enthusiasm, in the impetuosity which would have developed their full
power, in vigour and earnestness of purpose.”

There never were men purer in intention than the more influential of the
Parliamentary Radicals. The opinions of most of them are in opposition
to their private interests. Personal ambition they have none—would that
they had! In passive virtue—in determination to sully their hands with
no iniquity—in Edition: current; Page: [347] resistance to all
propositions, from whatever quarter coming, inconsistent with the most
rigid justice—no body of politicians ever were so exemplary. Of the
three parties in Parliament they are beyond question the party of the
most scrupulous conscience. Sir John Walsh helps to swell the vulgar cry
that property is in danger from them. Whenever, on the contrary,
property is endangered, it is on them chiefly that reliance is to be
placed for its security. Sir John is miserably mistaken when he says
that Lord Grey at the meeting of the first Reformed Parliament could
have “paid the fundholders 7s. in the pound” (p. 10). Had no one else
resisted such an iniquity, it would have raised such a spirit among the
Radicals as would have ignominiously hurled its author from power. It is
by the opposition of the Radicals, that measures inconsistent with the
legal rights or just expectations of individuals are usually defeated.
Sir John seems to take credit to the Tories for compelling the
relinquishment of the clause in the Irish Church Temporalities’ Bill
which imposed a tax on existing incumbents.[*] That clause was abandoned
in consequence of the general opposition of the Radicals. They had their
full share in defeating the proposition of the Whigs in 1831 for taxing
the transfer of stock, in violation of the express conditions on which
every loan was concluded.[†]

How comes it that with so much passive integrity, there is in these men
so little active energy? Why is it that men whom no consideration would
bribe to do anything against their consciences, cannot be urged by any
strength of motives to do anything for them? Because this is not an age
of heroism, or of disinterested exertion, or of vigour of purpose;
because the institutions which Sir John Walsh venerates, and the men
whom he eulogizes, have actually extinguished activity of intellect and
energy of character among our higher classes; because our church, our
schools, and our universities, will not suffer great minds to grow up
among us—minds fitted to accomplish great things, and to make their
spirit pervade and elevate the smaller minds around them. It is because
this people is becoming more and more a people of mere
Mammon-worshippers—and will soon be irretrievably sunk into that worst
degradation, unless our institutions of education, from Lambeth and
Christchurch to the lowest charity school, shall be radically
reformed,—unless a spirit in every respect the opposite of that which
now prevails, shall penetrate into every nook and cranny of them, and
give the dead carcasses a new life.

We offer this to Sir John Walsh as what he so earnestly demands, a
categorical declaration of the principles and purposes of the Movement
party. We hope he is Edition: current; Page: [348] satisfied. These are
our purposes. We have others; but these being the greatest, the most
distant, and the most difficult of accomplishment, may be considered our
ultimate objects. When this point is reached, we will not say that we
shall stop, for it would be absurd to set limits to improvement: but it
is not probable that, these things being attained, anything very
important will remain to be struggled for.

When therefore Sir John demands to be told how far we desire to go in
constitutional change, we answer, that this depends mainly upon Sir
John’s friends. We desire no constitutional changes, except as means;
and necessary means we believe them to be, because the opinion we
entertain of Sir John and his associates does not suffer us to believe
that they will give us our ends without them. If we are wrong in this,
the men whom Sir John celebrates have it in their power to undeceive us.
They have only to be what Sir John says they already are. When they have
given us a good code, a cheap procedure, courts which bring justice home
to the people’s doors; when they have abrogated the corn laws, corrected
all partial taxation, abolished all useless expenditure, and taken off
all restrictions upon industry; when they have made Ireland what it is
fitted to be, the garden, not the Golgotha of Europe; when they have
given us (what most civilized countries possess) an organized system of
administration, in which every public function has somebody trained to
it, somebody responsible for its performance, regularly watched and
systematically instructed by superior authority; when they have done all
this, and last and greatest of all, when, in the place of a church and
universities which are a disgrace to reason, and a laughing-stock to
Europe, they have given us such places and such methods of education,
both for young and old, as are suited to the wants, and therefore in
some important respects opposed to the spirit, of the age;—when these
things shall have been done, and done without organic changes, then let
Sir John Walsh repeat his question, and he shall receive an answer to
his heart’s desire.

Edition: current; Page: [349]


FONBLANQUE’S ENGLAND UNDER SEVEN ADMINISTRATIONS
 1837

Edition: current; Page: [350]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, V & XXVII (Apr., 1837), 65-98. Headed:
“Art. IV. / England under Seven Administrations. By Albany Fonblanque,
Esq. 3 vols. [London:] Bentley: 1837.” Running titles: “Fonblanque’s
England / Under Seven Administrations.” Signed “A.” Not republished.
Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “A review of Fonblanque’s ‘England
under seven Administrations’ in the London and Westminster Review for
April 1837 (No 9 and 52)” (MacMinn, 48). In the Somerville College copy
(tear-sheets) there are three corrections that have been adopted in the
present edition: “on” is changed to “no” (351.18); “not all” is altered
to “not at all” (359.27); and “writer panegyrist” is altered to “writer
and panegyrist” (379.39-40).

Edition: current; Page: [351]


Fonblanque’s England under Seven Administrations

these three volumes contain, not the best, (for they have left many of
their equals behind them,) but a few of the best, as well as most
permanently interesting, among the papers published in the Examiner by
its present editor: a man, of whom it is saying little, to say, that he
is facile princeps among English journalists; since it is doing
infinitely too much honour to English journalists as a body, to speak of
him as belonging to their craft. Mr. Fonblanque is something far higher
than a great journalist; he is a great writer, who happens accidentally
to be a journalist. Of the innumerable newspaper writers in this age of
newspapers, his writings alone will take a place among English classics.
In a generation whose bulkiest volumes are meant only for the day, his
ephemeral productions, by the carefulness of their composition, and the
lavish expenditure of mental resources upon their substance, might seem
to be designed for immortality.

As mere writers for the day, there have been several journalists of our
time as effective as Mr. Fonblanque; and (if we consider only immediate
effect) even upon a wider scale, because upon a more ordinary class of
minds. The most valuable of all talents for one who would be a
successful journalist, is that of being skilfully common-place: and the
writer who has received one-half of this gift from nature may add to it
the other half with no greater degree of diligence and practice than are
necessary to success in any other laborious profession. The influence of
most journalists may be explained as Mr. Fonblanque himself explained
Sir James Scarlett’s extraordinary success with juries: “there are
twelve Scarletts in the jury-box.” Even when pursued with higher
objects, newspaper writing is subject to the same condition as popular
speaking—it must produce its impression at once, or not at all; and he
is the most effective newspaper writer, as he is the most effective
speaker, who can, without being tiresome or offensive, declaim upon one
idea long enough to make it sink into the mind. Such was the secret of
the good writers in the Times, when the Times had good writers.

But in advancing to this pitch of excellence, a person who has a
multitude of ideas is apt to find them very much in his way. Seeing, as
he does, the bearings of a hundred different things upon his subject, he
knows not how to confine himself to one simple, broad, direct,
common-place view of it. He neglects the feebler but more obvious
reason, for the stronger one, but which is farther from the surface. He
surrounds his leading idea with allusions and illustrations, which
impress it Edition: current; Page: [352] more vividly upon the
intelligent, but which call off the vulgar reader—demand from him a
separate effort of attention, and so prevent him from being hurried away
by the main stream of the thought.

We think Mr. Fonblanque is chargeable with these faults, in a degree
highly creditable to his mental endowments. His eminence as a newspaper
writer has been attained in spite of the higher qualities of his mind:
and great must be his talents for popularity, when so great talents for
something better than popularity have not prevented him from attaining
it. If his unusual dialectic powers, his inexhaustible wit, and his
perpetual play of fancy, have rendered the Examiner popular as a
newspaper among the educated classes of almost all shades of opinion, a
still higher degree of success may be anticipated for the present
publication, since the very defects of his articles, as articles, arise
from their excellencies as permanent literary productions.

Nothing, certainly, can more strikingly exemplify, than these three
volumes, the difference between the treatment of a subject by a man of
genius, and by the most judicious thinker or ablest writer who is
without genius. Every one knows the insupportable tediousness of gone-by
politics. The Spartan in the story, who, for the crime of using two
words where one would have sufficed, was sentenced to read from
beginning to end the history of Guicciardini, and at the end of a few
pages begged to commute his punishment for the galleys,[*] would have
prayed to exchange it for death if he had been condemned to read a file
of English newspapers five years old. But with Mr. Fonblanque, the
farther we go back, and the more completely his articles are reduced to
their own intrinsic sources of interest, the more delightful they
become. If the interest anywhere flags, it is towards the end of the
last volume, where the contents are recent, and we come in contact with
the exhausted controversies of the present day and hour. But the
politics of Mr. Canning’s time and of the Duke of Wellington’s are fresh
in Mr. Fonblanque’s page, and we have accompanied him through them with
as much of the excitement of novelty as if we had never heard of either
of those personages before: for it was not in what the writer drew from
his subject, but in what he brought to his subject that the interest
resided. The matter immediately in hand might be local and temporary,
but the whole universe was the source whence he drew parallel cases for
its illustration; and the aptest and most felicitous analogies to
enforce his own view of it, or confute his adversary’s. Such, once more,
is the prerogative of genius. To the ablest mechanical man of talent a
subject is illuminated only by its own light: a man of genius will often
see into its darkest corners by a spark struck from some familiar
object, apparently altogether remote from it.

Edition: current; Page: [353]
Mr. Fonblanque’s opinions, it need scarcely be said, are those of the
philosophic radicals. That it may be more clear what we mean, we will
state whom we term the philosophic radicals, and why we so denominate
them. There are divers schools of radicals. There are the historical
radicals, who demand popular institutions as the inheritance of
Englishmen, transmitted to us from the Saxons or the barons of
Runnymede. There are the metaphysical radicals, who hold the principles
of democracy not as means to good government, but as corollaries from
some unreal abstraction—from “natural liberty,” or “natural rights.”
There are the radicals of occasion and circumstance, who are radicals
because they disapprove the measures of the government for the time
being. There are, lastly, the radicals of position, who are radicals, as
somebody said, because they are not lords.[*] Those whom, in
contradistinction to all these, we call philosophic radicals, are those
who in politics observe the common practice of philosophers—that is,
who, when they are discussing means, begin by considering the end, and
when they desire to produce effects, think of causes. These persons
became radicals, because they saw immense practical evils existing in
the government and social condition of this country; and because the
same examination which showed them the evils, showed also that the cause
of those evils was the aristocratic principle in our government—the
subjection of the many to the control of a comparatively few, who had an
interest, or who fancied they had an interest, in perpetuating those
evils. These inquirers looked still farther, and saw, that in the
present imperfect condition of human nature, nothing better than this
self-preference was ever to be expected from a dominant few; that the
interests of the many were sure to be in their eyes a secondary
consideration to their own ease or emolument. Perceiving, therefore,
that we were ill-governed, and perceiving that so long as the
aristocratic principle continued predominant in our government we could
not expect to be otherwise, these persons became radicals, and the motto
of their radicalism was, enmity to the Aristocratical principle.

Mr. Fonblanque’s career as a public writer is coeval with the birth of
this party. He was the first journalist who unfurled their banner: he
has borne it bravely and steadily through all fortunes, during ten years
of perpetual combat, and few men will have contributed more to its final
triumph.

Mr. Fonblanque began his labours in the cause of radicalism in
unpropitious times. The days of active persecution, indeed, were past;
but Reform principles were discountenanced by all persons in authority,
as much as their extreme contempt for those principles would suffer them
to consider necessary. There was no apparent Reform party among people
of property or education, and the demand for reform was believed to have
been effectually put down. In this state of affairs, Edition: current;
Page: [354] Mr. Fonblanque took up the cause; and was distinguished from
almost all others who were at that time serving it by this honourable
characteristic,—that he never in any single instance equivocated or
temporized for the sake of an immediate purpose, nor ever concealed one
particle of his ultimate designs. From the beginning, he scouted the
notion that the possession of large property qualified men for power, or
rendered it unnecessary to subject them to responsibility for the
exercise of it. From the beginning, he avowed that the House of Lords,
as it now exists, could never co-exist with a reformed House of Commons.
From the beginning, he treated the political Church of England as a mere
pretence for the misappropriation of a large portion of national wealth
to sordid purposes. From the beginning, he invariably represented the
Ballot as a sine qua non of good government, and universal suffrage as
necessary to its perfection, though demanding, as a preliminary
requisite, a degree of education and intelligence which was not yet, and
would not soon be, reached. In this straightforward and open course of
proceeding, we know not if Mr. Fonblanque had at the time of his
commencement any associates, except the early writers in the Westminster
Review, among whom, also, he himself was numbered. And now, when
doctrines which were at that time so universally obnoxious have gone far
towards becoming, and every discerning person sees that they must
ultimately become, the general opinions of the community,—those who
first descended into the arena and did battle for those principles, and
by so doing raised them from being objects of the unaffected contempt of
all persons of station or influence, to their present importance and
honour, are entitled to turn round upon those who are applauding
spectators of results they never hazarded anything to forward, and ask,
by what other course, profitable as it might have been to themselves,
they could so well have served their country and their opinions? and
whether, if they too had equivocated, and compromised, and enunciated
their opinions by halves, and kept the great questions out of sight for
fear of damaging the small ones, and on the whole trimmed and truckled
and played fast and loose with their convictions, as many would have had
them, as many are even now counselling them, their opinions would have
been now, or probably at any time during their lives, in the state of
triumphant progress and prosperity in which they now behold them? At all
times, and in all circumstances, has this truth been found invariable:
whoever, having adopted his opinions on mature consideration, openly
avows and publishes the full extent of those opinions (such things only
excepted as, if unseasonably declared, might deprive him of a hearing
altogether)—whoever, we say, does this, will lose many a point which, by
compromising some portion of his opinions, he might have carried; but he
will carry more points in the long run than the dissembler. He will not
always have done well for his own reputation, for he will often be so
far before his contemporaries as to be (in the words of Coleridge)
dwarfed in the distance:[*] he Edition: current; Page: [355] will often
not have done well for the interest of this or that particular truth;
but (so far as it is possible for human wisdom to affirm anything
universally of the variable course of human affairs) he will in all
cases have done well for the interests of truth on the whole.

In characterizing Mr. Fonblanque’s mind, most persons, we think, will
agree, that it belongs to the observing class rather than to the
ratiocinative. The two characters indeed are not inconsistent: a mind of
the ratiocinative order may be skilful in observing, and Mr. Fonblanque,
who is characteristically an observer, is also a good reasoner. It is
nevertheless true, that some minds are most given to arguing downwards
from principles to facts, and others upwards from facts to principles.
Some minds form their opinion of a case by closely examining the case
itself; others by applying to it some general law of nature, or of the
human mind, within the scope of which it seems to come. Mr. Fonblanque
is of the former kind. His radicalism is the result of no à priori
principle. His distinctive and pre-eminent merit as a thinker is (as it
seems to us), a keen eye for seeing and comprehending things as they
are—for taking a just view of the existing influences in society, as
they actually operate. His reflections on the ultimate causes of these
phenomena seem to have been prompted by a previous thorough insight into
the phenomena themselves; what he thought has been forced upon him by
what he saw.

He saw the whole machinery of the government of this country
systematically perverted, to the gain or supposed gain of the few; every
object which only concerned the minds, bodies, or fortunes of the many
treated with neglect or contempt; the many treated as having nothing to
do with the laws but to obey them,[*] and seldom meddled with by their
governors but for some purpose of vexation and annoyance. All this he
found going on under cover of the most pharisaical professions, and the
most pharisaical observances, religious, patriotic, and moral. The whole
of the class intermediate between the many and the few he found
grovelling in the most sordid worship of what he terms the two idols,
Mammon and Fashion; thirsting insatiably for two things—the means of
being admitted among the few, and the reputation of resembling them.
Seeing all this, he looked out for the cause of it; and this he found to
be, the constitution of the government of this country—which placed
irresponsible power in the hands of a small class, made wealth the key
to that power, and hereditary rank the symbol of the long possession of
wealth. He saw that to destroy the mischief, it was necessary to dry up
its source; and he declared war against the aristocratical principle.

The following passage, written in 1829, exemplifies those views of the
state of English society which have made our author a radical.

After quoting an opinion of the Morning Chronicle,[†] that to raise the
Edition: current; Page: [356] qualification of electors would destroy
the influence of the landed aristocracy, Mr. Fonblanque says,

In this view we cannot concur. Our own observation has led us to the
contrary conclusion, that the smaller gentry are for the most part
sycophantically subservient to the great. They do not make their stand
upon their own titles to consideration (either belonging to wealth or
moral worth), but rely for consequence on the mere countenance of the
class above them. The common ambition of the English gentry, and
superior trading men, is to be known and noticed by persons of a rank
above their own. For this pitiful object there are thousands ready to
waive their independence. It is, indeed, an especial misfortune of
England that the New Rich do not conceive the high point of pride of
constituting in themselves a new power; but, on the contrary, are
content to seek consequence by swimming in shoals, in the wake of the
Aristocracy, and rejoice in the poor crumbs of courtesy which are cast
to them, sometimes for policy, and sometimes for the sport of exposing
their active littleness in the gambols of sycophancy. The two idolatries
which corrupt us, morally and politically, in all ranks between luxury
and labour, are Mammon-Worship, and Fashion-Worship. These cults are
generally to be found in the same house: the man of business sets up a
temple to Riches in his own breast; and his wife, his daughters, his
sons, prostrate to Fashion, and compel his conformity, though the pride
of Mammon, which is great, should resist the propitiatory sacrifices to
the other idol.

We remember to have heard an experienced party politician number Lady
Castlereagh’s influence at Almack’s, and the fashion of her suppers
after the Opera, among the Parliamentary powers of her husband the
Minister. Opposition was marked as unfashionable by these tests of ton,
and men’s wives, sons, and daughters, became active missionaries of the
Ministry, and perpetual exhorters to a new birth unto Toryism. Almost
every Liberal Member’s family was against his politics, and the waverers
gave way. In the inferior classes the same folly is observable in other
instances. The grand society of a neighbourhood must be had at any
price. Countenance and civil speech alone, indeed, are mighty things:
witness certain of the radical Common Councilmen of the City, who have
become hotly ministerial by virtue of discourse with the Duke of
Wellington on the subject of the new bridge. Some of these worthies, to
whom the Duke has affably said, “Good morning,” are now surprised that
they ever found anything amiss in his politics.

The excessive reverence for property, which the Chronicle attributes to
the lower orders, is not to be denied; but we believe they do but share
in a common sentiment from which none of us are entirely free. We all,
Liberals and Serviles, Philosophers and Sentimentalists, are touched in
some degree by this prevalent taint in the moral atmosphere. The best is
he who is least affected by it. And when we examine the foible, it is
one which under other forms has been cultivated by the arts, and by the
imagination. What is property but power? Carry back the Yorkshire
buckskinned ’Squires of the Chronicle’s instance a few ages, and you
have “the bold Barons,” admirable in poetry, Waverley novels, and
paintings, with their castles of strength, their steel-clad knights, and
men-at-arms. Power in this form was picturesque, and power kept at a
banker’s shop has none of the show of martial array; but the power is
the substantial matter at the root of admiration in either instance. On
the other hand, a disposition to despise weakness seems to be a law of
nature, which humanity prevails against with effort, by urging the
sympathies, and stimulating them by the imagination. If one animal meets
with misfortune, the others of his kind fall upon and destroy him. In
the “Library of Entertaining Knowledge” this characteristic circumstance
is noted:

“In the kennels of fox-hounds the following barbarous custom of the dogs
towards one another has been sometimes observed. If a hound gets down of
his own accord from the Edition: current; Page: [357] bench on which he
is lying, no notice of it is taken by the others. But if a hapless hound
fall off the bench from awkwardness, his companions fly at him, and bite
him to death.”[*]

Marmontel describes a practice of men strikingly similar to that of the
hounds; for, says he, “All things are crimes in the unfortunate, and we
treat a fallen man as mothers do fallen children, namely, chastise them
for the mishap.” (Vol. I, pp. 237-41.)[†]

The following article on the House of Lords appeared as early as 1827.

If the late political changes should be attended with no other
advantage, they have yet effected a great good in the discovery they
have brought about of the true character of the House of Lords. To
thinking men, indeed, the character of this assembly could be no secret
at any time,—it was argued à priori from its constitution—it was seen
that wherever power is lodged without responsibility, the power is given
for the benefit of those who hold it. But the world is not filled with
thinking men; the majority take their opinions without examination from
current authorities. To persons of this stamp, the late pranks of the
House of Lords have proved extremely instructive.

A child treats its doll as a living creature, dandles and fondles it,
gives it the air, dresses and undresses it, and puts it to bed. Some
unlucky day it espies a little of the bran oozing out of its valued
form; curiosity is set at work—how is it made, is the question—research
begins—the opening in the seam of the puppet is increased, the stuffing
pours out, and the plump and specious form of the idol is reduced to a
trumpery piece of sewn leather, turned inside out, and cast with
contempt away. Our grand State Puppet has been provoking this process of
investigation; it has been letting its bran out, and the minds even of
the little children of society have been set to work to see whether
there is anything better in it. The stuffing of self-interest has
escaped in a most unequivocal way, and the idea occurs to the simplest
understanding, that by that substance only it is shaped. It is then seen
that this boasted body, the Hereditary Legislature, is entirely
insulated in power, and free even from the shadow of responsibility. The
Commons are in some slight degree responsible to the people; and the
name, the mere name, the name still, of responsibility, hangs over the
servants of the Crown, the King’s Ministers; but the Lords are
untroubled with responsibility, in substance, shadow, or name. They have
power on the most golden terms,—power without the necessity of
qualification for the use, or responsibility for the abuse of it. Such a
body, standing alone as it does, answerable in no quarter for its
conduct, not only unrestrained by any substantial check, but not even
reminded of its possible fallibility by any nominal one, must, according
to the nature of things, prefer its own interests when occasions arise,
with an audacity and contemptuous disregard to the sentiment of society,
which can be hazarded in no other branch of the state. Its members are
independent of the people, and independent of the King, who can make but
not unmake them; and consequently they can at pleasure set both the
people and the King at defiance. Nor can this surprise us: if we confer
power without responsibility, we cannot be astonished to see it
exercised without justice. Despots, little and great, many and few, will
of course consult their own pleasure; and sometimes that pleasure
happens to be good, sometimes bad; the good and the bad are matter of
chance, of lottery, from which hap-hazard work a wisely-constituted
government rescues society. When their individual interests are not
concerned, it is the nature of men to be just; but our House of Lords,
our Peers, are deeply interested in the perpetuity of most of the abuses
which the people are interested in abating. Many men there are
undoubtedly among them proof against narrow sinister influences, who
Edition: current; Page: [358] pursue the good of their fellow-creatures
as their sole object, and earn in the respect and love of mankind their
meet reward: such, however, are those superior natures—the moral like
the physical perfections—whose number in every class we know from
experience to be extremely small. We may calculate on their presence,
not on their preponderance. (Vol. I, pp. 35-8.)

After some other illustrations of the hereditary principle as judged by
its fruits, he continues—

In the Duke, who has married an elderly lady of great fortune for love,
we have the living evidence of that disdain of vile, sordid, pecuniary
interest, which may be expected in men of this noble class! Without
meaning anything unkind to the Duke, we must say that we wish, from the
bottom of our hearts, that a liberal Earl of high political influence
had married the rich elderly lady, instead of wedding himself to the
Corn Amendment.[*] Perhaps it would have been the same thing to his
Lordship, and certainly better for the country. We would, in truth, much
rather find the whole House in rich, crummy widows, than let them meddle
with our bread. The wisest thing that the Commons could do, would be to
send up to the Lords, with the next year’s Corn Bill, a vote of rich
widows to the holders of mortgaged or impoverished estates. (Vol. I, p.
40.)

This idea is improved upon in the following felicitous mixture of solid
truth and genuine wit. Mr. Fonblanque’s titles and mottoes are often
eminently happy. The passage we are about to quote is from an article on
the Corn question, appropriately headed “The way to keep ’em.”

Mr. Peel—it is useful to keep the public eternally reminded of what
stuff this leader of the British aristocracy is made—had said in defence
of the Corn Laws, that “it was the constitutional policy of the country
to maintain the aristocracy and magistracy as essential parts of the
community.”[†] Mr. Fonblanque closes with the proposition, and proceeds
in the following manner to point out the best and cheapest mode of doing
it.

This is plain speaking. If however it be the constitutional policy of
this country to maintain the Aristocracy and Magistracy, it is also the
policy of this country to maintain them in the manner least onerous or
detrimental to itself. The end being avowed and agreed on, the directest
means will be the best, and it will be wiser to vote a yearly supply in
pounds, shillings, and pence, for the maintenance of the Aristocracy and
Magistracy of these realms, than to keep them by means of a tax on
bread, which cramps the industry of the country. Let the Aristocracy and
Magistracy take their place in the estimates with the Army and Navy; let
money be voted for so many Lords and so many Squires a year, and country
houses be built, repaired, or fitted and found, like ships. No one
surely will grudge a few millions for the support of the wooden heads of
Old England! If it be declared that we must take our Masters into
keeping, in God’s name let us do it openly and directly, and maintain
them according to their wants. Mr. Goulburn, in this case, will come
down to the House, Edition: current; Page: [359] and show that Squire
Western[*] is so reduced in his fortunes as to be unable to afford a
pack of hounds; whereupon the Commons will vote him the dogs necessary
to the Constitution, inasmuch as they are necessary to the Squire’s
credit. Or he will set forth, that Lord Squander cannot keep a mistress,
as he greatly desires to do, and as his ancestors have done before him;
whereupon Parliament will vote him the wherewith for a concubine. One
man cannot drink claret, another is sunk below champagne: various are
the dilapidations in the estate of the Aristocracy and Magistracy, and
the country must repair them, according to the Ministers, but not, we
say, by a tax on bread:—substitute, in the place of it, the immediate
process of a demand on the public purse. Let the wants of Lords and
Squires be spread before us, hounds, horses, concubines, claret,
champagne, &c., and the estimates to supply them shall be regularly
discussed and voted, like those, as we have before said, of the Army and
Navy. The advantage of this mode over the present method of maintaining
the Aristocracy or Magistracy, or, in other words, of keeping our
Masters, is manifest. By way of illustration—George Barnwell perceived
it to be necessary to his constitution to keep a mistress, but for lack
of a direct supply from his old-fashioned uncle for so requisite and
respectable an appurtenance, he robbed the shop, and ultimately cut his
kinsman’s throat, just as the man killed the goose to get the golden
eggs, or as the squires kill this country to keep up the price of their
corn. If Barnwell’s uncle had been distinctly told by a neighbourly Mr.
Peel that it was absolutely necessary that his nephew should maintain
Millwood, none of this mischief would have happened.[†] The robbery
would have been avoided; also the personal inconvenience of
assassination to the sufferer. What was requisite for Millwood’s
“dresses and decorations,” as the play-bills have it, would have been
considered, and the damage would not have exceeded the occasion. The
present method of keeping our Millwood is attended with this obvious
mischief, that the cost of the maintenance of the hussy is more than
proportioned to her wants. Our Constitution requires that squires and
lords should be supported; but squires and lords need support in
different degrees: some need it very little; some very much; and some
again not at all. How stupid it is then to give to these various claims
and conditions one measure of supply! What a manifest offence against
economy! As Lord Eldon would say, “God forbid” that we should dispute
with Mr. Peel the propriety, fitness, and constitutional policy of
starving the people for the good of the Aristocracy and Magistracy; all
that we contend is, that they should be pinched with discretion, and
that a judicious manner of picking pockets should be substituted for the
practice of taking the bread out of their mouths. (Vol. I, pp. 164-7.)

On other occasions, he pursues the squirearchy with still more poignant
raillery; as thus—

magistracies to be sold

We would particularly refer the admirers of “things as they are”[‡] to
an auction advertisement, in the Courier, Globe, and others papers,
setting forth that on Tuesday the 16th of September, Mr. Driver will
sell by order of his Majesty’s Commissioners of Woods and Forests a
Crown estate in Essex, stocked with game, &c., and conveying many most
valuable privileges; “amongst others,” says the affiche.

Edition: current; Page: [360]
“The owner of this manor and lordship (Havering atte Bower) has the sole
nomination and appointment of two of the Magistrates, the tenants and
inhabitants within the manor and lordship appointing the third, who
exercise an exclusive jurisdiction, the Magistrates for the county at
large being prohibited from acting within this lordship.”[*]

It seems to us that Mr. Driver has scarcely laid sufficient stress on
this advantage. What an opportunity is here presented to Sporting
Gentlemen who have the preservation of game at heart! The purchaser of
the property may, if he please, make his keeper and helper Justices of
the Peace as well as Guardians of the Birds,—an union of functions as
rare as it is obviously desirable. The convenience of giving to the
apprehender of poachers the magisterial power also of committing them,
is indeed so manifest, that we are confident it is unnecessary to dilate
further on the topic; and then how great the advantage of the exclusive
jurisdiction, “the Magistrates of the County being prohibited from
acting within this lordship!” How delightfully snug! Game and Justice
within a ring fence! Everything done at home! Here the Squire may kill
his own mutton, brew his own beer, and make his own law; ay, and his own
law-expounder too. Nothing is wanting but a gaol on the estate, with a
tread-mill, that he might have it to say that he ground his own
prisoners also.

There is one benefit which Mr. Driver has omitted to recite, perhaps
from some little delicacy—we too scarcely know how to name it—we would
spare blushes, and it may be guessed what we would inquire—is there
no * * * * on the property? You know what we mean; do not compel us to
speak out, we really wish to be delicate—is there no “Justice Juice?” Is
there no “Cat and Bagpipes,” or “George and Dragon,” within the snug
jurisdiction; or, in plain terms, is there no licensing business? Say
that there is, and we will dream the rest. What game is to the
sportsman, public-houses are to the speculating Justice; and surely when
two Magistracies are put up for sale, by order of his Majesty’s
Commissioners of Woods and Forests, it is strange that the mention of
this important particular should have been altogether omitted.
Prœfulgebat quod non visebatur[†] may however have been the effect
intended.

When Magistracies of exclusive jurisdiction are on sale, going by
auction with arable and meadow, out-houses and barns, sheep and oxen,
pots and pans, the imagination fills the territory with the advantages
accruing from every conceivable abuse. Sentimental ladies may sing Mr.
Bayley’s choice of bliss, “I’d be a butterfly;”[‡] but for good,
substantial, dishonest profits and enjoyment, we should chaunt,

“I’d be a Justice of Hav’ring atte Bower.”

(Vol. I, pp. 192-4.)

One of the most honourable characteristics of Mr. Fonblanque is the
ardour of his sympathy with the hard-handed many, and the indignant
scorn with which he visits the indifference to their feelings, and
positive hostility to their pleasures, so general among those who lay
claim to the title of their betters. This spirit rouses, in Edition:
current; Page: [361] addition, another of Mr. Fonblanque’s strongest
feelings—his profound abhorrence of cant.

Take the following on stopping up footpaths:

Let it be stated that a Prince or Princess has been pitiably straitened
on an allowance of 12,000l. a-year, and Member after Member—yea, patriot
after patriot—will spring up, with his heart in his mouth and his hand
in our pockets, confess the hardship of the case, and his joyful
readiness to concur in the required grant, vouching, at the same time,
for the pleasure with which the public will defray this pleasing
addition to its charges. How different is the reception of any
representation of the privations, vexations, or sufferings, of the
humble and labouring classes! We hear nothing then of liberality, or
generosity, or the claims of justice, or the regards due to the comforts
of the deserving.

Those who make light of provocations of this character are miserably
ignorant of man. It is not always the greatest political wrong which has
the greatest effect on men’s minds; and we firmly believe that more of
bitterness, more of fierce vindictive sentiment, towards the rich, has
been produced by the path-stopping act, wheresoever it has been
enforced, than by any other of the many bad acts that have been spawned
by Parliament within the present century. The invasion of right and
convenience is in this case so palpable, so obvious to every
understanding, and so kept alive in the recollection by the daily
consequent discomfort; and the motive is also so exasperatingly
conspicuous in the improved domains of the rich and powerful, that it is
not in the very large patience of the persons concerned to become
reconciled to the wrong.

And who are the men who have authority to rob the labourer of the sweat
of his brow, to deprive him of the short and pleasant path to his
labour, and to add to the toil of him who lives by toil? The unpaid
Magistrates—men notoriously appointed without regard to any judicial
qualification, and who are as notoriously continued in the commission of
the peace after the most decisive proofs of unfitness—to such as these
the rights of the humble and industrious, in their paths to labour or
recreation, are entrusted. When a canal or road, most essential to
public convenience, is carried through the domain of a man of wealth, an
Act of Parliament is necessary, and compensation is had; but when the
way is to be stopped up, which has been of pleasure or convenience to
the men of labour, nothing more is necessary than the consent of two
Magistrates, and nothing more is given than notice of prosecution, with
the utmost rigour of the law, to trespassers. And ours is the
aristocracy which is declared not oppressive, and not to be likened to
the French aristocracy, before the Revolution.

(Vol. II, pp. 168-71.)

If space permitted, we would subjoin several passages from the striking
articles on that topic so fertile in cant, the beer-houses.

Mr. Fonblanque never flattered the prejudices or passions of the more
ignorant portion of the Radical Reformers. The doctrine of pledges, or
instructions by the constituents to the representative,—a doctrine first
taught to the people by the Tories, and which has recoiled upon
themselves, Mr. Fonblanque has always treated as destructive of the very
idea of a representative government. See for instance an excellent paper
published in 1829 (Vol. I, pp. 234-5). He assailed with his most
forcible weapons of argument, and ridicule, the outcry against the New
Police.* The paper in Vol. II (pp. 299-308) on the “Equitable
Adjustment”[*] Edition: current; Page: [362] is one of the best
denunciations ever written of that scheme of fraud. The commencement is
an excellent specimen of Mr. Fonblanque’s happiest manner; the simple
statement of an argument has the effect of the most consummate, because
apparently unstudied and unconscious wit:

The idea of “Equitable Adjustment” is, probably, of as high antiquity as
robbery, and in the felonious mind of all climes and ages, has been
“often thought, though ne’er so well expressed.”[†] The man in need, who
supplied his wants by seizing on his neighbour’s stores, doubtless
regarded the action as an “Equitable Adjustment,” and plumed himself on
redressing the wrongs of fortune. The first rude intent of an “Equitable
Adjustment” may, indeed, be traced in the history of Cain, who, seeing
that his offering was less acceptable than Abel’s, thought to relieve
himself of the inequitable depression by slaying his brother.[‡] The
needy soon began to contrast the abundance of others with their
privations, and to perceive an equity giving them a decree, according to
the power of their arms, or the nimbleness of their fingers, to share
with the provident and thrifty. Each of these men sat as chancellor in
his own Court of Equity, and adjusted to the uttermost of his
opportunities and capacity. There is in the mind of man so natural and
strong a disposition to Equitable Adjustment, that it may seem wonderful
how law could ever prevail against it; but Equitable Adjustment was, at
all times, and in all circumstances, attended with this great
inconvenience, that there was no limiting its operation,—no security
against its recurrence oftener than was desirable. The adjuster of one
day might be subjected to adjustment the next, and the equity he had
exercised upon one might be exercised on him by another, more needy and
more potent. Hence, from no higher motive than convenience, law seems to
have been generally preferred, and the institution of property secured.
From the period when, all things considered, men thought it, on the
whole, better not to be thieves, the names of purposes, actions, and
actors, have been bestowed by the greater number, who have stickled for
the distinction between meum and tuum: hence, the ancient practice of
Equitable Adjustment has passed under the various descriptions of
highway robbery, house-breaking, felony, larceny, or the yet larger
terms of rapine, spoliation, &c. At no time, indeed, have the adjusters
ceased to exist, and to cherish in their minds the principle of equity,
as consecrating their method of settling the differences of fortune, or
redressing the fluctuations of property; and it is remarkable, that
their administration of equity has been as summary as that of the Court
for the same object, having so many other points and practices in common
with them, has been dilatory; yet, the identical motive which induces
the speed of the one, explains the delay of the other, and we find the
closest affinity between the working of the High Court of Chancery and
the works of the unlicensed apostles of equity on the highway. Thus much
we have said, to show, that the name of “Equitable Adjustment” is not so
inappropriate to the design of those who have advocated it, as may at
first appear, and that it is the proper clothing of the sentiment of
those who yet hold to the

Edition: current; Page: [363]
-   

    “Good old rule, the simple plan,
-   

    That they should take, who have the power,
-   

    And they should keep, who can.”[*]
-   

    (Vol. II, pp. 299-301.)

We subjoin a few extracts of a more miscellaneous character, for the
more varied illustration of our author’s manner. Our last quotation
exemplified the wit of logic; in the following, on the old style of
pamphleteering, we have the wit of fancy.

A pamphlet of the old-fashioned style is a composition of much
circumlocution, and a sort of stuff which is best known by the name of
palaver. It is a thing of stateliness and decorum, and two or three
ideas pass slowly and solemnly along in a procession of winding phrases.
The author dances a literary minuet, as it were, before the public;
leading out his subject, bowing to it, putting on and taking off his
hat, flourishing now a leg, now an arm, and moving over a very small
space of ground with a very vast ceremony and parade of action—all
wonderfully imposing, and unspeakably tedious to behold.

(Vol. I, p. 68.)

The following is the introduction to an article on the unequal measure
with which immoralities are visited upon “somebodies” and “nobodies:”

A striking inconsistency of judgment is the result of the very active
state of the moral feelings in England, together with the general
ignorance of moral principles. Every Briton makes it a point of
conscience to keep a moral sentiment, and the more fierce its character,
the greater he believes its virtue, or rather his own virtue in
possessing it; but of any principle for the exercise of it he is
commonly barren. His morality is chained up in his breast as the mastiff
is chained up in his court-yard, and like the dog, it has generally a
proneness to bark at beggars and vagabonds.

(Vol. I, p. 206.)

No one excels our author in the happy application of a trait of comedy,
or a nursery tale. The following was written during the No-Popery
clamour against the Duke of Wellington:

The passing action (the removal of the Catholic disabilities)[†] great
and laudable as it is in our eyes, will hardly be appreciated in
history, for the ridicule attaching to the No-Popery panic will detract
from the merit of having defied it, and compelled submission to the
terms of reason and justice. The man who, a century ago, marched up to a
hobgoblin, breathing fire and smoke, was only too hardy a hero in the
eyes of the trembling beholders; but when the spectre was familiarly
known to be a pumpkin with a candle in its sconce, the act of daring it
sunk to a level with the absurd occasion. The superiority to a once
pervading superstition is forgotten, and it is only remembered that the
man was bold enough to brave a pumpkin and a rushlight. . . . It is all
very fine in newspaper writers to talk of the estimate after-ages will
form of his action, but the truth is, that its merit can only be
understood by ourselves, who know the obstacles he encountered and
overcame. There are certain conquests which, like the best witticisms,
seem perfectly easy when they are made, and that Edition: current; Page:
[364] under consideration is of the number. The Duke’s task has been
similar to the adventure we read of in the Arabian Nights, of the Prince
who climbed the mountain for the singing tree and golden water.[*] He is
stunned by a thousand Stentorian voices threatening resistance, and
perplexed by unseen hands opposing his advances, but with high constancy
and fortitude he makes good his way, and escapes the fate of those who
look back when their objects are forward, that of being turned into
stones.

(Vol. I, pp. 216-17.)

On the quiet submission of mankind to political evils so long as they
are not utterly unbearable:

John Bull is like the gentleman who occupied one of the Alpha cottages,
when the neighbouring high-ways and bye-ways were not so good and safe
as they now are, and who observed to a friend, that he had resolved to
change his quarters, for, said he, “I have given it a fair trial; I have
been knocked down and robbed regularly every night for the last three
years, and I can bear it no longer.”

Blessed are the knaves! for they are the only effective Reformers, and,
thanks be to Providence! we rejoice in a goodly number of them. But for
the hints they furnish in the way of practical demonstration, John Bull
would never be convinced of the flaws in his jurisprudential policy.
Until the steed is stolen, it is vain to attempt to persuade the honest
gentleman of the theoretical convenience of bolts and bars.

Who has not read with delight Mrs. Hamilton’s Cottagers of
Glenburnie,[†] in which the dogged constancy of the Scotch to their
habits of dirt and carelessness is so humorously described? Mutato
nomine de te fabula narratur,[‡] O Bull. You are a man neat in your
house and habits; you wash your hands twice and your face once a day;
your corduroys are not greatly stained with beer, and your waistcoat is
inconsiderably snuffy; you do not wear your stockings more than a week,
and your shirt has knowledge of the laundry; there is no dunghill before
your door, your barns and outhouses are in repair, your roads are
excellent, and you hold the golden maxim, that “one stitch in time saves
nine:”—but there is foulness, and slovenliness, and carelessness, beyond
the house, the farm, and the person. What the Scotch of Mrs. Hamilton
were in their domestic concerns, you, oh John, are in your political.
There is a dung-hill before your door of justice, bigger and fouler than
all the middensteads that ever stunk in Scotland—it is the Law, man. See
in your public estate too the havoc the pigs make, against whom you have
no fences, and who consequently devour your cabbages, grub up your
carrots and turnips, stye in your house, and grunt in your
Parliament—they are your Oligarchs—wilful creatures, vehement in filling
themselves, inordinate in craving, and resolute in procuring their foul
self-satisfaction.

It is with Mr. Bull as it was with Mr. Sawney in the less
concern—“damned custom” renders him callous to the perception of the
nuisances. “It’s just vary weel,”—“it has always been that gait,”—or he
“canna be fashed” to change. For this evil content there is no cure but
in the consequently-growing enormity of inconvenience. Mischiefs are
like jokes, laughed at till they are practical. . . . The sign of the
fool with his finger in his mouth, and the sentiment, “Who’d have
thought it?” is the precise emblem of English jurisprudence.

(Vol. I, pp. 281-4.)

We cannot resist quoting an article in our author’s happiest vein. It
was written Edition: current; Page: [365] during the struggle for the
Reform Bill, and is aimed equally at the Tories, and at the Whigs who
truckled to them:

Æsop tells us that, once on a time, a fox wheedled a crow out of a piece
of cheese;[*] but we have never heard that any arts of persuasion or
cajolery redeemed anything from the jaws of the fox. It is clear that we
have not had a crow to do with. For months every tongue was employed in
assuring it how much it was respected and valued, what a sweet pretty
creature it was, and ever would be reputed to be, if it would only open
its mouth and drop the morsel to which it had no right. It turned its
tail, however, most uncivilly upon all solicitations, and showed itself
a sort of animal that thought a good bit in the mouth better than any
quantity of fair words in the ear. Our Ministers have obviously great
reliance on their powers of persuasion. Of Lord Althorp it may be said,
as Mrs. Hardcastle remarked of Tony Lumpkin, “He would wile the bird
from the tree:”[†] but ah! not the fox from the goose. If he has not the
blandishment of oratory, he has the oratory of blandishment: but beasts
of prey have no ear for civilities. We fear, we greatly fear, that
wolves will never answer to the call of “Dilly, dilly, dilly, come and
be killed,”[‡] however sweet may be the accent, or urgent the propriety.

When children commit errors, the parent’s consolation is, “They will
have more sense when they get older.” This seems to have been the
calculation with respect to the Peers. Though already the wickedest old
body in the world, it is supposed they will know better in three or four
months. When the sight of a venerable Bencher of the Temple failed, at
the age of ninety, notwithstanding all the resources of art, he
tranquilly remarked, that he believed he must leave it to time. We fear
that time will not do more for the sight of the Peers than it did for
our aged friend. They have had all encouragement in their obstinacy.
Before they proved malcontent, they were assailed with flattery on the
one hand, and menaces of destruction and creation on the other. They
have proceeded to the extremity; they have insulted and defied the
nation, denied its rights, and spurned its claims, and they have
experienced none of the menaced consequences. The worst that is to
happen to them is to be tried again. Can we wonder should they begin to
be of opinion that threatened men live long. Great escapes give cowards
confidence. The cry of “wolf”[§] has proved a false alarm, and the
proverbial false security will follow on it; all warning will now be
laughed at till the terrible reality appears.

Our contemporaries are beginning to have their doubts, whether Ministers
can catch Peers by salting their tails. There is but one example in
point of their practice, and the success of it is uncertain—it is that
of a Frenchman who advertised a powder for killing fleas. A gentleman,
troubled with a large majority of these tormentors, having in vain
spread the bait, reproached the quack for his deception. The man coolly
asked how the specific had been applied? and having heard, answered, “O
Sare, but dat is quite wrong—first you catch de leetal flea, den you
take him and hold him by the nape of his neck till he gape; den you put
a grain of de powder down his trote—an den you let him run, and perhaps
he bite you no more.”

Ministers have had the flea by the nape of the neck, gaping, aye, and
with the whole country open-mouthed too, and they put a grain of
love-powder down the throat, and let it Edition: current; Page: [366]
run, and perhaps it will bite them no more—but perhaps it will. Our
adversaries have natural allies in all the calamities that can visit
mankind. On war they have always fondly reckoned. Pestilence they hailed
as “a diversion:” and cholera seems to have landed, as if by friendly
invitation, almost on Lord Londonderry’s threshold. There is nothing to
the minds of these men comparable in horror to honesty. The fabled
shriek of Mandrakes torn out of the ground, expresses their supernatural
agonies at being torn from the pockets of the people. Their attachment
to plunder has absolutely something of the romance of passion in it, and
when the struggle is over, we shall expect to see it illustrated in acts
of felo de se, or deaths by melancholy; and celebrated in tales and
tragedies. Goethe has made a most affecting story of one man’s love for
another man’s wife;[*] and we really do not see why as much may not be
made of one man’s love for another man’s money. This is a passion which
we know never cloys, but grows with what it feeds on, and the
disappointment will not be the less bitter after possession. As all the
pernicious desires in their wildest indulgences are celebrated by poets
and novelists, we think that the avarice of Boroughmongers, which has
had such tremendous effects on the state of a great people, is well
worthy of a tale, an epic, or a tragedy. We, as yet, want examples of
the appropriate manner of catastrophe; but, as these worthies boast to
be more of antique Romans than of Danes, we shall expect soon to read in
the Morning Post, that, “yesterday a large party took poison with Sir
Robert Peel;” that the Duke of Newcastle has thrown himself on his sword
at Clumber; that the Duke of Wellington is pining with a green and
yellow melancholy; and that his Grace of Cumberland has taken to his
bed, and died. These things, seasoned with sentiment, the distress kept
well in view, and the character of its causes artfully suppressed, may
be worked into as moving a story as the Sorrows of Werter. The Sorrows
of Newcastle!—how well it would sound, opening with a bread-and-butter
description of a Borough, and ending with the loss of all fat things!
But having thrown out the idea, we leave it to be worked out by persons
who have the befitting genius for the pathetic.

(Vol. II, pp. 106-10.)

Its length alone deters us from quoting the whole of the admirable
article intituled “The Soothing System Illustrated.” We shall cite the
beginning and the ending:

It is well known to all the world (which means ourselves and friends),
that Ministers are the best men breathing; having, however, this one
fault (all the best people have some great one, by-the-by), that they
are too good—to their enemies. A very melancholy instance of this
propensity has just transpired. Poor Lord Althorp has been shockingly
used by a Lancashire Tory, to whom he tendered some appeasing
civility.[†] He did but open a friendly communication, as a man might do
with a mad bull, asking him what had so transported him, and wherein he
was displeased? when the savage tossed, tore, and gored and pinned him,
and left him speechless!

The merchant in the Arabian Nights, who was eating nuts and throwing
away the husks, was terrified by the sudden appearance of a raging
giant—a sort of Lancashire gentleman—who desired him to prepare for
instant death. The poor man comported himself like Lord Althorp, spoke
most civilly, disavowed intention of offence, and begged to know wherein
he had displeased? “Wretch!” cried the giant,—“you have dashed out the
brains of my beloved son with your accursed nut-shells.”[‡] The merchant
was as much at a loss to Edition: current; Page: [367] understand the
connexion between the husks of nuts and the destruction of a giant’s
son, as was Lord Althorp to comprehend the relation of Mr. Hulton’s
displeasure to the words he had dropped; and his pain was the greater,
as he knew, that, though he renounced nuts, he never could be secure
against killing giants’ sons, whose forms were so fine as to be
imperceptible to the eye, and destructible by husks. The giant, as every
one knows, proved in the end more placable than Mr. Hulton of Hulton
Park—perhaps because the giant was not great man enough to have a
park—perhaps because he had never been in the Commission of the Peace,
which makes a gentleman understand his right to be angry. This story
illustrates self-love, that vast passion, whose objects of affection are
so small—against the wounds of whose minute and fragile offspring we can
never be secure. The sons of giant pride are about in all directions;
and although Lord Althorp be not husky in his speech, though his words
fall soft as flakes of snow, yet shall he brain the first-born, the joy,
the pride of the Gogs,[*] and be stunned with their complaints of wrong
and threats of vengeance. Throw but the stone, however, and the giant
dies—aye, were he ten times as big as Hulton of Hulton Park. Giantship,
whatever it was formerly, when beasts could speak, is now conventional;
if we allow men to lay down their own proprieties of consequence, they
will fill them with insolence. By taking their just measure, we bring
them down to their modesties or properties. We have not a doubt, that
had our aforesaid merchant filliped a nut sharply against his bullying
giant, instead of begging and praying, he would have knocked him down to
insignificance, for the chip showed the softness of the block.

(Ibid., pp. 145-6, 154-5.)

There is an intermediate passage which we cannot omit. Lord Althorp had
euphonically described the Manchester Massacre, as “the unfortunate
transaction at Manchester.”[†] Hereupon our author says,

It is one of the greatest discoveries of modern times, that when any
considerable public mischief happens, nobody is to blame. The stars
formerly had to answer for all crimes and miscarriages; but since the
improvements in astronomy, they have been found innocent, and are no
longer responsible for our calamities—had they not been timely set right
in public opinion, the Georgium Sidus would have borne the blame of all
the ills that have afflicted the country. Now, however, the stars and
garters of the Peers are the only ones apostrophised as malignant causes
of mischief. The instigations of the Devil succeeded; but, like an
overworked advocate, he sunk under excess of business, and died of
fatigue in the American war. Refinement then struck out the grand
discovery, that the force of circumstances had to answer for all courses
of action, and that events could be untoward, and transactions
unfortunate, without any fault attaching to the persons ostensibly
acting in them. This philosophy, which so wonderfully advances the cause
of charity, has not yet obtained footing in our courts of justice; but,
we foresee, and so doubtless do the lawyers, that their business will be
utterly at an end whenever it is acknowledged there. Murder has not yet
got the name of an “unfortunate transaction;” but when it does so, it is
clear that humanity will have greatly gained, for the indictments will
be laid for “unfortunate transactions,” without any personality or
occasion for a prisoner at the bar; and thus the odious character of the
murderer will cease to exist—the thing, to be sure, may still happen
untowardly; but what is a thing to a name? and words, indeed, are
things, the representatives of things, and as much superior in
consequence and power to them, as a Member of Parliament is of greater
authority than his constituency. Had an earlier improvement of
phraseology given to the Massacre of St. Bartholomew the name of the
Transactions of St. Edition: current; Page: [368] Bartholomew, that
action would doubtless have been regarded with more indulgence. As for
the atrocities of the French Revolution, adopting the nomenclature of
Lord Althorp, may we not soften them under the description of the
Philosophical Transactions?

(Ibid., pp. 147-9.)

An Edinburgh Reviewer (reported to be Lord Brougham) had broached the
doctrine so grateful to the smatterers, that statesmanship is not a
business requiring apprenticeship or study. “There is no such craft
recognized in this state,” said his Lordship, “as a professional
statesman. All our institutions are ignorant of it; all our habits
averse to it; nor is there one of a British statesman’s functions which
may not be conjoined with the cares of an industrious life.”[*]

On this our author remarks—

This last sentence contains the very essence of quackery. It may be sold
with the stamp of the Edinburgh Review on it, as “The Dunce’s Cordial,
or a Real Comfort to the Idle and Ignorant of both Houses of
Parliament.” The corollary is, that there is no political science; that
the conduct of the affairs of a nation is a mere elegant pastime to a
gentleman of a certain station in life, who has more profitable or
personally agreeable pursuits for the occupation of his more valued
hours. The idler, after having bent all the powers of his mighty mind to
the reduction of a milliner’s citadel of virtue, may apply with
sufficient success the residue of the day to the toils of the Statesman
in the House of Peers. The merchant, whose brain has been addled with
the business of his counting-house, has merely to rise from his desk and
to pass to St. Stephen’s, au fait of the most complicated questions that
can be submitted to the consideration of the legislator. The lawyer has
only to close his briefs, and to be at once ready for the budget.

When we can do just as much as suits our convenience, duties are seldom
onerous; and when they are utterly undefined, we may take credit for
their exact performance, and marvel at their exceeding easiness—that is,
if the simplicity and credulity of the world be at all proportioned to
our impudent assurance.

If a cobbler were dubbed an Esculapius, we can imagine Dr. Last, who,
from a long course of drenching and bleeding, had contracted an opinion
that the skill accompanied the practice, naively saying, “Such a one
(Dr. Baillie) was a physician by trade, a professional person. There is
no such craft recognized in this country; all our hospitals are ignorant
of it—all our habits averse to it; nor is there one of a British
Physician’s functions which may not be conjoined with the toils of a
cobbler’s life.” Gentlemen, indeed, of a certain order are all
Heaven-born Statesmen. No devotion of time or labour is necessary for
their qualifications. Senators, they are de facto Statesmen. Had Caleb
Quotem, the renowned Factotum, added M.P. to his various more useful
callings, he would doubtless, after his painting, glazing,
auctioneering, speechifying, almanacking, and essay-writing on
hydrostatics, have found sufficient leisure for the wise direction of
the affairs of the country.[†]

The proposition that the craft of a politican by trade, a professional
statesman, is not recognized in this state, is partly true and partly
false. We have an abundance of adventurous gentlemen who meddle in
politics as a trade, but few indeed who are skilled in them as one. If
we had the science together with the venal purpose, we should not
complain; Edition: current; Page: [369] but our fine folks have, it
would seem, no idea of the occasion for political science, or even of
the existence of political science. Arguing from their own ignorance,
they infer that there is no knowledge; admiring the ease with which they
conjoin doing nothing for the public with doing much for themselves,
they suppose that the functions of a Statesman are comprehended in their
miserable barren practices of aying, noing, inveighing, and declaiming;
and judging of what they ought to be from what they are, they exclaim
with a ludicrous and impudent self-complacency, like the dung in the
fable, “How fine we apples swim!”

(Vol. I, pp. 169-73.)[*]

Having illustrated our author’s powers of combining pleasantry with
argument, we will refresh the recollection of our readers with a few
specimens of his success in a mere squib.

The following was written when the Duke of Wellington after being
appointed Prime Minister, held along with that office his former one of
Commander-in-Chief. If the paragraph alluded to ever really “appeared in
the Herald,” the coincidence not unnaturally suggested the idea of this
jeu d’esprit.

The following paragraph has appeared in the Herald: “Some alarm was
excited in the Palace of the Archbishop of Canterbury, at Lambeth, on
Tuesday morning, at one o’clock, by the arrival of a dispatch from the
Duke of Wellington, with the word ‘Immediate’ superscribed on the
envelope. In consequence of this intimation, his Grace was awakened; the
Archbishop immediately arose, and read the dispatch. The rumours on this
unusual occurrence were various; but nothing has transpired from which
any conjecture can be drawn as to the purport of the communication.”

It is confidently rumoured that the purport of the communication was
this: His Grace of Wellington notified in the most friendly terms to his
Grace of Canterbury,[†] that the interests of the empire imperatively
required that he, the Duke, should put himself at the head of the
Protestant Church, and that it was therefore desired that his Grace of
Canterbury should forthwith vacate his See to allow of the necessary
arrangements—his Grace of Canterbury taking in exchange the cannonical
office of Master-General of the Ordnance. Anticipating a possible but
frivolous objection, the Duke explained that though he was not in Holy
Orders, he would put his appointment in General Orders, which was nearly
the same thing, orders being orders all the world over, and the
distinction one merely of quality and not of a substantive character.
The Duke ended, it is reported, by declaring that the Archbishop’s
exchange and his own consequent promotion vice Sutton should be gazetted
next Tuesday, and read at the head of every regiment in his Majesty’s
service. The Archbishop, we hear, is resigned to the necessity, for
there is no disputing the will of a man at the head of the Army and the
head of the State, and comforts himself, on the score of pride, by
dwelling on the precedent of Mr. Herries’s descent from the Exchequer to
the Mint; and on the score of fitness for his new office, by Mr.
Goulburn’s appointment to the Finance Department.

When this arrangement is completed, we understand that it is the
intention of his Grace of Wellington to have some serious conversation
with Lord Lyndhurst. There seems no reason why a Lawyer should be
Chancellor. The delays of the Court have been a long complaint; Edition:
current; Page: [370] and the Duke observes that the rapidity of his
motions and the decision of his character cannot be questioned even by
his enemies and detractors. In case of the event at which we are
glancing, the Duke will be his own Vice, and Mr. Shadwell will be
appointed to the command of a frigate.

(Vol. I, pp. 146-8.)

We shall next quote a paper “written,” says Mr. Fonblanque, “in ridicule
of some very circumstantial and absurd accounts of the Duke of
Wellington’s habits, which appeared in the newspapers upon his Grace’s
accession to power in 1828.”

The Duke of Wellington generally rises at about eight. Before he gets
out of bed, he commonly pulls off his nightcap; and while he is dressing
he sometimes whistles a tune, and occasionally damns his valet. The Duke
of Wellington uses warm water in shaving, and lays on a greater quantity
of lather than ordinary men. While shaving he chiefly breathes through
his nose, with a view, as is conceived, of keeping the suds out of his
mouth; and sometimes he blows out one cheek, sometimes the other, to
present a better surface to the razor. When he is dressed he goes down
to breakfast; and while descending the stairs he commonly takes occasion
to blow his nose, which he does rather rapidly, following it up with
three hasty wipes of his handkerchief, which he instantly afterwards
deposits in his right-hand coat pocket. The Duke of Wellington’s pockets
are in the skirts of his coat, and the holes perpendicular. He wears
false horizontal flaps, which have given the world an erroneous opinion
of their position. The Duke of Wellington drinks tea for breakfast,
which he sweetens with white sugar, and corrects with cream. He commonly
stirs the fluid two or three times with a spoon before he raises it to
his lips. The Duke of Wellington eats toast and butter, cold ham,
tongue, fowls, beef, or eggs, and sometimes both meat and eggs; the eggs
are generally those of the common domestic fowl. During breakfast the
Duke of Wellington has a newspaper either in his hand, or else on the
table, or in his lap. The Duke of Wellington’s favourite paper is the
Examiner. After breakfast the Duke of Wellington stretches himself out
and yawns. He then pokes the fire and whistles. If there is no fire, he
goes to the window and looks out. At about ten o’clock the General Post
letters arrive. The Duke of Wellington seldom or never inspects the
superscription, but at once breaks the seal and applies himself to the
contents. The Duke of Wellington appears sometimes displeased with his
correspondents, and says pshaw, in a clear, loud voice. About this time
the Duke of Wellington retires for a few minutes, during which it is
impossible to account for his motions with the desirable precision. At
eleven o’clock, if the weather is fine, the Duke’s horse is brought to
the door. The Duke’s horse on these occasions is always saddled and
bridled. The Duke’s horse is ordinarily the same white horse he rode at
Waterloo, and which was eaten by the hounds at Strathfieldsaye. His hair
is of a chestnut colour. Before the Duke goes out, he has his hat and
gloves brought him by a servant. The Duke of Wellington always puts the
hat on his head, and the gloves on his hands. The Duke’s daily manner of
mounting his horse is the same that it was on the morning of the
glorious battle of Waterloo. His Grace first takes the rein in his left
hand, which he lays on the horse’s mane; he then puts his left foot in
the stirrup, and with a spring brings his body up, and his right leg
over the body of the animal by the way of the tail, and thus places
himself in the saddle; he then drops his right foot into the stirrup,
puts his horse to a walk, and seldom falls off, being an admirable
equestrian. When acquaintances and friends salute the Duke in the
streets, such is his affability that he either bows, touches his hat, or
recognizes their civility in some way or other. The Duke of Wellington
very commonly says, “How are you?”—“It’s a fine day”—“How d’ye do?”—and
makes frequent and various remarks on the weather, and the dust or the
mud, as it may be. At twelve o’clock on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays, the Duke’s Master comes to teach him his Political Economy. The
Duke makes wonderful Edition: current; Page: [371] progress in his
studies, and his intructor is used pleasantly to observe, that “the Duke
gets on like a house on fire.” At the Treasury the Duke of Wellington
does nothing but think. He sits on a leathern library chair, with his
heels and a good part of his legs on the table. When thus in profound
thought, he very frequently closes his eyes for hours together, and
makes an extraordinary and rather appalling noise through his nose. Such
is the Duke of Wellington’s devotion to business, that he eats no
luncheon. In the House of Lords the Duke’s manner of proceeding is
this—he walks up to the fire-place, turns his back to it, separates the
skirts of his coat, tossing them over the dexter and sinister arms,
thrusts his hands in his breeches’ pockets, and so stands at ease. The
characteristic of the Duke’s oratory is a brevity the next thing to
silence. As brevity is the soul of wit, it may confidently be affirmed
that in this quality Lord North and Sheridan were fools compared with
him.

(Vol. I, pp. 160-3.)

When the late Mr. Henry Hunt appeared in Parliament, Mr. Fonblanque
produced, under the title of “Biography à la Mode,” a pretended sketch
of his life, from which we quote the following passage: it was preceded
by a flaming account of Mr. Hunt’s ancestorial honours:

The present Mr. Hunt, member for Preston, was the second son of Everard
Hunt, by Margaret Tollemash, a delicate shoot of one of the noblest
families in the land.[*] His elder brother dying of the rickets, at the
early age of three years, ten months, and eleven days, as we learn from
the tablet to his memory in Stoke d’Auvely churchyard, Henry was
educated as heir and hope of the noble house, nor did his youthful
promise disappoint the fond hope of his parents. Loyalty seems to have
been the instinct of his nature. His mother was used pleasantly to
relate that, when the child was seven years of age, she chanced on
approaching the nursery to hear a sound resembling that which an active
full-grown bee of the bumble kind makes in the interior of an empty
full-bellied pitcher, and, being naturally curious at hearing so
remarkable and singular a noise, she stepped gently on her tiptoes to
the door, and on listening attentively, ascertained that it was young
master Harry warbling from his infant lips “God save great George our
King.” If a piece of money was given to him, the bent of his affections
would appear in the delight with which he gazed at the head, and he
would ask whether the King at London was made of gold or of silver?—for
the child could not imagine royalty of the same substance as other
folks. As Henry advanced from childhood to youth, these feelings of
loyalty, directed by reason, settled down into a constitutional
affection to the throne—that throne, we may add, which stands a bulwark
of safety between the nobility and the people, protecting the latter,
while its splendour reflects dignity and lustre upon the former. At
eighteen, the young Hunt had the misfortune of losing his affectionate
mother, in whom the pride of a noble descent was so blended with natural
sweetness, that she moved through life with a dignified gentleness, that
won all hearts and well-nigh broke them upon her ever lamentable demise,
which took place on the 2nd of October, 1773. To dissipate the youth’s
grief, his father sent him to the University of Oxford, where he formed
those connexions with the Whig Aristocracy which have been strengthened
by time, intercourse, and the sympathy of feeling on political subjects.

After leaving Christchurch he entered into high life, and attracted the
attention of the Prince of Wales, afterwards George IV, with whom a
private friendship subsisted up to the demise of that
ever-to-be-lamented, and ever-virtuous, monarch. Soon after his
introduction in the Court circles, Mr. Hunt’s father dying, he became
the representative of his noble house: but the seductions of favour and
fashion never warped the mind of our hero, who found time, amidst the
riot of the gay world, for the studies of the philosopher, and the
Edition: current; Page: [372] writings of the moralist and the poet. To
the blandishments of verse Mr. Hunt was no stranger, as an anecdote, not
generally known, will show. Shakespeare says—

-   

    The evil that men do lives after them:
-   

    The good is oft interred with their bones.[*]

So it was with our late monarch, and hero’s patron, George IV. It is not
known that the last George was the inventor of the artful stitch called
fine-drawing. Mr. Hunt, who happened to be acquainted with the fact that
the honour of the invention belonged to the monarch, wrote upon the
occasion a popular song, beginning

Our King is a true British Tailor![†]

which became a great favourite with the trade, and has indeed been
parodied in a song in honour of his present Majesty. As a proof of the
value in which the late King held Mr. Hunt may be instanced the lodgings
at Ilchester he gave him, in one of those houses the doors of which our
sovereigns never shut against their people. Here Mr. Hunt resided two or
three years, which he has often declared were the best spent and
happiest of his life. Here he enjoyed the conversation of a benignant
governor; and received the visits of the neighbouring magistracy, whose
especial regards he had fixed. From this period up to the late election
for Preston, Mr. Hunt’s life has flowed in an even tide, his happiness
only disturbed by the event which plunged the whole empire into a grief
unparalleled in the history of affliction—we mean the deplored demise of
his late Majesty, and some time father of his people, and friend, and
protector, George IV

(Vol. II, pp. 182-5.)

The following, on “The General Hypocrisy,” as our author justly
denominates the general fast, ordained by Parliament at the suggestion
of Mr. Perceval, shall be our last quotation in this vein:

That precious pot of ointment, that godly gentleman, Mr. Perceval, has
at last had his pious will of us, and obtained from Ministers a promise
of a General Fast,[‡] or rather of the order for one,—for as it is true
that any man may take a horse to the water, but no one can make him
drink,—so also it is certain that any rulers may direct a general fast,
but no power can prevent men who have the means from ministering to the
carnal cravings of their stomachs. The only effect will be to put the
nation for one day through a grand ceremony of hypocrisy. In addition to
the customary dinner, people will eat salt fish with egg sauce, which is
a very good thing now and then for the palate, but decidedly dyspeptic,
and apt for cholera, and should by no means be eaten where the disease
exists.

How is the world changed! Time was, when contrition showed itself in
beating the breast, tearing the hair, rending the garments, and
screaming with energy. Now, the most pious man of the age proposes to
settle the nation’s long score of sins with one day of salt fish and egg
sauce! What penitence! See twenty millions of sinners expiating their
sins with fine large flakes of Newfoundland cod, smothered in an egg
sauce, rich with cream, and stimulant with mustard, every glutton, as he
gobbles it down, only remarking what a fine vehicle egg sauce is for
mustard,—and certainly it is so. If we ever write a tragedy it shall be
called “Contrition;” and the hero, after a tissue of enormities, shall,
by way of Edition: current; Page: [373] catastrophe in the fifth act,
order salt fish and egg sauce in addition to his customary meal.

A contemporary truly remarks that good Mr. Perceval has superseded the
Bishops, nay, the Archbishops, who have not said a word about the
necessity for this General Fast, perhaps because those worldly divines
well know that it will only prove a General Breakfast. Mr. Perceval
indeed explains, that he is the Member for Heaven; but we think we see
signs of his differing with his constituency. For instance, he rather
ungraciously flings in the teeth of the country the shameful prodigality
of bounty shown to him and his.

“I was taken up,” said the Hon. Member, “on the death of my father, by
the nation, which abundantly provided for me and mine; and it is in
gratitude for that kindness that I call on the house to address the
Crown to issue a proclamation for a fast.”[*]

Were he “taken up” by a mad doctor, it would be more becoming his
peculiar claims to care. It is the “taking up” of him, and such as he,
which constitutes the crying sin of the nation,—its endurance of abuse
to absolute baseness. That is the true national humiliation. And this
pot of godliness coolly talks of the abundant provision made for him.
Why does he not look to be fed, according to Scripture, as the young
ravens?[†] What does he do with that kitchen? What mean those fat
partridges at the fire? What is the purpose of that vast cook? Is that
simmering and bubbling from stew-pans, flesh-pots of abomination,
devices of carnal cookery? And lo! there we spy a haunch of mutton
hanging up to be dressed ten days hence, when tender,—perhaps on the
general fast day, after the fish and the eggs, and the mustard! What
providence is this—what thought of the morrow,[‡] and not the morrow of
all souls,—aye, and of ten days after the morrow! Is this in any degree
like the manners and customs of young ravens? Whoever saw a raven, young
or old, with a cook and a kitchen range, and a larder, and a carnal
joint hanging upon a devil’s hook? Does Mr. Perceval (we will not call
him good after such doings) suppose that the devil has never been in his
kitchen?—aye, has he, and perhaps kissed his cook too, and looked with a
leer into his stew-pans, and thought what a sop in the pan he would make
of his miserable little soul, tricked out with all its earthly gauds and
hypocrisies. Where is his treasure laid up?—at Ransom’s;—aye, that will
be no ransom for him from the pickle of Dives.[§] Again: What sort of
tabernacle is that he tarries in? Is it in the least like a raven’s
nest? No, no; his nest has been very differently feathered, and it is
lined most abundantly, as he truly says, with the golden fleece, from
this most patient and most pillaged people of all on the face of the
earth. He is like to the raven in nothing but blackness, and the
dismalness of his croak.

It is curious, that in a squib called the “Unreported Meeting,” in the
New Monthly Magazine of April last,[¶] Mr. Perceval’s argument, as to
the absence of any mention of responsibility to the people, in
scripture, is anticipated in the speech attributed to him:

“Mr. P— could not agree with the last speaker, that it was vain to cast
about for safety, in the sad strait to which they had been reduced. He
thought prayer could not fail to procure their deliverance. While there
was heaven there was hope. Many causes had conduced to their present
condition of danger. The devil had not been inactive,—when, indeed, was
he? The people were too well off; they waxed fat and kicked.[∥] Fasts
should be frequently enforced to keep down their pride. The visitations
which formerly softened men’s hearts are now unknown—as if Providence
had deserted this guilty world, famines and pestilences Edition:
current; Page: [374] have ceased. What was the consequence? the people
became stiff-necked and puffed up with pride, and their hearts rose
against their rulers. But this was not all. They were tasting of fruit
of the tree of knowledge in its accursed ripeness. Man in his innocence
was ignorant—he tasted of knowledge and he became a creature of sin.[*]
The apples, sweet to the taste, and bitter in the belly, were now his
daily food; the atrocious newspapers,—those deadly poisons to the soul,
were gathered twice a day. Knowledge had never been designed for man,
and yet he saw well-meaning persons engaged in promoting education,
which was the ladder to sin. He was rejoiced to see that the Church was
setting the example of neglecting learning in its own body. The vanity
of acquirements, merely human, was properly renounced by guides to a
heavenly destination. In a worldly and politic view, knowledge was an
evil. Men who knew nothing beyond their own circumstances, were content
and happy—with comparisons came discontent, and restlessness, and envy,
and misery. Would we give knowledge to dogs and horses? No. Suppose
horses could read and reason, what a clamour would be raised at every
coach-stand, and what coachman would be able to manage his steeds? They
would want Representation, forsooth!—they would want a horse on the
box—they would want horses to measure out the corn, and keep the bins!
Nothing could be more idle than the demand for Representation. Had there
been any virtue in Representation, would it not have been recommended in
Scripture? But in the sacred books is there a word of a Representative
Government? Providence would have given the Jewish people a
Representative Government if it had been an advisable institution. It
was, in his mind, a convincing argument against Representation, that it
was not spoken of in Scripture. It might be objected that boroughs were
also unnamed; but the payment of taxes was especially recommended, and
boroughs conduced to the exercise of that divinely enjoined duty. Our
Constitution was matchless and faultless, and constructed on a model
that could not fail. It was of three estates, King, Lords, and Commons,
and though three, it was one. This perfection was argued to be a fault
by the Reformers, who absurdly objected that one power ruled in all
these forms. Because they cannot understand this merit, is its being to
be denied? But with infidels in religion, or in politics, he would hold
no argument. The honourable gentleman concluded with a Resolution, ‘That
a prayer should be composed for the preservation of Boroughs, and that
frequent fasting was a discipline of the body and soul, essential to the
good conduct of the people.’ ”

(Vol. II, pp. 244-52.)

The squib here referred to, is well known to have been let off by Mr.
Fonblanque himself. Indeed these volumes, selected from the Examiner,
might easily be equalled, both in extent and in merit, by a selection
from Mr. Fonblanque’s writings not in the Examiner. The “Unreported
Meeting,” is one of those jeux d’esprit which would not willingly be let
die. It contains several speeches, which we think are no way inferior to
the oration of Mr. Perceval.

We quote as specially memorable, part of the speeches ascribed to Lord
Monson (the proprietor of Gatton), and to the somewhat more celebrated
Lord Huntingtower.

After a resolution in favour of potwallopers, moved by Sir Robert Peel,
Lord Monson rose and expressed his dissent:

“Potwallopers were very likely the best class of electors; he did not
dispute their merits; he believed their superiority; but, after all,
they were but the best of the fallible. Say what we may, the men are but
men, the best of whom stumbles six times a day. Now, bricks or stones
Edition: current; Page: [375] never stumble, they are always to be
reckoned upon. He had the happiness of possessing a borough on his
lawn—this was a thing as near perfection as it was possible to be . . .
. It was nonsense to suppose any virtue in popular election—the choice
of the many, forsooth! Does not the proverb say, that too many cooks
spoil the broth? One man was as likely to be right as a thousand. It was
proper that the aristocracy should choose members for the people. What
would become of the sheep if they chose their own dogs?—no, their
shepherd chooses them . . . . Pursuing this sentiment, he must declare
himself a parliamentary reformer . . . . He should propose, that sixty
decayed towns be enfranchised. Places having twenty, or more than twenty
inhabitants, to have the electoral right conveyed to the possession of
the nearest ruin. The remains of ancient castles, religious buildings,
and Roman camps, might be usefully represented. He should like to see
members for Kenilworth, Glastonbury, St. George’s Hill, &c. Thus, he
would meet the revolutionary reform scheme, by a plan of constitutional
reform . . . . It was truly said by some writer, who was a lord, and
therefore of some authority, that Time is the great reformer; and how
had Time reformed boroughs, but by depopulating them, by thinning away
the rank abundance of the electoral bodies? The same lord, whose name he
now remembered to be Bacon, observed that we should imitate Time in our
reforms;[*] and how then could we better do that than by producing
rottenness in the constituency? Time has decayed boroughs, and reformers
should decay boroughs after its example. He disliked large towns; they
were squalid, smoky, unairy, unhealthy. Who would compare Bramber with
Brighton? The representation of decay was the representation of the
condition of mortality. Out of corruption Nature reproduces life; and
the life of the constitution, in like manner, springs from corruption.
But the radicals would rail against the corruption of nature, and stop
by bill, the progress of re-creation. From the disgustful worm comes the
butterfly, with wings powdered with gold—from the rotten borough comes
the member, bright with parliamentary honours. Like the butterfly, he
might be called a pensioner; but such vulgar slang was to be despised.
What he takes from the world he renders back in decoration.” (Incessant
cheering, and loud cries of hear, hear, hear, from Lord E—.)[†]

This really is very fair parliamentary argument, and the drollest part
of it not more ludicrous than (for instance) Mr. Spring Rice’s argument
against the ballot “that it is absurd to expect moral effects from
mechanical means.”[‡] (What does Mr. Spring Rice think of the press?)
But Mr. Rice never yet made so clever a speech. Our author’s facility in
giving the forms of logic and the colours of rhetoric to the absurdest
trains of thought, is such as the rightful owners of the absurdities may
well envy.

Let us now listen to Lord Huntingtower:

“Lord H. declared that these palliatives were idle—he cared not a rush
who took offence at the term—he had tried more expedients than most men,
but ingenuity could not make everything of insufficient means. Nothing
would do but a return to the old feudal right of the gallows. When lords
could hang, they were respected. The lenity of certain persons who
should know better, was the great fault. He laughed at such petty doings
as those that had caused so much talk at Stamford and Newark. His people
had offended him at Grantham, Edition: current; Page: [376] and what did
he do? Why, he made a fish-pond in the place of houses, and worried the
dogs into meekness. The law had hitherto been their only instrument of
power, but that was about to be withdrawn from them; or at least, it was
to be shared with the people, which was as bad. If there were a club for
every one’s use, so heavy that none but giants could lift it, it was
clear that the giants would be able to arm with it, while the people of
common stature would only be controlled by it; but reduce the club to a
size that may be wielded by the ordinary run of people, and the great
lose their peculiar advantage. So it was with the law; by cheapening it,
the poor would be enabled to beard the rich in court, and their
insolence would be encouraged . . . . He had used the power of the purse
on the law, but never abused it; he had used it regularly, but always in
moderation. He had given notice to his attorney that he would never
allow himself more than two hundred a year, in what were called
vexatious proceedings, and that if more was charged in his bill it would
be disallowed . . . . He had compelled obedience to his wishes by
various means, but chiefly by nuisances which were of great convenience.
He had employed many expedients in his private way, vicious bulls,
indelicate operations before the windows of disagreeable people, and
many more than he had patience to recite; if these things promoted
prosecution, why then he had the parties in a court, with a hole in
their pockets, and an attorney’s bill on their shoulders. Law Reform, as
it is called—Law Deform, as he would style it—would however take all
power out of their hands, and strip them of any authority superior to
the vulgar. Unless we can have some instrument of force which the people
have not, how can we maintain our respect? Wrongs are complained of, but
why? Because the resistance of obstinate people to some necessary
command has provoked punishment. If the people were completely
submissive to us, they would be kindly treated. Are we cruel to our
cows, and our sheep, our dogs and our horses?—No; because they are ours,
and we hurt not our own—they are obedient, and offer no provocation. So
it would be with the people, were they what they were in the good old
times, and should ever have remained, adscripti glebæ, serfs, and
villains. But now they must have the protection of law! (his lordship
emphatically added). I wonder they are not ashamed to hold the
protection of law in common with the beasts of the field; is it not
degrading, that Englishmen will consent to have the same shield over
them which the legislature has flung over horses, and oxen, and
jackasses?”

(Hear, hear, hear.)[*]

This parody on the declamation against the ballot will not have escaped
the reader: and as for the argument for absolute power, in the sentences
immediately preceding, the Carlton Club should vote Mr. Fonblanque a
thousand pounds for it. It is the best thing ever said in favour of
Toryism.

One more quotation, and we have done. It has been seen that our author’s
wit is often not the mere ornament and garnishing of his argument, but
the solid reasoning itself, playfully expressed. At other times, when
the occasion demands a seriousness of feeling inconsistent with
pleasantry, the following article, written at the end of 1830, shows
with what lofty earnestness he can write. We quote it partly for this
purpose, and partly for the intrinsic value of the lesson of
encouragement which it so nobly conveys.

We have closed the year one of the People’s Cause. We have closed a year
that has teemed with events of a grandeur and importance to mankind,
unparalleled in the history of the world. We have closed a year in which
Justice has wielded the sword of Victory, and Fortune lent her wheel to
Truth. We have closed a year which has carried the mind of Europe
Edition: current; Page: [377] forward an interval of ages beyond its
antiquated trammels and thraldoms. We have closed a year which has dated
the decrepitude of despotism, and the Herculean infancy of the
democratic power; and must not our recollections swell with pride, and
our expectations be full of confidence? The past indicates the future.
Abroad we have the example of France, both for imitation and for
warning. Her people have set before us the great lesson of virtue—her
Government of error.

It cannot be denied, that for the last ten years, step after step has
been won by the liberal party, and not one inch of ground anywhere lost.
We have experienced no defeats—we have been stayed, indeed, but never
thrust back; and, despite of obstinate opposition, object after object
has been attained. The Liberals struggled long for Catholic
Emancipation. Catholic Emancipation was declared the destruction of
Religion, the delivery of society to all the powers of evil, the
unloosing of Anti-Christ and Satan. It was carried;[*] and all the world
perceived that the Liberals had been right. Nearly the same history
applies to the Test Laws.[†] The alteration of the Commercial System was
demanded: the Economists were forthwith declared visionaries, and their
doctrines were condemned, under the all-convincing description of
“new-fangled,”—one of the most potent phrases in the English language.
With the success of the experiments came the late acknowledgment, that
the economists were not such fools as the ignoramuses had thought them.

Reformers complained of the abuses, defects, and vices of the laws. “The
law is perfection,” was the first defence; and the objectors were
denounced as false preachers of discontent, the inveterate enemies of
all the excellences in our unrivalled institutions; and yet Law Reform
is now the great business of the day; and judges claim, and merit
praise, for their application to the purifying of the Augean stable.
Thus again, after all, the Reformers were right. Lastly, we come to the
grand question.

Who were they who have for years past denounced the corruption of the
Lower House, called for its re-constitution, and insisted on the
people’s right to representation as the only security against the abuse
of power? Radicals, clamourers without cause, it was said; men void of
truth and justice, who slandered an institution as perfect as the wit of
man could make it, and which, whatever theoretical flaws might be
objected by visionaries, worked excellently well in practice. Two years
ago the Honourable House declared, upon a division, that there was no
rotten representation. Less than two months ago, a Minister fell because
he offered the same impudent outrage to truth. Now, the vast majority of
society, Whig, Tory, and Moderates, acknowledge the necessity of
Parliamentary Reform. So again the Reformers, after all, were right. Two
years back, when Sir Robert Peel uttered a scoff at the Ballot,[‡] the
collective wisdom received it with shouts of applause. Six months ago,
Mr. Brougham railed against secret voting at popular meetings, without
provoking signs of displeasure or retort;[§] but now the judgment of the
country is for the Ballot. Men of all classes and denominations, not
interested in the foul influences, are convinced that the protection of
the voter is necessary to the freedom of the suffrage. So here again, it
will soon be seen, that the Reformers were right, after all. Where are
they yet said to be wrong? Only, we reply, upon the ground where the
battles are not yet fought out. They are said to be wrong, or wicked, or
mischievous, for demanding that the franchise shall be co-extensive with
the education and property of the country, and descending to the people
as information Edition: current; Page: [378] is spreading among them.
They are said to be wrong for objecting to an expensive Church
Establishment, and for thinking that the wealth of the Priesthood is not
apostolic or conducive to religion. They are said to be wrong, or
wicked, or mischievous, because they think it unjust, and impolitic, to
cramp the industry of a nation by Corn Laws for the supposed advantage
of the landed proprietors. They are said to be wrong, or disloyal, and
seditious, for supposing that the dignity of the Crown can be maintained
without extravagant ostentation, and that the conduct of the chief
magistrate is a better security for it than his cost.

They are said to be wrong, or to betray an ignorant impatience of
taxation, for contending that it is the duty of a Government to raise
the moral character of the people by knowledge, and that it is barbarous
impolicy to place out of their reach, by stamp duties, the information
which would teach them prudence and conduct. They are said to be wrong
for arguing that it is cheaper and better to direct men with books, than
to control them with bayonets, and that letters are more explanatory
missives than bullets.

Under these, and a very few other imputations of error, the Reformers
may be cheered by reflecting that such opposition has been offered, for
a season, to every measure (without any single exception) they have
carried; and in relation to those objects we have recited, as well as to
those already won, it will be confessed, at no distant day, that, after
all, the Radicals were right.

We ask of our opponents to reflect on the many questions which the voice
of society, and the acts of the State, have determined in our favour;
and to consider whether it is not probable that we are as right, in the
doctrines which remain unsettled, as in those now sanctioned and
established? Have they not as much cause for self-distrust as the
Reformers have for confidence?

Against what combined forces of sinister interest, custom and prejudice,
have the Liberals made their impressions, and achieved their victories,
by the vast power of truth alone! To the conviction of society, and to
nothing else, do we owe our proud successes.

(Vol. II, pp. 78-83.)

This eloquent and impressive passage will afford an appropriate
transition to a few remarks which appear to us to be called for, as to
the present political position of the Examiner, and the temporary, and
in a great measure only apparent, separation which has taken place
between Mr. Fonblanque, and that more active and vigorous section of the
thorough reformers, of which he was for some years perhaps the most
important, and certainly the most conspicuous representative.

We have delayed to the conclusion of our article, our observations on
this topic, because we were desirous of considering the writer of the
Examiner in his permanent, rather than in what we cannot but regard as
his temporary character. The position which Mr. Fonblanque has
established for himself in the history of our time, as not only one of
the most powerful but one of the most uncompromising asserters of the
doctrines of enlightened radicalism, in season and out of season,
through good and ill report, deserved that the tribute of admiration and
gratitude which we have endeavoured to render, should be undisturbed by
the intrusion of any of the differences of opinion which exist between
him and those whom we hope we may call his political friends, respecting
the exigencies of the present moment, and the attitude which, at a
single point in the varying course of passing Edition: current; Page:
[379] politics, it becomes the enlightened radicals to assume. We
confess, however, it was an unpleasant surprise to us, that a writer
who, in the judgment of most of those entertaining the same opinions,
occasionally outran the bounds of justice and discretion in his
onslaughts upon Lord Grey’s ministry, both collectively and
individually, should depart still more widely from the same line in the
contrary direction, when Lord Melbourne’s ministry are concerned. We did
not expect that he would so soon fall behind those whom he formerly ran
so far before. The change is not in them, it is in him. We acknowledge,
as we have always acknowledged, that Lord Melbourne’s ministry is, in
its spirit and general policy, several degrees in advance of Lord
Grey’s; and is entitled, against the Tories, to as much support from
radicals as can be reconciled with the unqualified and energetic pursuit
of their separate objects as radicals. And we may appeal to the whole
conduct of the active section of the radicals since the commencement of
the session (honour be to them, they have given us much to appeal to)
and ask whether any support consistent with this object has been denied?
rather, whether it has not been afforded more conspicuously and
zealously, as well as more powerfully, than at any former time? The
conduct of the radicals in this respect has left to Mr. Fonblanque no
subject of complaint; but they have no small subject of complaint
against him. They complain that while they have thought it incumbent on
them to make the promulgation of their own principles their primary
object, and support to the ministry altogether secondary to that; he, on
the contrary, has, almost from the first coming in of the present
ministry in 1835, acted as if his first object was to support and
glorify the ministers, and the assertion of his own political doctrines
only the second.

To Mr. Fonblanque, our description of that part of his conduct which we
complain of, will probably appear an over-statement, and we shall be
sorry if it does not. To many of those whose exertions have most
effectively served radical opinions, we know that it will appear an
understatement. Whatever course of conduct Mr. Fonblanque may think fit
to adopt, that he is sincere in it there can be no manner of doubt, and
as little in our minds of the unabated strength of his attachment to all
the principles and all the political objects which he has hitherto
pursued. Our difference with him is on a point of expediency, but it is
on one of those points of expediency which involve principles. That it
is possible to assert, when occasion arises, some of the most important
doctrines of radicalism, and yet to maintain a general tone of
systematic subserviency to ministers, as fulsome and undiscriminating as
that of the most sordid place-hunter or parasite, we have examples in
many members of parliament, and in the Morning Chronicle. That Journal
advocates the ballot and the repeal of the corn laws; but who knows, or
who thinks of it, in any other light than that of a mere ministerial
hack writer and panegyrist? Far be it from our thoughts to insinuate the
slightest vestige of a comparison between the Examiner and the Morning
Chronicle. Mr. Fonblanque Edition: current; Page: [380] could not, if he
would, and would not, if he could, be made a “utensil” of by any
ministry: he has compromised no principle; there is no opinion he ever
held, which he does not at times continue to advocate; nor does he spare
individual members of the ministry, when they lay themselves open to
radical attack. It is not any specific act, either of omission or
commission, then, which we complain of, so much as a general lowering of
the tone of political morality which formerly distinguished the
Examiner. He no longer studies to keep a high standard of the duty of
ministers and parliament perpetually in view, and to rebuke (with more
or less severity, according to circumstances) every instance of
deviation from it: he expends all his strength and his space in fighting
for the ministers and their measures against the Tories (and
occasionally against the radicals): while the advocacy of those broader
and bolder views, to the fearless promulgation of which we owe that the
Tories are not still in power, has become almost a subordinate feature
in his Journal; and it is only his past reputation for radicalism which
prevents him from being mistaken for a ministerialist with radical
inclinations, rather than a radical who, without relaxing one iota in
the pursuit of radical objects, consents to support the ministry. It was
not thus that Mr. Fonblanque attained his proud eminence among English
journalists; it was not thus that the only newspaper writer with whom he
can be compared, the unapproachable Armand Carrel, made himself, without
a seat in the legislature or any public station beyond the editorship of
his journal, the most powerful political leader of his age and country.*

For us, in the way in which all radical battles have hitherto been
fought and won, in that way we mean to persevere; not withholding, for
the sake of any ministry or party, or from regard to the immediate fate
of any party question, one particle of useful truth, for which we
believe that in the present state of the public mind we can find
audience. And as one of our chief examples and encouragements in this
course is to be found in the past career of Mr. Fonblanque, so are we
satisfied that we shall not long have to pursue it without his sympathy
and assistance; that the distance which, in appearance more than in
reality, divides that portion of the thorough reformers whom this Review
more especially represents, from him who was so long their decus et
tutamen,[*] will gradually diminish, and that before eighteen months
have elapsed, the difference will have ceased to exist, except in
memory.

Edition: current; Page: [381]


PARTIES AND THE MINISTRY
 1837

Edition: current; Page: [382]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, VI & XXVIII (Oct., 1837), 1-26. Headed:
“Art. I.—1.[Anon.] Domestic Prospects of the Country under the New
Parliament. Third edition, revised. [London:] Ridgway. 1837. / 2.
Corrected Report of the Speech of Lord John Russell, at the Dinner given
on his Election for Stroud, on Friday, July 28, 1837, and an Account of
the Proceedings. [London:] Knight. 1837. / 3. [George Pryme.] A Letter
to the Electors of Cambridge, touching Mr. Knight, Mr. Sutton, and the
Poor-Laws. By a Member of the University. Cambridge[: Johnson], 1837. /
4. [Thomas Perronet Thompson.] Second Series—Letters of a Representative
to his Constituents during the Session of 1837. With Additions and
Corrections. [London:] Effingham Wilson. 1837.” Running titles as title.
Signed “A.” Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An
article entitled ‘Parties and the Ministry’, in the London and
Westminster Review for October, 1837 (No 11 and 54)” (MacMinn, 49). The
Somerville College copy (tear-sheets) has one emendation (adopted in the
present edition): “do speak” is corrected to “do not speak” (389.13-14).

Edition: current; Page: [383]


Parties and the Ministry

the new parliament is about to meet; and it is desirable to consider
what is to be feared, and what is to be hoped, from the approaching
trial of the strength of parties.

The Tories have made the public fully aware of their intentions and
their anticipations. According to them, they are on the eve of coming
again into place. They have reduced the already small ministerial
majority. By pitting their long purses against the short purses of their
opponents before the most disgracefully expensive of all judicial
tribunals, Committees of the House of Commons, they hope to convert that
majority into a minority; and they are assured of doing so at the next
general election. And then, like Mrs. Partington, they will flourish
their mop, and set the Atlantic at defiance.[*]

We cannot tell that these hopes may not be realised. We cannot tell that
the Tories may not be permitted to succeed in making the counties, the
small boroughs, and the freemen, under the Reform Act, what the
counties, the small boroughs, and the freemen, were before. What then?
Is it for us to blush, and hang our heads, and give up all for lost, and
think ourselves beaten, and disgraced, and driven from the field? No,
truly. They may do so, if they please, who prophesied of a millennium,
in which the tiger was to grow ashamed of his claws, and the serpent of
his venom,—who dreamed that bribery and intimidation would grow less as
the temptation to them grew greater, and as the consciences of their
unhappy victims grew more seared,—who believed that the Reform Act had
been a mandate of reform in men’s hearts, as well as in their outward
institutions, and that there was to be no need henceforth of laws to
protect us against the misuse of power, for that the powerful would
stand so much in awe of the weak, would be so humble before them, would
have so much respect for their “opinion,” that they would let the
government of this country pass out of their hands without an effort to
retain it, without a fiercer word than “Good people, for charity’s sake,
your vote!” We, the visionaries, the Utopians, the Radicals, had none of
these visions. We left them to the “practical men.” We never bade the
people trust to what the Examiner calls the “O fie” check. We never
pretended that the Reform Bill, with its present Edition: current; Page:
[384] machinery, would be any better as a permanent constitution than
the government by rotten boroughs. We had faith in the Ballot, even
without the Reform Bill. We had no faith in the Reform Bill without the
Ballot. The foundation of our hope in the Reform Bill was that it would
bring the Ballot. We never believed that it would do so until the last
moment. The last moment has arrived.

We are not accusing the Ministers. We never felt so little disposed to
accuse them. We know all the allowances which are to be made for them.
And if we did not, we agree with those who say that this is not a time
when Reformers should turn against each other. Neither, we must add, is
it a time when we believe they could do so with success. We are sensible
how much the cause of Reform has lost by the inertia of Ministers. They
have allowed the enthusiasm to go down, by giving it nothing to keep it
up. But what is left of it still follows in their train, because it can
do no otherwise, until a bolder party shall furnish leaders equally
known and better trusted: they are still at the head of the Reform
party, and the crowd behind them is striving to push them on, not to
push them aside. We wish as heartily as any one that this were not so.
But neither are we entitled to forget that its being so is the fault of
no one so much as of our own party. Some of the best Radicals in
Parliament were members of the House of Commons long before the Reform
Bill. For the last five years we have never had fewer than seventy or
eighty English and Scotch Radicals in Parliament, without counting the
Irish; and in the last Parliament we had nearly double the number. If,
with all this Parliamentary strength, and the country ready to respond
to their call, our leaders have not yet succeeded in making themselves
the leaders of the country; if some have been too old, others too young,
some too impracticable, others too timid; if the ablest among them have
been indolent, or dispirited, or frivolous, or, as in the one case of
Mr. Roebuck, have not yet had time completely to conquer, even by the
most valiant efforts, a prejudice against them which they took no pains
to mollify; if they have never known how to strike the chord which was
prepared to vibrate; if, with talents inferior to no party in the
House—if with acquirements superior to any, they have not known how to
make those talents and those acquirements recognised, and available for
the common cause; if they have made their virtues and their faults
equally an obstacle to their influence; if they have come forward with
their accustomed honour, to take the lion’s share of all unpopularity,
and allowed the Whigs to carry off the credit of everything popular
which has been effected by their joint strength; our party must resign
itself for some time longer to the consequences of its past
inefficiency. The body of Reformers throughout the country, in all walks
of life, who have no means of judging political men but from what they
read in the newspapers, will continue, until the contrary is proved to
them, to believe that the Radicals in Parliament have shown all they can
do, and that those Radicals are a sample of the best whom Radicalism can
furnish. A vigorous, and, as far as it went, highly successful effort,
was made by a few of the Radicals in the early part of the last session,
to take a higher ground. We encouraged them to the effort, and Edition:
current; Page: [385] we applaud them for it. But years of lost time
cannot be made up in a few months; men’s minds had settled into other
channels; the post of honour which our friends had left so long
unclaimed, they could not assume at a moment’s warning; and the attacks
of some of them on the Whigs, before they had shown themselves qualified
to succeed the Whigs, were but partially responded to, because they
appeared ill-timed to a large majority even of those who thought them
true, and because numbers of those who go much further than the Whigs
see no chance of resisting the Tories but by their aid, and, in
proportion as they despair of the Whigs, despair of Reform.

We can see, as well as some of our friends, one not inconsiderable
advantage, which might result from a Tory ministry, or a mixed ministry
of Whigs and moderate Tories. There might be a far more efficient
Radical party. There would be an end to the parrot cry of “Do not
endanger the Ministry.” We should be fighting for a cause, then, and not
for a set of men. We should no longer be under leaders whose opinions,
or whose fears, or the necessities of whose position, make them rather
desirous to damp than to inflame the enthusiasm of their own supporters.
We should be delivered from the anomalous state, in which we have
neither the benefits of a liberal government, nor those of a liberal
opposition; in which we can carry nothing through the two Houses, but
what would be given by a Tory ministry, and yet are not able to make
that vigorous appeal to the people out of doors, which under the Tories
could be made and would be eagerly responded to. These are
considerations which cannot but act strongly upon men who feel that they
could play a part in this more energetic action upon the public mind. It
is natural that men who think the cause in danger of being lost by
timidity and lukewarmness— who think that all depends upon speaking out,
upon aiming at great things, upon offering to the people objects worth
fighting for, and a banner worth upholding—it is natural that they
should sigh for a time when to raise this banner, when to proclaim these
objects, will not be the way to be looked shily on by their own party,
and called marplots, and impracticable men, and Tory-Radicals. We, too,
differ in some things from Mr. Roebuck, and our able and upright friend
the Spectator; but the want of literal conformity, which, as Colonel
Thompson says in his admirable Letters of a Representative, “is always
the excuse of feeble people,”[*] shall not be ours. If we differ from
them somewhat, we agree with them in more. We sympathize cordially in
the feelings which are now actuating them. We doubt if they feel more
indignant than we do at the sort of reception which their manifestation
of these feelings has met with; at the sort of interpretation which has
been put upon it by some who ought to have known better. They have a
right to deem it monstrous that there should be any man, calling himself
a Radical Reformer, who cannot see how much justice there is in the
feelings, how much far-sightedness in the views, which separate them
from those Edition: current; Page: [386] who are now attacking them; who
cannot perceive, that the portion of the truth which they see, is that
which the Whigs, and a number of the moderate Radicals, are losing
themselves and their cause by not seeing. We should go much farther than
they do, we should invite a Tory Ministry, we should hail its advent
with delight, if we were as certain that the other Radicals would make a
vigorous use of the opportunities it would give them, as we are that Mr.
Roebuck would. But can Mr. Roebuck himself expect it? Alas! it is not,
it never has been in our time, opportunities that were wanting to the
men, but men to the opportunities.

It is supposed that those who are inert and tame on one side of the
House would be impassioned and laborious on the other? For many years
there never has been a time when great things might not have been done,
if there had been anybody to do them; there never has been a turn in
affairs which might not have been improved into some decided advantage
for the popular cause, if there had been men in Parliament on the
look-out to seize what opportunities it afforded, and to profit by them.
The longer we live, and the more we extend our experience of human
affairs, the less disposed are we to impute to accident any great thing
which ever was accomplished on this earth. Those lucky accidents, to
which men appear to owe their success, hardly ever occur but to persons
who have cultivated the faculty of availing themselves of accidents; and
for every one such man, there are a hundred or a thousand others, who,
if they had made as good use of their opportunities and chances as he
did of his, would have effected greater things. But there is a truth
which the popular party during the last seven years has never ceased
proving to us—that for men who have not the qualities which command
success, the chapter of accidents can do little. If a man waits for
circumstances, instead of making the most of those he has, it is likely
he will make no better use of better circumstances; any conceivable
amount of good fortune will be thrown away upon him.

We ask those Reformers who, because Ministers are ruining us, would
drive the Reform party into opposition, how will that ensure us against
being ruined in the same way, and even by the same men? If the Radicals,
as a body, act as they have hitherto done, they will let the leadership
of the party slip through their fingers in opposition as they did in
power, and we shall have as tame an Opposition as we now have a tame
Ministry. Some individual Radicals have distinguished themselves in
debate, and will do so every year more and more; they have most of the
rising men in the House, but they have no men who have as yet shewn
themselves capable either of leading and keeping together a party, or
(unless Mr. Roebuck or Colonel Thompson be an exception) of speaking to
the masses in a language which they can understand and sympathize with.
There is, in a few of the Radicals in Parliament, and in a greater
number of those out of Parliament, talent and energy which may in time
qualify them to play a distinguished part either as a Ministry or as an
Opposition. Even now they would make as creditable a figure in office as
the present holders, or any other set of men before the public. But the
old established parties make up for their want of intrinsic superiority
by their capacity Edition: current; Page: [387] of co-operation. We have
not yet seen in any individual Radical even the promise of qualities by
which he could lead a party single-handed; and without such a man, or
the habit of organized concert, they will be feeble, on either side of
the House, except as appendages to a party who have served a longer
apprenticeship to the art of acting together.

For the popular party must have leaders: no party can hope to direct the
public mind unless it has its cabinet ready made; no principles, be they
even the truest, can rally a nation round them until they are
personified in a set of men, whose cause is their cause, and whose
banner presents one undivided object to the public eye; a symbol,
representing to each man that in the common cause for the sake of which
he loves it, and which he could not prevail upon so many to agree in
fighting for, under its own separate standard. One man wishes more
especially to reform one thing, one another: as, on the other side, one
man is interested in preserving one abuse, another in preserving
another; and as these are only able to make head by banding themselves
together to bring men into power who though willing to abandon any
particular abuse, make it their general effort to preserve abuses, so,
on our side, each rests his hope of carrying his favourite reform, upon
making sure, in the first instance, that some men who stand upon the
general principle of Reform, shall be in a situation where any reform
which they support will be supported by the whole body of Reformers:
which being attained, all particular reforms become questions to be
debated and determined among themselves by Reformers alone. This place
may be filled by an Opposition party as well as by a Ministry, but it
must be filled somehow: and it is already a sufficient misfortune to
want confidence in our leaders, without struggling to put them aside
when we cannot as yet succeed in putting ourselves into their place.

With these feelings we address ourselves to the present Ministry. We are
willing to accept them as leaders until we can produce others, or until
they leave us and join the enemy. We are willing to support them as
Ministers, however little they may do to deserve support, if they will
but be the enemies of the Tories. If we cannot do without their votes,
they cannot do without our principles; they could not stand three days
if the people took them at their word—if there were not men beside them
and behind them to tell the country that the miserable Municipal Bills
and Appropriation Clauses, which they affirm to be all that the people
are fighting for, are not all, and that there is within these so
diminutive bodies a strong spirit, which, because it will not thus be
satisfied, because it will not stop where they say it will, is worth
fighting for, although the immediate prize which seems to be contended
about is so infinitesimally insignificant. We are willing to continue
rendering them this service, which is essential to their existence. What
we require of them, and we do not require it as a condition, but as a
return, is: That they will consent to be kept in place, by consenting to
do the things, without which it is not in human power to keep them
there; and that they will fulfil the part which is incumbent upon those
who are elected as leaders less from their personal influence Edition:
current; Page: [388] than by the result of a compromise: namely, that
they shall represent (we do not ask for more) the average opinion of
their supporters.

There are many of our objects which, on these principles, we cannot
expect them to support. But there is one which can be no longer trifled
with. If they can now persist in refusing the Ballot, they are not worth
supporting any longer; they will fall, and fall unregretted.

“All parties,” says the pamphlet first on our list, and which is said to
be from an official source—

all parties, those for the Ballot, those for extended Suffrage, those
for the abolition of Church Rates, those for grand plans of Public
Education, those for the Appropriation Clause, those for Municipal
Institutions in Ireland, those for yielding to Canada a more democratic
form of Government than at present exists there, should one and all
enter the new session with this conviction thoroughly impressed upon
their minds, that there is not one of these questions, no, not one,
which is not secondary to the great object of maintaining Lord
Melbourne’s Cabinet as the great agent of future improvement, free from
every species of present embarrassment.[*]

The proposition is more confident than modest: but, permit us to ask, is
that to be secondary to keeping in Lord Melbourne, which is the only
possible means of keeping him in? He has still a majority: but on a most
careful calculation of all the changes in the representation, giving
each party the benefit of every seat in which it has substituted a sure
man for a trimmer, we find the Tories gainers of a balance of seven
seats, equivalent to fourteen on a division. The calculations which give
Ministers a majority of thirty-seven are palpably absurd. They had not
that in the last Parliament, and nobody denies that they have lost by
the general election. Considering the certain majority for Ministers at
the close of the Session as twenty-six, which was the majority at the
last division on the Appropriation Clause, and the last on Church
Rates,[†] it has been reduced to twelve: six Reformers turned out on
petition would annihilate this; and when we consider the open profligacy
of Election Committees, and the inferior means of the Reformers
throughout the country either to prosecute their own petitions or to
resist those of their opponents, such a result cannot be deemed
improbable: nor, in so undecided a state of affairs, can the Ministry
expect the accession of many trimmers. If we escape this peril, for how
long do we escape it? At every vacancy, except in a few large towns, the
Tories will oppose us, and defeat us: they always carried the partial
elections, even during the enthusiasm of the Reform Bill; and now their
purses and their coercion will on every occasion be strained to the very
utmost. The casualties among three hundred and fifty men, a large
proportion of them old, must Edition: current; Page: [389] be of
frequent occurrence: casualties in the Peerage too, and acceptances of
office, must create some vacancies. We have already had all that the
Queen’s name could do for us; and those who expected wonders from it
have been wofully disappointed. How, then, we implore Ministers to
consider, can they hope to remain in office above a year or so at
furthest, without something to protect the electors from the foul
influences?

If the inducements derived from their own position are so strong, those
derived from the opinions of their supporters are no less so. One of the
Polignac Ministry, M. Guernon-Ranville, in the hour of sober reflection
which preceded their act of madness, said of the French people in
reference to the different parties in the chamber, La France est centre
gauche. The result of the late elections enables us in like manner to
say, England is moderate-Radical. Of the different shades of opinion
composing the majority (those who are returned under Tory colours we do
not speak of) the Whigs are considerably reduced in strength, and we
have lost a few of the more decided Radicals; among whom it will be
discreditable to the nation if Mr. Roebuck at least does not immediately
find another seat. But the moderate Radicals have even increased in
numbers. Several adherents of the Ministry have made a move towards
Radicalism, and of the new Liberal members (very numerous in this
Parliament), the moderate Radicals form a large proportion. Such persons
compose the great majority of the Reform party in the higher and middle
classes. They consist chiefly of men who have not till lately been
active politicians, or whose opinions have advanced with events. They
have hitherto not approved, or not responded to, any attacks on the
Ministers; and, in all their movements, they are anxious to carry the
Ministers with them. They are decidedly for King, Lords, and Commons.
They have generally not yet made up their minds to the necessity of any
organic change in the House of Lords. They are not for Universal
Suffrage. Many of them are for the Church; not such as the Tories have
made it, but yet the Church, such a Church in reality as we already have
in pretence; far less radically altered in its constitution than we deem
necessary, both for religion and for good government. But these men, so
little inclined to extreme opinions, are universally for the Ballot.
They are for shortening the duration of Parliaments. They are for
abridging the expenses of elections; simplifying the qualification of
voters; abolishing the rate-paying clauses. They are for abolishing, or
consolidating into districts like those of Wales and Scotland, the small
borough constituencies. They are for abrogating the Corn Laws. Friends
as many of them are to the principle of a Church Establishment
conformable to what they conceive to be the theory of the Church of
England, they recognize none of the conditions which render such an
institution legitimate in the monstrous anomaly calling itself the Irish
Church; a Church forced upon a conquered people by a handful of
foreigners, who confiscated their land, and for ages hunted them down
like beasts of prey.

We affirm, and if the Ministers do not know it the first few divisions
will teach it them, that these are the opinions generally prevailing
among the new liberal Edition: current; Page: [390] English members.
These men represent the average strength of the Reform spirit; those who
go further being in number and weight a full set-off against those who
do not go so far. If additional proof be wanted, look to the Liberal
newspapers in London and in the country. Those newspapers are adapted,
by persons who have full opportunity of observation, to what they deem
the prevailing sentiments of the public whom they address. A certain
degree of attention to this is essential to the existence of every
newspaper, not (like the Examiner and Spectator,) so superior in talent
as to force itself into circulation without reference to its opinions.
What then are the indications afforded by the Liberal press? Almost
universally it supports the Ministers, and with a fulness and vehemence
which shews that in doing so it conforms to the general feeling of the
Reform party all over the country. But while thus supporting Ministers,
and we must say it of some journals, with a slavishness and sycophancy
which is neither honourable to them nor useful to those whom it is
intended to serve; how many are there, even of the most Ministerial
papers, which stop short in the expression of opinion where the
Ministers stop, and do not find it necessary to go the length at least
of the Ballot, to say nothing of other opinions greatly in advance of
the Ministry? Let Ministers remember, that no party ever for long
together recognized its hindmost men as its chiefs: the leaders are
always either those who precede the rest in making up their minds and
pointing out the course to be followed, or those who can at least be
counted upon for adopting and giving effect to the opinion of the
majority.

The Ballot is necessary to their continuance in power; it is demanded by
the almost unanimous opinion of their supporters; and the country is now
aware that they themselves have no rooted aversion to it, no objection
but such as these considerations ought to remove. We have hitherto
regarded Lord John Russell as its chief opponent. We should never think
of addressing a man of Lord John Russell’s character with any argument
appealing solely to his interest; but from the revelations in his speech
at Stroud (which have raised him in the opinion of all reasonable men
much more than his previous opposition to the Ballot had lowered him) we
now know that his objection was never one of principle. He concurred in
proposing the Ballot when there was every objection to it that there can
be now, and when facts had not so strikingly corroborated the à priori
demonstration of its necessity.[*] Why, then, has he since opposed it?
For a reason not necessarily disparaging to him: he thought that a
statesman, who has to consider not only his own conviction, but the
rules according to which masses of men may most wisely regulate their
collective conduct, should give a fair trial to one great change, and
allow its full effects to unfold themselves before beginning another. To
this we cannot object: but what is to be considered a fair trial? The
majority for the Reformers has dwindled from three hundred to
twenty-six, and at last to twelve: is it necessary to the sufficiency of
the trial, that this last remnant should disappear? Edition: current;
Page: [391] Must the patient die before it is right to apply the remedy?
Will nothing satisfy you of the necessity of taking arms against the
evil, but having those arms wrenched from you?

You have the power; you have it perhaps for the first time; certainly
for the last. You have it, if what your adherents say be true—if you
hold the option of dissolving the Parliament. With the knowledge that
you have that power, together with that of creating Peers, you might
perhaps carry the question even in this Parliament. But if it fail,
throw yourselves once more upon the electors. It is the only question
for which they would again renew their sacrifices. If there is a spark
of generosity or humanity in your breasts, it is the only one for which
you will henceforth demand them. We are unable to imagine how men with
the feelings of human beings can say, year after year, to large masses
of their dependent fellow countrymen, “Suffer for us, make yourselves
martyrs for us, be beggars, you and your families, for our sake; to keep
us in office, be ruined every three or four years, for, though we can
carry no measures, we can appoint Bishops and Judges, and you ought to
consider that sufficient. But we cannot do such an un-English thing as
to protect you—be not you such cowards as to ask it; we cannot give you
the Ballot, that is good for us, we require it in our clubs and
societies to save us from frowns and harsh looks; you ought to be above
such disguises; you ought not to need a screen; you ought to stand
unmoved in the midst of ruin, to look tyranny in the face without
trembling; wait a little, and perhaps your persecutors will cease to
persecute, your landlords will send to implore your pardon, your
customers will return to you: at all events we shall be Ministers”—and
Ministers at what a cost! Not to sit on all the thrones in Europe would
we have at our door all the evil now consequent upon any one general
election—would we feel that we had blasted so many fair prospects, flung
back so many brave men to the bottom of the hill which they had been
climbing for half their lives by patient industry; that honest, upright,
religious men, placed in our cause between the preservation of their
self-respect, and distress to themselves and their families more
dreadful than they could bear, gave way, and have ever since been making
atonement in sackcloth and ashes; remorse-stricken, spirit-broken! We
know single instances which, if published, as we trust they are destined
to be, will fully justify these expressions. He must be insensible
equally to shame and to humanity, who would again call on men to pass
through this fiery furnace, except for one last struggle, to end in
their being free.

In this cause, the personal cause of every elector, except the corrupt
few who bring their votes to market, we might hope for an election like
that of 1831, when in all the English counties but six Tories could find
a seat. Now, too, Ministers might come forward with the best grace, and
without even the semblance of inconsistency. For years they have said
that they only waited further experience: they have now surely had
enough of it. The very accusations against themselves, of undue
influence, are an additional inducement: there cannot be a more
effectual means of meeting those accusations than to propose the Ballot;
and if their accusers Edition: current; Page: [392] be sincere they will
have an opportunity of voting for it, as every honest Tory ought, who
believes, as they all profess to do, that the country is with them. But
if Ministers lose this opportunity, and let office slip from their hands
inch by inch, their majority dying of a consumption before their eyes;
with what face can they present themselves to the country, and ask the
continuance in a defeated cause, of sacrifices which a good use of the
hour of success would have rendered unnecessary? “You were in power,” it
will be answered—“you could have given us the means of good government,
and did not: you had fair warning, and ample time and opportunity. Think
you that we will toil and suffer again for men who have shewn themselves
so little capable of appreciating or making use of our toils and
sufferings? Retire into obscurity; there is no place for you among men
who know what they would have, and who, when they will the end, will the
means: for you the hindmost rank, if any rank at all; the post of honour
is for braver men.”

Thus much on the only question of immediate urgency. A few words now on
general policy, and the means of advancing the Reform interest.

We are about to talk to Ministers in the language of expediency only: we
assume that it is there they differ from us. We assume that they are
sincere Reformers: that whatever is evil, they see to be evil, and would
remedy; though, to do so, we, in many cases, should think it necessary
to cut deep, where they would only pare the surface. We are safe in
assuming, as between us and them, that there are not one or two things
to be remedied, but many; and that it is a question only of prudence,
whether we shall attempt several together, or endeavour to finish one
before we begin another.

A timid policy says, “Encumber yourselves only with one question at a
time: endeavour to have to deal in each conjuncture with only one set of
enemies: nothing brings you sooner to a halt than going too fast: slow
and sure.” We leave it to others to say, that this is a timid policy; we
say that it is a dangerous policy. We object to it, not for being too
prudent, but for being too imprudent. The fault with which we charge the
system of Ministers is rashness. We say that, by dint of wishing to
fight their battle with the Tories on the narrowest ground possible,
they have fought it on the worst ground possible; and that, to consider
them as mere tacticians, they have shown as bad generalship as ever lost
a campaign.

They were placed at the head of a nation divided into two parts, which
have never been properly fused together; each part accustomed to
consider itself distinct from the other, to feel its interests separate,
and the affairs of the other to a certain extent foreign affairs, as
much so as those of India, or Canada. Of these two sections, it was on
the larger and more powerful—on England and Scotland—that their strength
ultimately depended: it was on the strength of the interest they could
excite there, that they had in the end to rely; and they are fighting
all their battles, except one, on Irish questions. Again, they had to
make themselves followed by a nation practical even to ridiculousness;
which hardly ever attaches itself to a Edition: current; Page: [393]
principle, or can see the value of one, further than the direct
practical effects of any law, existing or proposed, in which the
principle happens to be for the time embodied:—a nation given to
distrust and dislike all that there is in principles beyond this, and
whose first movement would be to fight against, rather than for, any one
who has nothing but a principle to hold out. And Ministers are fighting
all their battles, except one, on points on which the net practical
result of victory would be zero, and all the value of the contest is in
the principle it involves. But, again, this national indifference to
principles considered in themselves, has one exception. There is a case,
in which, instead of seeing in a principle only the practical result,
this nation sees in every practical result only a principle, and goes to
an excess one way equal to its excess the other—will not listen to
consequences—is afraid to let itself be influenced by any consideration
but the principle: this case is that of religion. And Ministers have
contrived that in every one of their battles a religious principle
should be capable of being appealed to against them; while, in several,
they have but a principle of temporal interest, barren of temporal
results, to oppose to a (mistaken) religious principle. They had nothing
but a principle to offer, and they so contrived that the only principle
which is potent merely as a principle, should appear to be against them.

Do we blame them, then, that they brought forward these questions? Do we
advise them to a more ignoble truckling than they have ever yet been
accused of? Far from it. They were bound by every honest motive to
propose everything that they have proposed. What we assert is, that the
proposing of these things should have been regarded by them as a matter
of duty: the strength, which was to enable them to perform that duty,
they should have looked for elsewhere. With such powerful antagonists,
and nothing but the people’s feelings for their support, it will not do
to render the strongest feelings the people have, indifferent or
hostile. A man with the talents of a great Reformer, knows how to make
friends by one good deed and use them for another. The way to carry,
without hindrance from the practical or from the religious feeling, the
measures which you have proposed, is to flank those measures with other
measures which will put those feelings on your side.

For instance, the measures now in dispute, all but the Municipal
Bill,[*] and even that indirectly, relate to the temporalities of the
clergy: those temporalities are not religion, but are capable of being
confounded with it. The cry is raised, “Danger to the Church! Enemies to
the Church! Papist and Infidel Alliance! Robbery of the Church!
Religious Instruction denied to the Poor!” What is the mode of meeting
this cry? By boldly throwing themselves upon the religious feeling
itself. Let them propose, on high religious grounds, a radical Church
Reform. Let it be such as to destroy the Church for ever as the
patrimony of the Edition: current; Page: [394] aristocracy, as a family
provision for the stupidest son; and to appropriate its funds to
training and paying real religious teachers, such men as raised the
Scotch people from savages to their present civilization. How such a
measure would winnow the chaff from the corn of their opponents! How it
would declare who of those who cry out “Danger to the Church” are the
religious men, and who are the Pharisees and sinners! How it would show
who are the real robbers of the Church; who are they that deny religious
instruction to the poor! A cry of “Church in Danger” from the bishops
and rectors, against a measure supported by the curates, would be well
received, would it not? How would those tremble who are now canting
about the “two millions of destitute souls,” if their religion could be
brought to the test in a moment by the question—“Are you for the Church
Reform Bill?” It would scatter them, as the profligate adventurers who
tried to catch stray votes in popular constituencies by philo-pauperism
and the cry of “No new Poor Law,” were scattered when they were asked on
the hustings, what they thought of the Corn Laws!

How, too, such a policy would annihilate the obstacles (the number of
petitions in favour of Church-rates shows them to be far from
inconsiderable) which the feeling for the Church now raises against
measures intended to relieve the Church from the odium of being unjust
to the Dissenters. Such measures, when they stand alone—when they are
not part of a more enlarged scheme to make the state of the Church more
satisfactory to sincere Churchmen—are liable (especially when proposed
by a ministry whom the Catholics and the Dissenters support) to the
imputation of being mere concessions to the Catholics and the
Dissenters. A measure is not dangerous to the Church because those
parties approve of it; but it is very naturally presumed that those
parties would still approve of it, although it were dangerous to the
Church. The effect of their support is, on the whole, to alienate the
more ignorant class of Churchmen. Give a pledge, then, to all sincere
Churchmen, that you are ready and anxious to strengthen everything in
the Church which conduces to its professed ends—everything for the sake
of which they value it; and give the Dissenters and the Catholics an
opportunity of showing that they are ready to do the same.

The effect, in regard to the objects now contended about, would be, in
accordance with the admirably conceived maxim of Mr. Henry Taylor
(author of the Statesman), to “merge particular objections which are
unanswerable in general ones which may be met.”[*] They should drop
their Appropriation Clause, appropriative of a surplus in nubibus; not
foolish when first proposed—foolish to be now persevered in. Instead of
it, let them tack to their Tithe Bill[†] a measure for reforming the
Irish Church, and reducing it to the modest dimensions of a national
Edition: current; Page: [395] endowment suitable to a small minority. As
for the surplus, let it vest in Commissioners and accumulate; we will
engage to find a use for it when the time comes. What the Irish people
want is not to save the few hundred thousands a year expended on the
enormity, but to abate the nuisance and insult of the thing itself.
Similarly would a Church Reform smooth all difficulties respecting
Church rates. Let no portion of the endowments go to anything whatever
but providing efficient religious teachers for the people, at the
smallest expense that would be adequate; and let such teachers be
provided for all who are willing to be taught by them. This done, the
difficulty is reduced to a question of arithmetic: the funds being so
much, the charges so much, is there a residue sufficient to build the
necessary number of churches, and keep them in repair? We suspect very
much the sincerity of any man who professes to doubt it. But if the fact
turn out otherwise, then make up the deficiency from the Consolidated
fund; granting from the same fund a duly proportionate amount to every
Dissenting body which can appoint an appropriate organ for administering
it.

It is thus that a Reform Ministry makes itself strong; not by splitting
down the point in contention to a hair, and for fear of one enemy losing
two friends; the enemies being enemies still—for, they are either
interested, and then they know that whatever wears Reform colours is
dangerous to them, and are all the more eager to slay the lion while he
is afraid to bite; or they are sincere, and if so, they are your enemies
because your designs are misunderstood, and the way to prevent them from
being misunderstood is to show more of them. We do not say, propose
measures for which the nation is not ripe; far from that; what the
nation is not ripe for, is to a ministry, quâ ministry, as if it did not
exist. The business of a Reform Ministry in its legislatorial capacity,
is to seize the first moment when the public mind is ripe for a good
measure, and propose it; and the more such measures they propose at
once, the more they will carry; for, in the first place, the enthusiasm
will be greater; and, in the next, one measure will explain the motives
and correct the misrepresentations of another.

The same advice which we give to the Ministers, we give, mutatis
mutandis, to the more advanced and more enlightened section of the
Radicals. To them, as to the others, we offer one rule, which, being
fully acted upon, includes all they stand in need of—“Attempt much.” If
they attempt much, chusing, as they are likely to do, the right objects,
failures are of no consequence. If you attempt little, and fail in that
little, you are ruined. In politics, as in war, every one makes
mistakes, and the only persons who succeed are those who, by the number
and character of their enterprises, establish a system of insurance
against their own blunders, and draw upon the surplus popularity
accumulated by successes, to indemnify them for failures. But our
friends in the House of Commons are in need of a stock in hand,
sufficient to cover their losses by honesty as well as their losses by
unskilfulness: they are troubled with a conscience, and it requires a
constant outlay of popularity to keep it up. If a conscience altogether
has been described as an expensive article, Edition: current; Page:
[396] a conscience like theirs—a purely negative conscience, which never
bids them do anything, but only not do—is the most expensive of all;
for, while it is making continual drafts upon their popularity, it never
brings anything in.

Whatever inconveniences are necessarily attendant on honesty, a
politician who lays claim to the character must submit to. He is bound
to resist those who would be his most ardent supporters, when what they
demand is unjust, or founded in ignorance. But he is not bound to
neglect any honest means by which he may retain the confidence of his
supporters even while he opposes their wishes: he is not doing his duty
if his best friends are only made aware of his existence when something
which they, or a portion of them, are eager for, requires to be opposed.
The Radicals in Parliament are committing the same blunder as the Whigs:
they are not performing those of their duties, the performance of which
would make the others easy. They are wanting to the first obligation as
well as the strongest interest of persons in their position—they are not
putting themselves at the head of the working classes. A Radical party
which does not rest upon the masses, is no better than a nonentity.

It used to be said in behalf of Whigs and Tories, by people who wished
to stand well with both, that the former supported the principle of
liberty in the constitution, and the latter that of authority, not that
they did not equally agree in reverencing both principles, but that each
party took under its more peculiar protection that one of the two
elements which it conceived to be more especially in need of support. On
this principle the Radicals may claim to themselves, as their peculiar
office, a function in politics which stands more in need of them than
any other: this is, the protection of the poor. This devolves upon the
Radicals as their especial duty. No other political duty is so
important. It is, God wot, left to them to perform. Let them show that
the protection of the poor from the poor is not the only part of this
duty which they are competent to. To serve the people is not the same
thing as to please the people; but those who neglect the services which
please, will find themselves disqualified from rendering those which
displease. Do we find that the working classes—that large body of them
who take interest in politics—look to the Parliamentary Radicals for any
good; regard them with one spark of hope or confidence? Is there one
Radical of mark in Parliament, or recently in it, except Mr. Roebuck,
and in mere justice it must be added Colonel Thompson, who even aims at
inspiring such confidence? No: they leave it to the patrons and
champions of the corrupt freemen to claim the title of “tribunes of the
poor.” Hence it is that the poor do not love them, do not rally round
them. They must be tribunes of the poor, and to some purpose too, if
they mean to be anything. Those who will not flatter the people must
make it doubly obvious that they are willing to serve them. It behoves
them to earn two blessings for every single malediction. If it be their
duty, as it is liable to be every man’s duty, to oppose themselves upon
occasion to the sentiments of large bodies of their countrymen, let them
endeavour to have still larger bodies helping them, and sympathizing
with Edition: current; Page: [397] them, and urging them on. They are
willing to make bitter enemies; we implore them not to forget that they
have need of warm friends.

On the other hand, let the working classes learn to know the
Parliamentary Radicals, and to do them justice. They are the only party
in politics who have, to any great degree, common objects with the
working classes. They are the only party who are not overflowing with
groundless dread, and jealousy, and suspicion of them. They are the only
party who do not in their hearts condemn the whole of their operative
fellow-citizens to perpetual helotage, to a state of exclusion from all
direct influence on national affairs. The Radical party have other
feelings. They look forward to a time, most of them think it is not yet
come, when the whole adult population shall be qualified to give an
equal voice in the election of members of Parliament. Others believe
this and tremble; they believe it, and rejoice; and instead of wishing
to retard, they anxiously desire, by national education and the action
of the press, to advance this period, to hasten this progress. In the
mean time, they are to a man determined enemies of every robbery, every
unjust exclusion, every uncalled-for restraint which the people suffer.
We know not a man among them who does not detest the Corn Laws. We know
not one to whom high wages, and a condition of the labouring classes
similar to that in the United States, is not the one thing needful, the
polar star to direct all those of their exertions which have reference
to the economical condition of the country. They demand, and they are
the only party who demand, that all national property shall be applied
to national purposes, and that the Church Establishment shall either
cease to exist, or become what the Scottish Church was—the People’s
Church. They are the only party who will never be satisfied without
cheap justice, justice brought home to every man’s door, justice without
cost to him, and giving him a prompt remedy for every wrong. They detest
the insolent interferences with the ways, the pleasures, the amusements
of the people. They wish to emancipate the poor from the impertinent
meddling of men who do not know them and do not sympathize with them.
With them, gentlemen and noblemen only count as so many men, except so
far as they make themselves useful to others than themselves. Their
principle of government is, until Universal Suffrage shall be possible,
to do everything for the good of the working classes, which it would be
necessary to do if there were Universal Suffrage.

These are the principles of the Radical party in Parliament, and no one
who watches their conduct will fail to see it. Their fault is not want
of attachment to the principles, but want of doing enough for them. It
is time they bethought themselves that they are not there to bear
witness passively for the truth, but to act for it; that they are not
there to do something for their cause, but to do the most that can be
done. If they do not the duties of leaders, the Radicals will find
others who will, and whom they must be content to follow. The time is
not now when feelings which are burning in the hearts of millions, will
want tongues for utterance in high places. And there is a vitality in
the principles, there is that in them both of absolute Edition: current;
Page: [398] truth and of adaptation to the particular wants of the time,
which will not suffer that in Parliament two or three shall be gathered
together in their name,[*] proclaiming the purpose to stand or fall by
them, and to go to what lengths soever they may lead, and that those two
or three shall not soon wield a force before which ministries and
aristocracies shall quail. We pity the men to whom there is given such a
golden harvest, and who leave it to be reaped by others. The men are
honest; what, if done, they would be the first to applaud, let them have
the spirit to do.

While, however, they ought to rest upon the operative, and generally
upon the productive classes, as their main stay, and as those whose just
claims and legitimate interests it is especially theirs to defend, let
them study not less to make manifest to the people of property the
truth, for a truth it is, that even their interests, so far as
conformable and not contrary to the ends for which society and
government exist, are safer in the keeping of the Radicals than anywhere
else. We know how strange this assertion will be likely to appear to a
majority of the people of property, but we doubt if their present
leaders, the profligate part of the Tory faction, will think it so: for
we find them, fond as they are of representing the Radicals as enemies
of property, to be at bottom so well convinced of their inviolable
attachment to it, that they are at times well content to leave to them
alone the burthen of defending it. We need not go farther for an
instance than the late elections, and the conduct of the Tories in
relation to the new Poor Law.

An immense majority of all parties in Parliament concurred in passing
the new Poor Law, and so far the position of all was alike. At the late
election all were under an equal temptation to bid high for the few
votes which, if added to either side, would have given it a decided
majority. But to the Radicals the difficulty was greater of withstanding
the cry, because it proceeded from their own supporters; and the infamy
of yielding to it would have been less, because the protection of the
poor is their peculiar office. It would have been comparatively
excusable in them, had they carried that principle to excess. It would
but have been an over-zealous performance of their proper duty. It was
not the Radicals, however, who, in almost every constituency where
anything was to be gained by it, abandoned their principles for the sake
of their party objects, and appeared as the enemies of the Poor Law.
Every man of the Radicals remained faithful. Those who had always
opposed the measure still opposed it, but of the others we are not aware
of one who flinched. It was the Radicals who had to fight the battle of
the people of property at a hundred hustings, against candidates put up
by the party of the people of property, as a last chance of tricking a
few pauper electors into voting for the supporters of low wages and dear
bread.

We may be told that this was only the scum of the party; and people may
talk to us of the Duke of Wellington, and his declaration on the Poor
Law just before the dissolution of Parliament.[†] To the Duke of
Wellington, and to that over-praised Edition: current; Page: [399]
declaration, we are willing, we hope, to render as much honour as is
due. We will thank him for it, when we find that we have derived any
good from it. We did not want his assurances that the Tories do not mean
to abrogate the law; we never imagined they did. It is no more the
interest of the Tories to abrogate the new Poor Law than to confiscate
the land, which the continuance of the old law for a generation longer
would have done. What would have been really meritorious and honourable
in the Duke of Wellington, would have been to have dissuaded his party,
and his own son, from rolling themselves in the dirt from which his own
hands were kept so studiously clean. As it was, his prudery was
necessary to their prostitution. The electioneering cry of “No new Poor
Law” was for the wretched electors whom it duped. The
counter-declaration of the Duke of Wellington was for the people of
property throughout the country, that they might not fancy that the
electioneering cry meant anything, or that the leaders of the party
would keep the promises their tools were allowed to make. It would have
been fatal to the Tories at the late election if their anti-Poor-Law
professions had been generally credited. The Duke may have meant
honestly; but he by his honesty, and other men by their knavery, have
played marvellously into each other’s hands.

It is for the people of property, the quiet rich people throughout the
country who are unconnected with office and with the seekers of office,
and who adopt and value only the fair side of Tory principles, to
declare whether this is the policy which is fitted to succeed with them;
whether these are arts which they are inclined to encourage, and whether
they will permit the authors of them to arrogate to themselves the name
of Conservatives. We tell them that the Radicals are the only true
Conservatives; the only persons who disdain to tamper with doctrines
subversive of society—who make a stand for the fundamental principles of
the social union whenever and wherever they see them endangered, even by
those who are the enemies of their enemies, even by persons whom a
different conduct would enlist among their most active adherents.

Consider, for instance, this matter of the Poor Law. The Tories have
been in the habit of saying that the quarrel of Radicalism with Toryism
is that of the house of Want against the house of Have; to which Colonel
Thompson once very happily answered, that it is the house of Have
against the house of Take.[*] But what was said of Radicalism as mere
vulgar abuse, is true of the opposition to the new Poor Law. That is
really the house of Want against the house of Have. On one side are all
who have, including all who have laboured for what they have; on the
other, are those who want, and who desire to satisfy their want by
taking from those who have, without equivalent. On the one side is the
principle of protection to property, protection to the produce of
industry in the hands of the industrious; on the other side are the
Have-nothings, who seek, not liberty to earn, not power to sell their
labour in the dearest market and buy food in the cheapest; but to be
maintained by Edition: current; Page: [400] the people of property, to
eat unearned bread at their expense. We do not mean that this is the
light in which the question appears to all the enemies of the Poor Law;
we know the contrary: but it is its true character, and if any one is in
a mistake about the matter, it is not the Tories. The agitators against
that law are attempting what the Radicals are vulgarly accused of aiming
at; they are attacking the security of property, encouraging the
indigent to prey upon the rest of society. They are proposing the very
worst sort of agrarian law. And this is what the party supported by the
landed aristocracy, and standing up for all the noxious privileges of
the wealthy, are willing for personal gain to promise to support. Why
did they dare do this? Why did they not recoil from the advocacy of that
which no one would more dread to see carried? Because they knew that
they could trust to the conservative principles of the Radicals: they
knew that if they chose to abandon the first foundations of society and
civilization, the Radicals would not, but would allow their enemies to
gain whatever was to be gained by the fraud, and step in to save them
from the fatal consequences.

It is not in this instance alone that the Radicals have had to defend
really conservative principles against the pretended Conservatives. Who
have stood up for the fund-holder? Who have placed themselves between
him and the confiscation which was meditated against him by the
agricultural party, by the authors of the Corn Laws, in common with Mr.
Cobbett? Was it the Tories? The Quarterly Review, the organ of the Tory
party, a year or two before the Reform Bill, distinctly and avowedly
advocated what was called the “equitable adjustment.”[*] Was it a
Radical who wrote a pamphlet to prove that 33 per cent should be struck
off from the National Debt, and from all the private debts of the landed
interest? It was Sir James Graham.[†] Was it a Radical who pronounced in
the House of Lords the famous Nemo tenetur ad impossible? It was the
aristocratic Whig, Earl Grey.[‡] But it was a Radical, the late Mr.
Mill, who, with all his vehemence of character and force of reason,
protested against the doctrines of them both, in the Westminster and
Parliamentary Reviews.[§] It was a Radical, Colonel Thompson, who, in
his Catechism on the Corn Laws, argued the cause of the fundholder in
the fewest and most pregnant words in which we ever saw it put.[¶] When
the right of property had ever to be vindicated in the person of the
public creditor, it was to the Examiner, or Tait’s Magazine, or the
Westminster Review, that the task was abandoned.

Edition: current; Page: [401]
Property has scarcely ever, in any country, been in danger from the
poor. Those who have always lived by industry respect the produce of
industry, and have never yet been disposed to tear it away. In the very
height of the French Revolution no private property was touched, except
that of men who were in arms against their country; the Convention,
during the Reign of Terror, rejected all propositions of an
anti-property character, and such doctrines never appear practically in
the history of the Revolution, but in the persons of Babœuf and his
fellow-conspirators.[*] What the Radicals want, is protection to the
property of the poor against the worst class of poor, the needy rich.
Those, in whatever rank or party they are found, are the real enemies of
property, the real Destructives. They are willing enough to invoke the
sacredness of property in favour of what is not property,—the abuses by
which they themselves profit. They are willing enough to give the name
of enemies of property to the enemies of those abuses. But when property
is really in danger, it is on those enemies that it leans for support,
and its pretended friends, for the slightest personal gain, are ready to
throw it overboard.

As for the organic changes which the Radicals are supposed to meditate,
and which haunt the imaginations of rich and timid people with nameless
fears, we have already* had occasion to say on that subject what we now
repeat: It is utterly false that the Radicals desire organic changes as
ends; they desire them as means to other ends, and will be satisfied to
renounce them if those ends can be obtained otherwise. To stickle for
words and forms instead of substances, is in no case the practice of the
English Radicals. But a government of which the moving principle shall
be the general interest, a government which shall be just to the working
classes, we will not consent to be without; and whatever insists upon
standing between us and that, let it call itself Church, or House of
Lords, or by what other name soever, we will by God’s help sweep from
our path. There is a sufficient number of determined men in these
islands, bent upon this, and resolute in the pursuit of it, to render
these no idle words. It will not be the work of a year, or, possibly, of
many years; but those are now alive who will see it done. Let it be the
care of those who ought to be our leaders in this great enterprise, that
they be not wanting to it.

Let them learn confidence in their own strength. The power of the
Radical Reformers in this country is immense. The Tories have been fond
of repeating, as if it were something wonderfully complimentary to them,
a saying of Lord Brougham in the Edinburgh Review, that a great majority
of the persons with more than five hundred a year are for the
established order of things;[†] as if the same Edition: current; Page:
[402] might not be said of every established order of things
whatever,—as if those who are best off were ever the most disposed to
change, or as if the rich were likely to be dissatisfied with the
privileges of riches. But if Radicalism has not the men with the five
hundreds a year, it has those with the fifties, who are in a way to
become the more influential body of the two. It has the middle classes
of the towns, and as many of those of the country as take any interest
in politics. The middle classes have twenty times the aggregate amount
of property of the higher classes. As for the men of thews and
sinews,[*] the labouring multitude, it will not, we imagine, be disputed
that they are Radicals. Among the young men of practical talent (the old
will soon be off the stage) the Radicals are the growing power. Among
those of speculative ability, a considerable number are theoretically
Tories; for it is easy to a person of imagination to frame (like Mr.
Coleridge) a theory of Toryism, finding a good use for everything that
the Tories put to a bad one, and to dream pleasantly enough of a Church
and an Aristocracy such as might be had in Utopia, but which the
partisans of the Church and the Aristocracy as they now are would be the
last to stir a finger for. Men of practical sagacity, who look abroad
into the world, and judge of men and institutions as they find them
there, and not as they read of them in books, are hardly ever Tories but
from interested motives. Those who are looking forward to being counted
among the aristocracy are Tories. The bar is Tory, because every young
barrister intends to die a wealthy man and a peer. The Church is Tory,
for reasons unnecessary to specify. Many who are not Tories are
sceptical as to the importance of forms of government, and, in
preference to changing them, endeavour to work those which exist to the
best ends they can be turned to. But among the working part even of the
aristocracy, the younger sons, and among that part of the legal
profession who are rising but have not yet risen, not a few, and those
generally the ablest and most efficient, are Radicals. They are showing
it in every field of fair and open competition; and will show it more
and more. Take, for example, the most important commissions appointed by
the present Government,—the Corporation Commission, selected
indiscriminately from Whigs and Radicals, or the two Commissions of Poor
Law Inquiry for Ireland and England, from Whigs, Radicals, and
Tories.[†] See how large a proportion of those who were thought worthy
to be selected, and how decided a majority of those who justified their
appointment by making any figure in it, were decided Radicals. If this
be true even in the classes from which the aristrocracy is recruited,
what must it be in others? There is a class, now greatly multiplying in
this country, and generally overlooked by politicians in their
calculations; those men of talent and Edition: current; Page: [403]
instruction, who are just below the rank in society which would of
itself entitle them to associate with gentlemen. Persons of this class
have the activity and energy which the higher classes in our state of
civilization and education almost universally want. They have hitherto
exerted that activity in other spheres. It is but of yesterday that they
have begun to read and to think. They have now many of the advantages
for mental cultivation which were so long confined to the higher
classes, and they are using them. There are more hard students, more
vigorous seekers of knowledge, in this class than there are at present
in any other, and out of all proportion more who study the art of
turning their knowledge to practical ends. They are, as it is natural
they should be, Radicals to a man, and Radicals generally of a deep
shade. They are the natural enemies of an order of things in which they
are not in their proper place. We could name several men of this class,
of whom it is as certain as any prediction in human affairs can be, that
they will emerge into light, and make a figure in the world. We could
name a still greater number who want only some slight turn in outward
circumstances, to enable them to do the same. Many of these will abandon
Radicalism as they rise in the world; but many will not; and for those
who do there will be successors still pressing forward. It is among them
that men fit to head a Radical party will be found, if they cannot be
found among the Radicals of the higher classes. These are the men who
will know how to speak to the people. They are above them in knowledge,
in calmness, and in freedom from prejudice, and not so far above them in
rank as to be incapable of understanding them and of being understood by
them.

These elements of almost boundless power are ill marshalled and
directed, we know. But they will not always be so; nor can any defect of
organization prevent our strength from showing itself. We are felt to be
the growing power; that which even the ambitious, who can afford to wait
for their gratification, would do wisely to ally themselves with. Not
one inch of ground, once gained, do we ever lose; and we carry every
point we attack. We are foiled and driven back nine times; the tenth we
succeed. What we accomplish is but a trifle, indeed, to what might be
accomplished: let it be our study to accomplish more.

To our leaders, two things are especially to be recommended: activity,
above all; and activity directed to the practical points. We have
already exhorted them to apply themselves to those topics which speak
strongest to popular feeling, which come home to men’s lives and
pursuits, to interests already felt. Let them also seize the occasions
which will strengthen, and make manifest, their own capacity for
practice and business. Let them not allow it to be thought that they can
make speeches on a few great questions, and that this is all. Let them
take the part their acquirements entitle them to in all the general
business of the House. Let them show that they are not men of one
subject, or of two or three subjects, but men equal to all the
questions, versed in all the interests, which a Ministry and a
Parliament have to decide upon. What gives Sir Robert Peel his personal
influence? What makes so many adhere to him? The opinion, a greatly
exaggerated Edition: current; Page: [404] one, entertained of his
capacity for business. In moments of general enthusiam it is enough that
a party carries the favourite banner; but in the intervals between those
moments, its importance depends upon the confidence inspired by its
personnel: in such times as we ought always to be prepared for, times of
momentary misgiving respecting the truth or applicability of principles,
the prize rests with that party which can present the nation with the
ablest practical man. If Radicalism had its Sir Robert Peel, he would be
at the head of an administration within two years; and Radicalism must
be a barren soil if it cannot rival so sorry a growth as that; if it
cannot produce a match for perhaps the least gifted man that ever headed
a powerful party in this country. Without one idea beyond common-place,
Sir Robert Peel owes his success to his having been cast upon times
which not only have not produced a statesman of the first rank, a
William the Silent, a Gustavus Adolphus, a Jefferson, a Turgot; but not
one even of the second-rate men who fill up the long interval between
Richelieu and William Pitt; and not so much as a single third-rate man,
except himself. He does not know his age; he has always blundered
miserably in his estimate of it. But he knows the House of Commons, and
the sort of men of whom it is composed. He knows what will act upon
their minds, and is able to strike the right chord upon that instrument.
He has, besides, all that the mere routine of office-experience can
give, to a man who brought to it no principles drawn from a higher
philosophy, and no desire for any. These qualifications are Sir Robert
Peel’s stock in trade as a practical statesman. Is it not a dire
disgrace to the Radical leaders to be left behind by such a man? But
then, he is always using his slender faculties; they, except a few young
and still inexperienced men, let theirs slumber.

This is for the leaders. To the people, at the present moment, we have
but one exhortation to give: let them hold themselves in readiness. No
one knows what times may be coming: no one knows how soon, or in what
cause his most strenuous exertions may be required. Ireland is already
organized. Let England and Scotland be prepared at the first summons to
start into Political Unions. Let the House of Commons be inundated with
petitions on every subject on which Reformers are able to agree. Let
Reformers meet, combine, and above all, register. The time may be close
at hand, when the man who has lost a vote, which he might have given for
the Ballot or for some other question of the first magnitude, will have
cause bitterly to repent the negligence and supineness which has
deprived him of his part in the struggle. All else may be left till the
hour of need, but to secure a vote is a duty for which there is no
postponement. This let the Reformers do; and let them then stand at
their arms and wait their opportunity.

Edition: current; Page: [405]


RADICAL PARTY AND CANADA: LORD DURHAM AND THE CANADIANS
 1838

Edition: current; Page: [406]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, VI & XXVIII (Jan., 1838), 502-33. Headed:
“Art. VIII.—1. The Canadian Portfolio. Conducted by John Arthur Roebuck,
Esq., and other friends of Canada. Nos. 1 to 4. 1838. [London:] Charles
Fox. / 2. [Thomas Frederick Elliot.] The Canadian Controversy: Its
Origin, Nature, and Merits. 1838. [London:] Longman [, Orme, Brown,
Green, and Longmans]. / 3. [Charles Neate.] A Plain Statement of the
Quarrel with Canada; in Which Is Considered, Who First Infringed the
Constitution of the Colony. 1838. [London:] Ridgway. / 4. [Anon.] Hints
on the Case of Canada, for the Consideration of Members of Parliament.
1838. [London:] Murray. / 5. Reports of Commissioners on Grievances
Complained of in Lower Canada. Ordered by the House of Commons to be
printed, 20th February, 1837. [In Parliamentary Papers, 1837, XXIV,
3-416.] / 6. [Charles Edward Grey.] Remarks on the Proceedings in
Canada, in the Present Session of Parliament. By one of the
Commissioners. 10th April, 1837. [London:] Ridgway. / 7. Papers Relative
to the Affairs of Lower Canada. Ordered by the House of Commons to be
printed, 20th February, 1837. [In Parliamentary Papers, 1837, XLII,
413-56.] / 8. Copies or Extracts of Correspondence Relative to the
Affairs of Lower Canada. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed,
23rd December, 1837. [In Parliamentary Papers, 1837-38, XXXIX, 317-432.]
/ 9. Copies or Extracts of Correspondence Relative to the Affairs of
Lower Canada, Upper Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick. Ordered by
the House of Commons to be printed, 10th January, 1838. (In continuation
of No. 8.) [Ibid., pp. 433-52.] / 10. A Bill to Make Temporary Provision
for the Government of Lower Canada. 17th January, 1838. [Ibid., Vol. I,
pp. 253-6. Enacted as 1 Victoria, c. 9 (1838).]” Running titles: 502-9,
“Radical Party and Canada” (in some copies, “Radical Party in Canada”);
510-33, “Lord Durham and the Canadians” (the change is keyed by the
paragraph, on 413, beginning, “The name of Canada . . .”). In table of
contents of L&WR, Vol. VI, “Lord Durham and the Canadians.” Signed “A.”
Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An article
entitled ‘Lord Durham and the Canadians’ in the same number of the same
review”; i.e., as “Ware’s Letters from Palmyra” (MacMinn, 50). In the
Somerville College copy (tear-sheets) there are two emendations (both of
which are adopted in this edition): “Whigs to” is corrected to “Whigs
would have to” (412.23-4); and “for—displaying” to “for displaying”
(434.19). For comment on the essay, see xlii-xlvi and lix above.

Edition: current; Page: [407]


Radical Party and Canada: Lord Durham and the Canadians

we had intended, on the present occasion, to review and characterize the
various divisions of the multitudinous and widely scattered Radical
party: to show to each of the diversified bodies of men who compose it,
what the others are, and are doing—by learning which it can alone know
what itself is; to enable them to look at themselves, and at each other,
in the light most calculated to allay unreasonable distrusts and awaken
sympathies; to point out to them the common ground on which they may
meet and co-operate, the common objects in the attainment whereof each
would find the realization of his separate aims; the points, therefore,
to which the efforts of all should converge, and the organization and
marshalling, by which those efforts may be brought most vigorously to
bear upon those points. By doing this, we should be, at the same time,
placing before the well intentioned part of those who have not hitherto
been in sympathy with us, a view of what Radicalism is. We should show
them that the demons and spectres which frighten them from their
propriety are not Radicalism, have no natural connection with
Radicalism: That the essentials of it are not only reconcileable, but
naturally allied, with all that ever was venerable or deserving of
attachment in the doctrines and practices handed down to us from those
ancestors, and those great teachers, whom they delight to honour: That
it is the pretended apostles of those traditional opinions and
institutions who dishonour them: That the low objects to which they
prostitute them, and the low grounds on which they defend them, are
loosening the hold which those old ideas had on the intellects and on
the affections of mankind, and sinking what is good and noble in them,
along with what is effete or despicable, into a common contempt: That it
is the Radical view of them alone which can save them: That to be ever
again objects of veneration in this New World, these Old Things must be
seen with the eyes of Radicals: That they must reconcile themselves with
Radicalism, must fill themselves to overflowing with its spirit: That
Conservatives must adopt the Radical creed into their own creed—must
discard all with which that creed is essentially incompatible, if they
would save that in their own which is true and precious, from being lost
to the world, overwhelmed in an unequal contest. For Radicalism is a
thing which must prevail. It is a thing which the better and the worse
influences of advancing civilization equally conspire to promote; and
this age has no other power over it but that of deciding what sort of
Radicalism shall, in the first instance, predominate. That Edition:
current; Page: [408] mainly depends upon the attitude which those
classes, on whom society has lavished its means of instruction and
cultivation, may, ere it be too late, be wise enough to assume towards
the remainder.

These were the topics to which we had destined the present article; but
these things must now wait for our next publication.[*] A question has
arisen which, for the present, places these great principles in
abeyance; which suspends all united action among Radicals, which sets
one portion of the friends of popular institutions at variance with
another, and by rivetting all attention upon events of immediate urgency
and of melancholy interest, interrupts for the time all movements and
all discussions tending to the great objects of domestic policy. We need
scarcely say that we allude to Canada. On this most grievous subject we
shall, in the course of this article, declare our whole opinion. But as
Canada will not occupy the whole session, and as the interval afforded
by Lord Durham’s mission will allow the public mind to revert to what
was so strongly occupying it before, we are anxious in the first place
to say something on the duties devolving upon the Radical party, in the
position in which it is placed by Lord John Russell’s declaration of
hostilities on the first night of the session.[†]

It would be wasting time to expend any in discussing now, what Reformers
ought to think of this ministerial declaration, or what feelings they
ought to bestow in return for it. On that subject the mind of the
country is made up. The Ministers are now understood. The alliance
between them and the Radicals is broken, never more to be re-united. The
late splendid demonstrations of Reform feeling, in all parts of the
island, and the declarations of want of confidence in the Ministry,
which have been carried by immense majorities at the greater part even
of the meetings which were called by their friends—these facts, however
attempted to be stifled by that systematic suppression of intelligence
which the Whig and Tory newspapers have practised on this occasion to an
extent unexampled in our remembrance, and which constitutes a distinct
pecuniary fraud upon their subscribers—are nevertheless known and
appreciated. They are a proof that the Ministry have been taken at their
word: that their camp and that of the Radicals are now separated: that
the Radicals are organizing themselves as a separate party; that the
spirit of reform is no longer obedient to Lord John Russell’s curb; and
that, in determining what proceedings are fittest for promoting the
rapid success of the cause of popular institutions, counsel will no
longer be taken with its avowed enemies.

We can understand the terror of the mere place-holding portion of the
Whigs, at demonstrations which so manifestly endanger their continuance
in place; and the Edition: current; Page: [409] consternation of those
Radical writers, and local or sectional leaders of Radicals, who having
for the first time in their lives known what it is to be courted by a
Ministry, would gladly go on uniting the credit of being for the people,
with the vanity and the more substantial advantages of being on the side
of power. What we cannot so well understand is, why some sincere
Radicals should behave as if they thought that the disclosure which has
been made to us of the real purposes of the Ministry, and the knowledge
which we have thence derived of what we have to expect from them, and of
what we need not expect, is an evil: and so great an evil as to justify
resentment; so great, that the man who has brought it upon us by his
“untimely” questions to Lord John Russell,[*] should be treated as if he
had inflicted on us a deadly injury. Mr. Wakley has had the usual fate
of the messenger of ill news. He has roused the lethargic, and compelled
the sleepy to open their eyes, and anger at being disturbed is their
first feeling and his reward. If Mr. Wakley’s silence could have made
any difference in Lord John Russell’s sentiments, no one would have
regretted more than we, that the silence was ever broken; but since Mr.
Wakley could only compel him to say what he already intended to do, is
there any Reformer who wishes that it had remained unsaid? If the
Ministerial mind had been undecided—had been gradually and insensibly
coming round to us, it might have been wrong to break in upon that
process, and force Ministers to a premature declaration when they were
but half prepared to express the opinion which was desired; but since
their minds were made up, and to an opinion the reverse of what was
wished for, could this be too soon known? Is there not a lurking regret
that we cannot longer enjoy the pleasure of being cheated, a pleasure
rated so highly by the greatest judges of human nature, and which may be
defined, the pleasure of not being called upon for any activity, for any
foresight, for any exercise of our own judgment as to our duties, for
any exertion to help ourselves or others? To have got rid of a delusion
which made us torpid and cowardly, and to have acquired a self reliance
which makes us vigorous and awake, is a gain, in our circumstances,
inappreciable; and to whomsoever we owe it, that man has conferred a
benefit, not inflicted an injury, and should be thanked, not snarled at.

The question of most pressing interest for the moment is, what ought now
to be done by the Parliamentary Radicals. And by Radicals we here mean,
those who believe in the absolute necessity of what Lord John Russell
says he will never consent to—the Ballot, with or without an extension
of the suffrage.*

Edition: current; Page: [410]
On this point we can but refer to the opinions and sentiments of which
we gave so full an exposition in the first article of our last
Number.[*] It will scarcely be said that in that article we manifested
any hostility to the Ministry, any unwillingness to be just to them, any
indisposition to court their alliance. We went as far to meet them, we
gave up as much to act in concert with them, as was possible without
betraying our cause and degrading our character. We asked them for
nothing but to serve themselves. We asked no more in return for their
being supported in office, than that they would consent to be kept in
it. We asked only that they would propose the Ballot, in the last
Parliament in which they can remain Ministers without the Ballot. Though
not for the sake of any of their measures, of which they can carry none
without the consent of the Tories, yet for the sake of Ireland—to which
the English and Scotch Radicals, though accused of being indifferent to
it, have in reality postponed every other interest of their country—they
have supported Ministers till the time when the Ballot became a vital
question to their remaining Ministers on the principles they have
hitherto professed. This exact time Ministers have chosen for declaring
a degree of enmity to the Ballot, which they have never before
expressed: and here, therefore, it is necessary that our support should
terminate. For this is no single question: it is not one particular
point on which the Ministers have gone back; it is the indication, or
rather the avowal, of a change of policy. There is no mistake in the
matter. The Ministers know as well as we do, that to remain in office
they must either carry the Ballot or become Tories. The meaning of Lord
John Russell’s declaration is to apprise the world which side of the
alternative they have chosen. Lord John Russell may talk of an
engagement with his late colleagues, and a feeling of personal honour
involved in not consenting to what is for his country’s good. His
country does not believe him. He states what is not the fact: he has no
such feeling, he is conscious of no such obligation. To believe his
assertion would be the insult; not to disbelieve it. If it be true now,
was it not true at Stroud,[†] and in Devonshire,[‡] and on all the
innumerable occasions on which he has declared, in a key ever rising
higher and higher, that if intimidation and bribery continued, and could
not otherwise be prevented, he might be compelled, although unwillingly,
to support the Ballot? Did he say this, while in his heart, and as a man
of honour, he felt for ever precluded from supporting it? And to this
avowal of three years’ systematic duplicity it is that some men have
given the epithets candid and manly. The Reformers do not believe Lord
John Russell to be so bad a man, as for his present convenience he gives
himself out to be. They believe that he was sincere formerly, and that
his present story of having his hands tied is an afterthought. They do
not believe that he feels himself under any restraint as to his
political course, or that Edition: current; Page: [411] his political
opinions at any time sit so tightly on him as not to admit of being
shaken off on a change of seasons. They are well assured that this very
conduct of his is an example, not of the obstinacy which (judging from
his demeanour this session) he seems to consider as one of his
qualities, but of the pliability by which his political career has
really been characterised. As on all former occasions, so now, he is
yielding to the signs of the times; only his misfortune is that he reads
them the backward way. There are always two contrary readings of a
historical fact. It seemed to Reformers to be the true reading of the
late general election, that unless the shield of the Ballot were thrown
over the electors, or something given them that they should think worth
fighting for, they would not longer persevere in their sacrifices and
sufferings, merely to keep the Tories out and the Ministers in. But the
Ministers have construed the same fact in another sense. Their reading
is, that the country is becoming Conservative, and that they must become
Conservative too: and the first fruit of this is Lord John’s
declaration.

On the mental hallucination which confounds the apathy arising from
hopes gradually withered, and the growing reluctance to brave ruin and
penury for no adequate national object, with a reaction in the public
mind against those national objects which have never been so much as
offered to it, we shall for the present spare our comments. It is enough
that the Ministry intend to be Conservatives; that they look henceforth
to the support of the Conservatives; and that the Tory leaders are
looking towards the same object, and are studiously preparing the way
for a coalition. They are throwing the Orangemen overboard. They are
paying compliments to Lord Mulgrave. They are making signals of
compromise on most of the little questions, which have been exaggerated
into great ones because the Whigs were committed to them. The present
session will be employed in getting rid of these stumbling-blocks. If
after that time we do not see Peel and Wellington in office, it will be
because they think it more for their interest to remain out of it,
getting their work done for them by the present Ministers. If things
continue as they are, we shall behold in another session, if not Sir
Robert Peel and Lord John Russell, Sir Robert Peel’s and Lord John
Russell’s followers, seated on the same benches, and enthusiastically
supporting the same Ministry; while the opposition benches will be
occupied by the Radical party, and by thirty or forty rabid Orangemen,
the offscouring of the House.

It is a foresight of these things, we must tell Mr. O’Connell, and not
insensibility to the interests of Ireland, that makes the bolder part of
the English Radicals disapprove and resist his reckless partisanship of
the Ministry. The charge of insensibility to Ireland we indignantly
deny. Mr. O’Connell may be sincere in accusing us of it; for with him
nobody cares for Ireland who cares for anything else. But it is unworthy
of Mr. O’Connell’s discernment not to perceive, that the good of
Ireland, no less than of England and Scotland, depends upon maintaining
the popular influence in the House of Commons, and that when this is in
jeopardy, all minor risks must be cheerfully run, rather than lose a
moment in taking up the Edition: current; Page: [412] necessary ground
for covering our place of strength. When the time comes, and it has now
come, at which a further perfecting of the representative system without
delay is necessary not only to our advancing, but to our holding what we
have already gained, including an honest executive in Ireland—from that
time, open opposition, to any and every government which refuses those
further improvements, is the only position which befits any Radical. And
it remains to be shown in what manner this opposition can be carried on
without playing into the hands of the Tories, and without exposing our
Irish brethren to any risk which can be avoided,—we do not say of an
Orange Government, which we consider impossible,—but of losing the
Government which they love.

Let the Radicals, then, assume the precise position towards Lord
Melbourne which they occupied in the first Reformed Parliament towards
Lord Grey. Let them separate from the Ministry and go into declared
opposition. Let their opposition not be factious; let them vote with the
Whigs as they would with the Tories, in favour of whatever they propose
worthy of support. But if the Tories should move a vote of want of
confidence in Ministers, let the Radicals vote for it. At first it might
appear that this would bring in the Tories, which it is our object to
avoid, although even that would be amply compensated if it procured for
us the only thing we at present care much about, a compact and vigorous
Radical Opposition. But a very little consideration will show that a
Tory Ministry need not, and would not, be the consequence. The necessary
condition of a Ministry is to possess a majority, that majority could
not be made up by Tories alone. It must be formed either of Whigs and
Tories, or of Whigs and Radicals; and the Whigs would have to determine
which. If they chose the Tories, it would then, we imagine, be tolerably
obvious what way their disposition lay, and whether we had lost anything
by exchanging a Ministry of concealed Tories for one of declared ones.
But they would not; they are too honourable men to do it without making,
at least, such conditions in favour of Ireland, as should guarantee Lord
Mulgrave’s generous and liberal system of government against any
infringement; and the Duke of Wellington’s compliments, so direct a
rebuke to his own party, are, and we have no doubt were meant to be, a
sufficient token that no difficulty of this kind shall stand in the way
of a junction when otherwise attainable.[*]

If the Whigs did not choose a coalition with the Tories, they would, no
doubt, retaliate by moving a vote of want of confidence in a Tory
Ministry: and here the Radicals might, and in common honesty must, join
with them. By ordinary good management on the part of the Radicals, both
these motions would be carried; and the only Ministry which could then
be formed, would be one in the formation of which the Whigs and the
Radicals would have an equal voice. The Radicals ought not to drive the
Whigs into the arms of the Tories by making hard terms with them.
Edition: current; Page: [413] They might be satisfied with the
remodelling of the present Ministry, leaving out Lord John Russell and
any others who may consider themselves pledged against the Ballot. But
the Radicals would have gained a victory. They would have asserted their
share of influence, as a portion, and at least an equal portion, of the
majority. They would have shaken off the character of a mere tail. They
would have restored the drooping spirits and decaying hopes of the
liberal party throughout the country. They would have taught the
reformers to look to them not merely for an occasional speech, but for
the attainment of important practical objects. They would rally public
confidence round them, and round the Ministry which they had called into
existence. That Ministry, too, would be altered in spirit, far more than
it need be altered in the personnel. There would be no necessity to
require that it should propose the Ballot, because it would be so
situated that it could not long go on without proposing it. Such a
Ministry would either itself be, or would prepare the way for, that of
which the time will soon come, a Ministry of moderate Radicals, a
Ministry which will take for its device the Ballot, Justice to Ireland,
and Justice to Canada.

The name of Canada recals us to the more immediate object of this
article. To that object we now turn: hoping, we trust not vainly, that
now when, according to general opinion, the insurrection is quelled, and
when the fate of an unfortunate people is in our hands, it may be
possible to obtain for their case an impartial hearing. We know how
strongly the tide has set in against them. We are painfully sensible
that considerate and unprejudiced views of the occasion of the quarrel,
are but beginning to find acceptance with the public mind; and that
among a large portion even of those who form the effective strength of
the popular party, the opinions which we feel bound to avow and justify
on this unhappy contest will meet as yet with only partial sympathy.
While, both for the sake of this cause and of all the other noble
principles which are involved with it, and which must suffer when it
suffers, we feel keenly the disadvantages under which it must for the
present be advocated; yet this situation has nothing discouraging to us,
for it is neither new nor unexpected. The friends of liberal opinions
need never flatter themselves that on any new question the public mind
will be with them at first. Not one victory has ever been gained by
liberal opinions but after a protracted contest; on no one question are
the people of England wiser than their grandfathers, but on those which
have been much, and long, and well discussed. When we recollect that
Ireland is at our doors, that Ireland has above a hundred
representatives in the British Parliament, and that with these
favourable circumstances it has required fifty years to procure even
such imperfect justice to Ireland as we now see, can we wonder that
Canada, which has none of these advantages, Canada, to which the
attention of England has never once till this very occasion been
seriously directed, should not obtain justice, and that her cause is yet
only in the first stages of an uphill fight? It must be so; this is
among the thousand and one mortifications which Edition: current; Page:
[414] in all states of society, and under all governments, those who
stand up for principles, or invoke justice from the strong for the weak,
must lay their account with enduring. Mortifying enough it truly is,
when, instead of having only to bear the defeat of an improvement, and
the protraction for some time longer of an evil already in existence,
they are condemned to witness their country rushing in blind ignorance,
and under interested guidance, into positive wrong and injustice. But no
generation that we remember has yet escaped a similar infliction: our
grandfathers witnessed the American war, our fathers the crusade in
behalf of despotism in France. We, of this generation, have now to bear
our share of the common liability, and considering what an easy matter
it has been found to bring it upon us, may be thankful that we have
escaped so long.

In commenting on these unhappy transactions it is not our wish to enter
into any retrospective crimination. A new state of things now exists in
Canada, and the past has ceased to be of importance, save for the
guidance of the future. But with a view to that future, and to the
measures on which Lord Durham first, and afterwards the British
Parliament, will have to deliberate, some reference to the past is
indispensable.

Let us first get rid of the language of mere abuse, which men so
inflamed by passion as to be lost to all perception of the most
recognised moral distinctions, have heaped upon the insurgents to render
them odious. They are styled rebels and traitors. The words are totally
inapplicable to them. Take the matter on the testimony of their
bitterest enemies, and what do those very enemies impute to them? Simply
this, that it is a contest of races; that being a conquered people, they
cherish the feelings of a conquered people, and have made an attempt to
shake off their conquerors; is this treason? Is not this the conduct
with which, when other parties were concerned, Englishmen have been
called upon to sympathize, and to subscribe their money, and to proclaim
their admiration of the sufferers and their abhorrence of the conqueror
to every region on the earth? On the showing of their enemies, what have
the Canadians done other than the Poles? We do not compare Lords
Dalhousie and Aylmer to the Grand Duke Constantine, or the
administration of our colonial office to that of Nicholas, although even
of Nicholas it must be remembered that we have not his story; we have
but that of the “rebels” and “traitors,” as they are called in his
vocabulary;[*] and does any one think that Mr. Papineau or Mr. Morin
would have any difficulty in making out a case against us, to the
satisfaction of a sympathizing audience in a rival nation, without our
being heard, or having any opportunity of contradiction? Of the injuries
inflicted by a foreign government, the people that suffers them, not the
people that inflicts them, is the proper judge; and when such a people
revolts, even improperly, against the foreign yoke, its conduct is not
treason or rebellion, but war.

From this view of the case, which, as we infer from his language, has
Edition: current; Page: [415] commended itself to the vigorous and
unsophisticated understanding of the Duke of Wellington,[*] and which
has been forcibly argued in one of the anti-Canadian pamphlets* at the
head of our article, what follows? That the Canadian contest not being
rebellion, but war, the insurgents who fall into our hands are not
criminals, who can be tried by a court of justice, but prisoners of war;
and that not only that indiscriminate judicial massacre, at the prospect
of which the ascendancy party in the colony are expressing so much
delight, but any severities beyond what are implied in the precautions
necessary against a second outbreak, would be as disgraceful, as much to
be abhorred by all who make any pretension to civilization or humanity,
as would similar treatment of any captives taken in honourable warfare.
Unless there be among the insurgents men who, without justification from
the laws of war, have been found wanting in similar forbearance towards
their prisoners, banishment from the colony, or imprisonment for safe
custody, and only while safe custody is required, must be the severest
punishment inflicted even upon the chiefs. To shed blood, anywhere but
in the field, in such a quarrel, would stamp indelible infamy on the
perpetrators; and would meet with its Edition: current; Page: [416] just
punishment in another insurrection, ten times more difficult to quell
than the present. A cause, generally, for the first time acquires a real
hold upon the feelings of large masses, when martyrs have been made for
it. A little will make men talk, but for making them take to their
muskets and fight, there is nothing like having to avenge the blood of
those whom they love and honour.

But the question is not to rest here. If we are to keep Canada, and if
we are to keep her by any other means than tyranny; if Lord Durham’s
mission is to lead to anything but setting up a government of brute
force, to be maintained at boundless expense to this country, until some
embarrassment in our foreign affairs enable the oppressed majority to
set themselves free; if this is not to be the end of it, the character
of the Canadian insurrection must be thoroughly understood, and we are
prepared thoroughly to discuss it. We are prepared to assert to the
utmost, without restriction or qualification, the justice and holiness
of the cause in which these men have taken arms. We are not prepared to
vindicate the wisdom of their conduct. There go other things to warrant
an insurrection, besides a just cause, and the principal of them is, a
reasonable prospect of success. Where that is wanting, the temerity of
the attempt, on the part of the leaders at least, cannot be
justified—can at most admit of excuse. But it does not require victory
to constitute success. If theirs is the just cause we affirm it to be,
and if the English are a just people, is it not success to have drawn so
much of their attention to it, when the most stirring appeals from the
most patriotic voices in Parliament failed last year to interrupt that
slumber which the din of arms has at last broken? Mr. Papineau—a man
whom Mr. Edward Ellice, from personal knowledge, describes as “blameless
in character, and of high talent and worth”[*]—Mr. Papineau ought, we
are told, to Edition: current; Page: [417] have followed the example of
Mr. O’Connell: but is Mr. Papineau in Parliament, with seventy followers
at his back, his country’s affairs the turning point of all British
politics, and a Ministry existing at his will? To their brethren and
countrymen who have been ruined, and to the families of those who have
been slain, the authors of this revolt have an account to render, which
we pray that they may come well out of. But against us they are
altogether in the right. The people of Canada had against the people of
England legitimate cause of war. They had the provocation which, on
every received principle of public law, is a breach of the conditions of
allegiance. Their provocation was the open violation of their
constitution, in the most fundamental of its provisions, by the passing
of Resolutions through Parliament, for taking their money from their
exchequer without their consent.[*]

We must dwell a little on this topic; for there is something very
alarming to us in the nonchalance with which Englishmen treat so grave a
matter as the infraction of a constitution. A Resolution taking away
representative government from Lower Canada passes the Commons’ House
with about fifty dissentients,[†] and (except from the brave Working
Men) hardly a whisper of public disapprobation. And there are liberal
men who consider this a trifling matter, a thing which may be softly
remonstrated against, but which is no “practical grievance;”[‡] and
there are writers, and able writers too, who compare it to levying a
rate for paving and lighting a corporate town when the corporation has
refused to do it: we ask those writers if Parliament ever, by formal
enactment, gave up the right to tax the corporate towns; or ever, by
another act, placed all the taxes raised within one of them at the
absolute disposal of the Town Council? If so, the cases of the
municipality and of the colony would be primâ facie parallel. If not,
the one act is an ordinary exercise of legitimate power, the other is
breaking faith with a people; taking away from them the right which
constitutes them members of a free state, and the violation of which, by
the sense of all ages and nations, forms the casus belli between a
people and their government. It is inflicting on them that injury which
Hampden resisted, and for which Washington raised the standard of
“treason and rebellion,” and rung the knell of aristocratic government
over the face of the earth. For it was not the twenty shillings of
ship-money that Hampden was solicitous about, nor did the Americans make
their Revolution for the sake of the penny a pound in the price of their
tea, which was the ostensible matter in issue when the war began. They
fought for the securities for good government, and to be willing to do
so is one of the tests of a nation’s fitness to enjoy them.

Edition: current; Page: [418]
And on what pretence have we done what even the Colonial Secretary*
admits to be “violating one of the great principles of the Canadian
constitution?” It is because they have refused the supplies. It is
because they have used a right, which we gave them, but which we never
intended they should use; or if we did, we intended that we, against
whom they used it, were to be the judges whether they used it properly.
By this impartial tribunal it has been decided that they have made a bad
use of it, and that it is therefore to be taken away. Permit us to ask,
since when has this discovery been adopted into English morals, that a
constitution is a gift resumable at the discretion of the giver? We
thought this doctrine had been confined to Charles X, and Ernest King of
Hanover, on whom a great load of obloquy has been heaped very
undeservedly, if the grant of a constitution implies a tacit condition
that the powers it gives shall be forfeited on their being exercised
disagreeably to the donor. That the power of despotic government, once
parted with, may be re-assumed at pleasure, is a maxim we little thought
to hear from the lips of Englishmen; or that political rights once
bestowed upon a people are to be exercised according to the judgment of
somebody who happens to be stronger. A constitution once conferred is
sacred, and to revoke it or to infringe it (“a constitution which is
violated is destroyed,”) is a breach of the most solemn compact which
man can make with man, or people with people, and to be justified only
by those emergencies which justify anything—when society is threatened
with dissolution—when anarchy or civil war is impending, and all laws
and institutions, and all compacts to maintain laws and institutions,
must give way before the terrible alternative.

Now let us see what would have been the evil incurred, supposing
Parliament had still respected the Canadian constitution, and left to
the Assembly the control over their own money. Much use has been made of
the phrase “stopping the supplies,”[*] and it has been attempted to
attach to it the ideas belonging to what is known by the same name in
this country, viz., a complete annihilation of all government. It
however turns out that the only supplies which the Assembly has power
over (except those for bridges, roads, schools, and the Legislature
itself) are the salaries of the Judges, of the Governor and his Council,
and of a certain number of subordinate executive officers. These
salaries have been suspended for three years, and we have had a most
piteous tale of the hardships, and we do not question Edition: current;
Page: [419] their truth, which have been suffered by some of the unpaid
officers of Government. Now, suppose Parliament, which professes so much
compassion for these people, instead of violating the Canadian
constitution to pay them, had resolved to pay them itself, what would
have been the cost to this country? The arrear for the whole three years
is 127,744l.,* from which subtracting about 23,000l. drawn from the
hereditary revenues of the Crown in Canada not given up to the Assembly,
there remain 104,000l.—rather more than a year’s income of Adelaide, the
Queen Dowager. The Parliament of Canada, then, have in the last resort a
power of fining this country about 35,000l. a year for maintaining a bad
government in Canada, or, to say no worse, a government unacceptable to
the majority of the Canadian people; and the stoppage of the wheels of
government, the subversion of civilized society, and all that mountain
of evil which we have heard so much about, resolves itself on
examination into the incovenience of paying that sum.

We may ask, is this too great a power to be possessed by the people of a
province, over rulers living at the other side of the globe, who appoint
all their judicial and administrative officers, whose sanction is
necessary to all their laws, and over whom they hold no other check,
direct or indirect, to secure any the smallest consideration of their
interests or their opinions? Is the power of making us pay 35,000l. a
year, in addition to the fifty millions of taxes we pay already, when we
who can control their government, although they cannot, suffer it to
govern them in a manner odious to the majority—is this more than enough
to secure a little attention to the interests of the Canadian people,
from a public who allowed a Resolution for destroying the Canadian
constitution to pass both Houses with scarcely more general interest or
inquiry than happens on many a private Bill? Canada cannot invade us;
she cannot interrupt our trade; she cannot cut off our revenue; she
cannot touch any one of our national interests—only one thing she could
do; she could tell us, that if she did not like the men we sent to
govern her, we might pay them ourselves; that if we chose to offend her,
our fault, or if you like it better, her misfortune, should cost us
35,000l. It is for the sake of taking away this power, that the national
honour has been stained with breach of faith, and an English Parliament
has followed the example of Polignac and King Ernest, in treating a
constitutional charter as waste paper; it is to save this penalty of a
third part of Queen Adelaide’s income, contingent upon making the
Canadians discontented with their government, that a brave and
kind-hearted people have been goaded into insurrection, and unknown
multitudes of them given over to slaughter and misery!

Edition: current; Page: [420]
It has been seen that we have argued this question without reference to
the original justice or reasonableness of the claims of the Canadians,
because we maintain (woe the day when it is necessary to stand up for
such a proposition!) that even if they were wrong, and the grounds on
which they refused the supplies wholly indefensible, they were in the
right from the moment when their representative institutions were
invaded, and an outrage practised upon them which no brave people ever
did, nor ever will, tamely submit to. But we go vastly farther. We
assert, that their demands were right; that they were right on the
whole, and right for the most part in the particulars. And this is the
most important question of all at the present moment. For according as
just concessions do or do not accompany the coercive proceedings about
to be authorized by Parliament, will Canada either be reconciled to us,
or continue during a few years of compulsory subjection to regard us
with detestation, which as soon as she succeeds in throwing us off will
be exchanged for contempt.

On this subject it is a source of gratifying reflection to us that this
Review cannot charge any part of the ignorance which universally
prevails as to the Canadian grievances, upon its own neglect. As long
ago as 1827 the Westminster Review demanded the attention of the English
public to the vices of the administration of Canada, and traced those
vices expressly to the irresponsible constitution of the Legislative
Council.[*] That article, as well as one in the second number of the
London Review,[†] was written by Mr. Roebuck; which may serve as an
answer to two assailants: to those who assert that the objection to the
Legislative Council is a new complaint only four years old, made because
a grievance was wanted, after all real grievances had been redressed;
and to the hired advocate of the Canadian loyalists in the Morning
Chronicle, who calls Mr. Roebuck the hired advocate of the Assembly,[‡]
as if Mr. Roebuck, who was bred though not born in Canada, and spent the
greater part of his youth there, had not been the champion of its people
many years before he either was, or could look to be, their hired
champion—and as if Mr. Roebuck’s hire, as well as that of Lord Gosford
and his subordinates, were not suspended by the unhappy differences
which he is accused, by implication, of fomenting for his own advantage.

As, however, the undaunted struggles of Mr. Roebuck in a cause with
which every principle of his political life is identified, and which had
few friends in this country until his unwearied activity obtruded the
case of the Canadians upon an inattentive public—as these exertions are
called “a wonderful display of public opinion, produced by throwing
backwards and forwards the voice of two or three Edition: current; Page:
[421] individuals,”* it may be well to state that Mr. Roebuck is an
entire stranger to the present article. The writer of it has never
before publicly expressed any opinion on the claims of the Canadians,
and he draws his facts not from Mr. Roebuck, or from any of the
partisans of the Assembly, but from the Reports of Lord Gosford and the
two other Government Commissioners[*]—of the men who advised the
violation of the Canadian constitution—of the authors of Lord John
Russell’s policy—the men who told him all he knows of the colony—who
furnished him with his brief, of which brief, however, a great part of
his speech on the re-assembling of Parliament is in downright
contradiction. If anything can excuse the Canadian people for having
believed that less than drawing the sword would not procure them a
hearing in the mother country, it is the inattention which has been the
fate of the statements in these Reports.[†] There is not an imputation
on the objects of the Canadian party which these documents do not
refute; there is not a misrepresentation against the popular cause which
they do not deny, not by implication or inference, but positively and in
express terms. The Resolutions of last year never could have been
passed, or if passed, never would have been acted upon, if the Members
of the House of Commons had performed the duty of reading the Reports,
and had thought that they would be read by their constituents.

The Reports bear marks, it is but justice to say, of good intention, and
even of candour. The Commissioners appear to have gone out, Lord Gosford
especially, with the ordinary Whig aversion to strong opinions on either
side. All former Governors had been blind followers of the dominant, or,
as it calls itself, the English party; we perceive no marks of this
influence over Lord Gosford, and that party detests him as much as it
applauded his predecessors. The Reports which he signed put that party
altogether in the wrong, and the popular party generally in the right.
But although the Commissioners carried out with them no unfair
intention, they carried out a feeling which seems ineradicable in every
official breast, namely, that when anything amounting to a quarrel has
once arisen between subjects and a Government, no matter though the
Government was first to blame, no matter though the demands of the
subjects were just, and ought to be conceded, and never ought to have
been refused; before any such concession can now be made, they must be
punished for the course of energetic remonstrance by which they sought
it; “the authority of Government must be asserted,”[‡] of the Edition:
current; Page: [422] Government who are admitted to have been in the
wrong, against the people who were in the right. And hence there is in
the Reports of the Commissioners, what the House of Assembly noticed in
their address to Lord Gosford on the 25th of August last,

one essential and paramount contradiction, which pervades every part of
them and forms their essence. It is, that while they admit the reality
of the greater portion of the abuses and grievances of which we have
complained, the Commissioners do not recommend their removal,* and the
destruction of the causes which had produced them, but an act of
aggression against this House which has denounced them, and the absolute
destruction of the Representative Government in this province, by the
illegal and violent spoliation of the public monies of the people by the
Ministers or by the Parliament.†

Lord John Russell, in the speech[*] in which he introduced to Parliament
the measures now in progress, drew a most charming picture of the
generosity of the British Government towards the conquered Canadians,
and a most hideous one of the ingratitude with which so much liberality
had been requited, and said what used to be said to himself on the
subject of the Catholics of Ireland, that our whole government of Canada
has been one course of concession. It has been one course of concession,
and so, thank God, bad government everywhere, in the present age, must
be. But if he means that any one concession was made willingly, or till
after protracted refusal, or in consequence of anything but the
“factious violence,” as it was then considered, of the House of
Assembly, “working upon the prudence,” or, if Lord John Russell prefers
it, upon the good intentions of the English Government, then Lord John
Russell says one thing, and Lord John Russell’s commissioners and
informants say the direct opposite. Let us hear them:

The House of Assembly was not slow to perceive the importance of the
functions which had been consigned to it by the Constitution; the
Government alone was slow to perceive it, or if perceiving, to
acknowledge it, and to provide with prudence for the consequences.
Instead of shaping its policy so as to gain the confidence of that
House, it adopted the unfortunate course of resting for support
exclusively on the Legislative Council. The existence of a majority of
French Canadians in the Assembly, seems to have been thought a
sufficient reason that there should be a majority of English in the
Council; for the principle observed in the first nominations, of making
it of equal numbers, French and English, was early departed from, and
thus the Council and Assembly were constituted on antagonist principles
almost from the commencement.

For a number of years the Council, keeping as it did, in close union
with the Executive, prevailed; but in process of time the inherent force
of a popular Assembly developed itself, and in the great contest which
ensued about money matters, the Assembly came out completely successful.
During this financial struggle, continued as it was for more than a
Edition: current; Page: [423] quarter of a century, it was only natural
that other collateral causes of difference should arise, and if we were
to examine into these, we believe we should also find that in every one
of them the Assembly has carried its point. As a few instances, we will
mention the right of the House to accuse and bring to trial public
officers; their right to appoint an agent in England, and their right to
control their own contingent expenses; their demand for a withdrawal of
the judges from political affairs, or from seats in the legislative
bodies, or the executive councils, and for the surrender of the proceeds
of the Jesuits’ estates. All these are points on which contests have
taken place between the two Houses, and in every one of them the popular
branch has prevailed, and the Council been successively driven from
every position it had attempted to maintain. The Assembly, at the same
time, by attacking abuses in the Administration, and bringing charges
against numerous officers of the Executive, succeeded scarcely less in
exposing the weakness of the Government, than that of the Council. Both
the Council and the Government have been worsted in many a struggle that
they never ought to have engaged in, and if the Assembly has, in
consequence, grown presumptuous, we apprehend that such is only the
ordinary effect of an unchecked course of success.

In the course of these protracted disputes, too, it has happened that
the Assembly, composed almost exclusively of French Canadians, have
constantly figured as the assertors of popular rights, and as the
advocates of liberal institutions, whilst the Council, in which the
English interest prevails, have, on the other hand, been made to appear
as the supporters of arbitrary power, and of antiquated political
doctrines; and to this alone we are persuaded the fact is to be
attributed, that the majority of settlers from the United States have
hitherto sided with the French, rather than the English party. The
respesentatives of the counties of Stanstead and Missisquoi have not
been sent to Parliament to defend the feudal system, to protect the
French language, or to oppose a system of registration. They have been
sent to lend their aid to the assertors of popular rights, and to oppose
a government by which, in their opinion, settlers from the United States
have been neglected or regarded with disfavour. Even during our own
residence in the province, we have seen the Council continue to act in
the same spirit, and discard what we believe would have proved a most
salutary measure, in a manner which can hardly be taken otherwise than
to indicate at least a coldness towards the establishment of customs,
calculated to exercise the judgment and promote the general improvement
of the people. We allude to a bill for enabling parishes and townships
to elect local officers, and assess themselves for local purposes, which
measure, though not absolutely rejected, was suffered to fail in a way
that showed no friendliness to the principle.*

This is rather a different picture from the paternal Government so
charmingly delineated by Lord John; and in this picture it will be
remarked that the Legislative Council figures as the author of the
grievances, and the Executive as its subservient tool. We find that
every one of the improvements for which Lord John Russell takes credit,
have been extorted from the perservering opposition of the Legislative
Council. We find the prayers of the people stopped in that intermediate
stage, and Edition: current; Page: [424] the representative of the Crown
of England prevented from granting them, or shielded from the
responsibility of refusing them. We find all the abuses in the Executive
Government, which were not acknowledged then though they are
acknowledged now, sheltered from reformation by the Council, as might
well be the case, since it was the Council and their connexions who
profited by them. We find the Council engrossing the patronage of
Government, exercising, under the mask of the Governor, all his power,
and forming the prop on which, by acknowledgment, the Government “rested
exclusively for support.” We find, according to the Commissioners, that
this “tendency to lean for support rather on the Legislative Council
than on the representatives of the people,” has lasted “in an
undiminished degree to the most recent times.”* We find this body still
unaltered in its constitution; altered indeed somewhat in its personnel,
but almost solely by the introduction of some men considered renegades
from the popular party, and of others too insignificant to be of any
party at all; and we find it still displaying the same spirit, by
throwing out, even during Lord Gosford’s Administration, a bill for
municipal institutions,[*] which the generally enlightened author of The
Canadian Controversy [p. 41] thinks is the very thing Canada most
requires, and which Lord Gosford considered “a most salutary measure.”†
We see all this; and will it be affirmed, in the face of this, that the
Council must be maintained as the representative of the mother country?
If it represented the mother country, would it reject measures of
important reform, which the real representative of the mother country
strenuously supports? Do we not see broadly apparent, what has always
been asserted by the advocates of the Canadians, that the Council
represents nobody; not the colony, for that is represented by the House
of Assembly; not the aristocracy of the colony, for there is no such
thing; not the mother country, for that is represented by the Governor
and the Executive Council? That it is the organ of Edition: current;
Page: [425] no interests but those of a jobbing local oligarchy; that
the mother country is making itself odious by upholding a body which
maintains grievances that itself would be willing to redress, and that
there will be no good government for Canada until the complaints of the
people go straight to the Governor, instead of being intercepted by a
body pretending to be a part of themselves, and prevented, to use the
Assembly’s words, “from reaching the foot of the Throne.”[*]

But of the spirit still pervading the Council no adequate conception can
be formed from the single instance mentioned by the Commissioners. The
reader may consult with advantage the descriptive list in the third
number of the Canadian Portfolio, of forty-two bills, embracing all the
most important matters of internal government, which were sent up by the
Assembly to the Council in the single session of 1835-36, and either
rejected, suffered to drop, or returned with amendments considered
inadmissible.[†] Many of these are alleged to have been sent up too late
in the session; and this is true of a proportion, but, as appears from
the dates on which they passed the Assembly, and which are given in the
Portfolio, not of a majority. But we wish here to take nothing upon the
authority of the Canadian party. We will content ourselves with one
fact, which will be disputed by no party, and which will give quite a
sufficient idea of the spirit of the Legislative Council.

By the Jury Law of Canada, juries are summoned by the sheriff; an
officer appointed for life, but removable at the will of the Crown. This
officer, who, like all others named by the Executive, generally belongs
to the local oligarchy, and never to the party opposed to them,
determines by his will alone the mode of selecting jurors: he has the
power, and, it is alleged on the Canadian side, unscrupulously exercises
it, of packing juries so as to obtain any verdict he pleases. In 1832,
however, a provincial act was passed, extending to Canada the principles
of Sir Robert Peel’s Jury Act.[‡] This bill gave satisfaction to the
people, and put an end for a time to the very worst of the existing
abuses; but unfortunately it expired in 1835. The Legislative Council
refused to renew it. The old packing system was therefore re-introduced,
and flourishes at this moment.[§] The Canadian leaders, if tried for
treason or sedition before the Canadian courts, will be tried by judges
whom they have kept without their salaries for three years, and one of
whom, in the hearing of a friend of ours, declared several years ago
that “the Edition: current; Page: [426] hanging of Papineau would settle
all disputes;” and juries packed by a sheriff to whom they have also
refused his salary; both judges and sheriff belonging to the party which
in the two Montreal papers, the Herald and Courier, is clamouring for a
special commission to try the traitors, as it would be absurd to fatten
them all the winter for the gallows.[*]

Have we made out our case? or does the reader still think that the
Legislative Council is “no practical grievance,” and that the Canadians
ought to be robbed of their Constitution because they sought the removal
of that grievance by exercising to the utmost all their constitutional
privileges, that utmost power (so far as money was concerned) amounting
to involving this country in a responsibility of thirty-five thousand
pounds? Will Lord Durham’s mission, of coercion and conciliation,
produce the tranquillity which the Ministers themselves do not hope for
more earnestly than we do, unless the measures of redress, to be
embodied in the new Constitution, include the abrogation of this
mischievous body?

The Commissioners (two out of three at least) approve, in principle, the
demand for an Elective Council. “Under more favourable circumstances, at
an earlier time, or had less animosity been excited, we can conceive”
(they say) “that good might have resulted from the introduction of a
principle of election.” But they “cannot advise the experiment now,” for
the avowed reason, that “the concession of it, in the present excited
state of public feeling, would afford a triumph to one portion of the
population which would be fraught with danger.”[†] Heaven knows it would
afford no triumph to anybody now. The “danger” which was anticipated is
explained in another place, by the Commissioners,* to be a civil war
between the two races, in which the English party would be the
aggressors. We direct attention to the circumstance, that the fear lest
the loyal party should rebel is advanced as the chief reason for
rejecting demands which, if there had been no such probability, would
have been deemed fit to be granted. Since, then, not justice, but the
apprehension of rebellion, and that from the loyal party, was to decide
the case, the reality of rebellion ought, we think, to go for something
on the other side. Or is it only unreasonable dissatisfaction,
dissatisfaction acknowledged to be unreasonable, which has the privilege
of expressing itself in that way?

The Council, it will be said, protects the English settlers: were it not
for the Council, they would not think their lives and properties secure.
And what is a Governor for? of what use is the whole machinery of the
Executive, and why has the Governor power to reject every bill passed by
the Legislature, if he cannot prevent one part of the community from
tyrannizing over another? The only Edition: current; Page: [427]
mischief the House of Assembly could do to the English, unless the
Governor were a party to it, they can do as long as there is a House of
Assembly: they can refuse any new enactments, which the interests or
opinions of the English part of the population may call for. And upon
this Lord Glenelg appears to take his stand in behalf of the Council. In
his late speech in the House of Lords he claims the Council as the
liberal party. He calls the Assembly “those who were against
improvement—attached to the obsolete notions of former times—unfriendly
to commerce, to the spread of intelligence, to the diffusion of
education”[*]—for which last great object, by the bye, they made one of
the most munificent provisions, in proportion to their resources, ever
made by any country[†]—the renewal of which has been lately refused by
the Legislative Council on the express ground of its being too
munificent. Let this be a sample of Lord Glenelg’s accuracy when he
gives the following history of the contests between the two bodies:

Thus it happened, on the one hand, that those who were the supporters of
an oligarchy hostile to improvement made use of the rights and
privileges of popular institutions, and pushed them to an extreme; and
on the other, privileges not generally used to promote improvements and
support free institutions, were pushed to an extreme for the purpose of
supporting them.[‡]

Let us hear the Commissioners, and learn what good the improvements
which the Council advocated have ever got by the support of such a body.

If we were to inquire, [say they,] in what degree the demands of the
English have been advanced by its means, we doubt whether we should not
find that the advocacy of the Council has tended rather to defeat, than
to promote, the measures which the commercial classes have demanded, and
continue to demand, with the greatest earnestness; for instance, the
commutation of tenures, the establishment of registry offices, the
settlement of the wild lands, and the facilitating of commercial
intercourse.*

All this cry of a hostility to the English race, and a disposition on
the part of the Assembly to tyrannize over them, is a mere work of art.
Hear Sir George Gipps, one of the Commissioners. He says, explicitly,
that the contest is not one of races, but of principles.

So long as the contest can be made to appear as one not of nationality
but of political principle, the Americans, and a portion even of the
British, will be on the democratic side. It is the policy of the leaders
of the majority in the Assembly to give the dispute the character of a
contest between the aristocratic and the democratic principle rather
than one of nationality, and they have succeeded to a great extent; for,
of the members from the townships, where there are no persons of French,
but numbers of American origin, nearly as Edition: current; Page: [428]
many vote with the French party in the Assembly as against them; and if
to the persons thus returned by the American or democratic interest be
added the Englishmen who are sent to the Assembly by French
constituencies, we shall find that of the twenty-two individuals with
English names, or of English origin, who have seats in the Assembly,
thirteen generally vote with the French party, and only nine against
them. It is, I believe, [continues Sir George Gipps,] the apprehension
that their democratic allies of British origin would change sides,
should the dispute become one purely of nationality, that renders the
leaders of the French party desirous of remaining for the present under
the protection of Great Britain.*

Jealousies between the two races do, doubtless, exist; the late events
have administered fresh fuel to them, and they are at this moment the
greatest difficulty in the good government of the colony. But who is the
cause of these jealousies? Who fostered them? We need only quote Lord
Glenelg. More ingenuous than Lord John Russell, to whom the conduct of
the English Government, from the first conquest, presented itself
throughout in so amiable a light, the Colonial Secretary says (we quote
from the daily papers)—

The Constitution of 1791, from the earlier years at least in the history
of Canada, might be said not to be administered. It might have been very
advantageous for the people of Canada if it had been so; but the
Executive Government took part with one race, against the other—it took
part with the English race, instead of being the umpire and arbitrator
between both. All the honours and emoluments flowed in the same channel,
and thus the popular institutions were severed, for the Canadians, from
the Government, and they obtained no advantage through them. This was
done while the Government usurped practically the funds of the State.
Those funds were in the hands of the Governors—abuses crept in, and at
length they prevailed to such an extent that many of the English united
with the French race to obtain a redress of grievances.[*]

Remembering all this; remembering that it is but of yesterday that the
French Canadians have been admitted to any share of the honours and
offices of their native country; remembering that the local oligarchy,
represented by the Council, have done their utmost to inflame those
national differences which enable them to identify their cause with that
of the British settlers and even of the mother country; is it to be
wondered at that such animosities should exist? But will any one believe
that they are the cause of the discontents, or that the Council have
made themselves obnoxious to the French by upholding the English, when
the party which is opposed to the Council is a mixed party of French and
English, and when, “of the members from the townships, where there are
no persons of French origin, nearly as many vote with the French party
in the Assembly as against them?” The assertion is one of the
misrepresentations, calumnies we may venture to call them, of which,
from their distance and the popular ignorance on the subject, the
Canadians Edition: current; Page: [429] are liable to far more than we
can at present meet; and of many others of which, the refutation, from
the Commissioners’ Reports, might be made fully as conclusive.*

To this people, thus calumniated, it will now be for Lord Durham to do
justice. He has the power. A more enviable position than he now enjoys,
if his soul is on a level with his opportunities, has been filled by no
statesman of our era. The whole institutions of two great provinces are
prostrate before him. Canada is a tabula Edition: current; Page: [430]
rasa[*] upon which it rests with him to inscribe what characters he
pleases. The immediate pacification of the colony depends upon him
alone; the institutions by which it is to be hereafter governed, upon
Parliament, guided, as there is every appearance that the present
Ministry at least are willing to be, almost implicitly by his advice.

He has, in the first place, what was the most necessary of all, and the
investing him with which is an earnest of the good disposition of
Ministers: he has powers for a general amnesty. We trust those powers
are not granted to him in vain. If, when he arrives, the finds the
insurrection at an end, or if the promise of oblivion can prevail upon
any who still remain in arms to lay them down, great will be the
responsibility of refusing it. It is not yet proved that there was any
preconcerted insurrection. There was preconcerted arming and drilling;
there were violent public meetings and political associations; but these
may have been for passive resistance, and a display of force, like the
measures of intimidation which carried the Reform Bill. There was
nothing, about the final outbreak, which bore any marks of concert. Had
insurrection been planned, it would have been better organized, and
would not have been so soon begun. The people seem to have flown to arms
for the rescue of their leaders, who were torn from them, or on the
point of being so, to be immured in gaol, and tried by juries of their
enemies; and some of whom were paraded with every mark of ignominy, by
armed bodies of those enemies, through the very heart of the disaffected
districts. But if they have been guilty, to the utmost extent, of
whatever is included in a deliberate and concerted insurrection, they
are not rebels, nor traitors; they are, we repeat, captives taken in
war; who went to war with us, justly or unjustly, wisely or unwisely,
but who have a claim to the rights of honourable warfare, and such
treatment as a generous nation bestows on a vanquished enemy.

But while we do not fear that spirit of sanguinary vengeance, happily
confined to the rabid party calling themselves Loyalists, and to the
Orange newspaper writers, who long to be doing in Ireland what they
instigate in Canada; it will not be a less Edition: current; Page: [431]
fatal mistake, nor in the end less productive of human suffering, if in
the new arrangement of the government, the French Canadians are treated
as a defeated party, the English as a victorious one; if the former are
now to be considered as the ruled, the latter as the rulers. At the pass
to which Ministers had brought matters by their first act of injustice,
we do not quarrel with them for the course they have now adopted; it
would be over-nice to make any mouths at the suspension of what remains
of the Canadian constitution, after the only provision in it which
renders the rest of any value has been despotically overruled and made a
nullity. When a country is in a state of civil war it is hardly possible
to execute a constitution. When a country is divided into two parties,
exasperated, by the taste of each other’s blood, beyond the possibility
of a peaceful accommodation, an armed umpire with strength to make
himself obeyed by both, is a blessing beyond all price, and such a
mediator it behoves the mother country to be. In itself, therefore, the
dictatorship which has been assumed, and of which Lord Durham is the
immediate depositary, admits of justification. But if it shall prove to
have been assumed only to remove the obstacles which the constitution of
the House of Assembly has of late years opposed to the previously
uncontrolled sway of a rapacious faction; if because the majority of the
people, when they had the power over the Assembly, did not use it to our
liking, we mean to remedy this inconvenience by taking the power from
them and giving it to a minority; if we have set aside their
constitution in order to confiscate the privileges of the old
inhabitants for the benefiit of a small proportion of foreigners and new
settlers; then will a stain rest upon the British name, to be effaced
only on the day when all that is now done shall be undone; and the name
of a Whig will be as infamous in American annals as is the name of a
Tory in those of Ireland.

If the English and the French inhabitants of Canada cannot live under
each other’s government, which ought to give way? The whole numbers of
the British race in Lower Canada do not even, on their own computation,
amount to a third of the whole; and of these, that large portion who
consist of emigrants or descendants of emigrants from the United States,
and a part even of those of British origin, as the Commissioners
acknowledge, side with the French party;[*] it cannot be they who think
themselves in danger from the French, and demand protection. The
remainder, Sir George Gipps distinctly asserts, are “for the most part
the natives of our own isles.”* Here, then, is a body of men, positively
not of American birth, strangers, mere new-comers, and a portion of
them, particularly the trading classes, not even perhaps intending to
remain permanently in the colony—who have actually the presumption (or
somebody has it for them) to expect that the political constitution of a
long-settled country is to be shaped to suit their convenience. Not
content with having what, under such circumstances, they Edition:
current; Page: [432] would have in no country of the old world, the
privileges of citizenship, and influence in public affairs proportional
to their numbers, they must be the masters, and the old inhabitants of
the country must be under their rule. They went to Canada, save the
mark! under the faith of the British Parliament. Did Parliament promise
them that because they went to Canada, the institutions necessary to
protect or to satisfy the old inhabitants of the country should be
denied to those inhabitants? Did Parliament promise them a veto on every
act of the Legislature of the country? Let them wait till they are a
majority. If they are, as they represent, the active, enterprising, and
industrious part of the people, and the others are the ignorant and
indolent portion, they will not have long to wait. Till that time, let
them be satisfied if they have a share of representation proportional to
their numbers, and if the Governor applies his veto to all laws which
aim at preventing those numbers from increasing. If they ask aught
beyond this, let them be told, and told in plain and unequivocating
language, that Parliament does not intend that their presence there is
to be an impediment to any settlement which is for the good of the
colony or of the empire; that they went there under liability to all
changes of institutions which the general interests of the population of
the colony might require; that they went there subject to the certainty
of a separation, sooner or later, and to the contingency of its
happening in their time, a possibility which, while the United States
exist, it would be rather bold to expect us to believe they had not fair
warning of.

What may be done for the less numerous race, if it is found impossible
that both should live harmoniously under one government, is to give them
separate Legislatures. This has been done once, by separating Canada
into two parts, the Upper and the Lower province. Sir Charles Grey, the
least liberal of the three Commissioners, proposes that it should be
done again; to which, according to him, local circumstances oppose no
insuperable obstacle. Sir Charles Grey’s plan is to divide Canada into
three districts, with separate provincial parliaments, to each of which,
the separation of the races being thus effected, he would have no
objection to give an elective Upper House.* On this system neither of
the races would be legislated for by the other: and a federal
Legislature would be created, of delegates from the local Legislatures,
to which the matters of common concernment to the three provinces would
be exclusively referred. In this federation, Upper Canada, and the other
North American colonies, might, he suggested, be ultimately included.

Of all changes in the political organization of Canada which there would
be any chance of carrying through Parliament, none has occurred to us
which appears liable to so little objection as this, or attended with
more probabilities of good. The principle of separating the internal
legislation and administration of each colony Edition: current; Page:
[433] from the control of the interests common to the different
colonies, has received the sanction of the highest authorities on both
sides. It was one of Mr. Roebuck’s propositions, in his statesman-like
speech last year on conciliation with Canada, a speech which he has
republished in the fourth number of the Portfolio, and to which we
invite the attention of all who may still mistake his occasional
violence of language, and the strength with which he expresses his
speculative convictions, for impracticability in action, or incapacity
for temperate views when the occasion calls for them.[*] Lord John
Russell at the time expressed no other objection to Mr. Roebuck’s
propositions than that he feared they were too moderate to satisfy the
Canadians.[†] Lord Glenelg, too, in his late speech, declared himself
prepared, if Upper Canada should consent, to sanction a “federal union”
between the two Canadas, and he enumerated among the objects which would
be within the competence of the federal legislature, “the navigation of
the St. Lawrence, the duties by which their commerce is to be regulated,
their railroads, their bridges, their internal communications, and their
monetary system.”[‡]

It was part of Mr. Roebuck’s proposition, that the federal legislature
should be that tribunal for the impeachment of public functionaries,[§]
the absence of which is the only objection the House of Assembly made to
a permanent appropriation for the salaries of the judges,[¶] over whom,
in the absence of such a tribunal, they did not choose to divest
themselves of the degree of control implied in an annual vote. In answer
to the demand for such a tribunal, Lord Gosford offered them the
Legislative Council! and it is pretended to be wondered at, that they
regarded the offer as a mockery.

We entreat Lord Durham, as he values the successful issue of the solemn
trust he has, as he assures us, so reluctantly undertaken—and (we may
say without disparagement to his feelings of honour and patriotism) as
he values also that high reputation to which the applause of all parties
on his nomination is so glorious a tribute, and those prospects of a
brilliant career as a British statesman, which he will most assuredly
either make or mar by his conduct in this emergency; by all these
considerations we entreat him so to act upon his declared resolution of
knowing no distinctions of opinion, party, or race, as to provide, if
provision be needful, for the interests of a minority,—not by putting
them over the heads of the majority, or by any legerdemain contrivance
to give them a power in the Edition: current; Page: [434] Legislature
beyond what their numbers entitle them to,—but either by the rigid
exercise, for their protection against any meditated injustice, of the
veto of the mother country, through its responsible representative, and
not through an irresponsible council; or if that will not content them,
by separating the two races, and giving to each of them a legislature
apart. No other plan will render Canada, from this moment, other than a
disgrace and a weakness to the British empire; by no other plan, when a
separation comes, shall we have entitled ourselves to the kindly
remembrances and friendly attachment of the Canadian people; by no other
can we be saved from the disgrace of having first broken their
constitution, and then used the insurrection that act of tyranny
provoked, as an excuse for confiscating the rights of the native
majority in favour of a handful of strangers.

Our subject draws to a conclusion. But we cannot leave it without
awarding, so far as our words can have any influence, the just honour to
that small, but even because of its smallness, that glorious minority,
who, with a talent and energy as conspicuous as their intrepidity, have
now and last year stood up for everlasting justice against temporary
clamour; and afforded in the cause of the injured and calumniated, at
the further side of the globe, an imperishable example of that constancy
and resolution, and that defiance of unmerited unpopularity, which we
find men every day claiming credit to themselves for displaying in
defence of their own pockets, or of the selfish prerogatives of their
“order.” The conduct of Mr. Grote, Mr. Warburton, and Mr. Hume will live
in history.[*] Nor ought we to omit Lord Brougham, who has shown by his
conduct in this Parliament, that he at least perceives the time to be
come when a practical statesman can best serve both the interests of his
country and his own glory, by putting himself at the head of the
moderate Radicals.[†] We have reserved Sir William Molesworth and Mr.
Leader for the last place, because to them is due, not only honour for
what they have done,[‡] but vindication against the accusations it has
exposed them to. If, by the warmth of expression natural to men deeply
penetrated with the truth of their principles, they exposed themselves
to misconstructions of which a most ungenerous advantage was taken by
their ministerial opponent, it is not upon their sentiments, but upon
the reproaches which were heaped on those sentiments, that the
condemnation not only of every high-minded person, but we will be bold
to add, of every Christian, will rest. What was the feeling they
expressed? That they Edition: current; Page: [435] would learn with less
regret, the defeat of the British troops in this war, than their
success. Will their assailant be pleased to remember, that according to
their view of the matter it is an unjust war? At what time since
Christianity existed has it been held, that success in injustice was a
lot which patriots ought to desire for their country? That to prosper in
evil courses was not a far worse evil than to fail in them—was not the
strongest mark of divine displeasure,—permitted only that the example of
the subsequent chastisement and humiliation might be more memorable?
Lord John Russell would bring us back to heathenism. That love of
country, which would rather see the success of our country than that of
the right, is an essentially Pagan sentiment, and even as such,
repudiated by all the great philosophers and moralists of the Pagan
world. If there is any one thing which we would hold up to especial
honour in the conduct of Mr. Leader or of Sir William Molesworth (for we
know not which of them it was) on this occasion, it is that they dared,
in the face of a hostile assembly, and without the support of a
favouring public, to declare the sentiment, which Lord John Russell has
not thought it unworthy of him, strong in his majority, to hold up to
obloquy and insult.

Edition: current; Page: [436] Edition: current; Page: [437]


LORD DURHAM AND HIS ASSAILANTS
 1838

Edition: current; Page: [438]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster, VII & XXIX (Aug., 1838), 507-12 (2nd ed. only).
Headed: “Art. XII. [John George Lambton.] An Ordinance to Provide for
the Security of the Province of Lower Canada. Passed by the
Governor-General of Canada in Special Council the 28th day of June,
1838. [Parliamentary Papers, 1837-38, XXXIX, 914-16.]” Running titles as
title. Signed “A.” Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as
“An article headed ‘Lord Durham and his Assailants’ in the second
edition of the same number of the same review”; i.e., as “Penal Code for
India” (MacMinn, 51). There are no corrections or emendations in the
copy (tear-sheets) in Somerville College. For comment on the essay, see
xlii-xlvi above.

Edition: current; Page: [439]


Lord Durham and His Assailants

we avail ourselves of a demand for a second edition of this number of
our Review, to offer a few brief comments on the factious, unseemly, and
in every way discreditable war of words which has been going on in the
Houses of Lords and Commons respecting Lord Durham’s ordinances.[*]

There are two modes of canvassing an act of any public functionary. The
question may turn either upon the merits, or the technicalities. The
point in issue may be, whether the act be right in itself—the most
eligible means for attaining the acknowledged ends—and which therefore
either is legal, or if it be not, ought to be legal, and should be made
so with the least possible delay; or the objection may turn upon the
words of the public officer’s commission—the limitations to which his
powers have been subjected, the forms and precautions with which he has
been surrounded, not in order to weaken his authority for a good purpose
(though that may be the incidental effect), but to prevent him from
aiming at bad ones.

Now, when a man has been selected to fill a new office; to do a new
thing, in new circumstances—circumstances which you in whose behalf he
acts do not know, cannot know, do not pretend to know, still less could
pretend to foreknow;—when this new thing, which he is sent to the other
side of the globe to do, is considered to be so difficult, so delicate,
so likely to be frustrated if at all opposed, that to enable him to do
it every other constituted authority in the country must be suppressed,
every place of public discussion shut up, every possibility of
counteraction from every quarter precluded, at any cost, even that of
the representative constitution of a free people; in which of the two
lights of which we have spoken is it fit that the measures of this
officer should first be viewed? Even then, undoubtedly, their
substantial merits should not be the only consideration; even then,
besides considering whether what he has done is right, it is necessary
to consider also whether he had power to do it. But are any words
adequate to express the contempt due to a mode of treating matters of
high public concernment, which makes the last the sole consideration?
which merges the former in it? which passes over the question whether
what Lord Durham did be a thing which ought to be done—whether some such
thing be not, in circumstances such as he was appointed to deal Edition:
current; Page: [440] with, the very thing which he ought to have been
empowered to do, which he ought to have been expected to do, which he
ought to have been encouraged to do—and makes the preservation of the
Canadas and the reconciliation of two embittered parties lately engaged
in shedding each other’s blood, subordinate to the grave consideration
whether what Lord Durham could lawfully punish, he could lawfully punish
as treason, and whether men whom he could lawfully banish, he could
lawfully banish to Bermuda?

With men meaning honestly, and having the intellects of statesmen
instead of fribbles or legal pedants, the matter would in the first
instance have been debated solely on the grounds of substantial justice
and policy. The question would afterwards have been conscientiously
examined, whether Lord Durham had gone beyond his powers, in order that
if he had done so, and his acts were therefore wanting in legal
validity, legal validity might be given to them; and the object for
which his powers were created might not be defeated either by any
technical error of his own, or by a blunder in the terms in which those
powers were conferred upon him. For if, under the pressure of alleged
necessity, you have confiscated the free constitution of a people and
thrust aside all the acknowledged principles of a constitutional
government, in order to enable Lord Durham to accomplish certain
important ends, and if it should turn out that by this costly sacrifice
you did not accomplish the ends, did not enable Lord Durham to adopt the
means most conducive to the ends, what will it please your wisdom to do
next? To submit, and leave the ends unaccomplished? Or may it perchance
occur to you, that if the dearest privileges of a million of free-born
human beings have been made perforce to give way to the exigency of the
case, some nice scruples about encroachment on the authority of
Parliament may do so too? It is becoming, is it not, to be so chary of
your own “little brief authority,”[*] when you have made so light, in
the very same case, of the most sacred constitutional rights of every
one else?

Dismissing this pettifogging mode of dealing with the subject, let us
turn to the really important view of it. What has Lord Durham really
done? And was it a thing fit to be done, or which may be presumed fit to
be done, under the circumstances?

Among so many flights of oratory about the mere form of Lord Durham’s
proceedings, about the enormity of his alleged infringement of his
powers, by one solitary figure of rhetoric alone was any imputation cast
upon the substance of the ordinance; the appeal ad invidiam rested
entirely upon a misdescription. It was called an ordinance for putting
men to death without trial.

But without trial! Was it not, on the contrary, distinctly stated in the
ordinance, that there should be a trial? Not, indeed, for rebellion; the
ordinance is one of amnesty for rebellion; amnesty to the men whom it
banishes, as much as to those whom it sets free altogether. Not being to
be punished for rebellion, it is rather unnecessary that they should be
tried for it. The punishment denounced by the Edition: current; Page:
[441] ordinance, is punishment for the violation of the ordinance; it is
the sanction with which every prohibitive enactment must be accompanied.
The ordinance is not a judicial act, it is a legislative act; it is not
to punish men for their past conduct, it is to restrain their future
conduct; it imputes to them no guilt; it has nothing to do with their
guilt, it has to do only with the consequences of their being at large
in the colony.

Now we affirm, without fear of contradiction from any one who has even
the most elementary notions of human affairs, that if a man be appointed
to restore tranquillity in a country after a civil war, and if that
person have not the power to command that any twenty-three men, let them
be the most virtuous citizens in the country, shall absent themselves
from it until their return shall be judged consistent with safety, and
not likely to disturb men’s minds—then the appointment of that person is
a mockery; and if he be a sane man, he has only been induced to
undertake the office by a disgraceful fraud.

We are curious to know what idea the assailants of Lord Durham have
formed of the state of a country in which a general insurrection has
just been put down by the sword; or of the nature of the work of
bringing such a country into a state of pacification. It is very well
known what our opinion is of the conduct by which that insurrection was
provoked; most unquestionably our own sympathies are not with the
victors, but with the vanquished, in that melancholy struggle. However,
they were vanquished; upon provocation, either sufficient or
insufficient, they threw themselves upon the chances of war, and failed.
Lord Durham was then sent out to heal the wound. We presume it was not
to be expected that he should begin this task by exactly reversing the
state of things which he found on his arrival; by making the vanquished
victors and the victors vanquished; by exciting the feelings of triumph
in the defeated party, of bitter indignation and resentment in that
which is at present predominant. His part was not to excite, but to calm
all feelings either of triumph or of mortification. His office was that
of a peacemaker—of a mediator. It was no business of his who was right,
or who most wrong, in the conflict which preceded; but how to prevent
any future conflict. It was his duty to avoid irritating any party; to
do nothing which could be construed by either side as a declaration in
its favour; to shape every one of his proceedings so as in no way to
impede the return of both parties to that tranquil state of mind, in
which it might be possible to satisfy both by conceding what is really
just in the demands of each, and nothing but what is just.

Now, without pretending to discuss the actual state of feeling in
Canada, which, like most of our readers, we are much too far off to
judge of; we pronounce it abstractedly impossible, that in any country
whatever, the leaders of a popular party which has just attempted an
insurrection could be at large in the country without retarding the
progress of the public mind to this calm and reasonable state. Mr.
Papineau and some others named in the ordinance may not have
participated in the insurrection; or they may have participated in it,
and may nevertheless be the Edition: current; Page: [442] most upright
and purest patriots to be found in the colony. All this is really
nothing to the point; they are the leaders of an insurgent party, and,
as such, their absence is necessary, so long as their presence would be
a hindrance to that reconciliation of parties, which, now that their
party has been beaten, is the most desirable thing remaining, even for
themselves. The measure is an ostracism, not a punishment: they are
banished because they are dangerous, not because they are criminal. But
if they are to be banished, there must be a penalty for returning from
banishment; and the penalty is capital, because that is the usual
penalty of state offences; and properly so, since any inferior
punishment might be a premium on the offence, while, by denouncing the
highest penalty of all, no necessity is incurred of actually inflicting
it.

If indeed there were the slightest colour for the supposition that even
one of these twenty-three men were banished for ever; if it were not
obvious from the whole tenor of the ordinance, as well as from all which
is known of Lord Durham, his advisers, and his purposes, that the sole
object of it is, as the ordinance itself declares, “to provide for the
present security of this province” [p. 914]; if the door were not
studiously and widely opened to let in even Mr. Papineau himself
to-morrow, if he should be able to satisfy Lord Durham that his
influence would be used to restore peace to the public mind instead of
disturbing it; we could then understand the passionate invectives of Mr.
Leader, which are at present as unintelligible to us as they are, for
his own sake, lamentable.[*]

Mr. Leader cannot so far mistake our feelings towards him as to suppose
that we entertain any sentiment inconsistent with the most entire
respect for his principles and intentions, and the warmest good wishes
for his future political career, which it would grieve us to see
compromised. Almost alone in the periodical press we stood by him,[†]
when to do so might be deemed an act of courage on our part, when at
least it would have been much more to our interest to do otherwise. We
were not bound to identify ourselves with the opponents of the Canada
Act;[‡] we never opposed it; we declared it to be right or wrong
according as it should be executed. Our practical views differed as
widely from Mr. Leader’s as our language did, and most persons in our
situation would have taken as much pains to separate their cause from
his, as we took to avoid all semblance of separation. For great is the
virtue of a passing word in reproof of “extreme views” and “intemperate
language” on one’s own side, for giving an air of moderation to one’s
sentiments: to say a little on one side and a little on the other is the
only way to present an appearance of impartiality to vulgar eyes. We
spurned the unworthy advantage. And the justice which we then claimed
for Mr. Leader, we now owe to those whom Edition: current; Page: [443]
he has attacked, and to whom we much mistake his character if he do not
soon feel that ample reparation is due from him.

If Lord Durham and his official advisers are the men Mr. Leader
represents them, he may rely on it they will soon give him fairer cause
of attack. The test of what they are, will be their plan for the
permanent settlement of Canada; let us wait to see what that is—whether
its basis be the predominance of an oligarchical party, or the removal
of whatever is justly obnoxious to either party. If the former be the
result, we shall deal the same measure to Lord Durham which we should
have dealt to any other man through whose instrumentality a similar act
of tyrannical injustice had been committed by a Whig or a Tory
Ministry—and shall lament the failure of the hopes which we have built
upon him, not only for justice to Canada, but for benefits to the empire
and to reform, of which this is not the place to speak. But if Lord
Durham fail us, have we anything better to expect from his successor? Is
it imagined, for instance, that if he could be sufficiently damaged, the
government of Canada would fall into the hands of Lord Brougham? For our
part, deeming such a dénouement not particularly probable, and having no
very great confidence that the change would be an improvement, we do not
see the wisdom of declaring war against the only man who has it in his
power to do what we wish done, in order to put in his place somebody who
would almost certainly do the exact opposite. It is intelligible that
the Tories, factious and envenomed beyond all recent precedent as a
large portion of them have shown themselves during the last half-year,
should strive, per fas et nefas, to lower the public estimation of the
only man in the ranks of their enemies whom they really fear. But what
is gain to them is bitter loss to the people; and Lord Durham is the
very last man upon whom any one in earnest for Reform should permit
himself, at the present time, to be betrayed into any act of hostility
not called for by an imperious duty.

Edition: current; Page: [444] Edition: current; Page: [445]


LORD DURHAM’S RETURN
 1838

Edition: current; Page: [446]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, XXXII (Dec., 1838), 241-60. Headed: “Art.
VIII.—1. [Anon.,] The Preamble. No. VII. Lord Durham’s Return. November,
1838. / 2. The Quebec Gazette of the 9th October, 1838.” Running titles:
left-hand, “Lord Durham’s Return:”; right-hand (page and line
equivalents from this edition), “His Position” (448.15-449.8), “His
Difficulties” (450.2-36), “The Political Prisoners” (451.32-452.17 and
453.17-454.11), “His Appointments” (455.7-456.12), “His Measures”
(457.24-458.21), “His Resignation” (459.24-460.20), “The Proclamation”
(461.16-462.11), and “His Success” (463.7-464.3). Signed “A.” Not
republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An article entitled
‘Lord Durham’s Return’ in the London and Westminster Review for December
1838 (No 62)” (MacMinn, 51). In the Somerville College copy
(tear-sheets) there is one emendation (which is adopted in this
edition): “this country” is corrected to “his country” (456n.7). For
comment on the essay, see xlii-xlvi above.

Edition: current; Page: [447]


Lord Durham’s Return

there were consequences dependent upon Lord Durham’s mission to Canada,
calculated to make it the turning point of English politics for years to
come, and to raise every incident connected with it, however secondary
in appearance, to the character of an event in history. It was not
merely because the interests consigned to his charge, to be rescued from
a state of peril and difficulty without any recent example, were the
lives and fortunes of a million of British subjects, and the British
dominion over possessions among the most intrinsically valuable, however
hitherto mismanaged, of that vast empire on which “the sun never
sets.”[*] In addition to so large a portion of the territory, there was
delivered into his keeping the character also of England; her reputation
in the eyes of all nations for wisdom and foresight, for justice,
clemency, and magnanimity; at one of those critical instants when
Europe, Asia, and America were looking on, to watch how England would
act under this trial—whether like an irritated despot, or a serious and
thoughtful ruler, intent upon profiting by experience, and gathering
from her failures the most valuable kind of knowledge, that of her own
mistakes. And along with interests of this importance to the physical
resources and to the honour of England, there hung also upon Lord
Durham’s measures the contingency of a war: war with men of our own race
and language—war with the great customer of our foreign trade—war with
the only power by which that of England has ever yet been baffled—a war
of opinion, and a war against liberty, in which the sympathy of all
Europe would have been with our enemies; the only war which could bring
us into conflict with the free nations of the world and with the despots
at once. All this was involved in the result of Lord Durham’s mission;
and something greater still than all this, because involving, in its
remoter consequences, these and all other national interests: the
prospects of the popular cause in England; the possibility of an
effective popular party, and of a Liberal Ministry worthy of the name.

What was the situation of politics? On one side, the great aristocratic
party, recovered from the sudden shock which laid it prostrate in 1832,
was progressively and rapidly reasserting its ascendancy; the
illegitimate influences of property, the Edition: current; Page: [448]
power to bribe and the power to starve, slowly but surely resuming the
dominion which belongs to them—under our present electoral system—at all
seasons except those of temporary popular excitement. To this natural
progress what was there to be opposed? A body, consisting indeed of half
the nation on the showing of their enemies, five-sixths of it on their
own showing, and who, under all disadvantages and abatements, still
possessed between two and three hundred voices in Parliament; but whose
objects and opinions were ostentatiously repudiated by their ostensible
chiefs—standing actually paralyzed for want of a common banner—for want
of a bond of union, and leaders. There was one man to whom this party
might look, to whom it had for years looked, as the man who might supply
this want; the one person of his rank and influence who was identified
with their opinions, the one person identified with their opinions who
might be thought of, who had been thought of, as the head of a future
Administration. Lord Durham was this man. Of no other man was there the
same reason to hope both that he might be willing to put himself at the
head of the Liberals, and that he would be able by doing so to render
them the predominant party. And he alone was so marked out for the
position, by every consideration of character, station, and past
services, that if he chose to assume it he could do so without rivalry
or dispute; that all the best heads and hands which the party could
produce would flock round him with their services and their counsels;
and the whole of its effective strength would come forth at his voice,
and give him that decisive majority in the House of Commons, with which
he might again break the power of the aristocratic faction, and this
time provide more effectually that the dead might not be able to revive.

Such was Lord Durham’s position; such the consequences depending upon
his qualifications for government. And these qualifications were now to
be tried by a most unexpected, a most severe, but at the same time a
most appropriate test. Severe, because the difficulties were arduous,
and the file of precedents contained no case in point; but appropriate,
because such circumstances are those which test the possession of the
very qualities that are required.

Nations are not governed nor saved by fine sentiments, or clever
personalities, or dialectical acuteness, or book-knowledge, or general
theories. If they could, the Liberal party would not now be in search of
a leader. A true politican knows how to put all these things to their
proper use. But the man we want is the one who can recommend himself not
solely by the ability to talk, nor even merely to think, but by the
ability to do. We want a man who can wrestle with actual difficulties
and subdue them; who can read “the aim of selfish natures hard to be
spelled,” can bend men’s stubborn minds to things against which their
passions rise in arms; who needs not sacrifice justice to policy, or
policy to justice, but knows how to do justice, and attain the ends of
policy by it. We want a man who can sustain himself where the
consequences of every error he commits, instead of being left to
accumulate for posterity, come back to him the next week or the next
month, and throw themselves in his path; where no voting of bystanders
can make that success, Edition: current; Page: [449] which is, in truth,
failure; where there is a real thing to be done, a positive result to be
brought about, to have accomplished which is success—not to have
accomplished it, defeat.

The world has a memorable example of such a man in Washington, and an
inferior, but still a great one, within his sphere, in the Duke of
Wellington. Such a man as the first, or even as the last, we cannot look
to have; but a much inferior degree of the same qualities would suffice
us. Even these could not have accomplished what they did, had they not
been well helped and counselled. We do not need a man who can be
sufficient without help, but a man who can avail himself of help; who
knows where to find help; who can either do or get done what the
situation requires, by the best means it affords. We need a man who can
seize the great circumstances of his political position; who can see
where his objects lie, and what things stand between him and them; can
conceive the outline of a policy by which they may be attained; and find
men competent to assist him in filling up the details.

The popular party will soon be either the ascendant power in this
country, or a thin, feeble, and divided opposition to the Tory
ascendancy, according as they are or are not supposed to possess, or to
be capable of producing, such men. It is what the world, at present, by
no means gives them credit for. The world never gives credit to anybody
for good qualities till it is compelled to do so. It denied them
honesty, it denied them learning, literary accomplishments, philosophy,
oratory, while it could: it now denies them capacity for action. They
are considered essentially unpractical. Can they wonder at it? In the
first place, this is a charge always made in politics against honest
men. Next, it is a charge always made against men who stand up for
general principles, or distant objects. But, above all, it is always
made against men who are untried, and who there is no desire should be
tried. They are untried. They have to prove that they can be men of
action. They have their spurs yet to win.

Lord Durham, then, the man marked out as a leader for this party—as, for
the present, almost its only possible leader—was suddenly in a position
in which he would be obliged to show whether he was a man of action, or
could become one. This was a conjuncture of the deepest import to all
Liberals. And it was a conjuncture to try the quality, not of Lord
Durham only, but of many persons besides. It was an occasion for sifting
the really practical part of the great Liberal body from the
unpractical. According to the disposition they manifested to aid or to
obstruct Lord Durham in a business so vital to Liberal objects;
according to the manner in which they judged him, or rather to the
principles which they brought with them to judge him by, they would
afford decisive evidence to which of those two sections of Liberals they
belonged.

Now, then, what circumstances had Lord Durham to deal with? A country,
the two divisions of whose inhabitants had just been cutting each
other’s throats, and in which the majority openly sympathised with an
insurrection just suppressed, Edition: current; Page: [450] and
suppressed only by a military force which they were physically unable to
resist; one party still crying loudly for the blood of the other, which
in its turn was muttering vengeance for the blood already shed. With one
of these parties, the more numerous though momentarily the weaker, the
public opinion of a neighbouring country, where public opinion is
omnipotent, was urged by every motive of political sympathy and national
aggrandizement to fraternize; the violent acts of the Loyalists of Upper
Canada, and the violent words of a Lieutenant-Governor, had added to
these incitements of ambition and sympathy the incitements of
resentment; and if the storm burst which was manifestly gathering, a
hundred thousand men would have been across the frontier before the news
could reach England; four-fifths of the population of the Canadas would
have risen to join them; and, in a fortnight, the fifteen thousand
troops that garrison British America would have been shut up in the
fortress of Quebec, or driven into the sea. The opposite party was
comparatively weak on the American continent; but it was the energetic
party; and made ample amends for its inferiority there, by its
preponderance here. It had the whole of the aristocratic party
enthusiastically in its interest. It had alone the ear of the English
public. It was called the British party. All that was known of it by
ninety-nine men out of a hundred was that it was the “loyal” party—the
party of British connection. It had all the Tory and almost the whole of
the Liberal press for its organs. In this dilemma was Lord Durham. One
step too much towards the French side, and he might expect to be
recalled, and to have all his projects for the good of Canada defeated,
all his measures reversed. One step too much to the English side, and
the empire was involved in the most ruinous, the most dishonourable, and
the most fratricidal of wars.

Here were real difficulties: here was an emergency not to be conjured
away by phrases: here was the occasion for a Governor-General, let him
be Conservative or Liberal, to show whether he was a pedant and a
formalist, or a man of action and reality; whether the Shibboleth of his
party governed him, or he it; whether the attainment of his end, or the
rules which he had learnt by heart, were dearest to him; whether he was
a man bent upon succeeding in his object, or a man like the old Austrian
tacticians opposed to Napoleon,[*] or the physician in Molière, who
would rather kill his patient by rule than save him contrary to it.[†]

What indication would Lord Durham have given of himself—to which of the
classes above characterized would he have proved himself to belong, if
he had proposed to himself to cope with such a combination of
circumstances as we have described, by the mere common-places of
Liberalism? Could he have been fit for his post if he had looked into a
book of rules or a catechism of doctrines for his conduct, and not at
his position, and the ends and means which it dictated?

Edition: current; Page: [451]
We claim for Lord Durham, from dispassionate men of all parties, the
recognition that he did apply his mind to those ends and means; that he
took, in every essential particular, a just and a comprehensive view of
them; that the scheme of policy which he conceived, and began to
execute, contained within itself every element of success; that he has
even already, to a very great extent, succeeded; and would have
succeeded altogether if he had met with no obstacles but those which he
could calculate upon, none but what were inherent in his situation; if
each of his measures had been opposed by those only to whose principles
it was adverse; if Conservatives had not rushed in to destroy a
Conservative measure, Radicals to denounce the act which saved the lives
of Radical leaders: both forgetting the essentials of their political
creed in the common-places of it, and doing thereby as much as one act
could do towards proving themselves the pedants and formalists which the
latter are called, but which is now proved to be a character fully as
applicable to the former. We leave the Tories in the hands of the
Standard, a journal whose superiority to its party in real understanding
of the principles they profess, never more strikingly asserted
itself—and which on this occasion has merged the party passions it so
strongly participates, in the sympathy of talent for talent and vigour
for vigour, and given the candid construction at all times, and the
support in time of need, due from consistent Tories to an officer of the
Crown, engaged in an enterprise not of party but of national
concernment, amidst difficulties over which only the honourable
forbearance of the disinterested of all parties could enable him to
triumph.

When Lord Durham landed in Canada the insurrection was already
suppressed; the work of the sword was done, and what remained was to
heal its wounds, and obviate the necessity of again drawing it. Lord
Durham saw that the sine quâ non of success in this was a reconciliation
of parties. Without it he might, indeed, have kept Canada by force, if
the United States would have let him; but only by making the yoke of the
mother country a tyranny; only by making her an object of detestation,
of imprecation, to her subjects; never under such a government could
Canada have been a safe place for Englishmen to dwell in; never could
she have been anything but a drain upon our finances in peace, upon our
military resources during actual or apprehended war. To restore a free
constitution, and to restore it at the earliest period possible, was the
only means of governing Canada which Parliament had contemplated, the
only one which Lord Durham either could, or, we may presume to say,
would, be a party to.

But the constitution being supposed re-established, was the struggle of
the majority and minority to be renewed, which was all the fruit it had
yet borne, and the sole justification, if justification there was, of
its suspension? We waive all the matters of principle and of policy
involved in the question whether the restoration of a constitution,
without a previous reconciliation of parties, would have been desirable;
but would it, we ask, have been possible? If a House of Representatives
Edition: current; Page: [452] must be an instrument of one exasperated
party or of the other, could Lord Durham expect the Lords and Commons of
Great Britain to put that instrument into the hands of the party whom
they considered disaffected? and could it, without the grossest
injustice, and without consequences in the end still more fatal, have
been put into the hands of the other?

To heal, therefore, the breach between the two parties; to avoid, so far
as possible, whatever would either put in evidence the extent of the
animosity which already existed, or give fresh occasion to it; to make
it apparent that if there ever had been, there no longer was, any
quarrel between the races, and that representative institutions might be
restored without giving rise to a permanent conflict between the English
and the French population—was the one condition of success in Lord
Durham’s enterprise; and to attain this, we challenge controversy when
we assert, that his whole series of measures was admirably calculated.

The first thing to be disposed of, was the traces of the past
insurrection, the political prisoners. We are not going to argue over
again the worn-out topic of the ordinance.[*] We said enough on that
manner in the second edition of our last number.* We have nothing to add
to our defence of it; we have only to point out its relation to that
comprehensive scheme for a reconciliation of parties which Lord Edition:
current; Page: [453] Durham had conceived, and which we assert that he
has in every respect acted up to. Had he granted an unconditional
amnesty, he would have set the leaders of the French Canadians,
including all who had been prominent in the insurrection, at large among
their countrymen, to resume all their former influence, before he could
form the slightest judgment whether that influence would be used for him
or against him, to calm the irritation of the people or to exasperate
it. He well knew that in the latter event they could do in the one way
what would be far more than a match for all he could do in the other. We
speak not of the irreconcilable offence which would have been given to
the party so lately fighting with the insurgents, as it believed for
life or death, and whose cries for the blood its fears demanded (cries
not wholly unsupported, if report speak true, by the Lieutenant-Governor
of Upper Canada)[*] could only have been kept in check by something
which would carry with it the wiser heads of the Loyalist party itself.
On the other hand, if he had tried these men by an unpacked jury, that
is to say, a jury of their own party, the result would equally have been
their liberation, with the character of persecuted men, and with the
whole train of consequences flowing from the animosities engendered by
the trial.* And was he to pack a jury? or to try them by the judges, by
the men most odious to their party, without a jury? or was a
court-martial to be the Edition: current; Page: [454] resource? or a
special commission appointed for the nonce? Imagine them so tried,
imagine them found guilty by any of these tribunals, and of course
sentenced to death, and the sentences commuted for transportation to
Bermuda! What those in England, who are so bitter against Lord Durham
now, would have said of him then, we know not; but when he, by what the
French Canadians would have deemed a violation of all law, had procured
a sentence which they would have considered to be in defiance of all
justice, what chance would the persecutor of their leaders have had of
gaining their confidence, what chance of winning back their affections
to British rule?

Lord Durham disposed of the prisoners in the only way compatible with
his policy, a policy not of talking about conciliation, but of aiming at
it; and never in a similar situation did any government that we know of
act with a happier union of vigour and lenity. And so it has been
pronounced by as good judges of the principles of liberty as any English
democrats, the people of the United States; whom this act above all
others contributed to detach from the cause of Canadian separation; and
(together with the assiduous cultivation of every opportunity of
counteracting, by the expression of sentiments of good-will, the
impression which some of his predecessors had made by the ostentatious
avowal of opposite ones) has restored that peace and friendship between
two great nations, which, so long as Lord Durham’s policy is followed
up, as the spirit of his administration shall rule in Canada, there is
no danger that we should again see broken.

Edition: current; Page: [455]
In every other act from which the spirit of his policy could be seen,
the same general view of his position is apparent. His first act on
entering the country, the composition of his two councils, was a
declaration that he would put himself into the hands of neither party.
But while he kept himself independent of both, he did not exclude
either, from a share in his deliberations or in his favours. He gave, or
offered, appointments to influential men on both sides,* and availed
himself of the opinions of the moderate men of both, so far as they were
willing to communicate them. It has been stated in print that he
endeavoured, through the medium of Mr. Edition: current; Page: [456]
Wakefield, to open a communication even with M. Papineau;[*] but we are
informed that this is incorrect, and that Mr. Wakefield acted solely on
his own prompting;[†] affording, however, by what he did, an opening to
M. Papineau for fair and honourable explanation, which that gentleman,
we will venture to say with more passion than judgment, rejected.* But
the institutions which he was about to bestow on the colony, are what
exhibit above all the superiority of his conceptions, and those of his
advisers, over the peddling expedients of common-place politics. It is
there that we can estimate the difference between a policy of
conciliation and one of compromise; between the vulgar juste-milieu of
mere time-servers, and that which aims at contenting all parties by
being just to all. There are few statesmen in our days, who may not take
a lesson from the means which Lord Durham chose for carrying with him
the opinion of the majority of both races; from the system of healing
measures which he devised, to detach the reasonable and disinterested
portion of both parties from the unreasonable.

Though the leaders of parties have generally unworthy objects in view,
their followers, as it has been often said, have almost always honest
ones. Canada is no exception to this rule. Both the English and the
French have grievances, which each believes that the other will not
suffer to be removed. Among the demands of the French have long figured,
in the most prominent place, free municipal institutions and a general
system of education; and these they complain that the English will not
let them have. The English want a system of registration, the
commutation of feudal tenures, internal improvements, and facilities for
colonization; Edition: current; Page: [457] and complain that they could
not get these from the French when the latter were masters of the
Assembly.

We are not going to discuss the justice of these complaints; how greatly
exaggerated the last are, we showed in a former article, from the
evidence of Lord Gosford and his Commissioners.* But there must be some
colour for them. They must have some appearance of truth, by which they
are rendered credible, or they would not be serviceable even as
pretexts. It is evident that disinterested English Canadians believe the
one set of assertions, disinterested French Canadians the other. It is
evident that the English and French generally, and not merely factious
leaders on either side, see in each other the hindrance to their
obtaining those improvements which impartial third parties would bestow
upon them. The course, then, for Lord Durham was to seize the golden
opportunity of giving to both what they were entitled to; of removing
all that had occasioned heart-burning between the honest of the two
parties, all that had afforded the dishonest of either a handle for
misrepresentation. This was Lord Durham’s duty; and to his honour be it
said, this he would have done, this lesson he leaves for his successor.

The measures which were on the point of completion when his career was
cut short, were four in number: all of first-rate importance, all such
as ought to have been given, even though not asked for: two of them had
been long demanded by the popular party, two by the English population.
The first was, free municipal institutions: not only the grand
instrument of honest local management, but the great “normal school” to
fit a people for representative government, and which have never yet
existed in Canada.[*] The preparation of this law was undertaken by Mr.
Charles Buller, whose admirable speech in the House of Commons on that
very subject no one can have forgotten.[†] The second measure was a
comprehensive scheme of general education. The third was a Registry Act,
for titles to landed property. The fourth was for the commutation of
feudal tenures in Montreal, where they are peculiar, and peculiarly
obnoxious to the English population.[‡] These were to be followed by
others, among which the Proclamation enumerates “large and solid schemes
of colonization and internal improvement,” a “revision of the defective
laws which regulate real property and commerce,” the introduction of “a
pure and competent administration of justice,” the “eradication of the
manifold abuses engendered by the negligence and corruption of former
times, and so lamentably fostered by civil disunions.”[§] These are the
projects in the midst of Edition: current; Page: [458] which Lord Durham
has been interrupted; these the services, which Parliament thought fit
to take from him the power of rendering. We know it is one thing to aim
at these noble objects, another thing to accomplish them; we cannot tell
with what degree of skill he, or his advisers, would have performed a
task, difficult, without much trial and experience, even to the ablest
men. But how many English statesmen can be named, capable of rising to
the conception of such objects? Is there one other who, in Lord Durham’s
situation, would have had the public spirit and courage even to attempt
the realization of them?

Passing now from what is known of Lord Durham’s projects to what is only
believed, to the scheme, so far as yet matured, which he is understood
to have had in view for the future constitution of the colony;[*] this,
too, so far as anything is known of it, is constructed upon the same
great principle of impartial justice; the removal of all real evils; the
satisfaction of the just demands of either side. The French sought to be
freed from the incubus of a Legislative Council, a second chamber,
representing neither the English nor the French population, neither the
colony nor the mother country, but possessing a veto on every proposal
emanating from either, and which it actually exercised against measures
equally desired by both.[†] From this grievance it is understood that
Lord Durham was prepared to relieve them.* The English complained that
the French of Lower Canada, by their majority in the House of Assembly,
possessed a veto on all measures which concerned the five colonies
collectively; that the navigation of the St. Lawrence, the roads and
canals, the post office and custom regulations, of all British America,
were under the control of a portion of the people of one colony, who had
no good-will, it was affirmed, either to commerce or colonization, and
who, aiming at a separate nationality, were rather hostile than friendly
to the improvement of the purely British provinces. Lord Durham’s plan
took such affairs entirely out of their cognizance, and placed them and
all matters of common concernment under a federal body, to be chosen by
all the provinces, and subject, in the same manner with the local
legislatures, to the veto of the mother country. This project, the
principle of which so exactly met the difficulties of the case, that
every one who has sincerely applied his mind to an amicable adjustment,
has hit upon it—that for a moment it united the suffrages of Mr. Roebuck
and of Lord John Russell[‡]—had the further advantage, that it was the
only legitimate means Edition: current; Page: [459] of destroying the
so-much-talked-of nationality of the French Canadians. It would compel
them to consider themselves, not as a separate family, but an integral
portion of a larger body; it would merge their nationality of race in a
nationality of country; instead of French Canadians it would make them
British Americans; and this without bringing into their house and home,
into their social and domestic relations, the customs of another people
(which, whether practised on all of them or on a part, would be one of
the last excesses of despotism), or establishing, as hitherto, over not
only their necks but those of the English population, a petty oligarchy
of the latter.

The mode in which the suffrage was to be regulated under the proposed
constitution has not yet transpired, and we cannot, for this and other
reasons, at present pronounce an opinion upon the scheme as a whole.
There will be time enough and materials enough for discussing what must
be the principal topic of the approaching session of Parliament. In the
mean time let us come to the questions—was Lord Durham justified in
resigning? and, if he resigned, can the manner be defended in which he
published to the colony the reasons of his resignation?[*]

We think that he was justified. When a man has had grievous cause given
him for resentment it is easy to accuse him of being actuated by it. But
we see no ground for any such imputation. We see nothing in his conduct
which is not defensible on public grounds. He declares that the moral
force and consideration of his government were gone. What else was to be
expected? The attacks in Parliament, the mere vituperation of his
enemies, he could have stood; but to have the first and only completed
act of his government annulled, was to strike with impotence all that he
could thereafter do. If men at the distance of half the globe, in utter
ignorance of the facts of the case and the situation of the colony, at
the dictation of personal enmity and party spite, were suffered to
overset one of his acts, his friends not merely looking on tamely, but,
after a few deprecatory words, actually turning round to aid in the
deed, and themselves giving the mortal blow—what better fate could he
expect for any other of his proceedings? If the Conservative House so
treated his Conservative measure, what hope was there for his Radical
ones? Facts, which he did not then know, have justified his
anticipations. On the very day preceding that which brought the news of
his retirement, the chief newspaper organ at once of the Ministry and of
the English Canadian party, fulminated an anathema against his plan of a
federal legislature;[†] and it is some consolation for the abrupt close
of his government, when we see that, however wisely his plans might have
been formed, he would not have been suffered to carry them. The
coalition between the Tory party at home, and those who are Liberals at
home and Tories in the colonies—between the enemies of a representative
constitution altogether, and the enemies of any which does not make the
minority preponderant—would Edition: current; Page: [460] have been too
strong for Lord Durham at the distance of half the globe; and the battle
for good government in Canada, as well as for reform in Great Britain,
will have to be fought here. Add, too, that Parliament, while showing so
patriotic a zeal for keeping him within his powers, declined to render
those powers sufficient; the ground assigned for the refusal being
expressly the unfitness of Lord Durham to have that extension of power
which Lord Melbourne at first solicited, but meekly withdrew his prayer
without waiting for its rejection.

Lord Durham saw that he could do no good in Canada if the every-day
weapon of a faction for making war upon another, its engine for working
its adversaries out and itself in, was to be a presumptuous interference
with his administration; and he felt that if his friends were not
prepared to back him better, they should have looked out for a man who
had no enemies.

Such measures as those which he had in view required, as he truly says,
“all the strength which the cordial and stedfast support of the
authorities at home can alone give to their distant authorities; all the
moral force” that could be derived by a government

from the assurance that its acts would be final, and its engagements
religiously observed . . . . Of what avail are the purposes and promises
of a delegated power, whose acts are not respected by the authority from
which it proceeds? With what confidence can I invite co-operation, or
impose forbearance, whilst I touch ancient laws and habits, as well as
deep-rooted abuses, with the weakened hands that have ineffectually
essayed but a little more than the ordinary vigour of the police of
troubled times?[*]

But the Proclamation! We are not surprised at the cry which has been
raised against this noble and plain-spoken document. We can conceive
what gall and wormwood,[†] to a certain class of official men, a state
paper must be, so “remarkable” (it has been well said) “for its
disregard of conventional usages, and its contemptuous treatment of the
mysteries of state-craft.”[‡] To speak so much truth to the governed
concerning their government, has been not unnaturally reprobated, as
contrary to all rule—as an embarrassment wantonly thrown in the path of
his successor—an appeal to the public of the colony from the government
at home—a sacrifice of the tranquillity of the province to childish
pique.

We wonder that those who are in so much haste to call the Proclamation
inflammatory, do not ask themselves what there was for it to inflame?
Whether all upon whom the topics introduced into it could have any
inflammatory effect, were not already roused to such a pitch of
indignation, that the calm though feeling manner in which their
sentiments were responded to by the Governor-General, was more
calculated to temper than to add fuel to the fire? It can hardly be
supposed that those who hanged Lords Brougham and Melbourne in effigy,
and who voted Edition: current; Page: [461] the addresses and passed the
resolutions of which such multitudes have reached us, waited to form
their opinion on the affront to Lord Durham until he told them that it
was one. His address was no “appeal” to them; their sentence was already
pronounced. The whole scope and object of the Proclamation has been
carelessly misapprehended. It was not a complaint; there was no more
complaint in it than was unavoidable. Its purpose, its declared purpose,
was to explain the reasons of his retirement. All the addresses, all the
resolutions, were solicitations to him to retain the government: the
Proclamation was his answer.

If the only use of making this explanation had been to gratify personal
feelings, by guarding his motives from misconstruction, then, as there
would have been no public good to be attained, private sentiments,
however creditable, might have found a more appropriate expression
through private channels. But it was not as a mere matter of individual
feeling that it was important for him to retain the confidence of all
among the Canadian people who had bestowed it upon him. Though no longer
their Governor, his connexion with them was not to cease; upon him it
was to devolve to watch over their interests in England; he was the only
man in the kingdom of first-rate political influence, the only man ever
thought of as minister, or as a party leader, who did not at that moment
stand convicted, in the minds of those whom he was addressing, of the
grossest ignorance of all the circumstances of the colony, and the most
presumptuous incapacity in legislating for it. When this last specimen
of presumption and incapacity was making the whole British population of
both the Canadas join with the French Canadians in denouncing the
principle of distant colonial government, and the very officials talk
familiarly of a separation, was it nothing to show to Canada that there
was one British statesman who could understand her wants and feel for
her grievances—that from any councils in the mother country in which he
had influence she might expect justice—and that the man, on whose
constancy and magnanimity so much depended, was not throwing up his
mission from personal disgust, but returning to England because the
manœuvres of his enemies had changed the place where he could serve them
from Quebec to the House of Lords?

Viewed in this light, it seems to us that the Proclamation, with all in
it that has been inveighed against—the ungrudging acknowledgment of past
misgovernment and present abuses—the disclosure of his generous schemes
for the improvement of the laws and administration, and for conferring
“on an united people,” not a restricted, but “a more extensive enjoyment
of free and responsible government”[*]—so far from needing an apology,
points out Lord Durham, beyond almost anything else which he has done,
as the fit leader for the great Reform party of the empire. The
proclamation was the necessary complement and winding up of his short
administration—the explanation which was due to the people of Canada for
the past, and the best legacy which he could leave to them for the
future. So far Edition: current; Page: [462] from being inflammatory, it
was in all probability the only kind of address to the people, which, in
the then state of men’s minds, could have had any healing effect.

As we have said all along, the main end of his administration was the
reconciliation of the two parties, by exhibiting to both, embodied in a
series of measures, a policy which, by satisfying the just claims of
both, should convince them that there was no necessity for their being
enemies—that both might hope for justice under a government knowing no
distinction between them. If this, the one thing needful, was now
debarred him by the mother country, was it not the next best thing,
since he could not leave healing measures, to leave healing principles
behind him? Next to doing the noble things spoken of in the
proclamation, to point them out as fit to be done, was the thing most
calculated—was the one thing calculated—to restore harmony in the
colony. If the policy there chalked out is that on which alone a
reconciliation of parties and races can be founded; then, since he could
not give them the policy itself, he has done well and wisely in giving
them the hope of such a policy; in giving them the idea of it, as a
possible thing, as the thing which they should strive for, instead of
separation, or the mere predominance of their own side; and which, as
far as his influence reaches, he will yet help them to obtain.

These considerations are still further strengthened if we reflect in
what position the disallowance of the ordinance found Lord Durham with
respect to the French Canadians. He had as yet done nothing to redress
what they deemed their grievances. His plans for their benefit, like all
his other plans of general improvement, were yet unfinished; and they
were a people too little accustomed to good treatment from their rulers
to give their confidence until earned by actual benefits. Lord Durham
had done enough to convince the more intelligent and experienced people
of the United States—not enough to convince the French Canadians. Of the
amnesty, qualified by the ordinance, they knew not at first what to
think; but when they learnt from the despatch laid before Parliament
that “Sir John Colborne and the heads of what is called the British
party”[*] had approved of it, from that moment (we know the fact) the
French, though previously undecided, deemed it their part to disapprove
of it. This was mere prejudice in them; if Lord Durham could carry the
British party with him in clemency to the French, the greater was the
credit due to him; and having to give an account of his measure in a
quarter where lenity was more likely to be imputed to it than severity,
he naturally availed himself of the fact that it had obtained the
acquiescence of those whose error was not likely to be on the lenient
side. But when we consider how the French Canadians have seen governor
after governor become the tool of the officials, and how seldom the two
parties have concurred in approving of the same measures, we cannot
wonder that a governor who had done but one great act, and that act in
Edition: current; Page: [463] concert, as it now appeared, with the
dominant faction, should not yet have made much progress in attaching
the other party to his government.

If, then, Lord Durham had left matters in this state; if he had departed
leaving no explanation to the Canadians of his principles and of his
ulterior purposes, he would have gone away without doing a single act
which could prove to the French population that there existed a British
statesman willing to redress their grievances, and without giving a
single lesson to the English party of what was due to the French. We
maintain that, surrounded as he was at the last by the English
inhabitants—leaving the country amidst the mingled sound of their
plaudits and their lamentations, while the bulk of the French Canadians
kept sullenly aloof—he had, from all these causes, an appearance of
being the man of a party, of giving his countenance to the exclusive
principles of a class, which appearance he was bound to throw off—from
which it would have been criminal in him not to have taken the most
direct means of freeing himself. And we foretel that his having done so
will yet be found to be the greatest thing yet done to facilitate the
settlement of Canada on a basis just, and therefore capable of being
permanent. The whole English population are now committed, as far as the
strongest public demonstrations can commit them, to the policy of a man,
who has told them unambiguously and minutely, and in a manner admitting
of no misunderstanding, that his plans involve full justice to the
French Canadians. They have invested with their confidence, they have
acknowledged as their virtual representative, the man who is identified
with the principle of conciliation instead of coercion, of equal justice
to all instead of the predominance of the few over the many. The English
population has stood up openly as a distinct body from the jobbing
official clique which has hitherto assumed to be its representative; and
it may be hoped that the settlement of Canada which they will now exert
themselves for, will be conceived under the inspiration of Lord Durham
rather than that of the late legislative council.

It is time to conclude. We have attempted to do justice to the absent—to
show that, instead of having done anything to justify the clamour which
has been raised from so many discordant quarters against them, Lord
Durham and his advisers, so far as their conduct can yet be judged of,
have displayed qualities among the rarest to be found in English
politicians, and which, wheresoever found, conspicuously mark out the
possessors for that station at the head of the Reform party which the
present Ministers have thought fit to abandon. But their defence is now
in their own hands. They will soon be here, not only to combat their
enemies, but to perform the more important duty of expounding their own
views; and we shall not be long without full opportunity of judging
whether Lord Durham is equal to the great destiny to which he is called
(and which is not a destiny for any man who cannot give active
guidance), or is wanting in the courage to claim it, or the energy and
skill for its achievement.

Edition: current; Page: [464]
Meanwhile, he has been thwarted, but he has not failed. He has shown how
Canada ought to be governed; and if anything can allay her dissensions,
and again attach her to the mother country, this will. He has at the
critical moment taken the initiative of a healing policy; that which
seeks popularity, not by courting it, but by deserving it, and
conciliation, not by compromise, but by justice—by giving to everybody,
not the half of what he asks, but the whole of what he ought to have. If
this example had not been set at that juncture, the colony was lost;
having been set, it may be followed, and the colony may be saved. He has
disposed of the great immediate embarrassment, the political offenders.
He has shown to the well-intentioned of both sides an honourable basis
on which they may accommodate their differences. He has detached from
the unreasonable of one party their chief support, the sympathy of the
United States; and it is reserved for him to detach from the
unreasonable of the other the sympathy of the people of England. He
comes home master of the details of those abuses which he has recognized
as the original causes of the disaffection; prepared to expose these as
they have never before been exposed, and to submit to Parliament, after
the most comprehensive inquiry which has ever taken place, the system on
which the North American Colonies may be preserved and well governed
hereafter.

If this be failure, failure is but the second degree of success; the
first and highest degree may be yet to come.

Edition: current; Page: [465]


REORGANIZATION OF THE REFORM PARTY
 1839

Edition: current; Page: [466]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London and Westminster Review, XXXII (Apr., 1839), 475-508. Headed:
“Art. VIII.—[“Marvell Redivivus.”] A Letter to the Earl of Durham on
Reform in Parliament, by Paying the Elected. London: [Sherwood, Gilbert,
and Piper,] 1839.” Running titles: left-hand, as title; right-hand (page
and line equivalents in this edition), “Conservatives and Radicals”
(468.20-469.13), “The Landholders” (470.8-471.5), “Small Proprietors”
(471.41-472.36), “The Great Capitalists” (473.29-474.23), “The Middle
Classes” (475.17-476.12), “Dissenters and Church Reformers” (477.6-40),
“The Durham Policy” (478.33-479.25), “Divisions of Reformers”
(480.19-481.12), “Universal Suffrage” (482.6-41), “Grievances of the
Working Classes” (483.34-484.29 and 487.17-488.14), “Opinions of the
Working Classes” (485.23-486.22), “Catholics and Voluntaries”
(489.9-490.6), “Church Reformers” (490.41-491.34), “The Voluntaries”
(492.31-493.27), and “Church Reform” (494.22-495.18). Signed “A.” Not
republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed
‘Reorganization of the Radical [sic] Party’ in the London and
Westminister Review for April 1839 (No 63)” (MacMinn, 51). In the
Somerville College copy (tear-sheets) there are four emendations (which
are adopted in this edition): “modern” changed to “moderate” (467.10);
“trio” changed to “threefold” (493.22); “principles” altered to
“principle” (493.40); and “compound” corrected to “confound” (494.11).
For comment on the essay, see xlvi and lx above.

Edition: current; Page: [467]


Reorganization of the Reform Party

the radicals have hitherto exhibited the spectacle of a great body of
men without policy, leader, organization, concert, or simultaneous
efforts. They must be mere material to make tools of, if they continue
in this position one moment after they can get out of it. Their whole
strength in the country has never been called forth, because no
immediate purpose has ever been presented to them in which they all felt
an equal interest—for which they were all equally impelled to exert
themselves.

When we call the party which we desire to see formed, a Radical party,
we mean not to circumscribe it by any partial or sectional limitation.
We call it Radical because the moderate Radicals are in possession of a
part of the ground on which it is necessary that the combination should
be built; because the measures with which they, and we may add, with
which any leader they may select, must be identified—the Ballot and
Household Suffrage, or something equivalent to it, are a portion of
those which must be comprehended in the practical policy of such a
party. But we well know that the Reform party of the empire ought not to
be, cannot be, Radical in any narrow or sectarian sense. There may be
many coteries in a country, but there can be only two parties. What we
must have to oppose to the great Conservative party is the whole Liberal
party, not some mere section of it,—a combination which shall exclude no
shade of opinion in which one sober or practicable man can be found,—one
man capable of adapting rational means to honest ends; a phalanx,
stretching from the Whig-Radicals at one extremity (if we may so term
those among the persons calling themselves Whigs who are real Liberals)
to the Ultra-Radicals and the Working Classes on the other.

Such a phalanx has existed; and by its support the Grey Ministry was
enabled to carry the Reform Bill. We wish to see this great party
reconstructed. We are persuaded that it can be, and that to accomplish
this it only requires a popular leader. People are ready to cry out that
it is impossible, because it is indeed no longer possible by the same
means; but is not this what every rational view of politics would
prepare us for? Was it ever known in history that the same thing took
place twice in exactly the same manner? To find the means of
accomplishing what borné politicians pronounce impracticable, is the
test of statesmanship: we do not even think that the difficulties to be
overcome in this instance are a very severe trial of it. It is a case
for moral qualities, fully as much as for intellectual. A Lafayette
Edition: current; Page: [468] will find his way to the object sooner
than a Talleyrand. Straightforwardness and singleness of purpose, and
the energy of a strong will, aided by sufficient knowledge of the state
of opinions in Great Britain and Ireland, and of the peculiarities of
the different classes of society, are the main requisites. And a very
moderate degree of that knowledge is sufficient to point out, that it is
not time to declare the object impracticable, since the means which are
alone proper for attaining it have not yet been tried. What those means
are, it is the purpose of the present article to investigate.

Our aim in this inquiry is altogether practical. We intend no doctrinal
discussion. That a reform in many of the institutions of this country is
needful, that the pursuit of such reform is a laudable undertaking, that
there will never more be peace or content in this country without it,
are propositions which we shall allow to rest upon their own evidence:
we are not now addressing ourselves to any persons by whom they are
denied, nor is this the time for stating how far, in our own opinion,
the changes in the existing order of things ought to go. The question is
not now about particular reforms, but how to carry on the Reform
movement; not whose are the best ideas of reform, but how to plant the
firmest footing for reform in general. Radicalism has done enough in
speculation; its business now is to make itself practical. Most
reformers are tolerably well aware of their ends; let them turn to what
they have hitherto far less attended to—how to attain them. No reformer
can hope to realize any reforms of importance but by means of a strong
and united Reform party. To form this, must be an object paramount in
the mind of each to the pursuit of his particular aims, because it is a
condition precedent to them all; and we are either much mistaken, or
this object will exact from every class of Reformers far less sacrifice
or even postponement of their particular aims than is commonly thought,
and that what is required from each is a better knowledge and juster
appreciation of the opinions and feelings of his allies, rather than any
compromise of his own.

Let us examine, then, what is the available strength of the Reform
party; what proportion it collectively bears to that of our adversaries;
and of what component parts that strength is made up; that we may have a
clear view of the elements to be combined, and of the nature of the
hindrances to their combining; and may know what are the obstacles to be
overcome, in order to the organization of the party for powerful and
systematic action on a combined plan.

Who, then, are the natural Radicals of the country, and who are the
natural opponents of Radicalism? We use the words “natural Radicals,”
and “natural opponents of Radicalism,” as an index to our whole mode of
looking at this subject. One is constantly hearing of “reaction,” or of
“the progress of opinion;” of the growth, or spread, one day of
Radicalism, another day of Conservatism; and newspapers are perpetually
comparing notes about registrations, and municipal elections, to
ascertain which of the two principles is gaining upon the other. How
inconclusive such evidences are, has been very often pointed out. For
our part we Edition: current; Page: [469] have hardly any belief in
reactions, and but little in any growth of political opinion, whether
Radical or Conservative, but the growth in numbers, intelligence, and
wealth, of the classes who are already, and from the circumstances of
their position, Radicals or Conservatives. Men change sides on
particular questions, as their views change as to the point at which
they can, or should, make their stand for their party; as the Duke of
Wellington changed his opinion on the Catholic claims. But we know of no
instances in our time, and have read of few in history (except in
seasons of panic, which in this as in other respects produce strange
phenomena) where a great and sudden movement took place in the feelings
of a people, either towards Radicalism or Conservatism. We have known,
it is true, many instances, and in these times can seldom be long
without them, when circumstances have suddenly called out masses of
Conservative or Radical feeling which already existed, from a passive
state into an active. The real amount of either feeling which exists in
our own country, at least, we believe to be at all periods much the
same; saving the gradual changes, which the natural laws of the progress
of society bring about.

In order to estimate the strength of the two parties, we must consider
the permanent causes which are operating upon each of the separate
divisions that compose the nation, and determining it towards the one
party or the other: and these permanent causes (speaking as we are of
bodies of men, and not of remarkable individuals) are for the most part
to be looked for in their personal interests, or in their class
feelings. We are the last persons to undervalue the power of moral
convictions. But the convictions of the mass of mankind run hand in hand
with their interests or with their class feelings. We have a strong
faith, stronger than either politicians or philosophers generally have,
in the influence of reason and virtue over men’s minds; but it is in
that of the reason and virtue on their own side of the question; in the
ascendancy which may be exercised over them for their good, by the best
and wisest persons of their own creed. We expect few conversions by the
mere force of reason, from one creed to the other. Men’s intellects and
hearts have a large share in determining what sort of Conservatives or
Liberals they will be; but it is their position (saving individual
exceptions) which makes them Conservatives or Liberals.

If we would find, then, the line of distinction between the two parties,
we must look out for another line of demarcation; we must find out who
are the Privileged Classes, and who are the Disqualified. The former are
the natural Conservatives of the country; the latter are the natural
Radicals.

The Privileged Classes are all those who are contented with their
position; who think that the institutions of the country work well for
them; who feel that they have all the influence, or more than the
influence, in the present order of things, which they could expect under
any other; who enjoy a degree of consideration in society which
satisfies their ambition, and find the legislature prompt to lend an ear
to their complaints, and if they feel anything as an inconvenience to
endeavour to devise a Edition: current; Page: [470] remedy for it. All,
in short, who feel secure that their interests will not be postponed to
those of other people, and still more all who feel secure that the
interests of other people will be postponed to theirs, compose the
Conservative body. Those who feel and think the reverse of all this are
the Disqualified Classes. All who feel oppressed, or unjustly dealt
with, by any of the institutions of the country; who are taxed more
heavily than other people, or for other people’s benefit; who have, or
consider themselves to have, the field of employment for their pecuniary
means or their bodily or mental faculties unjustly narrowed; who are
denied the importance in society, or the influence in public affairs,
which they consider due to them as a class, or who feel debarred as
individuals from a fair chance of rising in the world; especially if
others, in whom they do not recognize any superiority of merit, are
artificially exalted above their heads: these compose the natural
Radicals; to whom must be added a large proportion of those who, from
whatever cause, are habitually ill at ease in their pecuniary
circumstances; the sufferers from low wages, low profits, or want of
employment: for even if they do not impute their situation to the
government, they almost always think that the government could, if it
chose, do something to relieve them; and, at all events, finding
themselves ill off as they are, think they should not fare worse and
would stand a chance of faring better under a change.

Let us proceed to make an inventory of these several classes, and begin
with the Conservatives.

At the head of the Privileged, or in other words, the Satisfied Classes,
must be placed the landed interest. They have the strongest reason
possible for being satisfied with the government; they are the
government. It was said without exaggeration before the Reform Bill, it
may be repeated with very little exaggeration even yet, that the English
Government is an oligarchy of landholders. They compose the House of
Lords exclusively. In the House of Commons they possess the
representation of the counties, and of most of the small towns. On all
questions which interest them as landholders, and on which the Whig and
Tory portion of them are united, their majority in the House of Commons
is irresistible. That this power does not lie idle in their hands, the
Corn Laws are an instance, intelligible to every capacity. And never was
the fact more signally illustrated than in the last session of
Parliament, on the occasion which Mr. Charles Villiers termed, in a
spirited speech, the East Retford of the Corn Laws.[*] On the eve of the
most decided scarcity of the last twenty years, a majority refused, not
the admission of foreign corn to the home market, but the paltry
permission to grind it here for re-exportation: a trifle, which did not
even, to the extent of a trifle, infringe upon their monopoly, which did
not encroach one hair’s-breadth upon the right Edition: current; Page:
[471] they arrogate to make their countrymen eat dear bread for their
benefit: but against which the objection urged was, that in some case
which was just conceivable, some remote or possible danger might chance
to accrue, of an encroachment in some other way upon that insulting
claim. Their fancies go before all other people’s most substantial
interests. If we desire other examples, the embarrassment is solely in
the choice. The whole course of legislation has ever, and does now, run
wholly in their favour. Not content with selling dear, they must borrow
cheap; and in that hope—a fallacious one after all—the usury laws,
abolished for the trading classes, are still kept up for the benefit of
the landholders. Their land descends without probate or legacy duty, and
is very incompletely liable to the claims of their creditors. When it
comes to their turn to be creditors, they have secured to themselves the
preference over all others (except the tax-gatherer) by the power of
distraining for rent: all other people must first go to law—they may
come at once on the premises and take. As the owners of advowsons, the
endowments of the church of England are in reality theirs; they it is
who, by converting the cure of souls into a family property, have made
the Christian ministry the provision for the fool or profligate of a
family,—for those who, being too stupid, or too idle, or too vicious to
work, are fit only for an “easy life.” The abuses of the church are the
patrimony of the younger children of the landowners. Again, the
government of the rural districts is altogether in their hands; as
justices in quarter sessions they vote the taxes, control all the
expenditure, decide without appeal a majority of all the causes, civil
and criminal, which are tried in this country. As magistrates sitting
singly or in petty sessions, not a police officer can move but by their
warrant, not an act of administration can be done of which they have not
the direct control. Accordingly they enjoy all the importance which
appertains everywhere to the class that wields the powers of government.
What the noble is in Austria, and the placeman in France, the landed
proprietor is in England. A landowner and a man of consequence are
synonymous. To become a landowner is what every one is looking to who
desires to rise—is the test of having risen. It is the boast of America
to be “a fine country for poor people;” if England cannot say as much,
she may pride herself, however, on being the paradise of country
gentlemen: they, with a luxury and comfort enjoyed by their class in no
other country, combine a personal importance comparable only to that of
the high nobility elsewhere, and the richest of them are from time to
time aggregated to the nobility of their own country.

That the body for whose interest the present order of things is all
contrived, should be Conservative of that order of things, can surprise
nobody. The landholders, as a class, are generally unqualified Tories;
those who are not so, mostly belong to the Conservative Whigs, differing
from Tories in little but in hereditary personal connexions and in name.
Neither among the landholders, nor among those whom the landholders can
influence, could the party which we desire Edition: current; Page: [472]
to see constituted, hope to find any great portion of its strength.
These classes constitute, on the contrary, and will continue to
constitute, the main body of the force which that party has to contend
against.

Yet even on this, their weakest point, the Reformers are not altogether
unsupported; nor need they, even on the present system of open voting,
give up all the county elections for lost. First, it is only the great
landed proprietors that are hostile. The small proprietors are on our
side. On the Corn Laws indeed, but on the Corn Laws only, they have a
common interest with the great landholders. In every other respect they
belong to the natural Radicals. They are not rich, and derive no benefit
from the privileges of riches; while they are more independent than any
other persons can possibly be who are not rich, in a country where all
power goes along with wealth. Wherever any considerable number remain of
what were once the pride of England,—her yeomanry; wherever the
multiplication of large fortunes, and the eagerness of men of fortune to
buy land, has not yet extinguished the class of small proprietors, there
the county elections return Liberals. It was this class which gave Sir
James Graham so disagreeable a lesson in Cumberland. It is a similar
class, in the part of Yorkshire nearest to Cumberland, that gives Mr.
Cayley his majority; and in West Kent, that, in spite of the strongest
influences, succeeds in returning Mr. Hodges. He is a shallow politician
who imagines that the mere possession of land makes men Conservative. In
France the Liberal deputies are mostly sent by the small proprietors of
the agricultural departments, while the great manufacturers and
merchants form the Conservative party. In every country in which landed
property is much divided, the land will be on the side of democracy; as
they well know who fight for primogeniture and entail as the bulwarks of
Toryism, the main stay of an aristocratic constitution.

In addition to the small proprietors, the Reformers may claim another
class connected with the land, who bear a strong affinity to small
proprietors, the class of prosperous farmers with long leases. This
class, rare in the south of England, where most of the farmers are
tenants-at-will, is more frequent in the north, and in Scotland almost
universal. Nearly every farmer in Scotland holds his land on lease, and
feels himself almost as independent of his landlord as his landlord is
of him. Accordingly, even under the unexciting circumstances of the last
general election, full half the Members returned for the Scotch counties
were Liberals. Such facts show the real value of the assertion one often
hears, that the agricultural constituencies are at heart Tories, and
would, even under the protection of the Ballot, send Tories to
Parliament. Wherever the electors are in a position to declare their
real sentiments we find them Liberals. The yeomanry are Liberals; and so
are the farmers, in the country of long leases; and it is well known
that everywhere in Scotland, except at Edinburgh, a Liberal and a
Radical are synonymous. The tenants-at-will are not made of different
stuff from the tenants for a term, or the small proprietors. The Ballot
might not at first produce upon them its full effect, Edition: current;
Page: [473] for habitual servitude leaves its traces on the mind as
fetters do on the limbs; but a few years would make them feel their
freedom as those feel it who have always enjoyed it. The slavish
deference for their landlord, the notion that their vote goes with their
rent, and is to be exercised at the landlord’s pleasure, has sustained
far too many shocks of late years, to have much strength left; and the
English farmer will not, when no longer in the alternative of servility
or ruin, be long found on a different side from the Scotch farmer and
the English yeoman.

We have mentioned two classes connected with the land, whose
co-operation a real Liberal party might even now count upon for giving
it a majority in a general election. There is a third class, which, in a
muster of our strength, is by no means to be neglected—the owners and
occupiers of land connected with towns, or in the manufacturing or
mining districts equivalent to towns. The number of persons thus
situated who are county electors, though much reduced by the Reform
Bill, is still considerable, and the rapid growth of the towns and of
manufacturers makes the class an increasing one. The numerous small
manufacturing towns not enfranchised by the Reform Bill furnish many of
them; the potteries, and the mining districts, many more; and the class
includes those who raise garden produce and other articles for the
markets of the towns, and whose interest is not identical with that of
the agriculturists generally, but with that of the town population. The
body thus composed has even now a preponderant influence in not a few
county elections. It returns both members for the West Riding of
Yorkshire; and it still gives to the Liberals three of the four members
for Cornwall, three of the four members for Durham. It will give us the
members for Middlesex and Surrey, for South Lancashire, Glamorganshire,
Warwickshire, Somersetshire, whenever the electors are appealed to at a
critical moment, in a cause worthy of their efforts.

Besides these various classes, there are among the landowners many
individuals of fortune and consequence, who though belonging by their
interests to the Conservative side, are attached by their sentiments to
Liberalism. In all privileged classes there are individuals whom some
circumstance of a personal nature has alienated from their class, while
there are others sufficiently generous and enlightened to see the
interest of their class in the promotion of the general interest, and to
desire it by no other means. Such were the glorious minority of the
French noblesse in the States General of 1789; forty-five names, almost
every one of which has made itself remembered for some personal merit.
There are men of a similar description in this country, some of them
possessing sufficient influence of wealth, and weight of character, to
decide many a wavering vote in the House of Commons, and turn the
balance of many an election. Lord Durham is such a man. Lord
Fitzwilliam, Lord Radnor, are such men. Among the most valued adherents
of the present Ministry some such are to be found, in whose sentiments,
so far as known to the public, there is nothing to preclude them from
bearing a part in the formation of a Liberal party such as we hope to
see. Lord Spencer, for instance, Edition: current; Page: [474] Lord
Normanby,—may we not add, Lord Howick?—are far too precious to such a
party not to be cordially welcomed to it, and if it be such as we wish
it to be, it will be one to which they may honestly belong.

On the whole, although a large majority of the county members will
remain Conservatives, at least during the continuance of open voting, we
cannot, even after allowing for the presumable defection of the
Conservative Whigs, reckon the minority that might be obtained in the
English and Welsh counties by the Liberal party, at a general election
held under circumstances of excitement, at fewer than forty-five or
fifty, which is about the number that after an election held without any
excitement at all, support the present Ministry.

To return to the Conservatives. The landowners, as we have already said,
form their main strength. To the landowners, however, must be added
(saving, as before, individual exceptions) nearly the whole class of
very rich men. It is true, no other class of rich men find the
legislature ever at their back, ready to make all its powers
instrumental to the promotion of their class interests: no other class
has the same actual participation in the direct business of government:
nor has the man of great monied or mercantile wealth quite so much
political influence or consideration in society as the great landowner
has. But every rich man may be a landowner if he please; he expects, and
intends, if not a landholder himself, to be the founder of a family of
landholders; he looks upon himself as already belonging to the class,
and cherishes its privileges, as he does those of the Peerage—as of
personal interest to him, since they may one day be his own. A similar
observation applies to the professions which partake of aristocracy,—the
army, the navy, the bar. The heads of all the three professions rank
with the aristocracy; the two former consist originally of the sons and
brothers of the landowners. All these professions have moreover a direct
interest adverse to the spirit of Reform. The army and navy fear
retrenchment and injury to their prospects; and dislike generally the
new ideas of the times; for this reason, among others, that the tendency
of the new ideas is hostile to war. The lawyers fear law reform, which
would render much of their hardly-acquired learning valueless, and
though it would greatly add to the general amount of business of the
profession, would, at least they think so, diminish the value of the
great prizes. The army and navy therefore, with nearly all the leaders
and a numerical majority of the bar, are generally Conservatives. To
these it is scarcely necessary to add, the beneficed clergy of the
Church of England, both in possession and in expectancy. They have been
told, as everybody else is told, that the Church is part and parcel of
the Constitution; and it is so much the most peccant part, that reform,
they needs must feel, cannot creep into any other part and pass by this.
Accordingly no other of the privileged classes is so intensely Tory,
upon the whole, as the beneficed clergy. There are indeed in the Church,
and even in the highest ranks of it, men to whom the labour is more
precious than the reward, and who would care little for any risk which
the temporalities of the Church might run Edition: current; Page: [475]
in the attempt to make it spiritually what it professes to be. But of
these hereafter: of these a large proportion may be claimed for the
Reformers.

We are not aware of having omitted any important element of the
Conservative strength; unless, indeed, it be the protected trades, those
who share with the landowner the privilege of taxing the community to
keep up their own prices; the shipping interest, the timber interest,
the West India interest. These three in particular have long been the
main pillars of Toryism among the commercial classes; for, like the
Church of England clergy, they have been so long attacked, and with so
much effect, as to feel that if the time ever comes for a general
yielding up of exclusive privileges, theirs must be among the first to
go.

Against these various denominations of Privileged Classes, of people who
thrive under existing institutions better than they would hope to thrive
under any probable change, and who are, therefore, the natural
Conservatives of the country, we are now to set in array the classes who
are dissatisfied with their position, and who compose the natural
Radicals.

To begin with the middle classes. In almost every division of them the
majority are on the side of change. The same cause which makes the
landlords Conservatives, makes the bulk of the manufacturing and
mercantile classes Reformers. The chief exceptions are the protected
trades, and, as already mentioned, the very rich manufacturers and
merchants of all denominations; though even these have sources of
dissatisfaction in common with the rest. The class, as a class, feel
that they have not justice done them by existing institutions. Their
most essential interests are made to give way to the idlest fears, the
most silly prejudices of the landowners. To keep up rents, and under a
mistaken notion too of their being in reality much kept up, the profits
of capital are brought down by the Corn Laws to the lowest scale;
foreign nations whose produce we will not take, are unable to take our
manufactures, and those who can, are provoked to enact retaliatory laws
against us, and to establish manufactures which are treading upon the
heels of ours. We are driven, or in yearly apprehension of being driven,
out of one market after another. Our small capitalists are emigrating in
numbers, because they can no longer live upon their profits. The
difficulty of subsisting on the proceeds of a moderate capital, whether
in business or at interest, continually increases. The field of
employment becomes more and more crowded; contracted artificially by the
Corn Laws. And this is not a casual evil, the result of a passing error,
which can be remedied by the mere progress of discussion. Discussion has
done its work; the obstacle lies deeper than it can reach. The landlords
are masters of the legislature. They know their power; they have the
manufacturers down, and they mean to keep them down. The heads of the
agricultural party boast of the working of the Corn Laws. They triumph
in having secured to themselves by these laws the full profit of a
season of scarcity. They have their hands upon the loaf on every man’s
table, and will not let it go; and their organs load with abuse the
Edition: current; Page: [476] “grasping capitalists,” because they had
rather not be ruined to fatten the landowners. The Corn Laws may be got
rid of; but it can only be through a further Parliamentary Reform. The
last reform left almost unabated the master-evil, the preponderance of
the Corn Law interest. And the manufacturers and merchants will have to
learn what the working classes have already learnt—that they must
combine to agitate, not against the Corn Laws, but against the source of
the Corn Laws, as well as of every other grievance—the vicious
constitution of the legislature.

The bulk of the middle classes of the towns, the ten-pound electors, are
still more universally Reformers. They are the greatest sufferers of all
by low profits, and an overcrowded field of employment. They belong
almost universally to the “uneasy classes.” They are nearly all of them
struggling either against the difficulty of subsisting, or against that
of providing for their sons and daughters. They have no common interest
or fellow feeling with the aristocracy; under no circumstances can they
hope to be participators of aristocratic privileges; and they are
accustomed to conjunct action, to meet in Corporations, form
associations and hold public meetings, without waiting for a lord or the
owner of ten thousand acres to put himself at their head. The new
municipal bodies have been already of admirable use towards the
political education of this class. Those assemblies are normal schools
of real public business; and are forming, in all the considerable towns,
able and experienced local leaders for the Reform party. Reform has
another and a still stronger hold upon many of the class; upon many of
those among them who are most prosperous in their circumstances, and
least under the influence of the causes of dissatisfaction which act
upon the trading classes through their pecuniary means. A great part of
the most thriving and influential of the town electors are Dissenters;
and as such, are in open opposition to one of the great aristocratic
institutions, one with which all the rest are inseparably interwoven. No
part of the Reform body, for constancy in their political conduct, are
more entirely to be depended upon than these. Between them and the
aristocracy, there is a deeper gulph fixed than can be said of any other
portion of the middle class; and when men’s consciences, and their
interests, draw in the same direction, no wonder that they are
irresistible.

Almost all the skilled employments, those which require talent and
education but confer no rank,—what may be called the non-aristocratic
professions—are to a great degree in the hands of Dissenters, and those
professions may, in any case, be numbered among the natural Radicals. If
the great landowners are mostly Tories, it would surprise some persons
to know how many of the men who manage their affairs, how many of the
stewards, and attornies of men of fortune, are Dissenters and Liberals;
and where the landlord does not take a very active part in politics, the
influence of his agent in an election often goes as far as his. The men
of active and aspiring talent, indeed, in all classes except the
highest, are Radicals everywhere; for what is Radicalism, but the claim
of pre-eminence for personal Edition: current; Page: [477] qualities
above conventional or accidental advantages? And what more certain than
that a man of talent, compelled to serve men of no talent, and taught by
daily experience that, even if fortune favours him he can scarcely by
the labours of a life raise his head to a level with their feet, will
be, by a natural tendency, something of a leveller?

There is another body besides the Dissenters, whom their religious
sentiments place among the natural Radicals, among those who either are
Radicals already, or are ripe for being so as soon as they awaken to
their position; we mean the Church Reformers, a growing body among the
laity and even among the clergy of the Church of England. They are, more
than can be said perhaps of any other class, determined to the Reform
side by a sense of duty only, without the additional stimulus of a
personal injury. They are not, like the Dissenters, taxed for the
support of a worship which is not theirs; but they see the religion
which is theirs, corrupted in the way in which every religion has been
corrupted, by the secular interests of its ministers; and this because
those ministers spring from the aristocracy, and are part and parcel of
the aristocracy; because the class that predominate in the legislature
present to livings, and by being the makers of ministries, are the
dispensers of ecclesiastical dignities; because the proprietors of the
land are the proprietors of the Church too, and their interest is that
its much pay be burthened with little work. The Church Reformers will
never attain their object while the House of Commons is under the
influence of those for whose benefit Church abuses exist. They must be
Radicals if they would be successful Church Reformers. Every doctrine
and practice, which either in present times, or in times past, has
tended to corrupt the Church, every claim which has been advanced to
spiritual despotism, or countenance given to worldly sycophancy, has
emanated from the Tory part of the body, and has been dictated by the
desire to make the Church a political engine. For any aid in chasing
such doctrines and practices out of the sanctuary, the Church Reformers
can look to the Liberals alone.

In addition to all these classes must be included among the natural
Radicals nearly all Scotland and all Ireland. Since the Church of John
Knox followed the example of its richer sister, and from the People’s
Church made itself the Laird’s Church, one half of the people of
Scotland have become Voluntaries; most of the remainder are Church
Reformers, enemies to the great abuse of both Churches’ individual
patronage. Half the members for the Scotch counties, and all the members
for the boroughs, except one, are even now Liberals, most of them
Radicals; and nearly all the places which now return Whigs will return
Radicals when the present equivocal position of parties is ended, and
the question is distinctly put between Radicalism and Conservatism. Of
the Irish little need here be said. It would be strange, indeed, if a
people who have never known any thing but oppression from their
government, oppression slowly and reluctantly relaxed under the
compulsion of their growing force; a people who have been for centuries,
and are still, the most wronged and the most suffering in Europe—were
not Edition: current; Page: [478] numbered among the Disqualified
Classes; if they were not eager to ally themselves with anybody who will
be, or who will but seem, the enemy of their enemies. And they well
know, that where there is such a mass of mischief to be cleared away,
where it is necessary to cut so deep, they will find no real fellow
feeling but in the Radicals; that from them alone have they any chance
of complete redress; and that their only policy is an alliance with the
other Disqualified Classes, to give the ascendancy to the Radical
interest in the empire.

Last, but not the least formidable part of the Radical body, comes the
whole effective political strength of the working classes: classes
deeply and increasingly discontented, and whose discontent now speaks
out in a voice which will not be unheard; all whose movements are now
made with an organization and concert of which those classes were never,
at any former period, capable, and with a comprehension of political
tactics, and of the necessity of postponing all subordinate ends to the
main end, not yet reached by any other class of Reformers. As to this
point, indeed, the whole Reform party has much to learn from their
example. There are as many conflicting opinions, as much diversity of
ultimate objects, among the Chartists themselves, as between the
Chartists and the Moderate Radicals. But they have agreed for the
present to let all disputed questions alone, and to pursue exclusively
those changes in the representation, about the expediency of which they
all are agreed, and through which alone they hope to obtain a
legislature from whom they can look for a just adjudication of their
points of difference. Much less mutual concession than this would make
the Radicals complete masters of the next House of Commons.

These, then, are the Disqualified Classes; those who in addition to
their share of the general interest, have a particular interest in
opposition to things as they are; who either have special grievances, or
upon whom the general grievances bear with peculiar weight. In calling
upon all these sections to knit themselves together into one compact
body, we are not seeking to build a party on a mere combination of
classes for the promotion of separate interests, however legitimate. We
are appealing in behalf of the general interest of all, to those whose
particular interests have opened their eyes. It is not for themselves,
it is for a principle, that we would summon them into the field. Instead
of calling upon all sorts of men to seek redress for their particular
wrongs by an alteration in the distribution of political power, we
should beseech them to bear those private grievances patiently, and
trust for relief to the progress of opinion among the ruling classes
themselves, did we see in those classes any of the qualifications which
entitle a government to the respect and attachment of the governed. We
would bear many injuries rather than stir up discontent against
institutions and rulers that we deemed, on the whole, beneficent. But
before we accord any such forbearance, we demand that they make out
their title to it. We do not acknowledge that any such right is
conferred by the mere possession of power. As whatever is noble or
disinterested in Toryism is founded upon a recognition of the moral duty
of submission to rightful authority, Edition: current; Page: [479] so
the moral basis of Radicalism is the refusal to pay that submission to
an authority which is usurped, or to which the accidents of birth or
fortune are the only title. The Tory acknowledges, along with the right
to obedience, a correlative obligation to govern for the good of the
ruled: the Radical requires the performance of that obligation as the
condition of his obedience. He acknowledges no call upon him to pause in
the pursuit of his just claims, rather than endanger institutions which
he believes never were intended for his good. Believing the government
of this country to be in the main a selfish oligarchy, carried on for
the personal benefit of the ruling classes, he is not Utopian enough to
address himself to the reason of his rulers, he endeavours to attain his
object by taking away their power. One Radical differs from another as
to the amount of change which he deems necessary for setting what is
wrong right: but as to the kind of change there is no disagreement: it
must be by diminishing the power of those who are unjustly favoured, and
giving more to those who are unjustly depressed: it must be by adding
weight in the scale to the two elements of Numbers and Intelligence, and
taking it from that of Privilege. To do this, is the object of all
Radicals: to do it cautiously and tentatively, but to go on doing it
till it is done effectually, is the policy of Moderate Radicalism; it is
the Durham policy, and under its banner we hope to see gathered together
the whole Movement party of the empire.

It is not to be dissembled, however, that to form a united Movement
party is not so easy as to form a compact Conservative one.
Conservatives may differ on policy, but their end is the same, to keep
the great institutions of the country as they are. Reformers differ not
only about the means of effecting changes, but about the changes
themselves. We have among us men who are terrified at Universal
Suffrage, and men who hold that any thing short of Universal Suffrage
would be a mischief and a delusion: we have men who cherish the
principles of a Church Establishment, and men to whom the compulsory
support of a State religion appears not only a tyranny but a sin. There
are religious differences in our ranks, which of all differences of
opinion set men most at variance with one another; and there is an
opposition of interest, which gives birth, it would seem, to the most
deep-rooted distrusts and aversions which exist in society—the
opposition between capitalists and labourers. On these differences our
adversaries rely. They know that they have nothing to fear if the
physical strength of the Reform party can be set in array against the
education and property of it, or if the latter can be divided against
itself. They flatter themselves that the middle and the working classes,
that the Catholics, the liberal Churchmen, and the Dissenters, can never
act cordially together. And they hope that large bodies of the natural
Radicals may be frightened into the arms of the Conservatives, by dread
of Mr. O’Connell and of the Voluntaries, or of Mr. Stephens and Mr.
Feargus O’Connor.

There is much plausibility in these hopes; nevertheless, the enemy may
be reminded, that they counted upon exactly the same thing on the eve of
the Reform Edition: current; Page: [480] Bill. Then too they thought
that the Reformers could never agree, could never join in asking for the
same measure. The topic came round with the regularity of clock-work in
every juvenile Tory’s maiden speech against Reform. A month before Lord
Grey came into office—the very day after the Duke of Wellington’s famous
declaration[*]—Sir Robert Peel said, “that although the Reformers might
have a majority on the whole, there would be more voices for keeping the
representation as it was, than there would be for any one mode of
changing it.” The event proved, however, that the Tory leader had made a
false calculation. He had omitted to consider, that persons who were not
agreed about their ultimate destination might be agreed about the next
step; might have sufficient common sense to perceive, that they could
not expect to accomplish more than one step at a time; and that they
might as well make use of one another’s assistance in taking that step,
each being at liberty to go forward afterwards in his own peculiar
track. What has been done once, may be done again, provided it can be
well understood among us what is to be the next step, and that it be one
which by those who wish to go farther shall still be deemed a good in
itself, and not calculated to impede subsequent steps, unless indeed it
should work so well as to satisfy those, by whom ulterior progress is
desired. It is enough if we can agree about the things which it is
possible to do just now. If Reform is to be deferred until Mr. Lovett
and Mr. Cleave contend for it by the same arguments as Mr. Ward and Sir
Lytton Bulwer, or until Dr. Wardlaw and Dr. Pye Smith talk exactly the
same language in Church matters as Mr. Baptist Noel, we concede that it
is not likely to be obtained in our time. But it is quite another thing,
to believe that every one of these personages retaining his own
sentiments and opinions, Dr. Wardlaw and Mr. Baptist Noel might consider
one another as allies, not adversaries, a mutual help instead of a
hindrance; and even that Mr. Lovett might be led to see in a policy
which Mr. Ward would approve, advantage, and not injury, to the cause
which he himself defends.

A great part of the difficulty arises from the mistaken, and, in
reality, unpractical idea, that in order to help one another it is
necessary that Reformers should be silent on their points of difference.
So far from this, one Reformer often gives a more effectual support to
another by demanding more than he, than by demanding only as much. We
would have them aid one another not by leaving their opinions and
feelings unspoken, but by speaking them. We would have every man loudly
cry out for what he deems most important, for whatever he is most in
earnest in desiring to see carried. Men are sure to be more stirring and
active for all that they want, than for a part only of what they want:
while, the more deeply-seated the dissatisfaction is seen to be, and the
more it seems to require to satisfy it, the greater is the intimidation
of the enemy. It is not those who ask for all, but those who reject less
than all, that render union impossible. Men may combine in supporting a
good thing which is to be had now, and continue to do all they can
Edition: current; Page: [481] by speech and writing for something they
think better, which the time is not yet come for putting into a
practical shape and carrying through Parliament. Each may drive at his
separate and remote object in addition to, and not to the exclusion of,
the immediate and practicable one. Voluntaries and Church Reformers, may
mutually support one another at elections, without its being an
understood condition that either, when elected, shall restrain the
expression of any of his opinions on the Church question; and a man may
join in agitating for Universal Suffrage with those who agree with him,
and yet co-operate on other occasions with men who go no further than
Household Suffrage.

A still greater obstacle has been the want of a directing head, the only
possible bond of union of a body consisting of many scattered parts. In
this respect, as in so many others, that becomes possible, as soon as we
have a recognized leader, which was impracticable before. All ranks and
shades of Reformers would not have rallied round “the Bill, the whole
Bill, and nothing but the Bill,” if it had been only the speculative
project of an individual Member of Parliament: they took it because it
was the thing offered to them by men who had a prospect of carrying a
measure when they made it their own; and was distinguished from all
other schemes of Reform by this, that it was actually to be had. It is
as true now as then, that the different denominations of Reformers will
not find out by themselves what it is that they can agree in supporting,
what it is that would content all of them, at least as a step. There is
no probability of their arranging among themselves how they may all join
in agitating for the same thing. Some one in a sufficiently commanding
position must give the word; some minister, or some one who may be made
a minister, must declare the thing that is wanting; must announce it as
the object of any administration which he will consent to form. The
leader must not wait to receive his measures from his supporters. It is
his business to know, better than they know themselves, not only what is
in itself right, but what they are prepared to support. The leader of
the Reform party, must be a leader who will lead. He must do like Lord
Durham in Canada, “take the initiative.” And it is because Lord Durham
is almost the only man in the first rank of public life, and on the
popular side, who has shown in practice that he both can do this and
dares do it, that we believe him to be the man most fitted to be the
popular leader, but we are far from thinking him the only man who would
be able to make himself followed as such.

And let there be no misunderstanding. It is no single measure; it is a
whole system of policy that the leader, whoever he is, will have to
proclaim. It is not for the Ballot, nor even for the Ballot accompanied
by Household Suffrage, that the whole force of the Movement party will
ever again take the field. The Ballot is a necessary part of what must
be contended for, and so is an extension of the Suffrage, corresponding
to what is meant by Household Suffrage. But the present body of
electors, even with any reinforcement that might be made to them from a
class similar to their own, would still, in the estimation of the active
Radicals among the working classes, be a mere oligarchy. It is the
opinion of the Edition: current; Page: [482] Operatives, that unless the
Suffrage comes down to their own level, anything which enables it to be
exercised more independently does them harm. The men of thews and sinews
will never give their confidence to a party recommended only by
willingness to take from the aristocracy and give to the shopocracy. On
the other hand, to propose Universal Suffrage would be to bid adieu to
all support from the middle class. Most of the Reformers who belong to
that class at present, deem Universal Suffrage objectionable in
principle: to no sober man among them does the time appear to be come
for it; and if they were obliged to choose between the principles of the
Whigs or even the moderate Tories, and those of the Chartists, very few
of them would prefer the latter. A practical statesman must look farther
and use other means, to induce the middle and the working classes to act
in harmony.

No practical and judicious statesman could, even on the very unlikely
supposition of his being so inclined, take his stand anywhere but on the
middle class. He must necessarily rest, not on those who have no votes,
but on those who have, and who can give him a majority in Parliament. It
does not follow, that he is obliged to take their policy; it follows
only, that he must be able to make them take his: that he must carry
them with him in all he does, and need not attempt anything which there
is no chance whatever of prevailing on them to support. He cannot
therefore, attempt Universal Suffrage. To extend the franchise to the
whole middle class, to equalize its distribution among that class, to
enable that class to exercise it freely, all this he can and ought to
aim at. He might even possibly propose some means of tempering the
government of the middle classes with a partial admixture of
representatives elected chiefly by the working men: for in such an
amount of concession it would not be hopeless that the middle classes
might be made to see both justice, and an increase of their own
security. But it would be idle to expect that they could be induced to
swamp themselves, and hand over to unskilled manual labour the entire
powers of the government. Do we regret this? No: let Universal Suffrage
be ever so desirable, let it even be ever so practicable when the minds
of the other classes have been for some time gradually prepared for it
by intermediate measures, it cannot be either good or practicable now.
One great experiment in government is as much as a nation can safely
make at a time. From the government of the higher to that of the middle
classes is already a mighty change, and it is rather soon to begin
making a second before we have more than half accomplished that. Let us
have full experience of what that does for us before we try another. The
French Revolution is an example of how little is ultimately gained by
attempting greater changes than the general state of opinion is prepared
for. After going the round for a whole generation of every form of
government, from democracy to military despotism, what did the French at
last sit down contented with? Exactly the same thing, neither more nor
less, which they were ripe for when the revolution began.

What, then, has a liberal statesman to offer to the working classes? The
greatest Edition: current; Page: [483] thing of all; and a thing which
must precede Universal Suffrage—if Universal Suffrage is ever to come
without a civil war. He must redress the practical grievances of the
working classes. They are now the Parias of society; not a voice is ever
raised in the legislature for their good, except it be for some
restraint upon their liberty, or curtailment of their pleasures: an end
must be put to this. The motto of a Radical politician should be,
Government by means of the middle for the working classes. One of the
most original and powerful of recent political writers,* has expressed
the principle with admirable aptness and force:—Until Universal Suffrage
be possible,—to govern the country as it would be necessary to govern
it, if there were Universal Suffrage and the people were well educated
and intelligent.

Is it conceivable, for instance, that in a country where there was
Universal Suffrage, and where the people were intelligent, the labouring
classes would suffer themselves to be taxed on the bread they eat, to
the verge of starvation, avowedly to keep up the rents of the landlords?
That the importation of almost all other kinds of provisions would be
absolutely prohibited? That two-thirds of the whole revenue of the
country would consist of taxes on the articles of their consumption?
That even of those articles, the inferior qualities, which alone they
consume, would be taxed three or four times higher in proportion to
their value, than the finer qualities which are used by the richer
classes? Is this a system of revenue and commerce which could ever
co-exist with Universal Suffrage and an intelligent people?

Is it credible, again, that with such a Suffrage and such a people the
exhibitions would be afforded us, which we now see every time that a man
with a good coat and a man with a shabby coat come into collision before
any of the petty courts of justice? Should we find police magistrates,
when a nobleman’s son has beaten somebody to death’s door, or another
has fired air-guns from a coach window, or a wretch of “respectable
appearance” has grossly insulted a woman in the streets, almost
apologizing to the culprits for fining them five pounds and dismissing
them,—while a poor man on some trifling accusation has every presumption
strained against him, the magistrates descant in set terms on the
imperious demands of public justice and the enormity of his offence, and
his family are left to starve or come upon the parish, while he is lying
in prison for want of bail? Would it be the common practice of the
legislature to fix as the minimum of penalty sums which amount to
several weeks’ wages of a working man, and as the maximum in exactly the
same case, what to a man of fortune falls short of the average
expenditure of half-a-day? Would there be vagrant laws which make
poverty punishable—laws by which any magistrate may put any poor person
into gaol? Would there be more persons in prison for offences against
the game laws than for Edition: current; Page: [484] all other offences
together, and would gamekeepers be sent out in bands of a dozen at a
time to wage mortal combat against men on account of the life of a
pheasant?

Again, if the class that supplies the men who fight the battles of their
country and man her ships, had any voice in making the laws of that
country, is it likely that they would reserve the stripes for
themselves, and leave the commissions and the honours for those who can
pay for them? Would they suffer themselves to be impressed into the navy
by force, because we will not make their portion in it such as any one
will accept by choice; because we will neither give them the wages which
they can earn in open market, nor leave an opening for them to rise so
much as to the rank of a midshipman, in all the long years between the
press-gang and Greenwich Hospital?

Again, if the people who walk in footpaths made the law, could a single
magistrate, with the assistance of any other justice of peace who is
dining at his house, shut up a path, aye, or a road, which existed
before his park was made—by which for centuries the labourer had
shortened his way to his work, and tasted the breath of free air—a path
not even passing near his windows or intruding upon his privacy, but
crossing some bye-corner of his domain, and exposing to some
constructive jeopardy his hares and patridges? Would there be whole
counties of England where the gentlemen have abolished every field path,
where the foot passenger has nothing but a dusty road to travel on?
Would the bit of grass by the side even of that road be enclosed to give
an additional rood of ground to the Squirearchy of the adjoining fields?
Would the commons on which the whole inhabitants of a village once
enjoyed pure air and sunshine, and athletic amusements, be seized and
ploughed up in one district after another; and would it have been laid
down by the Court of King’s Bench that compensation in any such case is
due only to the neighbouring landholders, who alone had right of common,
while those who have erected cottages and subsisted by the bit of ground
they took in, and the cow or pig they turned out, may be ejected from
their holding without equivalent? Could these things be if the working
classes had a voice in the state?

And, more even than this, if the working classes had power to make their
well-being a matter of concern to those who rule, if they had even power
enough to make the ruling classes uneasy as to the consequences of their
ignorance, could this government absolutely neglect one of its highest
duties, one which not only republican American but nearly all the
despotic governments of the Continent studiously and conscientiously
execute—the duty of seeing the people taught? Could it continue neither
to provide the teaching, nor to hold out any inducements to the people
to find it for themselves? While it leaves all secular instruction, not
only to the voluntary principle, but to the voluntary principle unaided
by any of those facilities and encouragements which are quite compatible
with the principle, would it maintain the most costly of all Church
Establishments on pretence of religious instruction, while the real
religious teaching of the poorer classes, such teaching as they receive,
they owe after all to the voluntary principle? If the Edition: current;
Page: [485] working classes had votes, would not everybody be anxious
for their instruction, for their intellectual improvement? Would not
every one be eager to establish, not bad, but good schools for them; to
write books for them on the most important subjects, to make the best
ideas of the best minds accessible to them, to present the grounds of
every public measure, the justification of every institution of the
state, in such a form as should convince them? And would not this
necessity, even of itself, tend to make our institutions and measures
much more generally such as can be so defended?

But we have not yet touched the core of the question. Such grievances as
those we have mentioned have ceased to hold more than a secondary place
in the estimation of the working classes themselves. Even the Corn Laws
are now no longer capable of interesting them strongly. Their minds are
engrossed with one subject—the relation between labourers and employers.
It is for the sake of benefitting themselves in that relation, that they
desire Universal Suffrage. They believe that they have not a just share
of the fruits of their industry. They impute this to the large portion
which is taken by the capitalist. They are persuaded that were there a
reduction of taxation, or even a repeal of the Corn Laws, and all other
things remained the same, not they but their masters would reap the
benefit; and they care little for any changes in government, or even in
society, that would not enable them to make their contract for wages on
more advantageous terms. No political party will carry the working
classes along with it unless it have something to propose which will be
deemed by the more reasonable part of the working classes an evidence of
good intentions on this point. But there is a much larger portion of
them who are reasonable, and they would be much more easily satisfied
than is supposed by those who are unacquainted with the state of their
minds.

There is an enormous amount of misunderstanding among the other ranks of
society as to the opinions of the working classes, and a degree of
distrust and terror of their supposed projects, greatly beyond the cause
for it. The quarrels between trades unions and capitalists, the cry for
the “rights of labour”[*] against the “claims of capital,”[†] do not
mean spoliation; nor is the Chartist agitation, as an able man among the
Moderate Radicals has called it, “the anti-Poor-Law movement in
disguise.”[‡] The Oastlers and Stephenses represent only the worst
portion of the Operative Radicals, almost confined, moreover, to a
narrow district in the North. If we would know the sentiments of the
intelligent leaders of the working classes, we must look to the Working
Men’s Association in London; who framed the People’s Charter; who
originated the agitation for it; who have some of their members present
at every meeting which is held for it in any part of the Edition:
current; Page: [486] country; and who represent the best and most
enlightened aspect of working-class Radicalism.

There is much error afloat even about the character, as men, of
thepolitically active part of the Operative body. There is a notion
abroad that they are the ill-conditioned and ill-conducted portion—the
desperadoes of the class. The very contrary is the fact. Hardly any
drunken or profligate working man is a politician. Such men do not read
newspapers, or interest themselves in public measures; they take part in
strikes, but not in Political Unions. The politicians of the class are
almost universally its most respectable and well-conducted men. They are
the heroes of their class; men respected and looked up to by the rest.
We have been credibly informed that even the Glasgow convicts were sober
domestic men, of unexceptionable habits in all relations between
individual and individual, where their class feelings did not
interfere;[*] and it is but in a small part that the class feelings take
so terrible a shape. In London the political leaders of the working
classes are not only some of their best men, but are also, to a great
extent, instructed and cultivated men; they are, moreover, growing every
day in instruction and intelligence; they have shaken off, within the
last few years, many crude notions, and have made quite progress enough
not to see any benefit to their class in a general conflagration, nor
look to agrarian laws, or taxes on machinery, or a compulsory minimum of
wages, as the means of improving its condition.

We do not dissemble that many even of the very best of these men
entertain notions in political economy with which we by no means
coincide. There is in fact no essential difference between their ideas
as to the general circumstances which determine the condition of the
labourer, and those common among their class. They believe that they are
ground down by the capitalist. They believe that his superiority of
means, and power of holding out longer than they can, enables him
virtually to fix their wages. They ascribe the lowness of those wages,
not, as is the truth, to the over-competition produced by their own
excessive numbers, but to competition itself; and deem that state of
things inevitable so long as the two classes exist separate—so long as
the distinction is kept up between Capitalist and Labourer. These
notions are in fact Owenism; and Owenism, as those are aware who
habitually watch the progress of opinion, is at present in one form or
other the actual creed of a great proportion of the working classes. But
Owenism does not necessarily, it does not in the mind of its benevolent
founder, imply any war against property. What is hoped for is, not
violently to subvert, but quietly to supersede the present arrangements
for the employment of capital and labour. The labourers wish to become
their own capitalists; they have founds for the purpose, since they have
funds for strikes, and Trade Societies, and Benefit Clubs. These funds
they desire to employ as capitals of their own, administering them on
their Edition: current; Page: [487] common account, and dividing the
whole produce among the labourers. And what, it may be asked, prevents
them from setting about this whenever they please? The defects of the
law; which, on the subject of partnership, and especially of numerous
partnerships, is one of the most imperfect in Europe: under which it is
almost impossible for a numerous body to invest their joint savings in a
productive employment, and to maintain any effectual control over the
managers to whom the immediate direction must be entrusted.[*]

We believe few people have any idea of the amount of good will which
might be gained from the working classes, and of the genuinely healing
effect which would be produced upon their minds, by so apparently small
a thing as the removal of this one grievance. A small thing to do, but a
great thing to leave undone; a thing which would make the Operatives
feel that they have fair play given them; that they have an opportunity
of trying to improve their condition in the way by which they think it
is to be improved—of trying, at their own risk, an experiment which
nobody has the smallest right to prevent them from trying, and which,
whether it succeed or fail, can do harm to nobody. On the contrary,
either its success or failure would do good to everybody. If it
succeeded—if the Co-operatives could contrive to carry on the great
operations of industry independently of individual capitalists,
independently of inequality of wealth and the irritating sense of
contrariety of interest—where is the good man, of whatever political
opinion, who would not hail their success? If they failed, would not
this be an instruction to them in political economy, worth a thousand
treatises? Would it not be the very lesson they need to learn, the very
experience they require? Would it not teach them that the present
arrangements respecting property and production, though they may not be
the best conceivable, are the best practicable, and that the only real
means of raising their condition are the correction of the abuses of
government, the improvement of their own habits, and a due proportioning
of their numbers to the field of employment, either by taking off the
superfluous hands through systematic colonization, or by forbearing to
call them into existence?

Such, then, are some of the duties of the government of the Middle
Classes towards the working class: duties which those classes cannot
leave unperformed, without drawing upon themselves the retribution which
sooner or later awaits all classes or bodies of men who seize the powers
of government, and emancipate themselves from its obligations. Suppose
now that a leader could be found, that a party could be formed in public
life, which stood upon the recognition of these duties as the ground of
its existence, and while it upheld the government of the Middle Classes,
used whatever influence it could acquire over those classes for the
purpose of getting those duties performed,—would it be no advantage to
the working classes that the middle classes should acknowledge such men
as its Edition: current; Page: [488] leaders, and engage itself in the
support of their policy? Would it not be worth while for the working
classes to lend a helping hand towards bringing about such a
result—towards placing a party entertaining these sentiments in that
commanding position? Without suspending the agitation for Universal
Suffrage—for we desire to stifle no man’s sincere opinion, least of all
that of the most numerous and ill-used class—would they not find their
account in showing that they seek it only as a means to a just and
reasonable end, and that men who will the same end may have their
support in endeavouring to work towards it by the existing means? As Mr.
O’Connell agitates for Repeal or Justice to Ireland, why should not
they, too, admit the alternative of Universal Suffrage or Equal Justice
to the Working Classes? The degree of support which this would give to
the attempt to obtain for them that equal justice, would lend a strength
to their friends among the middle classes which would in time suffice to
carry almost every thing which is desirable. Will they attain Universal
Suffrage sooner by appearing to seek not merely justice but
predominance? Will they arrive at it sooner by confirming the middle
classes in the idea that not redress of wrong, but nothing less than the
power of inflicting it, will satisfy them? If ever democratic
institutions are to be obtained quietly, a great change in the
sentiments of the two great classes towards one another must precede the
concession; at present there is hardly a person possessed of the
smallest property (and they are strong enough in this country, even in
numbers, to make a desperate defence) who would not prefer almost any
evils to those which they would expect from the political ascendancy of
the working classes.

More than this; are the great and intelligent portion of the Operative
classes of whom the London Working Men’s Association is the
representative, are even they themselves free from apprehension of the
mass of brutish ignorance which is behind them? of the barbarians whom
Universal Suffrage would let in, although at present caring nothing
about it, and unable to do anything towards gaining it until the affair
becomes one of brute force? Do they never think of the state of the
agricultural labourers? of the depraved habits of a large proportion of
the well-paid artisans? Do they forget Sir William Courtenay?[*] do they
forget Swing? do they forget that in a great city like Glasgow it has
been recently ascertained that every tenth house is a spirit shop? have
they forgotten the secret murders, the throwing of sulphuric acid? Can
they wonder that the middle classes, who know all these things, and who
do not know them, should tremble at the idea of entrusting political
power to such hands? Cannot the intelligent working classes be
persuaded, that even for themselves it is better that Universal Suffrage
should come gradually? that it should be approached by steps bearing
some relation to the progressive extension of intelligence and morality,
from the higher to the lower regions of their own manifold domain? Lord
Durham’s advice to them in one of his Newcastle speeches was the true
one: to seek political power by one road, the only Edition: current;
Page: [489] safe, the only practicable one, by showing more and more
that they are worthy of it.[*] The strongest prejudices exist, not
inexcusably, in the minds of the best men among the middle classes,
against them and their claims; let it be their effort to overcome those
prejudices; let the Associations continue, as we are happy to say they
do already, to inculcate temperance, economy, kindness, every household
virtue, and every rational and intellectual pursuit, among their
members. Let them systematically discountenance all appeals to violence,
and let those who really disapprove of the destructive schemes
propounded by some of the talkers, take fit opportunities of making
known their disapprobation. Discussion is rapidly doing its work in
cultivating the intelligence of the working classes; the appreciation of
that intelligence will necessarily follow. Every year we expect to see
an advancement both in their real good sense and good conduct, and in
the recognition of it by other people.

We think it desirable even now that the suffrage should be such as to
let in some members returned chiefly by the working classes. We think it
of importance that Mr. Lovett and Mr. Vincent should make themselves
heard in St. Stephen’s as well as in Palace yard, and that the
legislature should not have to learn the sentiments of the working
classes at second-hand. We believe these and some others we could name,
to be men who, to say the least, would do no discredit to the House of
Commons. We desire, too, that a sufficient number of the respectable
working men should have votes, for their influence to be felt in many
elections in which they have not the preponderance. We would give them
power, but not all power. We wish them to be strong enough to keep the
middle classes in that salutary awe, without which, no doubt, those
classes would be just like any other oligarchy; sufficiently strong for
making it necessary to listen to their complaints, and for giving weight
to the counsels of those who press their just claims upon the attention
of the legislature. What precise extension of the suffrage would best do
this, we cannot now undertake to decide: but there is evidently no
particular difficulty in discovering it.

Next to the division between the middle and the working classes, the
only other great discordance among Reformers relates to Church affairs.
There, indeed, the dissonance by no means amounts to a rupture. The
Dissenters, the Roman Catholics, and the liberal Churchmen, are far from
being on the terms on which the Chartists and the middle classes are.
All the efforts of the Tories to make a quarrel between them have not
hitherto prevented them from being allies; but they are not, by any
means, such close allies as they might be; nor is the full force of any
of the three bodies, the Irish Catholics excepted, drawn forth to take
part in the contest. Edition: current; Page: [490] Many a sincere
reformer of the Church of England stands aloof, or leans to the
Conservatives, from fear of the Voluntaries or of the Catholics, who at
present may be regarded as Voluntaries; and many a Dissenter, even many
a Voluntary, abstains from mixing actively in politics, because he does
not like the Papists and Socinians with whom he is told that he would
have to identify himself. A still greater number in all these classes
confine their exertions in the cause to Ecclesiastical matters, and take
little part in the general movement of political affairs; because they
do not yet see, in any set of men who are competitors for office, any
guarantee for the Ecclesiastical changes which they are desirous of; and
being made Reformers chiefly by their religious sentiments, if they
entered into political combinations it could only be for the sake of
bringing men into power by whose elevation they would expect to forward
their religious views: which views being different, cannot, it would at
first sight appear, be all promoted by supporting the same men.

The latter difficulty, however, is more in appearance than in reality.
The religious questions are no exceptions to the general rule, that all
sections of Reformers are each other’s best friends, and have, for
immediate purposes, one common interest. The Voluntaries and the Church
Reformers have different ultimate aims, it is true. But each of these
parties ought not the less to see in the other its best ally. The
Voluntary is not the foe of the Liberal Churchman, but his auxiliary;
the thunderer without the gate, who is ever the main strength of the
Reformer within. The Liberal Churchman is not the antagonist of the
Voluntary, but his next of kin; they have the same enemies, and
partially at least the same objects; they both recognize and deplore in
the Church as it is, the predominance of the worldly character over the
spiritual; the one holds this vice to be inherent in the very nature of
a Church Establishment, the other hopes that the Church of England may
be purged of it; but the former does not the less acknowledge that a
reformed Church is a more spiritual thing than an unreformed one; and
would not the less welcome the growing strength in the Church itself of
those who wish to spiritualize it. Both are driving at the same end, by
different means; but every step made by the one is so much gained for
the other.

There are in the Established Church men who value, and even profess to
value the Church, we will not say more than the Bible, but equally with
it, and hold the one as much an essential part of Christianity as the
other. And there are men who prize the Bible infinitely above the
Church, and would regard with horror any imputation of putting the two
on a level. To the former, the High Church party, we need not address
ourselves. We wish to do them all justice. They have much to say for
themselves. Many of them are sincerely religious men; and much of the
best spirit of religion dwells even in those who have carried the High
Church principle to the greatest pitch of exaggeration—the new school of
Oxford Theology. It is not impossible that such men may even desire to
see the Church more spiritualized, to see it purged of its abuses. But,
believing as they do, that mankind in general are to Edition: current;
Page: [491] take their religion not from private judgment but from an
appointed authority, and that the Church of England, as by law
established,[*] is that authority, to maintain that Church as a
recognized national institution is naturally the first object, and
anything else can only be secondary. It is to the Low Church party that
we are now addressing ourselves, to those members of the Church with
whom its spirituality passes before its political privileges; who are
already in the habit of combining, for missionary objects, with persons
beyond its pale; who desire to see it established, but would rather it
were not established than not reformed. We speak to those who believe
that the Church, as a national institution, has neglected its duties,
has sacrificed the welfare of the flock to the luxury and ease of the
shepherd; and who, if they were compelled to choose, would prefer the
risks of the Voluntary system to the certain evils of a professedly
Christian ministry sunk in indolence, and thinking more of its
enjoyments than of its responsibility.

To such men we say, fear not the Voluntaries. It is true they would
divest the Church of all existence as a political body; but what do you
yourselves seek to do? To induce the Church to reform itself: but did
any political body, whether hierarchy or aristocracy ever reform itself,
until it trembled for its existence? Did it ever listen to the warning
voice of the friend within the walls, save from terror of the enemy
without? Take any of the great historical examples, the Reformation for
instance. What has been the great purifier of the Roman Catholic Church?
Is it not, confessedly Protestantism? Do not all enlightened Roman
Catholics agree that the abuses with which they acknowledge that their
church swarmed before the Reformation, were far too dear to the
potentates of that church ever to have been yielded up to the mere
remonstrances of good men within her pale, but for the imminent
necessity of strengthening her against the assaults of the great
Reformers? Turn, again, to the improvement, a real improvement as far as
it goes, which the greatest adversaries of the Church of England admit
to have taken place within the last fifty years in the character and
conduct of her clergy: is not the beginning of this improvement, by
universal admission, coeval with the rise of Methodism? The best
reformers of the Church of England are those whom the authors and
protectors of her abuses stand most in fear of, those who make her feel
that “if she do not work, neither shall she eat.”[†] The real Church
Reformer ought to cherish the Voluntaries. They are not yet half strong
enough for his purpose. The enemy are not yet by any means sufficiently
alarmed.

The Voluntaries ought no less to cherish the Church Reformers. Are they
not, if not as politicians, yet as religious men, aiming at the same
end? Are not the Church Reformers endeavouring to make the Church what
the Voluntaries say it can only be made by separating it from the State?
If so, are they not the very persons from among whom a sincere Voluntary
ought to look for converts to Voluntaryism? For Edition: current; Page:
[492] men convinced as the Voluntaries are that a religious body cannot
be both an established church and an apostolical one, but who find
others (vainly, as they think) flattering themselves that it is possible
to unite the two, what can be a more natural wish than this, “Let them
try?” These are no idle speculations. There is already a numerous body
of some of the most religious men in the Church (Mr. Charles Lushington
in a recent pamphlet has spoken their sentiments)[*] who are hovering on
the very verge of separation from her, in consequence of the abuses in
her discipline, and the unprotestant and unchristian doctrines (as they
deem them) which are extensively professed and highly patronized within
her communion. Do not the Voluntaries, again, believe that not only what
upholds the abuses of the Church, but what keeps the Church connected
with the State, is secular interest? Let them, then, lay it well to
heart, that every point which the Church Reformers carry, diminishes by
so much the interested motives for supporting the Establishment: every
sinecure abolished cuts off one possessor and fifty expectants from the
supporters of things as they are; every step gained towards reducing the
emoluments of dignitaries or equalizing those of incumbents, every iota
of progress made in attaching duties to remuneration, and making it
necessary for the clergy to lead laborious lives, diminishes the value
of the Church to the self-interest of the aristocracy. Nay more, reform
in the Church cannot be complete (and it is to the honour of Mr. Baptist
Noel that he has proclaimed the fact) without cutting down to the ground
the great principle of all abuse, the nomination of parochial ministers
by irresponsible individuals. But when the system of advowsons is gone,
all is gone that gives the gentry at large a personal interest in the
Establishment. The Church would thenceforth stand as an institution,
upon her spiritual merits alone; and the stanchest Voluntary need not
fear to submit the question between the two principles, the voluntary
and the compulsory, to that test. If the Church could be spiritualized,
remaining an Established Church, it is his belief that she would at
once, and of herself, renounce her endowments.

We cannot doubt, then, that the Dissenters and the Church Reformers will
recognize that they have reason to link themselves together in strict
alliance, and rejoice in the progress and strength of each other, almost
as if it were their own. But there is also another feeling from which it
is equally necessary for them to free themselves. As religious men, many
of them feel a disinclination to associate for a common object with any
but religious men. This reluctance stands greatly in the way of their
attaining those of their religious objects to which the road lies
through political ones; for no politician can afford to reject
assistance because it is tendered to him by men whose religion is
different from his, or who may appear to him not to be sufficiently
under the influence of any religion. Having chosen his objects Edition:
current; Page: [493] according to his own view of right, he must avail
himself of any aid which circumstances render accessible to him, and
must consider those who are best qualified for aiding him effectually as
his most desirable allies. What, indeed, is this, but the very principle
which religious men themselves follow, in associating for religious
objects? Men of many different religious denominations co-operate in
Bible Societies, Missionary Societies, Societies for the Propagation of
the Gospel; they do not inquire if those with whom they associate agree
with them in all respects, but only if they have the one religious
requisite of a desire to promote the religious purpose for which they
are joined together. Why should they not carry the same principle into
politics, and be ready to ally themselves there also, as far as the
immediate purpose requires, with those persons, whatever be their creed
or sentiments, who possess the one political requisite of practical
efficiency in the promotion of those political ends, in which their
convictions as religious men, as well as their rights as citizens, are
so directly interested?

But the appeals of the Tories to religious antipathies are intended to
take effect, not so much upon the Dissenters or the real Church
Reformers, as upon a numerous body of Churchmen who do not reflect much
upon Ecclesiastical matters, nor have any very decided opinion on the
debateable points, but who have a habitual dislike of Dissent and
attachment to the Church, and are capable of being acted upon by vague
fears for its safety. To these the Tories preach of an alliance of
Papists, Dissenters, and Infidels, to destroy the Church: taking care to
add, that this threefold conspiracy against the Church is at the bottom
of all Radicalism; that the Constitution is attacked chiefly to get at
the Church, and that those who wish to pull down the Church, as many of
them as are not Papists or Dissenters, are enemies of all religion: from
whence it is left to be inferred that the chosen seat and main
stronghold of Christianity is the English aristocracy.

With regard to the assertion, that the infidels of the present day hate
the Church as the great bulwark of Christianity, and the aristocracy as
the bulwark of the Church, we could produce on the subject of it such an
array of facts and considerations bearing on the character of modern
infidelity, as would greatly disconcert those by whom the parrot cry is
mechanically repeated, and prove how utterly ignorant those who give any
credit to it must be of the march of European opinion, and the
differences between the present age and that of Voltaire and Diderot.
But to confine ourselves to the remark which lies nearest the surface,
we do not believe that the generality of English infidels are hostile to
the Church; we believe, on the contrary, that both infidels and
indifferents very generally prefer the Church of England to the other
forms of English Protestantism, as being more comprehensive, and
allowing far greater divergence of opinion without exclusion from its
communion. Both infidels and indifferents, too, are mostly, if we are
not mistaken, rather favourable than otherwise to the principle of a
Church Establishment. The famous argument of Hume, that an Established
Church is the Edition: current; Page: [494] best security against
fanaticism, expresses their real sentiments.[*] In a clergy voluntarily
supported, they dread what they would probably call excess of zeal and
lack of discretion. We believe that almost all persons, who are not much
in earnest about religion, would prefer, for the sake of their own ease
and quiet, an endowed to an unendowed clergy, although doubtless such of
them as are Radicals desire for political and not religious reasons,
that the Church should put off the character of an engine of state; an
object which the religious reformers have in common with them, and which
the difference of their religious sentiments constitutes no reason why
they should not jointly pursue.

With respect to Papists, the accusation of hostile designs against the
Church of England is a pure fiction, a paltry attempt to confound with
the English Church Establishment the monstrous anomaly known as the
Church of Ireland; a disgrace to the name of Church; a thing for which
the very attempt to set up a defence is itself an insult, and against
which, indeed, there is a perpetual alliance among all persons deserving
the name of Reformers. The thing is open, undisguised tyranny, and
admits of no compromise; nothing but unconditional surrender. Such a
thing as a Church imposed by conquest, and upheld by means of foreign
force, against the will of thirteen-fourteenths of the inhabitants,
never would be submitted to by any people except at the point of the
bayonet; and no Radical Ministry can make itself any party to the longer
continuance of the enormity. We do not say that a bill ought to be
brought in for its total extinction the moment a Ministry of Moderate
Radicals comes into power; a government must consider times and
circumstances, and not march too far in advance of the general
sentiment. It ought to begin at once preparing the public mind for this
act of justice. It should not hesitate to declare openly from the first
to what point it hopes to come: and it should begin immediately to cut
down the endowments to a modest provision for the religious instruction
of a small minority.

The Church of England is a totally different thing from the Church of
Ireland: against the one, war to the knife; in the other, the programme
of the Moderate Radicals should be a thorough and comprehensive Reform.
Not a Reform stopping at the dignitaries, and leaving untouched the
parochial clergy; it is of more consequence to a nation to have good
parish priests than good prelates: the Rector of Stanhope must be no
more spared than the Bishop of Durham. Abuse for abuse, a better case
may be made out for the salaries of the bishops than for the gross
inequalities of livings; and nothing can better show how the subject of
Church Reform has been trifled with, than that in none of the plans
hitherto patronized by politicians has any provision been made for this
branch of it. Difficulties would arise with respect to the owners of
advowsons, to whose claims, although a property in the cure of souls is
itself an abuse and the parent of all other abuses, an equitable
consideration is nevertheless due. An approach, however, to equilization
Edition: current; Page: [495] in the emoluments and duties of the
working clergy is indispensable. By throwing adjacent small parishes
into one (the county of Norfolk contains, we believe, as many parishes
as all Scotland), by subdividing large and populous town-parishes, and
by compelling every clergyman hereafter presented to a rich living, to
maintain a clergyman for some other place where he is wanted, the
desirable end might be attained with little disturbance.

A party, whether in office or not, which announced the principles of
such a plan; which, if in office, did as much as circumstances would
admit towards immediately realizing it, lost no opportunity of
approaching even a step nearer to it, and brought forward into the
places of dignity and power in the Church the numerous worthy and able
men who are favourable to these principles—would have the support of
every liberal man among the lay members of the Church, that of the
poorer clergy generally, and nearly the whole body of the curates! They
would have the support of all the Dissenters, of all Scotland, as well
as of all the Catholics of Ireland. Whenever, indeed, a Radical party
shall form itself, the leaders of the Irish Catholics must take their
place in it; Mr. O’Connell knows this perfectly well, whatever sparring
may occasionally pass between him and some of the body; and with that
quick feeling of the immediate interest of his country, which has never
yet been at fault, he would be one of the foremost to give in his
adhesion to any leader who would pledge himself to such a course of
policy as we have been advocating.

To the formation of such a party we now look forward with considerable
hope. All things are ripe for it. The ground is unoccupied; the man, in
a suitable station, who “goes a-head” with a policy adapted for uniting
the Reformers, will find all things prepared for him, and is sure of
everything, to the Premiership inclusive, which their support can give.
The policy we have outlined is the only policy by which the Reformers
would be enabled to face the constituencies. If the trial of strength at
the next general election were between Sir Robert Peel and Lord
Melbourne, we do not believe the Whigs themselves think they would have
any chance; but if it were between Sir Robert Peel and the leader of the
party we have sketched; between the representatives of the two great
principles,—not between two men whose politics differ from one another
only by the shadow of a shade,—we should look with confident hopes to a
very different result.

Edition: current; Page: [496] Edition: current; Page: [497]


WHAT IS TO BE DONE WITH IRELAND?
 1848?

Edition: current; Page: [498]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Holograph MS, Walpole Collection, King’s School, Canterbury. Not signed,
but in Mill’s hand. Not published, and therefore not listed in Mill’s
bibliography of his published writings. Dated on internal evidence. For
a description of the MS, and comment on it, see lx-lxi and lxiii above.

Harriet Taylor’s suggested revisions are indicated in pencil on the MS;
these are given in footnotes, keyed by superscript letters, and
identified as hers by the initials “HTM” (though, if the dating is
correct, she was not yet married to Mill; this use conforms to that in
other volumes of the Collected Works, and distinguishes her from her
daughter, Helen Taylor). Where Mill’s cancellations (made currently,
before HTM’s revisions were indicated) relate to her suggestions, these
are indicated and identified as his by “JSM.”

Edition: current; Page: [499]


What Is to Be Done with Ireland?

there are advisers who have a ready answer. aYou havea conquered; they
say bto the Governmentb. There is nothing to resist cyou. Yourc power
has been tried, and found adequate. dYoud are strong enough to
tyrannize: etherefore tyrannizee. Make no pretence of a free press, or
public meetings, or jury trial, or regular courts of justice. Govern by
the sword. Trample out the last spark of freedom in the country. Place
Ireland permanently in a “state of siege”.[*] Agitation, demagoguism, is
the real evil of Ireland. Put an end to it. Moral force is as bad as
physical. Let neither of them any longer be tolerated. Stop the mouth of
Ireland as well as tie her hands.

These fsuggestionsf are worth glistening to,g as an instance hhow far
the force of impudence can goh. It would be unjust either to the present
ministers or to any who iarei likely to succeed them, to suppose them
capable of acting on advice of this complexion. Yet this is at least a
plan, though a detestable one. It is true, there is no great expenditure
of ingenuity in it. Simple, straightforward military despotism is the
vulgarest and least recondite of political conceptions. Still, those who
recoil from this expedient ought to jhavej some other. The condition of
Ireland is not a thing which can be dealt with by people who do not know
what ends they are aiming at.

Open, armed resistance to government has been suppressed. It would k be
more correct to say, that none has been attempted. There has been
abundance of talking about an insurrection, but none of the reality. The
military operations of Mr. Smith Edition: current; Page: [500] Edition:
current; Page: [501] O’Brien have been about as much a rebellion as the
Boulogne expedition of Louis Napoleon was an invasion. There has been
all possible inclination to rise, but no rising. And most of the
individuals who attempted a rising, or who called on the people to rise,
having fallen into the hands of the authorities, there will be no great
difficulty in preventing any such attempts or instigations for some time
to come. If that be the sole end of government, it is for the present
attained. A people, in the utmost state of exasperation against the
government short of that which would make them rush upon fixed bayonets,
will be prevented, by those bayonets, for an indefinite period, from
forcibly expelling or overthrowing the rulers whom they detest.

[lf0223-06_figure_001.jpg]
Folio 1r of “What Is to Be Done with Ireland?” MS The King’s School,
Canterbury

But this is not what will satisfy anybody as a permanent state. To get
rid of the exasperation, by some means, must be the intention of
everybody. Will it be enough, for this purpose, to repress by violence
the outward signs of the feeling? or is it desired to get rid of the
cause?

The cause of Irish disaffection is not demagogism. It is no creation of
Mr. O’Connell or of Mr. Mitchell. These, and such as these, are the more
or less able and active, and skilful organs of dissatisfaction, who by
giving energetic expression to the general feeling, stimulate it into
activity, and make it outwardly powerful, but do not create it where it
is not. The causes of Irish disaffection are many and various; the
greatest of them being, that several millions of the Irish people having
nothing to support them but potatoes and for two or three months of
every year not enough of those, even when the crop has not failed; all
the remainder of what the land produces, be that remainder great or
small, being taken, under the name of rent, by about eight thousand
persons. If these several millions of Irish are dissatisfied under this
kind of arrangement, it must be acknowledged that they have something to
be dissatisfied with.

We shall be told, of course, that this is no fault of the government or
of the English nation, and no just ground of outcry against them. And
those who say this, will mostly say it lin alll sincerity. Conscious
that they themselves have no wish and that most people whom they know
have no wish, that the Irish should be starved or tyrannized over for
any English purposes, but would even give something in a time of famine
to keep them from starving, and have done so, mverym largely and
liberally less than two years ago, for which bounty they have nby no
meansn received the thanks which their intentions deserved, they think
it mere calumny to impute, in any degree, Ireland’s poverty and
wretchedness to any fault of theirs. But what avails it that England now
no longer grinds down the Irish from religious bigotry or manufacturing
jealousy; that Ireland’s wretchedness and degradation are not the work,
in the present generation at least, of England’s Edition: current; Page:
[502] tyranny? They are the work of England’s ignorance, oof England’so
prejudice, pof England’sp indifference; they are the effect of a vicious
social system, upheld by England. They result from a radically wrong
state of the most important social relation which exists in the country,
that between the cultivators of the soil and the owners of it; that
vicious state having been protected and perpetuated by a wrong and
superstitious English notion of property in land.

It is qof no use saying,q that the fault is not in the laws of property
or the customs relating to landed tenure, but in the people’s own
laziness, their recklessness, their improvident multiplication, which
would keep them in the same state of semistarvation, under any laws or
customs whatever. This laziness, this recklessness, rthis improvident
multiplication,r are themselves part and parcel of the evil of a bad
social system;s are a principal portion of the case against it. A people
may be lazy and improvident under any system, but they must be so under
the customs as to occupation of land, which exist in Ireland. When land
is let by competition, it may almost be said by auction to peasants
cultivating for food and not for profit, then if those peasants are
superabundant in numbers, their competition makes them engage for rents
impossible to be paid; and the utmost that can be paid becomes the
landlord’s by right, leaving the tenant still in debt to him. From that
time no industry, temperance, or prudence can make the peasant better
off; the landlord takes all. If here and there a peasant saves anything,
he takes care that his farm shall shew no traces of it; he invests it in
a distant savings bank, or hides it in the thatch of his cabin. On the
other hand, no indolence, or improvident increase of numbers, makes him
poorer: he and all his family are sure of potatoes while there are any
on the farm, and if there is nothing left, it is the landlord’s loss,
not his.

But what, it will be said, is the remedy? What, against such an evil,
can the government do? Is the legislature to set aside the proprietary
rights of the Irish landlords? By what means can those rights be
respected, and yet a larger portion of the produce of the soil, and a
more secure tenure, be bestowed on the cultivators?—The thing is not
easy. Nobody pretends that it is. To extinguish a system by which, under
the name of sanctions of property, the land with all that it produces
exists for the sole benefit, it may fairly be said, of a handful of
persons who neither by their labour, their skill, nor their
accumulations contribute in any way to its productiveness, is difficult,
consistently not merely with the claims of property, but without some
infringement of its acknowledged rights. Two things however are certain:
first, that the thing, although difficult, is not impossible: and
Edition: current; Page: [503] secondly, that difficult or not, it tmustt
be done. uIf it cannot, government altogether, in Ireland, vis a
failurev, and its foundations require to be broken up, and laid anew on
some different plan. The social condition of Ireland, wonce for all,
cannot be tolerated; it is an abomination in the sight of mankind.wu It
must be further said, that the more difficult any one declares it to
effect this indispensable transformation of the state of society in
Ireland the further he goes towards excusing, at least as to intention,
the Irish revolutionary party. The great and salutary change the
accomplishment of which by regular legislation is found so arduous, the
French Revolution actually accomplished. Before 1789 the peasantry of
most of the provinces of France were even more destitute and miserable
than Irish cottiers. By the revolution and its consequences, the
property of a great part of the soil of France passed into the hands of
the peasantry; and the result was the greatest change for the better in
their condition, both physical and moral, of which, within a single
generation, there is any record. The Irish leaders believed, thatx of
such a change, or anything equivalent to it under English government,
ythere was no chancey. They thought probably, that an Irish government
might effect it, or at all events that an Irish revolution would: and
that the value of the object was worth the risks of such a revolution.
And who zwillz presume to say athat they were wrong in any of these
anticipations? ora that they miscalculated anything except their chances
of success?

Edition: current; Page: [504] Edition: current; Page: [505]


ENGLAND AND IRELAND
 1868

Edition: current; Page: [506]


EDITOR’S NOTE

5th ed. London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1869. Reprinted from
the 4th, 3rd, 2nd, and 1st eds., all of which were issued in 1868 by
Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as
“A pamphlet entitled ‘England and Ireland’ published in February 1868”
(MacMinn, 98). There are no copies in Somerville College; Mill’s copy of
the 2nd ed. is in the Goldsmith’s Library, University of London Library,
without correction or emendation. For comment on the work, see
xlix-liii, lx-lxii, and lxiii-lxiv above.

The copy-text is the 5th edition (the last in Mill’s lifetime), which
has been collated with the four earlier editions and the surviving
portions of the MS of the first draft (part of which is in the Harvard
University Library, and part in the Yale University Library). The
substantive variants among the printed editions are given in footnotes,
in which the editions are signified by the last two digits of the year
of publication, with superscripts when more than one edition appeared in
the same year: i.e., “681” = 1st ed., “682” = 2nd ed., “683” = 3rd ed.,
“684” = 4th ed., and “69” = 5th ed.; these variants are keyed by
superscript italic letters in the text. Superscript Greek letters in the
text are keyed to the equivalent passages in the first draft, which is
printed in App. A below; editorial notes (in square brackets and
italics) indicate the relation between the printed text and the MS.

Edition: current; Page: [507]


England and Ireland

once at least in every generation the question, “What is to be done with
Ireland?”[*] rises again to perplex the councils and trouble the
conscience of the British nation. It has now risen more formidable than
ever, and with the further aggravation, that it was unexpected. Irish
disaffection, assuredly, is a familiar fact; and there have always been
those among us who liked to explain it by a special taint or infirmity
in the Irish character. But Liberal Englishmen had always attributed it
to the multitude of unredressed wrongs. England had for ages, from
motives of different degrees of unworthiness, made her yoke heavy upon
Ireland. According to a well known computation, the whole land of the
island had been confiscated three times over. Part had been taken to
enrich powerful Englishmen and their Irish adherents; part to form the
endowment of a hostile hierarchy; the rest had been given away to
English and Scotch colonists, who held, and were intended to hold it as
a garrison against the Irish. The manufactures of Ireland, except the
linen manufacture, which was chiefly carried on by these colonists, were
deliberately crushed for the avowed purpose of making more room for
those of England. The vast majority of the native Irish, all who
professed the Roman Catholic religion, were, in violation of the faith
pledged to the Catholic army at Limerick, despoiled of all their
political and most of their civil rights, and were left in existence
only to plough or dig the ground, and pay rent to their task-masters. A
nation which treats its subjects in this fashion cannot well expect to
be loved by them. It is not necessary to discuss the circumstances of
extenuation which an advocate might more or less justly urge to excuse
these iniquities to the English conscience. Whatever might be their
value in our own eyes, in those of the Irish they had not, and could not
have, any extenuating virtue. Short of actual depopulation and
desolation, or the direct personal enslaving of the inhabitants, little
was omitted which could give a people cause to execrate its conquerors.
But these just causes of disloyalty, it was at last thought, had been
removed. The jealousy of Irish industry and enterprise has long ceased,
and all inequality of commercial advantages between the two countries
has been done away with. The civil rights of the Catholic population
have been restored to them, and (with one or two trifling exceptions)
their political disabilities have been taken off. The prizes Edition:
current; Page: [508] of professional and of political life, in Ireland,
England, and every British dependency, have been thrown open, in law and
in fact, to Catholic as well as Protestant Irish. The alien Church
indeed remains, but is no longer supported by a levy from the Catholic
tillers of the soil; it has become a charge on the rent paid by them,
mostly to Protestant landlords. The confiscations have not been
reversed; but the hand of time has passed over them: they have reached
the stage at which, in the opinion of reasonable men, the reversal of an
injustice is but an injustice the more. The representatives of the Irish
Catholics are a power in the House of Commons, sufficient at times to
hold the balance of parties. Irish complaints, great and small, are
listened to with patience, if not always with respect; and when they
admit of a remedy which seems reasonable to English minds, there is no
longer any reluctance to apply it. What, then, it is thought even by
Liberal Englishmen, has Ireland to resent? What, indeed, remains from
which resentment could arise? By dint of believing that disaffection had
ceased to be reasonable, they came to think that it had ceased to be
possible. All grievances, of a kind to exasperate the ruled against the
rulers, had, they thought, disappeared. Nature, too, not in her kinder,
but in one of her cruellest moods, had made it her study to relieve the
conscience of the English rulers of Ireland. A people of whom, according
to the Report of a Royal Commission, two millions and a half were for
many weeks of each year in a state of chronic starvation,[*] were a
sight which might cause some misgiving in a nation that had absolute
power over them. But the Angel of Death had stepped in, and removed that
spectre from before our gate. An appalling famine, followed by an
unexampled and continuous emigration, had, by thinning the labour
market, alleviated that extreme indigence which, by making the people
desperate, might embitter them, we thought, even against a mild and just
Government. Ireland was now not only well governed, but prosperous and
improving. Surely the troubles of the British nation about Ireland were
now at an end.

It is upon a people, or at least upon upper and middle classes, basking
in this fool’s paradise, that Fenianism has burst, like a clap of
thunder in a clear sky, unlooked for and unintelligible, and has found
them utterly unprepared to meet it and to deal with it. The disaffection
which they flattered themselves had been cured, suddenly shows itself
more intense, more violent, more unscrupulous, and more universal than
ever. The population is divided between those who wish success to
Fenianism, and those who, though disapproving its means and perhaps its
ends, sympathize in its embittered feelings. Repressed by force in
Ireland itself, the rebellion visits us in our own homes, scattering
death among those who have given no provocation but that of being
English-born. So deadly is the hatred, that it will run all risks merely
to do us harm, with little or no prospect of any consequent good to
itself. Our rulers are helpless to deal with this new outburst of
enmity, Edition: current; Page: [509] because they are unable to see
that anything on their part has given cause for it. They are brought
face to face with a spirit which will as little tolerate what we think
our good government as our bad, and they have not been trained to manage
problems of that difficulty. But though their statesmanship is at fault,
their conscience is at ease, because the rebellion, they think, is not
one of grievance or suffering; it is a rebellion for an idea—the idea of
nationality. Alas for the self-complacent ignorance of irresponsible
rulers, be they monarchs, classes, or nations! If there is anything
sadder than the calamity itself, it is the unmistakeable sincerity and
good faith with which numbers of Englishmen confess themselves incapable
of comprehending it. They know not that the disaffection which neither
has nor needs any other motive than aversion to the rulers, is the
climax to a long growth of disaffection arising from causes that might
have been removed. What seems to them the causelessness of the Irish
repugnance to our rule, is the proof that they have almost let pass the
last opportunity they are ever likely to have of setting it right. They
have allowed what once was indignation against particular wrongs, to
harden into a passionate determination to be no longer ruled on any
terms by those to whom they ascribe all their evils. Rebellions are
never really unconquerable until they have become rebellions for an
idea. Revolt against practical ill-usage may be quelled by concessions;
but wait till all practical grievances have merged in the demand for
independence, and there is no knowing that any concession, short of
independence, will appease the quarrel.

But what, it will be asked, is the provocation that England is giving to
Ireland, now that she has left off crushing her commerce and persecuting
her religion? What harm to Ireland does England intend, or knowingly
inflict? What good, that she knows how to give her, would she not
willingly bestow? Unhappily, her offence is precisely that she does not
know; and is so well contented with not knowing, that Irishmen who are
not hostile to her are coming to believe that she will not and cannot
learn. Calm men, like the clerical authors of the Limerick
declaration,[*] who disapprove of Fenianism and of all that the Fenians
are doing, and who have no preference for separation in itself, are
expressing a deliberate conviction that the English nation cannot see or
understand what laws and institutions are necessary for a state of
society and civilization like that of Ireland. The English people ought
to ask themselves, seriously and without prejudice, what it is that
gives sober men this opinion of them; and endeavour to remove it, or
humbly confess that it is true, and fulfil the only duty which remains
performable by them on that supposition, that of withdrawing from the
attempt.

That this desperate form of disaffection, which does not demand to be
better governed, which asks us for no benefit, no redress of grievances,
not even any reparation for injuries, but simply to take ourselves off
and rid the country of our Edition: current; Page: [510] Edition:
current; Page: [511] presence—that this revolt of mere nationality αhas
been so long in coming, proves that it might have been prevented from
coming at all. More than a generation has elapsed since we renounced the
desire to govern Ireland for the English: if at that epoch we had begun
to know how to govern her for herself, the two nations would by this
time have been one. But we neither knew, nor knew that we did not know.
We had got a set of institutions of our own, which we thought suited
us—whose imperfections we were, at any rate, used to: we, or our ruling
classes, thought, that there could be no boon to any country equal to
that of imparting athesea institutions to her, and as none of their
benefits were any longer withheld from Ireland. Ireland, it seemed,
could have nothing more to desire. What was not too bad for us, must be
good enough for Ireland, or if not. Ireland or the nature of things was
alone in fault.αβ

[lf0223-06_figure_002.jpg]
Folio 3r of draft of England and Ireland MS Houghton Library, Harvard
University

γIt is always a most difficult task which a people assumes when it
attempts to govern, either in the way of incorporation or as a
dependency, another people very unlike itself. But whoever reflects on
the constitution of society in these two countries, with any sufficient
knowledge of the states of society which exist elsewhere, will be
driven, however unwillingly, to the conclusion, that there is probably
no other nation of the civilized world, which, if the task of governing
Ireland had happened to devolve on it, would not have shown itself more
capable of that work than England has hitherto done. The reasons are
these: First, there is no other civilized nation which is so conceited
of its own institutions, and of all its modes of public action, as
England is; and secondly, there is no other civilized nation which is so
far apart from Ireland in the character of its history, or so unlike it
in the whole constitution of its social economy; and none, therefore,
which if it applies to Ireland the modes of thinking and maxims of
government which have grown up within itself, is so certain to go
wrong.γ

The first indeed of our disqualifications, our conceit of ourselves, is
certainly diminishing. Our governing classes are now quite accustomed to
be told that the institutions which they thought must suit all mankind
since they suited us, require far greater alteration than they dream of
to be fit even for ourselves. When they were told this, they have long
been in the habit of answering, that whatever defects these institutions
may have in theory, they are suited to the opinions, the feelings, and
the historical antecedents of the English people. But mark how little
they really mean by this vindication. If suitability to the opinions,
feelings, and historical antecedents of those who live under them is the
best recommendation of institutions, it ought to have been remembered,
that the opinions, feelings, and historical antecedents of the Irish
people are totally different from, and in many respects contrary to
those of the English; and that things which in England find Edition:
current; Page: [512] their chief justification in their being liked,
cannot admit of the same justification in a country where they are
detested. But the reason which recommends institutions to their own
supporters, and that which is used to stop the mouths of opponents, are
far from being always one and the same.

Let us take as an example, that one of our institutions which has the
most direct connexion with the worst practical grievances of Ireland;
absolute property in land, the land being engrossed by a comparatively
small number of families. I am not going to discuss this institution, or
to express, on the present occasion, any opinion about its abstract
merits. Let these, if we will, be transcendant—let it be the best and
highest form of agricultural and social economy, for anything I mean to
say to the contrary. But I do say that this is not self-evident. It is
not one of the truths which shine so brilliantly by their own light,
that they are assented to by every sane man the moment he understands
the words in which they are conveyed. On the contrary, what present
themselves the most obviously at the first aspect of this institution
are the objections to it. That a man should have absolute control over
what his own labour and skill have created, and even over what he has
received by gift or bequest from those who created it, is recommended by
reasons of a very obvious character, and does not shock any natural
feeling. Moveable property can be produced in indefinite quantity, and
he who disposes as he likes of anything which, it can fairly be argued,
would not have existed but for him, does no wrong to any one. It is
otherwise with regard to land, a thing which no man made,[*] which
exists in limited quantity, which was the original inheritance of all
mankind, and which whoever appropriates, keeps others out of its
possession. Such appropriation, when there is not enough left for all,
is at the first aspect, an usurpation on the rights of other people. And
though it is manifestly just that he who sows should be allowed to reap,
this justice, which is the true moral foundation of property in land,
avails little in favour of proprietors who reap but do not sow, and who
assume the right of ejecting those who do. When the general condition of
the land of a country is such as this, its title to the submission and
attachment of those whom it seems to disinherit, is by no means obvious.
It is a state of things which has great need of extrinsic
recommendations. It requires to be rooted in the traditions and oldest
recollections of the people; the landed families must be identified with
the religion of the country, with its nationality, with its ancient
rulers, leaders, defenders, teachers, and other objects of gratitude and
veneration, or at least of ungrudging obedience.

These conditions have been found, in some considerable measure, or at
all events, nothing contrary to them has been found, for many centuries,
in England. All that is most opposite to them has at all times existed
in Ireland. The traditions Edition: current; Page: [513] and
recollections of native Irish society are wholly the contrary way.
Before the Conquest, the Irish people knew nothing of absolute property
in land. The land virtually belonged to the entire sept; the chief was
little more than the managing member of the association. The feudal
idea, which views all rights as emanating from a head landlord, came in
with the conquest, was associated with foreign dominion, and has never
to this day been recognised by the moral sentiments of the people.
Originally the offspring not of industry but of spoliation, the right
has not been allowed to purify itself by protracted possession, but has
passed from the original spoliators to others by a series of fresh
spoliations, so as to be always connected with the latest and most
odious oppressions of foreign invaders. In the moral feelings of the
Irish people, the right to hold the land goes, as it did in the
beginning, with the right to till it. Since the last confiscations,[*]
nearly all the land has been owned from generation to generation with a
more absolute ownership than exists in almost any other country (except
England), by landlords (mostly foreigners, and nearly all of a foreign
religion) who had less to do with tilling it, who had less connexion
with it of any useful kind—or indeed of any kind, for a large proportion
did not even reside on it—than the landowners of any other known
country. There are parts of Europe, such as East Prussia, where the land
is chiefly owned in large estates, but where almost every landowner
farms his own land. In Ireland, until a recent period, any one who knew
the country might almost have counted those who did anything for their
estate but consume its produce. The landlords were a mere burthen on the
land. The whole rental of the country was wasted in maintaining, often
in reckless extravagance, people who were not nearly as useful to the
hive as the drones are, and were entitled to less respect. These are the
antecedents of Irish history in respect to property in land. Let any
Englishman put himself in the position of an Irish peasant, and ask
himself whether, if the case were his own, the landed property of the
country would have any sacredness to his feelings. Even the Whiteboy and
the Rockite, in their outrages against the landlord, fought for, not
against, the sacredness of what was property in their eyes; for it is
not the right of the rent-receiver, but the right of the cultivator,
with which the idea of property is connected in the Irish popular mind.

These facts being notorious, and the feelings engendered by them being,
in part at least, perfectly reasonable in the eyes of every civilized
people in the world except England, it is a characteristic specimen of
the practical good sense by which England is supposed to be
distinguished, that she should persist to this hour in forcing upon a
people with such feelings, and such antecedents, her own idea of
absolute property in land. If those who created English manufactures,
commerce, navigation, and dominion, to say nothing of English literature
and science, had gone to work in this style—had shown this amount of
judgment in the adaptation Edition: current; Page: [514] of means to
ends—England would at the present time have been in something like the
condition of the Papal territory, or of Spain.

Thus much as to the harmony of certain English institutions with the
feelings and prepossessions of the Irish people, which, according to the
received doctrine of our historical Conservatives, is the first point to
be considered in either retaining old institutions or introducing new.
But now, apart from the question of acceptability to Ireland, let us
consider whether our own laws and usages, at least in relation to land,
are the model we should even desire to follow in governing Ireland;
whether the circumstances of the two countries are sufficiently similar,
to warrant the belief, that things which may work well, or may not be
fatally destructive to prosperity, in England, will be useful or
innocuous, even if voluntarily accepted by the people of the
neighbouring island.

δWhat are the main features in the social economy of Ireland? First, it
is a country wholly agricultural. The entire population, with some not
very important exceptions, cultivates the soil, or depends for its
subsistence on cultivation. In this respect, if all the countries of
Europe except Russia were arranged in a scale, Ireland would be at one
extremity of the scale, England and Scotland at the other. In Great
Britain, not more than a third of the population subsists by
agriculture. In most countries of the Continent a great majority do so,
though in no country but Russia so great a majority as in Ireland.
Ireland, therefore, in this essential particular, bears more resemblance
to almost any other country in Europe than she does to Great Britain.

When the agricultural population are but a fraction of the entire
people; when the commercial and manufacturing development of the country
leaves a large opening for the children of the agriculturists to seek
and find subsistence elsewhere than on the soil; a bad tenure of land,
though always mischievous, can in some measure be borne with. But when a
people have no means of sustenance but the land, the conditions on which
the land can be occupied, and support derived from it, are all in all.
Now, under an apparent resemblance, those conditions are radically
different in Ireland and in England. In England the land is rented and
cultivated by capitalist farmers; in Ireland, except in the grazing
districts, principally by manual labourers, or small farmers in nearly
the same condition in life. The multitude of other differences which
flow from this one difference, it would be too prolix to detail. But
(what is still more important), in Ireland, where the well-being of the
whole population depends on the terms on which they are permitted to
occupy the land, those terms are the very worstδ in Europe. There are
many other countries in which the land is owned principally in large
masses, and farmed in great part by manual labourers. But I doubt if
there be now any other part of Europe where, as a general rule, these
farm-labourers are entirely without a permanent interest in the soil.
The serfs certainly were not; they could not be turned out of their
holdings. Edition: current; Page: [515] The métayers in France, before
the Revolution, could; and their wretchedness, accordingly, was the
bye-word of Europe. There are still métayers in France, but those of
them who have not, as many have, other land of their own in full
property, are still the disturbing element of rural society. The
departments which returned Socialist deputies to the Assemblies of 1848
and 1849 were chiefly those in which métayerism still lingered. The
métayers of Italy are, by a custom, as binding as law, irremovable so
long as they fulfil their contract. The Prussian peasants, even before
the beneficent enfranchising legislation of Stein and Hardenberg,[*] had
positive rights in the soil which they could not be deprived of. It is
only in parts of Belgium that it is a frequent practice for small
farmers to hold from large proprietors, with no other legal protection
than the stipulations of a short lease: but their truly admirable
industry owes its vigour to the fact that small landed properties are
always to be had for money, at prices which they can hope to save. They,
moreover, live in the midst of a large and thriving manufacturing
industry, which takes off the hands that might otherwise compete unduly
for the soil. In Ireland alone the whole agricultural population can be
evicted by the mere will of the landlord, either at the expiration of a
lease, or, in the far commoner case of their having no lease, at six
months’ notice. In Ireland alone the bulk of a population dependent
wholly on the land, cannot look forward with confidence to a single
year’s occupation of it: while the sole outlet for the dispossessed
cultivators, or for those whose competition raises the rents against the
cultivators, is expatriation. So long as they remain in the country of
their birth, their support must be drawn from a source for the
permanence of which they have no guarantee, and the failure of which
leaves them nothing to depend on but the poor-house.

In one circumstance alone England and Ireland are alike: the cultivated
area of both countries is owned in large estates by a small class of
great landlords. In the opinion of great landlords, and of the admirers
of the state of society which produces them, this is enough: the
interest and the wisdom of the landlords may be implicitly relied on for
making everybody comfortable. Great landlords can do as they like with
their estates, on this side of St. George’s Channel; English landlords
are absolute masters of the conditions on which they will let their
land; and why should not Irish landlords be so? But in the first place,
English landlords do not let their land to a labourer, but to a
capitalist farmer, who is able to take care of his own interest. The
capitalist has not to choose between the possession of a farm and
destitution; the labourer has. This element subverts the whole basis on
which the letting of farms, as a business transaction, and the
foundation of a national economy, requires to rest. The capitalist
farmer will beware of offering a rent that will leave him no profit; the
peasant farmer will promise any amount of rent, Edition: current; Page:
[516] whether he can pay it or not. England, moreover, not being a
purely agricultural, but a commercial country, even great landlords
learn to look at the management of estates in a somewhat commercial
spirit, and can see their own advantage (where the love of political
influence does not binterfereb) in making it the interest of the tenant
to improve the land; or, if they can afford to do so, will often improve
it for him. An average Irish landlord, instead of improving his estate,
does not even put up the fences and farm-buildings which everywhere else
it is the landlord’s business to provide; they are left to be erected by
the labourer-tenant for himself, and are such as a labourer-tenant is
able to erect. If a tenant here and there is able and willing to make
them a little better than ordinary, or to add in any other manner to the
productiveness and value of the farm, there is nothing to prevent the
landlord from waiting till it is done, and then seizing on the result,
or requiring from the tenant additional rent for the use of the fruits
of his own labour; and so many landlords even of high rank are not
ashamed to do this, that it is evident their compeers do not think it at
all disgraceful. It is usual to impute the worst abuses of Irish
landlordism to middlemen. Middlemen are rapidly dying out, but there was
lately a middleman[*] in the county of Clare, under whose landlordship
Irish peasants, by their labour and their scanty means, reclaimed a
considerable tract on the sea-coast, and founded thereon the flourishing
watering-place of Kilkee. The middleman died, his lease fell in, and the
tenants fancied that they should now be still better off; but the head
landlord, the Marquis cofc Conyngham, at once put on rents equal to the
full value of the improvements* (in some instances an increase of 700
per cent), and not content with this, pulled down a considerable portion
of the Edition: current; Page: [517] town, reduced its population from
1879 to 950, and drove out the remainder to wander about Ireland, or to
England or America, and swell the ranks of the bitter enemies of Great
Britain.* Did the interest, any more than the good feelings, of this
landlord, prevent him from destroying this remarkable creation of
industry, and giving its creators cause bitterly to repent that they had
ever made it? What might not be hoped from a people who had the energy
and enterprise to create a flourishing town under liability to be
robbed? And to what sympathy or consideration are those entitled who
avail themselves of a bad law to perpetrate what is morally robbery?

When Irishmen ask to be protected against deeds of this description,
they are told that the law they complain of is the same which exists in
England. What signifies it that the law is the same, if opinion and the
social circumstances of the country are better than the law, and prevent
the oppression which the law permits? It is bad that one can be robbed
in due course of law, but it is greatly worse when one actually is.
England, with her capitalist farmers and her powerful public opinion,
can afford to leave improper power in the hands of her great
landlords—not, indeed, without serious evil to her agricultural
population, the state of dwhomd is generally felt to be the most peccant
part of her social condition; not without evil to all over whom power is
exercised through the votes of that population; but yet without
hindrance to the attainment, by the nation as a whole, of great wealth
and prosperity. Ireland is very differently circumstanced. When, as a
general rule, the land of a country is farmed by the very hands that
till it, the social economy resulting is intolerable, unless either by
law or custom the tenant is protected against arbitrary eviction, or
arbitrary increase of rent. Nor is there any country of Western Europe
save England (unless Spain be an exception) which, if Ireland had
belonged to it, would not before this time have seen and acted on that
principle; because there is not one which is not familiar with the
principle and its bearings, from ample experience. England alone is
without such experience of its own, and knows and cares too little about
foreign countries to benefit by theirs.

Edition: current; Page: [518]
At a particular moment of the revolutionary war, a French armament, led
by the illustrious Hoche, was only prevented by stress of weather from
effecting a landing in Ireland. At that moment it was on the cards
whether Ireland should not belong to France, or at least be organized as
an independent country under French protection. Had this happened, does
any one believe that the Irish peasant would not have become even as the
French peasant? When the great landowners had fled, as they would have
fled, to England, every farm on their estates would have become the
property of the occupant, subject to some fixed payment εto the State.
Ireland would then have been in the condition in which small farming,
and tenancy by manual labourers, are consistent with good agriculture
and public prosperity. The small holder would have laboured for himself
and not for others, and his interest would have coincided with the
interest of the country in making every plot of land produce its utmost.
What Hoche would have done for the Irish peasant, or its equivalent, has
still to be done; and any government which will not do it does not
fulfil the rational and moral conditions of a government. There is no
necessity that it should be done as Hoche would most likely have done
it, without indemnity to the losers. A few years ago it might not have
been necessary to do as much as he would have done. The distribution of
the waste land in peasant properties might then have sufficed. Perhaps
even such small measures as that of securing to tenants a moderate
compensation, in money or by length of lease, for improvements actually
made, and abolishing the unjust privilege of distraining for rent, might
have appeased or postponed disaffection, and given to great-landlordism
a fresh term of existence. But such reforms as these, granted at the
last moment, would hardly give a week’s respite from active
disaffection. The Irish are no longer reduced to take anything they can
get. They have acquired the sense of being supported by prosperous
multitudes of their countrymen on the opposite side of the Atlantic.
These it is who will furnish the leaders, the pecuniary resources, the
skill, the military discipline, and a great part of the effective force,
in any future Irish rebellion: and it is the interest of these
auxiliaries to refuse to listen to any form of compromise, since no
share of its benefits would be for them, while they would lose the dream
of a place in the world’s eye as chiefs of an independent republic. With
these for leaders, and a people like the Irish, always ready to trust
implicitly those whom they think hearty in their cause, no accommodation
is henceforth possible which does not give the Irish peasant all that he
could gain by a revolution—permanent possession of the land, subject to
fixed burthens. Such a change may be revolutionary; but revolutionary
measures are the thing now required. It is not necessary that the
revolution should be violent, still less that it should be unjust. It
may and it ought to respect existing pecuniary interests which have the
sanction of law. An equivalent ought to be given for the bare pecuniary
value of all mischievous rights which landlords or any others are
required to part Edition: current; Page: [519] with. But no mercy ought
to be shown to the mischievous rights themselves; no scruples of purely
English birth ought to stay our hands from effecting, since it has come
to that, a real revolution in the economical and social constitution of
Ireland. In the completeness of the revolution will lie its safety.
Anything less than complete, unless as a step to completion, will give
no help. There has been a time for proposals to effect this change by a
gradual process, by encouragement of voluntary arrangements; but the
volume of the Sibyl’s books which contained them has been burned. If
ever, in our time, Ireland is to be a consenting party to her union with
England, the changes must be so made that the existing generation of
Irish farmers shall at once enter upon their benefits. The rule of
Ireland now rightfully belongs to those who, by means consistent with
justice, will make the cultivators of the soil of Ireland the owners of
it; and the English nation has got to decide whether it will be that
just ruler or not.

Englishmen are not always incapable of shaking off insular prejudices,
and governing another country according to its wants, and not according
to common English habits and notions. It is what they have had to do in
India; and those Englishmen who know something of India, are even now
those who understand Ireland best. Persons who know both countries, have
remarked many points of resemblance between the Irish and the Hindoo
character; there certainly are many between the agricultural economy of
Ireland and that of India. But, by a fortunate accident, the business of
ruling India in the name of England did not rest with the Houses of
Parliament or the offices at Westminster; it devolved on men who passed
their lives in India, and made Indian interests their professional
occupation. There was also the advantage, that the task was laid upon
England after nations had begun to have a conscience, and not while they
were sunk in the reckless savagery of the middle ages. The English
rulers, accordingly, reconciled themselves to the idea that their
business was not to sweep away the rights they found established, or
wrench and compress them into the similitude of something English, but
to ascertain what they were; having ascertained them, to abolish those
only which were absolutely mischievous; otherwise to protect them, and
use them as a starting point for further steps in improvement. This work
of stripping off their preconceived English ideas was at first done
clumsily and imperfectly, and at the cost of many mistakes; but as they
honestly meant to do it, they in time succeeded, and India is now
governed, if with a large share of the ordinary imperfections of rulers,
yet with a full perception and recognition of its differences from
England. What has been done for India has now to be done for Ireland;
and as we should have deserved to be turned out of the one, had we not
proved equal to the need, so shall we to lose the other.ε

It is not consistent with self-respect, in a nation any more than in an
individual, to wait till it is compelled by uncontrollable circumstances
to resign that which it cannot in conscience hold. Before allowing its
government to involve it in another repetition of the attempt to
maintain English dominion over Ireland by brute force, Edition: current;
Page: [520] the English nation ought to commune with its conscience, and
solemnly reconsider its position. ζIf England is unable to learn what
has to be learnt, and unlearn what has to be unlearnt, in order to make
her rule willingly accepted by the Irish people; or, to look at the
hypothesis on its other side, if the Irish are incapable of being taught
the superiority of English notions about the way in which they ought to
be governed, and obstinately persist in preferring their own; if this
supposition, whichever way we choose to turn it, is true, are we the
power which, according to the general fitness of things and the rules of
morality, ought to govern Ireland? If so, what are we dreaming of, when
we give our sympathy to the Poles, the Italians, the Hungarians, the
Servians, the Greeks, and I know not how many other oppressed
nationalities? On what principle did we act when we renounced the
government of the Ionian Islands?[*]

It is not to fear of consequences, but to a sense of right, that one
would wish to appeal on this most momentous question. Yet it is not
impertinent to say, that to hold Ireland permanently by the old bad
means is simply impossible. Neither Europe nor America would now bear
the sight of a Poland across the Irish Channel. Were we to attempt it,
and a rebellion, so provoked, could hold its ground but for a few weeks,
there would be an explosion of indignation all over the civilized world;
on this single occasion Liberals and Catholics would be unanimous; Papal
volunteeers and Garibaldians would fight side by side against us for the
independence of Ireland, until the many enemies of British prosperity
had time to complicate the situation by a foreign war. Were we even able
to prevent a rebellion, or suppress it the moment it broke out, the
holding down by military violence of a people in desperation, constantly
struggling to break their fetters, is a spectacle which Russia is still
able to give to mankind, because Russia is almost inaccessible to a
foreign enemy; but the attempt could not long succeed with a country so
vulnerable as England, having territories to defend in every part of the
globe, and half her population dependent on foreign commerce. Neither do
I believe that the mass of the British people, those who are not yet
corrupted by power, would permit the attempt. The prophets who, judging,
I presume, from themselves, always augur the worst of the moral
sentiments of their countrymen, are already asseverating that, whether
right or wrong, the British people would rather devastate Ireland from
end to end and root out its inhabitants, than consent to its separation
from England. If we believe them, the people of England are a kind of
bloodhounds, always ready to break loose and perpetrate Jamaica horrors,
unless they, and their like, are there to temper and restrain British
brutality. This representation does not accord with my experience. I
believe that these prophecies proceed from men who seek to make their
countrymen responsible for what they themselves are burning to commit;
and that the rising power in our affairs, the Edition: current; Page:
[521] democracy of Great Britain, is opposed, on principle, to holding
any people in subjection against their will. The question was put, some
six months ago, to one of the largest and most enthusiastic public
meetings ever assembled in London under one roof—“Do you think that
England has a right to rule over Ireland if she cannot make the Irish
people content with her rule?” and the shouts of “No!” which burst from
every part of that great assemblage, will not soon be forgotten by those
who heard them.[*] An age when delegates of working men meet in European
Congresses to concert united action for the interests of labour, is not
one in which labourers will cut down labourers at other people’s
bidding. The time is come when the democracy of one country will join
hands with the democracy of another, rather than back their own ruling
authorities in putting it down. I shall not believe, until I see it
proved, that the English and Scotch people are capable of the folly and
wickedness of carrying fire and sword over Ireland in order that their
rulers may govern Ireland contrary to the will of the Irish people. That
they would put down a partial outbreak, in order to get a fair trial for
a system of government beneficent and generally acceptable to the
people, I readily believe; nor should I in any way blame them for so
doing.ζ

ηLet it not, however, be supposed that I should regard either an
absolute or a qualified separation of the two countries, otherwise than
as a dishonour to one, and a serious misfortune to both. It would be a
deep disgrace to us, that having the choice of, on the one hand, a
peaceful legislative revolution in the laws and rules affecting the
relation of the inhabitants to the soil, or on the other, of abandoning
a task beyond our skill, and leaving Ireland to rule herself, incapacity
for the better of the two courses should drive us to the worse. For that
it would be greatly the worse even for Ireland, many Irishmen, even
Irish Catholics, are probably still calm enough to perceive, if but good
government can be had without it.η

θThe mere geographical situation of the two countries makes them far
more fit to exist as one nation than as two. Not only are they more
powerful for defence against a foreign enemy combined than separate,
but, if separate, they would be a standing menace to one another. Parted
at the present time and with their present feelings, the two islands
would be, of all countries in Europe, those which would have the most
hostile disposition towards one another. Too much bitter feeling still
remains between England and the United States, more than eighty years
after separation; and Ireland has suffered from England, for many
centuries, evils compared with which the greatest grievances of the
Americans were, in all but their principle, insignificant. The
persevering reciprocation of insults between English and American
newspapers and public speakers has, before now, brought Edition:
current; Page: [522] those two countries to the verge of a war; would
there not be even more of this between countries still nearer
neighbours, on the morrow of an unfriendly separation? In the perpetual
state of irritated feeling thus kept up, trifles would become causes of
quarrel. Disputes more or less serious, even collisions, would be for
ever liable to occur. Ireland, therefore, besides having to defend
herself against all other enemies, internal and external, without
English help, would feel obliged to keep herself always armed and in
readiness to fight England.θ ιAn Irishman must have a very lofty idea of
the resources of his country who thinks that this load upon the Irish
taxpayer would be easily borne. A war-tax assessed upon the soil, for
want of other taxable material, would be no small set-off against what
the peasant would gain even by the entire cessation of rent. The burthen
of the necessity of being always prepared for war, was no unimportant
part of the motive which made the Northern States of America prefer a
war at once to allowing the South to secede from the Union. Yet the
necessity would not have weighed so heavily on them as it would on
Ireland, because they were both the most powerful half of the American
Union and the richest. To England, the necessity of being always in a
state of preparation against Ireland would be comparatively a less
inconvenience, because she already has to maintain, for defence against
foreigners, a force that would in general suffice for both purposes. But
Ireland would have to create both a fleet and an army; and, after all
that could be done, so oppressive would be her sense of insecurity, that
she would probably be driven to compromise her newly acquired
independence, and seek the protection of alliances with Continental
powers.ι κFrom that moment she would, in addition to her own wars, be
dragged into a participation in theirs. Were she to choose the smaller
evil, and remain free from any permanent entanglement, all enemies of
Great Britain would not the less confidently look forward to an Irish
alliance, and to being allowed to use Ireland as a basis of attack
against Great Britain. Ireland would probably become, like Belgium
formerly, one of the battle-fields of European war: while she would be
in not unreasonable fear lest England should anticipate the danger, by
herself occupying Ireland with a military force at every commencement of
hostilities. On the part of England, the pacific character which English
policy has assumed precludes any probability of aggressive war; but the
ejected Irish higher classes (for ejected they could scarcely fail to
be) would form an element hostile to Ireland on this side of the Irish
Sea, which would be to the Irish Republic what the émigrés at Coblentz
were to revolutionary France. In all this I am supposing that Ireland
would succeed in establishing a regular and orderly government: but
suppose that she failed? Suppose that she had to pass through an
interval of partial anarchy first? What if there were a civil war
between the Protestant and Catholic Irish, or between Ulster and the
other provinces? Is it in human nature that the sympathies of England
should not be principally with the Edition: current; Page: [523] English
Protestant colony, and would not she either help that side, or be
constantly believed to be on the point of helping it? For generations it
is to be feared that the two nations would be either at war, or in a
chronic state of precarious and armed peace, each constantly watching a
probable enemy so near at hand that in an instant they might be at each
other’s throat.κ λBy this state of their relations it is almost
superfluous to say that the poorer of the two countries would suffer
most. To England it would be an inconvenience; to Ireland a public
calamity, not only in the way of direct burthen, but by the paralyzing
effect of a general feeling of insecurity upon industrial energy and
enterprise.

But there is a contingency beyond all this, from the possibility of
which we ought not to avert our eyes. Ireland might be invaded and
conquered by a great military power. She might become a province of
France. This is not the least likely thing to befal her, if her
independence of England should be followed by protracted disorders, such
as to make peaceably disposed persons welcome an armed pacificator
capable of imposing on the conflicting parties a common servitude. How
bitter such a result of all their struggles ought to be to patriotic
Irishmen, I will not stop to show. But I ask any patriotic Englishman
what he would think of such a prospect; and whether he is disposed to
run the risk of it, in order that a few hundred families of the upper
classes may continue to possess the land of Ireland, instead of its
pecuniary value.λ

μAll this evil, it may be thought, could be prevented by agreeing
beforehand upon a close alliance and perpetual confederacy between the
two nations. But is it likely that the party which had effected a
separation in home affairs, would desire or consent to unity in foreign
relations? A confederacy is an agreement to have the same friends and
enemies, and can only subsist between peoples who have the same
interests and feelings, and who, if they fight at all, would wish to
fight on the same side. Great Britain and Ireland, if all community of
interest between them were cut off, would generally prefer to be on
contrary sides. In any Continental complications, the sympathies of
England would be with Liberalism; while those of Ireland are sure to be
on the same side as the Pope[*]—that is, on the side opposed to modern
civilization and progress, and to the freedom of all except Catholic
populations held in subjection by non-Catholic rulers. Besides, America
is the country with which we are at present in most danger of having
serious difficulties; and Ireland would be far more likely to
confederate with America against us, than with us against America.μ
νSome may say that this difference of national feeling, if an obstacle
to alliance, is, à fortiori, a condemnation of union. But even the most
Catholic of Irishmen may reasonably consider that Irish influence in the
British Parliament is a great mitigator of British hostility to things
with which Ireland Edition: current; Page: [524] sympathizes; that a
Pro-Catholic element in the House of Commons, which no English
Government can venture to despise, helps to prevent the whole power of
Great Britain from being in the hands of the Anti-Catholic element still
so strong in England and Scotland. If there is any party in Great
Britain which would not have cause to regret the separation of Ireland,
it is the fanatical Protestant party. It may well be doubted if an
independent Ireland could in any way give such effective support to any
cause to which Ireland is attached, as by the forbearance and moderation
which her presence in British councils imposes upon the power which
would be likeliest, in case of conflict, to lead the van of the contrary
side.ν

ξI see nothing that Ireland could gain by separation which might not be
obtained by union, except the satisfaction, which she is thought to
prize, of being governed solely by Irishmen—that is, almost always by
men with a strong party animosity against some part of her population:
unless indeed the stronger party began its career of freedom by driving
the whole of the weaker party beyond the seas. In return, Irishmen would
be shut out from all positions in Great Britain, except those which can
be held by foreigners. There would be no more Irish prime-ministers,
Irish commanders-in-chief, Irish generals and admirals in the British
army and fleet. Not in Britain only, but in all Britain’s
dependencies—in India and the Colonies, Irishmen would εthenceforthε be
on the footing of strangers. The loss would exceed the gain, not only by
calculation, but in feeling. The first man in a small country would
often gladly exchange positions with the fourth or fifth in a great one.

But why, it may be asked, cannot Ireland remain united with the British
Crown by a mere personal tie, having the management of her own affairs,
as Canada has, though a part of the same empire?[*] Or why may not Great
Britain and Ireland be joined as Austria and Hungary are, each with its
own separate administration and legislature, and an equal voice in the
joint concerns of both?[†] I answer: The former of these relations would
be to Ireland a derogation, a descent from even her present position.
She is now at least a part of the governing country. She has something
to say in the general affairs of the empire. Canada is but a dependency,
with a provincial government, allowed to make its own laws and impose
its taxes, but subject to the veto of the mother-country and not
consulted at all about alliances or wars, in which it is nevertheless
compelled to join. An union such as this can only exist as a temporary
expedient, between countries which look forward to separation as soon as
the weaker is able to stand alone, and which care not much how soon it
comes. This mode of union, moreover, is still recent; it has stood no
trials; it has not yet been exposed to the greatest trial—that of war.
Let Edition: current; Page: [525] war come, by an act of the British
Government in which Canada is not represented, and from a motive in
which Canada is not concerned, and how long will Canada be content to
share the burthens and the dangers? Even in home affairs, Ireland would
not relish the position of Canada. The veto of the Crown is virtually
that of the British Parliament; and though it might, as in the case of
Canada, be discreetly confined to what were considered imperial
questions, the decision what questions were imperial would rest with the
country in whose councils Ireland would no longer have a voice. It is
very improbable that the veto would stop at things which, in the opinion
of the subordinate country, were proper subjects for it. Canada is a
great way off, and British rulers can tolerate much in a place from
which they are not afraid that the contagion may spread to England. But
Ireland is marked out for union with England, if only by this, that
nothing important can take place in the one without making its effects
felt in the other. If the British Parliament could sufficiently shake
off its prejudices to use the veto on Irish legislation rightly, it
could shake them off sufficiently to legislate for Ireland rightly, or
to allow the Irish, as it already allows the Scotch members, to transact
the business of their own country mainly by themselves.

These objections would not apply to an equal union, like that which has
recently been agreed upon between Austria and Hungary. In that there is
nothing humiliating to the pride of either country. But if the Canadian
system has had but a short trial, the dual system of Austria and Hungary
has had none. It has existed only a bare twelvemonth.ξ οHungary, it is
true, has been much longer attached by a personal bond to the reigning
family of Austria, and Hungary had a Constitution, with some of the
elements of freedom; but Austria had not. The difficulty of keeping two
countries together without uniting them, begins with constitutional
liberty. Countries very dissimilar in character, and even with some
internal freedom, may be governed as England and Scotland were by the
Stuarts, so long as the people have only certain limited rights, and the
government of the two countries practically resides in a single will
above them both. The difficulty arises when the unforced concurrence of
both nations is required for the principal acts of their government.
This relation, between Austria and Hungary, never existed till now.ο πIf
an arrangement so untried and so unexampled be happily permanent—if it
resist the chances of incurable difference of opinion on the subjects
reserved for joint deliberation, foreign relations, finances, and
war—its success will be owing to circumstances almost peculiar to the
particular case, and which certainly do not exist between Great Britain
and Ireland. In the first place, the two countries are nearly equal in
military resources and prowess. They have fairly tried themselves
against one another in open war, and know that neither can conquer the
other without foreign aid. In the next place, while each is equally
formidable to the other, each stands in need of the other for its own
safety; neither is sufficient to Edition: current; Page: [526] itself
for maintaining its independence against powerful and encroaching
neighbours. Lastly, they do not start with hostile feelings in the
masses of either country towards the other. Hungary has not the wrongs
of centuries to revenge; her direct injuries from Austria never reached
the labouring classes, but were confined to portions of society whose
conduct is directed more by political interest than by vindictive
feeling. The reverse of all this is true between Great Britain and
Ireland. The most favourable of all combinations of circumstances for
the success and permanence of an equal alliance between independent
nations under the same crown, exists between Hungary and Austria, the
least favourable between England and Ireland.π ρNor let it be said that
these reasons against an equal alliance are reasons à fortiori against
union. The only one of them of which this could be said is the
alienation of feeling, and this, if the real grounds of bitterness were
removed, the close intercourse and community of interest engendered by
union would more and more tend to heal: while the natural tendency of
separation, either complete or only partial, would be to estrange the
countries from each other more and more.ρ σIt may be added, that the
Hungarian population, which has so nobly achieved its independence, has
been trained from of old in the management of the details of its
affairs, and has shown, in very trying circumstances, a measure of the
qualities which fit a people for self-government, greater than has yet
been evinced by Continental nations in many other respects far more
advanced. The democracy of Ireland, and those who are likely to be its
first leaders, have, at all events, yet to prove their possession of
qualities at all similar.

For these reasons it is my conviction that the separation of Ireland
from Great Britain would be most undesirable for both, and that the
attempt to hold them together by any form of federal union would be
unsatisfactory while it lasted, and would end either in reconquest or in
complete separation. But in however many respects Ireland might be a
loser, she would be a gainer in one. Let separation be ever so complete
a failure, one thing it would do: it would convert the peasant farmers
into peasant proprietors: and this one thing would be more than an
equivalent for all that she would lose. The worst government that would
give her this, would be more acceptable, and more deservedly acceptable,
to the mass of the Irish people, than the best that withheld it; if
goodness of any kind can be predicated of a Government that refuses the
first and greatest benefit that can be conferred on such a country. This
benefit, however, she can receive from the Government of the United
Kingdom, if those who compose that government can be made to perceive
that it is necessary and right.σ τThis duty once admitted and acted on,
the difficulties of centuries in governing Ireland would disappear.

What the case requires is simply this. We have had commissions, under
the authority of Parliament, to commute for an annual payment the
burthen of tithe, Edition: current; Page: [527] and the variable
obligations of copyholders.[*] What is wanted in Ireland is a commission
of a similar kind to examine every farm which is let to a tenant, and
commute the present variable for a fixed rent. But this great
undertaking must not drag its slow length through generations, like the
work of those other commissions. The time is passed for a mere amicable
mediation of the State between the landlord and the tenant. There must
be compulsory powers, and a strictly judicial inquiry. It must be
ascertained in each case, as promptly as is consistent with due
investigation, what annual payment would be an equivalent to the
landlord for the rent he now receives (provided that rent be not
excessive) and for the present value of whatever prospect there may be
of an increase, from any other source than the peasant’s own exertions.τ
υThis annual sum should be secured to the landlord under the guarantee
of flawf. He should have the option of receiving it directly from the
national treasury, by being inscribed as the owner of Consols sufficient
to yield the amount. Those landlords who are the least useful in
Ireland, and on the worst terms with their tenantry, would probably
accept this opportunity of severing altogether their connexion with the
Irish soil. Whether this was the case or not, every farm not farmed by
the proprietor would become the permanent holding of the existing
tenant, who would pay either to the landlord or to the State the fixed
rent which had been decided upon; or less, if the income which it was
thought just that the landlord should receive were more than the tenant
could reasonably be required to pay.υϕ χThe benefit, to the cultivator,
of a permanent property in the soil, does not depend on paying nothing
for it, but on the certainty that the payment cannot be increased; and
it is not even desirable that, in the first instance, the payment should
be less than a fair rent.χ ψIf the land were let below its value, to
this new kind of copyholder, he might be tempted to sublet it at a
higher rent, and live on the difference, becoming a parasite supported
in idleness on land which would still be farmed at a rackrent. He should
therefore pay the full rent which was adjudged to the former proprietor,
unless special circumstances made it unjust to require so much.* When
such circumstances existed, the State must lose the difference; or if
the Church property, after its resumption by the State, yielded a
surplus beyond what is required for the secular education of the
Edition: current; Page: [528] people, the remainder could not be better
applied to the benefit of Ireland than in this manner.ψ

ωWe are told by many (I am sorry that Lord Stanley is one of them)[*]
that in a generation after such a change, the land of Ireland would be
overcrowded by the growth of population, would be sublet and subdivided,
and things would be as bad as before the famine. Just in the same manner
we were told that after a generation or two of peasant proprietorship,
the whole rural territory of France would be a pauper warren, and its
inhabitants would be engaged in “dividing, by logarithms, infinitesimal
inheritances.”[†] How have these predictions been fulfilled? The
complaint now is that the population of France scarcely increases at
all, and the rural population diminishes. And, in spite of the
compulsory division of inheritances by the Code Civil,[‡] the reunions
of small properties by marriage and inheritance fully balance the
subdivisions. The obsolete school of English political economists, whom
I may call the Tory school, because they were the friends of entail,
primogeniture, high rents, great landed properties, and aristocratic
institutions generally, predicted that peasant proprietorships would
lead not only to excessive population, but to the wretchedest possible
agriculture. What has the fact proved? I will not refer to the standard
work on this subject, Mr. W. T. Thornton’s Plea for Peasant Proprietors,
or to Mr. Kay’s Social Condition of the People in England and Europe, or
to the multitude of authorities cited in my own Political Economy, or to
the more recent careful and thoughtful researches of M. Emile de
Laveleye.[§] I will quote from M. Léonce de Lavergne, at present the
stock authority of the opponents of small landed properties. What says
M. de Lavergne in his latest production, an article in the Revue des
Deux Mondes of the 1st of December last? “As a general rule, the lands
held in small properties are twice as productive as the others, so that
if this element were to fail us, our agricultural produce would be
considerably diminished.”[¶] Those who still believe that small peasant
properties are either detrimental to agriculture or conducive Edition:
current; Page: [529] to overpopulation, are discreditably behind the
state of knowledge on the subject. There is no condition of landed
property which excites such intense exertions for its improvement, as
that in which all that can be added to the produce belongs to him who
produces it. Nor does any condition afford so strong a motive against
overpopulation; because it is much more obvious how many mouths can be
supported by a piece of land, than how many hands can find employment in
the general labour market.ω αThe danger of subletting is equally
visionary. In the first place, subletting might be prohibited; but on
the plan I propose there is no necessity for prohibiting it. If the
holder, by his labour or outlay, adds to the value of the farm, he is
well entitled to sublet it if he pleases. If its value augments from any
other cause than his exertions, it will generally be from the increased
prosperity of the country, which will be a proof that the new system is
successful, and that he may sublet without inconvenience. Only one
precaution is necessary. For years, perhaps for generations, he should
not be allowed to let the land by competition, or for a variable rent.
His lessee must acquire it as he himself did, on a permanent tenure, at
an unchangeable rent, fixed by public authority; that the substituted,
like the original, holder may have the full interest of a proprietor in
making the most of the soil.α

βAll prognostics of failure drawn from the state of things preceding the
famine are simply futile. The farmer, previous to the famine, was not
proprietor of his bit of land; he was a cottier, at a nominal rent,
puffed up by competition to a height far above what could, even under
the most favourable circumstances, be paid, and the effect of which was
that whether he gained much or little, beyond the daily potatoes of
which his family could not be deprived, all was swept off for arrears of
rent. Alone of all working people, the Irish cottier neither gained
anything by industry and frugality, nor lost anything by idleness and
reckless multiplication. That because he was not industrious and frugal
without a motive, he will not be industrious and frugal when he has the
strongest motive, is not a very plausible excuse for refusing him the
chance. There is also another great change in his circumstances since
the famine: the bridge toβ γAmerica has been built. If a population
should grow up on the small estates more numerous than their produce can
comfortably support, what is to prevent that surplus population from
going the way of the millions who have already found in another
continent the field for their labour which was not open to them at
home?γ δAnd the new emigrants, there would then be reason to hope, would
not, as now, depart in bitterness, nor return in enmity.

The difficulty of governing Ireland lies entirely in our own minds; it
is an incapability of understanding. When able to understand what
justice requires, Edition: current; Page: [530] liberal Englishmen do
not refuse to do it. They understood the injustice of the political
disabilities of Catholics, and they removed them.[*] They understand the
injustice of endowing an alien Church, and they have made up their minds
that the endowment shall no longer continue.[†] Foreign nations and
posterity will judge England’s capacity for government, by the ability
she now shows to overcome the difficulty of seeing what justice requires
in the matter of Irish landed tenure. To her it is a difficulty. Other
nations see no difficulty in it. To the Prussian Conservative, Von
Raumer, and the French Liberal, Gustave de Beaumont, it was already,
thirty years ago, the most obvious thing in the world.[‡] It will seem
so to future generations. Posterity will hardly be just to the men of
our time. The superstitions of landlordism once cast off, it will be
difficult to imagine what real and deep-rooted superstitions they once
were, and how much of the best moral and even intellectual attributes
was compatible with them. But not the less is he in whom any principle
or feeling has become a superstition, convulsively clung to where the
reasons fail, unfit to have the power of imposing his superstition on
people who do not share it. If we cannot distinguish the essentials from
the accidents of landed property; if it is and must remain to us the Ark
of the Covenant which must be neither touched nor looked into,[§] for
however indispensable a need, it is our duty to retire from a country
where a modification of the constitution of landed property is the
primary necessity of social life. εIt may be that there is not wisdom or
courage in English statesmen to look the idol in the face. We may be put
off with some insignificant attempt to give tenants the hope of
compensation for “unexhausted improvements”[¶]—something which, ten
years, or even two years ago, would have been valuable as a pledge of
good will, a sign of just purposes, and a ground of hope that more would
be done when experience had proved this to be insufficient;ε but which
would not even then have been accepted as payment in full, and is now
scarcely worth offering as an instalment. Even this, if proposed, ought
to be voted for in preference to nothing. If a debtor acknowledges only
sixpence when he owes a pound, he should be allowed to pay that
sixpence; but let us not for a moment intermit the demand, that the
remaining balance be paid up before the otherwise inevitable hour of
bankruptcy arrives.δ

ζFor let no one suppose that while this question remains as it is, the
sum of all Edition: current; Page: [531] other things that could be done
for Ireland would at all alleviate our difficulties there. Abundance of
other things, indeed, require to be done. There are not only the
religious endowments to be resumed, but their proceeds have to be
applied, in the most effectual way possible, to the promotion of Irish
improvement. The Church lands and tithes, augmented by the Maynooth
endowment[*] and the regium donum,[†] would be more than enough, with
the sums already appropriated to the purpose, to afford a complete
unsectarian education to the entire people, including primary schools,
middle schools, high schools, and universities, each grade to be open
free of cost to the pupils who had most distinguished themselves in the
grade below it. The administration of local justice, of local finance,
and other local affairs, requires the hand of the reformer even more
urgently than in England. Such minor matters as, though of small account
in themselves, would help to conciliate Irish feeling, ought not to be
neglected. Those are not wrong who have urged that, with parity of
qualifications, Irishmen (when not partisans) should have the preference
for Irish appointments; and there is no good reason why the heir to the
throne should not, during part of every year, reside and hold a Court at
Dublin. Those purely material improvements to which voluntary enterprise
is not adequate, should, with due consideration and proper precautions,
receive help from the State. The possible consolidation of Irish
railways under State management, or under a single company by concession
from the State, is already engaging the attention of our public men;[‡]
and advances for drainage, and other improvements on a large scale, are,
in a country so poor and backward as Ireland, economically admissible:
only not on the plan hitherto adopted, of lending to the landlords, that
the entire benefit of the improvement may accrue to their rents. It is
scarcely credible that a large extension of such advances has within the
last few weeks been publicly propounded as a remedy for Fenianism and
all other Irish ills, and that a bill for that purpose, promoted by the
Government, is actually before Parliament.[§] We have heard of people
who would have cried fire during the Deluge: these people, if they had
lived at the time of the Deluge, would have proposed to stop it by
turning on a little more water.

But none of these things—not even the cashiering of the Irish Protestant
Church—nor all these things taken together, could avail to stop the
progress of Edition: current; Page: [532] Irish disaffection, because
not one of them comes near its real cause.ζ ηMatters of affronted
feeling, and of minor or distant pecuniary interest, will occupy men’s
minds when the primary interests of subsistence and security have been
cared for, and not before.η θLet our statesmen be assured that now, when
the long deferred day of Fenianism has come, nothing which is not
accepted by the Irish tenantry as a permanent solution of the land
difficulty, will prevent Fenianism, or something equivalent to it, from
being the standing torment of the English Government and people. If
without removing this difficulty, we attempt to hold Ireland by force,
it will be at the expense of all the character we possess as lovers and
maintainers of free government, or respecters of any rights except our
own; it will most dangerously aggravate all our chances of
misunderstandings with any of the greatθ powers of the world,
culminating in war; we shall be in a state of open revolt against the
universal conscience of Europe and Christendom, and more and more
against our own. And we shall in the end be shamed, or, if not shamed,
coerced, into releasing Ireland from the connexion; or we shall avert
the necessity only by conceding with the worst grace, and when it will
not prevent some generations of ill blood, that which if done at present
may still be in time permanently to reconcile the two countries.

Edition: current; Page: [533]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [534] Edition: current; Page: [535]


Appendix A

England and Ireland

First Draft (Dec., 1867-Jan., 1868)

ms in two parts, ff. 3, 6-11 in the Harvard University Library, f. 12 in
the Yale University Library (other ff. lost). The full text of the
surviving part of the MS is presented here, keyed to the text of the 5th
ed. (505-32 above) by superscript page numbers and Greek letters. E.g.,
the first passage below begins “511α-α”, meaning that the equivalent
passage in the 5th ed. appears on 511 and is enclosed in that version by
superscript alphas. “H” and “Y” are used to indicate the sections in
Harvard and Yale. The breaks between the entries are, of course, not
found in the MS, but are introduced here to facilitate comparison. The
sequence of Greek letters is established in the apparatus to the 5th
ed.; therefore some letters do not appear here (because Mill expanded
the text in rewriting; see, e.g., 523λ-λ), and in two cases the sequence
is broken (because Mill reordered part of the text; see 527χ-χ, ψ-ψ).
Editorial notes (in square brackets and italics) indicate when necessary
the relations between the MS and the printed versions. For a descriptive
account of the MS, see lxi-lxii and lxiii-lxiv above.

Edition: current; Page: [544]



