The Daily News had published a series of articles on 26 Oct., and 2, 9,
25, and 29 Nov., 1847, entitled “The Literature of the Lower Orders,” by
William Hepworth Dixon (1821-79), journalist, historian, and traveller.
The editor of the Examiner, John Forster (1812-76), excerpted from and
endorsed these articles in pieces entitled “The Moral Epidemic,” 30
Oct., pp. 690-1, and “Literature of the Lower Orders,” 6 Nov., p. 709.
Mill’s response, in a letter to the editor, in which Harriet Taylor
probably had a hand, is his first contribution to the Examiner since
August 1842 (No. 293). It appears in the “Political Examiner,” headed as
title, with the subhead, “To the Editor of the Examiner.” It is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter signed J.S. in the
Examiner of 11th December 1847 remonstrating against an attack on Sue’s
novel of Martin l’Enfant trouvé”

(MacMinn, p. 69).

sir,—

You have lately quoted with approval, and thereby given additional
publicity and weight to some articles in the Daily News, which purported
to give an account of “The Literature of the Lower Orders,” meaning the
cheap periodicals, and publications in series. The quality of the mental
food and entertainment provided for the “lower orders” (if they are
really the purchasers of this cheap literature) is so important a
subject, that the Daily News is to be commended for directing attention
to it; but that paper has unfortunately delegated the office of
examining the publications in question to a person so little worthy of
the judicial trust reposed in him, as to heap all the terms of moral
reprobation in his vocabulary upon works with which he seems entirely
unacquainted. He has already been under the necessity of retracting the
words in which he had accused one publication (the production, too, of a
woman), of “looseness, warmth of colouring in criminal scenes, and a
false glow cast round guilty indulgences.”1 Among the other works which
he has designated by name as forming the literature which he terms “a
chaos of corruption,”2 there is one characterised by him in the
following words, which have been quoted in the Examiner.

Edition: current; Page: [1090]
Martin the Foundling, our readers already know too well as the most
disgusting production of a writer who was never remarkable for his
purity. In these penny numbers, largely circulated and almost
universally devoured by eager female readers [the italics are the
writer’s own] his most obscene and intoxicating details are reproduced
with all the minute fidelity of which the English language is capable,
and this very fidelity is flaunted forth as the chief recommendation of
this edition. The translations current in the superior ranks are
expurgated; but in spite of that necessary care for the taste and better
feeling of the educated English reader, the tale is utterly disgusting.3

It is not often that a single paragraph displays such complicated
unfitness in the writer of it, for having anything to do with the
subject which he affects to treat of, as is shown in these sentences. So
uneducated is he, as to suppose that “educated English readers” read
French books in a translation. So ignorant of life and the world as not
to know that the demand for M. Sue’s and all other French novels among
the “superior ranks,” the “eager female readers” of the English nobility
and higher classes, is so great and incessant that the libraries in Bond
street cannot supply them fast enough or in quantity enough.4 And, to
crown all, he has never read the book he condemns. I, having read it,
doubt whether he has even looked at it. He has charged it with being
what it is not, and entirely missed what it is. It does not contain
“obscene and intoxicating details.” It does not describe scenes of
sensuality, or introduce any licentious characters except those whom it
intends in other respects to inspire disgust. Martin l’Enfant trouvé is
a book which no one can read without seeing that it is written with a
serious moral and even political purpose. It is a manifesto against the
relation between rich and poor, such as the present institutions of
society have made it. The author aims at exhibiting the moral perversion
which the existing state of society engenders in a part of the rich and
in a part of the poor; and this is done with something of the
melodramatic exaggeration of the Mysteries of Paris,5 though in a far
less degree. But he also presents, from both classes, characters of the
noblest and highest principle, and the most conscientious self-control,
and I do not fear to add that there are diffused through the book, and
illustrated by the conduct and maxims of those characters, many
principles of conduct and ideas of moral and social improvement,
decidedly in advance of the age, and showing in the writer no ordinary
degree of the desire and the capacity both to improve the outward
Edition: current; Page: [1091] condition of mankind, and to raise the
tone of their minds; notwithstanding some errors, and among the rest a
very decided tendency towards Communism, which in this most improving
writer further reflection will probably reduce within just bounds.

I confess I feel indignant at seeing one of the very few popular
imaginative writers of our time, who aim at any noble objects or
inculcate any lessons but the most beaten and trivial moralities, made a
byeword by people who have never read him for the extreme contrary of
all that he is and desires to be. I know nothing of M. Sue except his
works, but the more recent of them, and especially Martin, have given me
the highest esteem for his intentions and for many of his principles,6
and I protest, with all the force I am capable of, against the
calumnious representation of them which the Daily News has sent forth,
and which you have, I am sure unwittingly, assisted in diffusing.

A remonstrance, addressed to the Daily News, not having been inserted, I
address this protest to you.

J.S.7


370.: THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT IN FRANCE
 SPECTATOR, 18 MAR., 1848, P. 273

The banning of the culminating banquet (planned for 22 Feb., 1848), in a
series designed to promote parliamentary reform, led to demonstrations,
and Louis Philippe dismissed Guizot. Troops fired on demonstrators on
the 23rd, and armed insurrection resulted. On the 24th Louis Philippe
(aged seventy-four) abdicated in favour of his ten-year-old grandson,
the comte de Paris, and went into exile in Britain (where he died three
years later); revolutionary leaders set up a provisional republican
government at the Hôtel de Ville. Mill is here responding to “News of
the Week,” Spectator, 11 Mar., 1848, p. 237, from which the quotations
are taken. The letter, headed “To the Editor of the Spectator,” is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter signed J.S.M. in the
Spectator of 18th March 1848, on some proceedings of the Provisional
Government of France”

(MacMinn, p. 69).

sir,—

The opening remarks of the commentary on French affairs in your last
paper recommend, in the best possible spirit, forbearance in judging and
liberality in interpreting the conduct of the Provisional Government of
France. I Edition: current; Page: [1092] beg you to consider whether, in
the detailed criticisms which immediately follow this recommendation,
you have acted up to your own very proper canon. You blame the
Provisional Government for “going beyond its provisional function to
undertake legislation of a permanent character.” The first instance with
which you support this censure is not felicitous. You say, “It was, for
example, within its province to suspend the sitting of the Peers, but
not to abolish the order of Peerage by abolishing titles.”1 Surely you
must be aware that the French nonhereditary Peerage had nothing to do
with titles: a vast majority of titled persons were not Peers, and a
large proportion of the Chamber of Peers were not titled. With reference
to the other acts of the Government on which you comment unfavourably,
such as the reduction of the hours of labour,2 may it not be said in
your own words, that “they are acting upon views and under compulsions
which we cannot fully appreciate”? Yet even what we can already see of
their situation may well be conceived amply to justify every act
hitherto ascribed to them. Is it not their grand business as a
Provisional Government to keep the peace and restore order? and was it
possible to do this after such a revolution, unless on the foundation of
a compromise which should afford some immediate satisfaction to the
demands and expectations of the classes by whom the revolution was made?
We must remember that no act of the Provisional Government is anything
more than provisional. They very properly disclaim all right or power to
make permanent laws;3 and they have convoked an Assembly who must
necessarily reconsider all their acts, and who have power instantly to
set those acts aside.4

The general colouring given by you to your description of events in
France, tends (I am sure contrary to your intention) to encourage those
who, wishing the Republican Government to fail, look out for every
pretext to prophesy its failure. Where was the necessity for citing some
idle rumour of an intended resignation of Lamartine, and acounting for
it by supposing that he “probably discovers too much of the rude and
sordid in the work of revolutionary politics”? Where is there the
slightest sign in any public manifestation of M. De Lamartine, that he
thinks any part of the work he is engaged in “rude and sordid”? and how
unworthy must he be of such a position if he could think so? Again, you
have given an entirely mistaken account of the admirable experiment
which “a leading Edition: current; Page: [1093] journal,” and it may be
added a leading railway company, have organized for associating the
labourers employed by them in the profits of the undertaking.5 You call
it, with great exaggeration, a “community of property”; and you accuse
it of “subjecting the men, who have hitherto counted on regular wages,
to the vicissitudes of profit and loss.” If you had read with any care
the particulars given in the daily newspapers, you would have seen that
the plan does nothing of the kind. Every member of the establishment
continues to receive a fixed salary as before; but, after deducting this
and all other expenses, and allowing 5 per cent to the proprietors, any
surplus profit is to be divided among all concerned, in the ratio of
their fixed gains. It is exactly the plan successfully adopted some
years ago by an individual at Paris, employing some hundreds of
labourers, M. Leclaire; descriptions of which have been given in the
Edinburgh Review and in Chambers’s Journal.6

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

J.S.M.7

Edition: current; Page: [1094]


371.: GEORGE SAND
 UNPUBLISHED LETTER TO THE VOIX DES FEMMES [AFTER 9 APR., 1848]

Amandine Aurore Lucie Dupin, baronne Dudevant (1804-76), who wrote under
the name “George Sand,” attacked established views of society and
marriage in her novels and her life. La Réforme published on 9 Apr.,
1848, p. 3, a letter to the editor from her (dated 8 Apr.), in which she
objected to “Candidature de George Sand,” an article in the short-lived
feminist and socialist newspaper, the Voix des Femmes (6 Apr., p. 1), by
the editor Eugénie Niboyet (1797-1883), suggesting that Sand would be an
ideal candidate for the National Assembly. Niboyet also read her article
at a meeting of a feminist club on the same day. In her letter Sand
denied knowing the people involved in the proposal, saying she did not
wish to remain silent lest the “joke” might be thought to entail her
acceptance of their proposal and ideas. The Voix des Femmes reprinted
her letter (10 Apr., pp. 1-2), and reported that Sand’s candidature had
formally been proposed at the Jacobin Club on the 9th. The MS of this
undated draft letter, in Mill’s hand but undoubtedly a “joint
production” with Harriet Taylor, is in the Mill-Taylor Collection, Vol.
XLI, No. 2, ff. 10-12, on paper watermarked 1846. The MS of the English
draft, also in Mill’s hand and undated (printed in App. D below), is
ibid., ff. 18-19. As the letter was not published, it is not listed in
Mill’s bibliography.

depuis longtemps admiratrice de George Sand, je fus des premiers à lui
rendre honneur et justice. Lorsqu’en Angleterre tous se ruèrent sur elle
comme sur un écrivain immoral et indécent, nous fûmes, moi et un cercle
d’amis non sans influence, les premiers à nous récrier contre les
accusations qu’alors on prodiguait à ses écrits. A tous ceux qui les
condamnaient nous invoquions contre leur jugement d’alors leur jugement
d’aujourd’hui, et l’événement est venu justifier notre appel. Comment
donc exprimer ce que j’éprouve d’étonnement, de honte et de chagrin en
apprenant que lors de la grande crise politique et sociale de
l’humanité, amenée par le noble élan de Paris, Mme George Sand, au lieu
d’avancer, recule—que non seulement elle ne prend aucune initiative,
n’énonce aucuns principes, mais pareille à une lady timide et vulgaire,
elle rejette les flateries amicales qui lui ont été faites par votre
journal, et tâche d’écraser du haut de sa célébrité littéraire celles
qui ont osé la prendre pour chef d’une opinion1 qu’elles étaient bien en
droit de lui attribuer.

Sa protestation dans la Réforme contre l’usage que vous avez fait de son
nom ne peut s’expliquer que par la crainte que son amour propre d’auteur
pourrait être compromis par le soupçon d’une relation quelconque entre
sa réputation faite et des réputations encore à faire. Quoiqu’il en
soit, la réponse que vous avez faite à cette lettre lui est autant
supérieure en dignité et en désintéressement, que la gloire littéraire
de Mme Sand l’est à la vôtre. Serait-elle retombée au niveau de Edition:
current; Page: [1095] nos femmes-auteur anglaises, qui s’empressent
toujours à déclarer qu’elles ne veulent pas soutenir l’émancipation des
femmes tandis que c’est à l’émancipation partielle, conquise par des
âmes plus généreuses, qu’elles sont redevables de pouvoir élever la
voix, et se faire la position sociale et l’influence littéraire qu’elles
craignent de compromettre en donnant la moindre aide au mouvement qui
les a fait ce qu’elles sont. La littérature féminine de notre pays nous
a bien habitués à ces petites bassesses, effets de la peur. Ce n’est pas
ainsi que nous aurions voulu parler de G. Sand. Mais je crains qu’elle
ne soit destinée à ne servir à la cause des femmes, cause inséparable de
tous les grands intérêts de l’humanité, que de la manière dont toute
femme éminente lui sert, l’aide par le seul fait d’être femme. Au reste
je partage toute votre admiration pour son superbe talent, ses beaux
romans et son merveilleux style. Mais je pense que vous tombez dans une
erreur très nuisible à la cause des femmes, en la qualifiant de
philosophe.2 Au point de vue philosophique rien ne me semble autant
caractériser les écrits de Sand que la présence de l’imagination et du
sentiment et l’absence de l’esprit logique et de principes exacts.

Permettez qu’en vous exprimant les voeux que toute femme d’un esprit
élevé et d’un coeur large devrait émettre pour le succès de votre
entreprise j’ajoute mon espoir que vous traiterez tout désaveu de
sympathie pour cette entreprise de la part d’une femme quelle qu’elle
soit, avec la pitié indulgente que réclament la faiblesse et la
timidité.


372.: ENGLAND AND IRELAND
 EXAMINER, 13 MAY, 1848, PP. 307-8

The agitation for repeal of the union of Ireland with Great Britain,
having died down in 1843, began again in late 1847. The French
Revolution of February 1848 and the Chartist agitation sparked hopes of
a bloodless revolution in Ireland, aided by the French; the Nation in
April called for a national guard, and issued a radical creed. This
letter from Mill, dated 5 May, is in response to “Repeal of the Union,”
Examiner, 29 Apr., pp. 275-6 (from which the quotations are taken), by
Thomas Carlyle. It signals the chasm that now separated their social and
political views, as Mill, though one of Carlyle’s “earliest admirers,”
now saw his views as pernicious, while Carlyle thought Mill’s valueless.
(Their conflict over “The Negro Question” in 1849 may be compared; see
CW, Vol. XXI, pp. 85-95.) This letter to the editor appears in the
“Political Examiner” headed as title, with the subhead, “To the Editor
of the Examiner.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter
signed M on ‘England and Ireland’ in the Examiner of 13th May 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 69).

sir,—

In your last week’s paper you published a dissertation by a writer whom,
even if you had not named him, it would have been impossible to mistake,
Edition: current; Page: [1096] expressive of his judgment on the
question of Irish Repeal. Will you permit one of that writer’s earliest
admirers to express, through the same medium, the grounds on which he
feels compelled to declare unqualified dissent from the judgment thus
promulgated?

Let me premise that I am not an Irishman, but an Englishman; that I do
not desire Repeal, but, on the contrary, should regard it as a
misfortune to all concerned. It is good government that should be
agitated for, not separate government: but separation is better than bad
government; and I entirely sympathize in the indignation which an
Irishman is entitled to feel at the reasons given by your correspondent
for refusing it.

The doctrine of your correspondent is (to quote his own words) that “the
Destinies have laid upon England a heavier, terribler job of labour than
any people has been saddled with in these generations”—no other than
that of “conquering Anarchy:” that this, which is “England’s work,
appointed her by the so-called Destinies and Divine Providences,” cannot
go on unless Ireland is either English, or in English hands; and that
consequently the repeal of the Union is “flatly forbidden by the laws of
the universe.”

This is a new phasis of the Hebrew prophet of these later days, the
Ezekiel of England. The spirit of his prophesying is quite changed.
Instead of telling of the sins and errors of England, and warning her of
“wrath to come,”1 as he has been wont to do, he preaches the divine
Messiahship of England, proclaims her the prime minister of Omnipotence
on this earth, commissioned to reduce it all (or as much of it as is
convenient to herself) into order and harmony, or at all events, under
that pretext, into submission, even into “slavery,” under her own
power—will it or will it not.

When an assumption of this sort is coolly made, and the already ample
self-conceit of John Bull encouraged to invest itself with the imaginary
dignity of an appointed minister of “the laws of the universe,” the
proper answer would seem to be, simply to deny the premises. Where is
the evidence that England has received any such mandate from the supreme
powers? Where are her credentials? By what signs has she shown that the
“conquering of anarchy” is the work specially appointed to her from
above?

If the test is to be (and one cannot imagine your correspondent
appealing to any other), her having given proof of the capacity to do
it, it so happens that England is precisely the one country among all
others, which has had the opportunity of showing, and has conclusively
shown, that she has not that capacity. For five centuries, to speak
within bounds, has this very corner of earth in question, this Ireland,
been given over to her by the “destinies and divine providences,” as a
test of what capacity she has for reducing chaos into order.2 Edition:
current; Page: [1097] For five centuries has she had Ireland under her
absolute, resistless power, to show what she could do in the way of
“conquering anarchy”—and the result is the most total, disastrous,
ignominious failure yet known to history. No other nation ever had such
an opportunity for so prolonged a period, and made such a use of it. The
Romans were in many respects barbarians, yet the Gauls, within a century
after being conquered by them, were a civilized people; and the most
recalcitrant of all subjects with whom they had to deal, the people who
then, as now, had the strongest natural tendency to anarchy of any in
Europe, the Iberian Spaniards, in 150 years after the conquest were
perfectly peaceable, and far more civilized than the Romans themselves
were when they conquered them. Mahomet, one of your correspondent’s
heroes,3 was a savage, and a leader of savages; he lived in one of the
worst times of the world’s history, yet in a century after his death the
most civilized monarchy in the western world, one which kept arts,
letters, and commerce alive when they seemed to have perished everywhere
else, had been founded at Grenada by the descendants of his wild Arabs.
These may be called conquerors of anarchy. But England! and in Ireland!
For the first four and a half of her five centuries she had not so much
as the wish to do aught but oppress and trample on Ireland for her own
supposed benefit. I waive penal laws4 and all controversial topics, but
even in the eighteenth century she purposely and avowedly crushed the
nascent manufactures of Ireland (the hopeful germ of so much that
Ireland still needs), lest they should compete with her own.5 And there
was not one of her statesmen who would not have thought it disgracefully
unpatriotic to have acted otherwise. This is no peculiar reproach to
England; it was the infernal spirit of that time—a time at which
England, now the liberator of the negro slave, made wars and treaties
for the sake of Assiento contracts for supplying negroes to be worked to
death in Spanish America.6 It is Edition: current; Page: [1098] to the
honour of England that she was the first to cast off this spirit: and
during the present generation, the policy of England towards Ireland has
been, in point of intention, as upright and even as generous as was
consistent with the inveterate English habit of making the interest of
the aristocracy and of the landlords the first consideration. As between
the two countries, nothing can now be more disinterested than the policy
of England. It is a pity we should be obliged to add, nothing more
imbecile; more devoid of plan, of purpose, of ideas, of practical
resource. Omitting former times, we had, two years ago, what may prove
to have been a last opportunity of regenerating Ireland. A terrible
calamity quelled all active opposition to our government, and Ireland
was once more a tabula rasa,7 on which we might have inscribed what we
pleased. This was an occasion for English politicians to show what they
had in them. Here was a field to exercise this divine gift of bringing
chaos into order. Whatever ideas they had, they must have then
displayed; and it proved that they had none. They spent ten millions in
effecting what seemed impossible—in making Ireland worse than before.8
They demoralized and disorganized what little of rational industry the
country contained; and the only permanent thing with which they endowed
Ireland, was the only curse which her evil destiny seemed previously to
have spared her—a bad poor law.9

The eternal laws of justice, which one might have expected that your
correspondent at least would have stood champion for, will not permit
that a country which has for five hundred years had the power to make
what it pleased of another, and has used that power as England has done,
and which has no more idea now, than it had 500 years ago, how to make
any good use of the power, should now—when its unhappy dependent, weary
of such government, declares that it will try what can be done by and
for itself—should now say to the dependent, I am appointed to improve
and civilize you, and rather than let go my hold of you, I will make you
suffer “a doom that makes me shudder.” You appointed! the dependent
country may well retort; then why did you not set about it before? What
proof do you give that you mean to attempt it now? And even if you do,
has not your capacity, both long since and down to this very hour, been
weighed in the balance and found wanting?10

There might be somewhat to be said for a pretension of this sort, if
made in behalf of England by a Cromwell.11 If courage and capacity of
the highest order, proved through a long period of confusion, in which
capacity of every sort rose to the top, had invested some eminent ruler
of this island with a temporary Edition: current; Page: [1099]
dictatorship, thereby enabling him more effectually and speedily to
clear away all obstacles to future progress, and erect on the ground
thus cleared an enduring edifice of good government, and if every part
of his conduct steadily manifested that such was really his purpose, I
for one should have nothing to object, if such a ruler claimed it as his
duty, and consequently his right, having already Ireland under his
power, to do a similar good work for it also; nor is it likely that
either the duty or the right would in such case be gainsaid by Ireland
itself. But at present the individual in whom England is personified,
and who is to regard himself as the chosen instrument of heaven for
making Ireland what it ought to be, and is encouraged to carry fire and
sword through Ireland if that assumption should be disputed, is—Lord
John Russell!

In regard to the 150,000,000 of subjects whom your correspondent says
that the English nation has to care for; it is quite true that in India,
having to do, not with “anarchy” (save in some passing exceptional case,
like that of the Sikhs), but with a people inured from numberless
generations to submission, the English nation does contrive to govern
them some degrees better than they were governed by their tyrannical or
incapable native despots. And inasmuch as England was able to do this in
spite of Napoleon and of united Europe, she could probably continue to
do so in spite of Ireland. As for the remainder of the 150,000,000
(except the comparatively insignificant negro colonies), I am yet to
learn that England does any one thing for them which they could not do
better for themselves; or that her good government of them consists when
at the best, in anything better than in leaving them alone. With respect
to the “world just now fallen into bottomless anarchy,” and which your
correspondent seems to think may expect to be helped out of it by
England, is not this the case for saying, “Physician, heal thyself!”12
The quellers of anarchy among the English ruling classes will have work
enough of that sort to do at home, unless the author of Past and Present
is a false prophet.13 With what sort of mental furniture they are fitted
out for doing it, we have had some recent specimens in the childish
panic of a few days ago, the childish exultation when the panic was
over, and that precious proposal from the leaders of all the parties in
the state for a “Public Order Memorial”—a thing to convulse gods and men
with “unextinguishable laughter.”14 These sages are hardly yet fairly in
the wood, when they begin to holloa as if they were already out of it.

Edition: current; Page: [1100]
No, sir: rely on it, that England has no mission, just now, to keep
other nations out of anarchy; but on the contrary, will have to learn,
from the experience which other nations are now in a way of acquiring,
the means by which alone it can henceforth be averted from herself. And
your correspondent, of all persons, might have been expected to
acknowledge that there is not one of the working men and women now in
conference with Louis Blanc at the Luxembourg on the “organization of
labour,”15 who is not a degree nearer to the overcoming of this
difficulty than Lord John Russell or Sir Robert Peel; since those at
least know what the problem is, and (however crude and wild their
present notions are) place their hopes in attaining a rational and
peaceful solution of it, while the Englishmen place theirs in nothing
but in crushing it down, and preventing it from being mooted at all.
Before I cease to intrude on your space, let me be permitted to express
the opinion that Europe, and especially France, which are accused, and
by your correspondent, of rushing headlong into anarchy, are in reality
affording a proof, and a most precious and salutary one, how utterly
repugnant all approach to anarchy is to the present state of the
European mind. For six weeks after the revolution there was no police,
no organized force, the city guard was annihilated, the troops banished,
the Government had no means of making itself obeyed but by argument and
persuasion; nothing apparently stood between Paris and anarchy; yet
nothing worse is known to have happened than a few forced illuminations
in honour of trees of liberty; and even of common offences, it is said
that a smaller number were committed than in ordinary times. Most
remarkable is it, that so far from being an anarchical spirit, the
spirit which is now abroad is one which demands too much government; it
is wholly a spirit of association, of organization; even the most
extreme anti-property doctrines take the form of Communism, of
Fourierism,16 of some scheme not for emancipating human life from
external restraint, but for subjecting it to much more restraint than it
has heretofore been subject to, or ever ought to be; and the apostles of
those doctrines rely avowedly on moral force and on bringing the rest of
mankind to their opinion by experiment and discussion.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

M.17

Edition: current; Page: [1101]


373.: THE REFORM DEBATE
 DAILY NEWS, 8 JULY, 1848, P. 3

This article was prompted by the introduction by Joseph Hume on 20 June,
1848, of a Motion on National Representation, which included household
franchise, the ballot, triennial parliaments, and redistribution (PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 99, cols. 879-906). The debate (ibid., cols. 906-66) was
continued on adjournment to Thursday, 6 July, when the motion was lost
by a vote of 84 to 351 (ibid., Vol. 100, cols. 156-226). This is the
first of many leading articles Mill wrote for the Daily News. Unheaded,
it appears after the parliamentary report. It is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A leading article on the Reform Debate (1st leader) in
the Daily News of 8th July 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 69).

if the condition and prospects of a great popular question may be
estimated at each period by the character of the opposition to it, the
reform movement has made great progress in the interval between the
first debate on Mr. Hume’s motion and that of Thursday last; for the
change in the complexion of the anti-reform advocacy is most
perceptible. On the first occasion, the tone was that of a champion who
is quite persuaded that he is safe, and only for form’s sake exchanges a
few thrusts. Lord John Russell’s speech sounded like an echo of Mr.
Canning in days long gone by, when nobody in parliament took reform au
sérieux, and the orator well knew that what his hearers demanded from
him was not reason or argument, but a colour, to put upon the vote they
were predetermined to give.1 All Lord John Russell’s points were an
exact repetition of Mr. Canning’s. The country did not want organic
change. Our constitution was the admiration and envy of surrounding
nations. In England, a man might rise from the lowest station in society
to the highest. If the House of Commons were reformed, it would not be
compatible with an unreformed House of Lords. All these saws Lord J.
Russell had heard, twenty times from Mr. Canning, in opposition to his
own motions for reform; and there was as much truth and pertinency in
them then as there is now. Whether Lord John, a tardy pupil in his
opponents’ school, now actually thinks that these are arguments, we do
not Edition: current; Page: [1102] know; but we feel sure that Mr.
Canning did not, that (to use a stale metaphor) he laughed in his sleeve
at them, and that if he had ever been brought to close quarters, he
would have fought the battle with weapons totally different. He
estimated his tory supporters very justly in supposing that they did not
require anything better, and as for reformers they were not strong
enough (at least he thought so) to be worth the trouble of any more
ingenious sophistry.

It is possible that Lord John Russell, when he delivered his speech
against reform, may have been of a somewhat similar way of thinking. It
was not then many weeks since the glorious tenth of April, when the
demon revolution, or at least a noisy braggart that attempted to look
like him, sneaked away at the sight of a special constable’s staff; and
perhaps Lord John thought that democracy had been extinguished with Mr.
Cuffey.2 If so, subsequent reflection has brought wisdom, if not to him,
at least to his supporters, for on Thursday there was no renewal of this
old and once serviceable style of argumentation. Nobody took down from
their shelves any more of Mr. Canning’s dusty instruments of warfare, or
borrowed from Lord John those which he had brushed and burnished for the
former occasion. The speakers on Thursday had completely altered their
tactics. They no longer took their stand in defence of “things as they
are.”3 They gave up the defence of their own position, and only tried to
show that their assailants where as vulnerable as themselves. The series
of speeches against Mr. Hume’s motion was a succession of assaults not
upon reform, but upon the details of the particular plan of reform which
Mr. Hume has brought forward. The burden of the complaint was that the
plan is not systematic—that it rests on no definite principles, and is
open, at various points, to the double question, why go so far; and,
since you go so far, why not go farther?4

The assertion is only true in a sense in which it is denied by no one.
Mr. Cobden accepted the charge,5 and none of Mr. Hume’s supporters
repudiate it. But it comes with an ill grace from the speakers and
writers who advance it. There is not one of them who does not proclaim
that he also is for reform. A member of Sir Robert Peel’s cabinet
congratulates the ministry on having done with finality;6 and we find,
to our great edification, that all the world are Edition: current; Page:
[1103] reformers, each in his little way. Then, may not Mr. Hume retort
on his assailants their cavilling objection against himself? Does any
one of their little plans rest on any abstract principle any more than
his, or contain in itself any demonstrative reason for doing exactly so
much and no more? In what, then, do their schemes of reform differ from
his? In that which is of more importance than anything else—that his
proposition is for a great reform, theirs for a small one. If it is
asked what principle is involved in Mr. Hume’s proposition, this is the
principle. It is the principle of a large reform.

Whatever people may say, for the sake of success in a debate or in a
leading article, every one knows that the question is not about any
particular collection of details, about any six points, or four, or
five. The question is that of a large alteration in our representative
system. Any plan which is brought forward as a standard for a party to
rally round, must be of the nature of a compromise. The new reform bill
is neither more nor less so than the old one. There is probably as much
variety of opinion among those who voted with Mr. Hume, as there was
among those who voted with Lord Grey in 1831.7 But they are agreed in
this, that they demand a large measure. There is no other principle in
the matter, and there needs no other. The measure is intended to be such
as all may vote for, who think that a large reform of parliament, in a
democratic direction, but short of actual democracy, is desirable in
itself, and suitable to the circumstances of the present time. In this
respect the scheme perfectly fulfils its purpose. It draws the line with
sufficient distinctness. Those who are for no change at all, or for such
changes only as would make no difference in the spirit of the
government, of course vote against it. All others may vote for it,
reserving their ulterior opinions. It excludes all who do not come up to
its mark, but admits all who go beyond it.

One lesson the consistent supporters of reform may take to themselves—a
lesson which becomes more important in proportion as the contest ceases
to be a mere mock fight and becomes a serious conflict of opposing
reasons. Their practical conduct as politicians necessarily partakes of
compromise. Their demands and systematic aims must often fall short of
their principles. But let them not therefore cut down their principles
to the measure of their demands. If they do, they lose far more in
vigour of argument, and in the imposing influence of a sense of
consistency and power, than they can possibly gain in charming away the
fears of those who would, but dare not, follow them. Let them disclaim
nothing which is a legitimate consequence of their principles. Let them
tell the truth—when it is the truth—that their private opinion goes
further than their public demands, and that if they ask less than what
their principles would justify, it is not because they fear to avow, or
are unable to defend, their principles, but Edition: current; Page:
[1104] because they think they are doing more good by uniting their
efforts with those of others to attain a nearer object, and one more
immediately practicable.


374.: ON REFORM
 DAILY NEWS, 19 JULY, 1848, P. 2

This unheaded leader (following the parliamentary report), which again
brings French experience to bear on English reform, is described in
Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on Reform (1st leader), in the
Daily News of 19th July 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 70).

the more reasonable class of the opponents of reform do not attempt to
defend the present constitution of parliament by any very confident
appeal to its fruits; they find little to say in recommendation of the
sort of government, or the sort of governors, which our present
institutions give us; but they are unable to persuade themselves that
matters would be at all mended by giving a more democratic character to
the popular branch of the legislature. The fault, they say, is in the
country itself; in the national education; in the state of the public
mind; not in the constitution of parliament. If our statesmen are
without ideas and without purposes, weak, passive, opinionless; if they
have neither head nor heart to face the difficulties of any great
question; if they rarely aspire to leave any of the larger interests of
the people they profess to govern in a better condition than they found
them; this is not (in the opinion of some persons) the fault of the men,
so much as of the age and country, which have not produced better men,
or have produced them only as scattered, obscure individuals, quite as
likely to be overlooked by a numerous constituency as by a narrow one.
If the classes who now rule in parliament are so deficient in the
qualities which should belong to rulers, do the masses possess them? The
knowledge, the vigour of intellect, the freedom from prejudice, the
judgment undivided by selfishness or partiality, which we so deeply
desiderate in the rich and high-born, do we find them in the poor? That
clear-sighted justice and high-minded generosity, combined with
practical resource, which the times demand—without which this great
transitional period in opinions and institutions may be lengthened out
in fruitless oscillations—what reason have we to flatter ourselves that
these endowments, which we seek vainly among our so-called educated
classes, will be found in the untaught delegates of the factory and the
workshop? Is it not much, and more than we can expect, if those for whom
society has done nothing, prove no worse than those on whom it has
lavished all its means of instruction and improvement?

This objection assumes, as the natural and intended effect of popular
institutions, that the crude opinions and unguided instincts of the
working classes would be the directing power in the state. We have no
such expectation from any extension of the franchise. Reformers have
always maintained, and the example Edition: current; Page: [1105] of
France is now before us to show, that views of things taken from the
peculiar position of the working classes are not likely to predominate,
or to have at all more than their just influence, even in a legislature
chosen by universal suffrage. After a revolution made by workmen, not
twenty members in an assembly of nine hundred are working men. Scarcely
in our own parliament do opinions with any semblance of an anti-property
character meet with a more hostile reception; and it is evident that the
errors of the assembly are more likely to be on the side of conservatism
than of revolution. Then what has France gained, it may be asked, or
what would England gain by the admission of the working classes to the
franchise? A gain beyond all price, the effects of which may not show
themselves in a day, or in a year, but are calculated to spread over and
elevate the future. This gain does not consist in turning the propertied
classes out of the government and transferring it to the unpropertied,
but in compelling the propertied classes to carry it on in a manner
which they shall be capable of justifying to the unpropertied.

Grant but a democratic suffrage, and all the conditions of government
are changed. Whoever may be the rulers, the interest of the great mass
of the community must then stand foremost among the actuating principles
in the conduct of public affairs. The legislature must from that time
make both the real and the apparent interests of the most numerous
classes an object of incessant solicitude; and whenever it does things
which are opposed to those apparent interests, it must defend them by
reasons drawn from the interests of those same classes, and appealing to
their understandings. The consequences of this would be incalculable.
The discussions of parliament and of the press would be, what they ought
to be, a continued course of political instruction for the working
classes. Let those classes be as ignorant, prejudiced, passionate as any
one may choose to represent them; let them be full of all sorts of
prepossessions against property and order—those who are interested in
property and order would feel all the more strongly that their safety
depended on enlightening that ignorance, prejudice, and passion. One of
the first measures of the democratic government of France has been a
bill to bestow gratuitous education, at the expense of the state, upon
the whole rising generation of the French people.1 Where the poorest
have votes, the richest can no longer be indifferent to the state of
their mental cultivation. To educate the whole community up to the
highest point attainable is not then a matter of choice but of fortunate
necessity.

This, however, is only one, and the most obvious, of the benefits which
would arise from making the labouring masses a great power in the state.
Nothing can be imagined which would tend so much to regenerate the
intellectual vigour of the classes, who are now letting the powers of
government perish in their hands Edition: current; Page: [1106] from
mere mental feebleness. Every one who knows history or the human mind is
aware, that powerful intellects and strong characters are formed by
conflict, and that the times which have produced brilliant developments
of mental accomplishment in public stations have been those in which
great principles and important social elements have been fighting each
other hand to hand—times of struggle for national independence,
political freedom, or religious emancipation. The present age also is an
age of struggle between conflicting principles which it is the work of
this time, and perhaps of many generations more, to bring into a just
relation with one another. The conflict now going on is between the
instincts and immediate interests of the propertied classes and those of
the unpropertied. This opposition of interests—partly real, partly only
apparent—is at present the grand difficulty of government. All other
questions with which governments have yet begun to occupy themselves,
are difficult chiefly by their connexion with this. Now, of those two
opposing forces—neither of which can be disregarded, neither of which
can or ought to triumph over the other, but which it is the grand
business of government to attempt to reconcile—one only is represented
in the British parliament. The ministry, be it what it may, exclusively
represents the propertied classes; and the two houses of parliament are
unanimously on the same side of the question as itself. It has to make
out a case to the satisfaction solely of its own party. The murmurs of
the other party it only hears at a distance, and is under no greater
necessity of attending to them than the cabinet of a despot. There are
no recognised organs for that other power, no way in which it can show
itself above ground, and the extent of its subterraneous working will
therefore only be known when some day, as at Vienna, it explodes and
blows up the whole fabric of society.2

Is it not of old one of the principal and acknowledged uses of
parliament, that all which agitates and divides society should make
itself felt by a corresponding agitation and division there? Ought not
parliament to be the place of discussion for adverse interests and
principles, the arena where opposing forces should meet and fight out
their battle, that they may not find themselves reduced to fight it in a
less pacific field? If so, the British parliament does not fulfil its
office; for the vital question with which all Europe rings, and which
fills every thinking mind, both in England and on the continent, with
anxiety—the question how to make the rights of property acceptable to
the unpropertied classes, is unheard of in that assembly, which it ought
more than anything else to occupy; and the subjects which engross
parliamentary debates, compared with the great and urgent interests of
the nation, form a contrast as full of irony, as the Byzantine multitude
Edition: current; Page: [1107] occupying itself with the factions of the
circus when Attila was at their gates.3 So it will be until the rulers
of the country have to meet face to face in parliament the
representatives of those interests and feelings of which they are now
ignorant, or from which they superciliously turn aside. They have to
learn the difficult but necessary act of looking at established
institutions and opinions from the point of view of those who are not on
the sunny but on the shady side of the social edifice. Defects by which
other people alone suffer are seldom seen until the sufferers point them
out. When the unpropertied are fairly represented in the House of
Commons, their just claims will, for the first time, obtain a really
impartial hearing, and their unreasonable demands will, also for the
first time, be so resisted as not to leave a stinging sense of injustice
behind.


375.: ELECTORAL DISTRICTS
 DAILY NEWS, 25 JULY, 1848, P. 2

This article returns to the issues of No. 373 (q.v.), with particular
reference to Thomas Noon Talfourd’s Speech on National Representation (6
July), PD, Vol. 100, cols. 170-81. This unheaded second leader is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on Electoral
Districts and against Mr. Talfourd’s speech, in the Daily News of 25th
July 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 70).

the most important point in Mr. Hume’s plan of reform is the
equalisation of the electoral districts. This one thing would do more
towards diminishing the undue ascendancy of landed and moneyed wealth
than all the other points, even of the charter,1 without it. It would
reduce the nominees of the landlords in the House of Commons from about
two-thirds of the whole assembly to about one-third. And by making every
electoral body too numerous to be bribed, it would put an end to the
obtaining seats by mere expenditure, an object for which so much
virtuous zeal is so ineffectually professed by all classes of
half-reformers.

This, then, being, of all the “points,” by far the most disagreeable to
the present ruling powers, the opposition to it is proportionally more
obstinate than Edition: current; Page: [1108] to any other. But as it is
not convenient to say that the real objection to the measure is its
efficacy, every encouragement is held out to the invention of
sentimental objections. Electoral districts are said to be mechanical,
pedantic, a rule-and-square system; and all the other phrases usually
employed to throw discredit on precise and business-like modes of
conducting any transaction. Serjeant Talfourd, the “good poet but bad
politician,”2 lent himself as an organ for this style of declamation;
and clenched his first specimen with the passage, known to all readers
of poetry from Coleridge’s translation of Schiller’s Wallenstein, in
which the crafty Ottavio Piccolomini inculcates on his high-minded son
the superiority of tortuous courses:

-   

    Straightforward flies
-   

    The lightning flash, and straight the cannon-ball,
-   

    Shattering that it may reach, and shattering what it reaches.3

So, because the lightning and the cannon-ball fly straight to their
mark, nothing else should. Straightforwardness and directness of aim are
declared to be discreditable things, and whatever takes the straight
road to its object is an agent of destruction. Let us rather say that
directness and power are the same thing or always accompany each other.
If the object be to destroy, the means which are most direct are the
most effectual; and so they are when the object is to preserve. When a
person is in the water and drowning, Mr. Talfourd would hardly quote
Schiller in favour of going round about, instead of straight in to
deliver him. If it is absolutely necessary to have an illustration from
visible nature, the sunbeams move in straight lines as well as the
lightning; indeed more so, for the lightning makes no objection to
twisting and turning in order to accommodate itself to the direction of
the conducting medium. A steam-ship, also, would have been a more
appropriate exemplification of rectilineal movement than a cannon-ball.
The poet goes on to say that the road on which blessing travels

-   

    Winds round the corn field and the hill of vines,
-   

    Honouring the holy bounds of property;4

but the very words of the quotation suggest that the illustration and
the philosophy are both antiquated, and that roads, in these days, are
not made on the principle which the poet patronises. Does it not occur
to the admirers of crooked paths that we are living in an age of
railroads; and that, now-a-days, rather than Edition: current; Page:
[1109] not go straight to our object, instead of winding round the hill
we even tunnel through it? The spirit of the time requires that its
machinery, whether for physical or for political purposes, shall be
efficient. It is not reckoned a merit in machinery to imitate the
pleasing irregularities of nature. Its beauty is in its accuracy: it
works by straight lines and right angles, and works best when its lines
are most correctly straight, its angles most exactly square.

Coleridge himself, though fond of quoting the passage which Mr. Talfourd
cited from him,5 is an authority in favour of electoral districts. He
recommended, we think in his Church and State, a new administrative
division of the country, describing the present one as barbarous, and a
great obstacle to improvement.6 Even Schiller is against Mr. Talfourd;
for the fine verses put into the mouth of Piccolomini do not express
Schiller’s opinions; on the contrary the whole tragedy is a
demonstration, not for, but against Piccolomini’s maxims and conduct.

Electoral districts are mechanical. And why not? In whatever manner
members of parliament are elected, there must be mechanical arrangement
of some sort; and what these should be is not a question of poetry or
the picturesque, but of means to an end. What is the right end, and by
what means can it be accomplished? Is it the proper end of a House of
Commons to make the landed and monied aristocracies the masters of the
legislature? If so, keep the system as it is. Is it the object that no
class shall predominate, but that all sections of the community shall be
powerful in proportion to their numbers and their intelligence? A new
division and constitution of the electoral body is then imperative; and
the more nearly equal the number of electors in each constituency the
more nearly is the end attained. There is a sentiment concerned in the
matter, without doubt, but it is that of justice. When just ends are
aimed at by just means, and means well adapted to their attainment, all
other sentiment will take care of itself. Sentiment, and of the best
kind, is sure to gather round all things which are large diffusers of
good among the human race.

Unfortunately, reformers no more than anti-reformers have yet learned to
make great principles their object, and in this lies the secret in the
affairs of communities no less than in those of individuals, of
ineffectual struggles and mean results. The world will rally round a
truly great principle, and be as much the better for the contest as for
the attainment; but the petty objects by the pursuit of which no
principle is asserted, are fruitless even when attained.

Edition: current; Page: [1110]


376.: FRENCH AFFAIRS
 DAILY NEWS, 9 AUG., 1848, P. 3

This unheaded third leader, another comment on the aftermath of the
February Revolution (see Nos. 370 and 374), is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A leading article on French affairs in the Daily News
of 9th August 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 70).

from the day when the people of Paris expelled the ruler who had been
called the monarch of the middle classes, and proclaimed a democratic
republic, it has been evident that the fate of political and social
improvement in Europe, for many years to come, was to be decided in
France. If the revolution, after its first difficulties are over, issues
in a government which at once preserves order and accelerates
progress—makes the laws obeyed, and labours actively to improve
them—then in England, and in all Europe, faith in improvement, and
determination to effect it, will become general, and the watchword of
improvement will once more be, as it was of old, the emancipation of the
oppressed classes. If, on the other hand, the French people allow their
republican institutions to be filched from them by artifice, or yield
them up under the ascendancy of some popular chief, or under the panic
caused by insurrection, or compromise them by an indefinite succession
of disorders, repressed only by a succession of illegal violences on the
part of the government, the tendency in this and other countries to the
extension of political rights or the redress of social injustices, may
be for a long time suspended. The tide will set in in a retrograde
direction, and a timid conservative instinct will probably take the
place of even that moderate taste for improvement which did exist in a
certain portion of the influential classes of this country before
February last.

The enemies of reform in England know all this, and their tactics are
accommodated to it. Events in France itself are fortunately out of their
power. If anything which they were able to do could make the revolution
in France really a disastrous failure, it would be done. Lacking this,
the most that there is any chance of accomplishing is to make it be
thought a failure. And to effect this, there is hardly any exaggeration
or misrepresentation which is not resorted to. Those whose notions of
the state of France are taken from the leading articles of almost any
English newspaper, are much worse than ignorant, they are entirely
misinformed. The writers do not even preserve a decent consistency with
the facts published by themselves. It has repeatedly happened, that the
Paris correspondent in one column has given an authoritative denial of
some slanderer’s report, which is expatiated on as an admitted truth in
the same day’s editorial article.1 In other cases similar slanders,
after having for several days Edition: current; Page: [1111] served
their purpose as texts for blackening the revolution, or some individual
or party connected with it, have been contradicted in half-a-dozen
words, and in a corner, a week or more after the official contradiction
had gone the round of the French newspapers. Oftener still, the denial,
or positive disproof, given in the French papers, has not been noticed
at all, while the calmuny has continued to be assumed as an indisputable
fact. Instances of all these kinds of misrepresentations have occurred
(for example), with regard to the imputed atrocities of the late
unsuccessful insurgents.2 There was no limit to the absurd incredibility
of the things at first asserted respecting these people. The English
journals eagerly circulated them all—even the nonsense about waylaying
the troops and the national guard to poison them with brandy, and such
cock and bull stories, which bore their absurdity on the face of them—to
which nothing but the extreme of terror and exasperation combined could
have made the greatest gobemouche in Paris give credit for an instant.
This, and all the tales about poisoned balls and other peculiarly
murderous missiles made and used by the insurgents,3 have been proved
and are now admitted to be, not exaggerations, but absolute fictions,
without the smallest pretence of a fact to ground them on. There is not
a single imputation of cruelty or ferocity of anything like a general
character which is not now given up; the only assertions of the kind as
yet unrefuted are of two or three insulated acts by individuals, and it
remains to be seen whether even these will stand the test of judicial
inquiry. Yet the English public are still led to believe, and do
believe, that the insurrection was something unheard-of for its horrible
barbarity; and the journals which led them into this belief take care
not to disabuse them of it. Nor are the victors in the late contest more
spared by calumny than the vanquished. We are told with the coolest
effrontery in leading articles about the number of persons who have been
shot by order of the present French government4—it being a notorious
fact that not one person has been shot, not one life taken, by the
authority of government in consequence of the insurrection, while it is
expected that none will be taken even after trial. The mildness and
moderation of the sincerely republican party are as conspicuous in the
present head of the government and his cabinet as in the provisional
government and executive commission who preceded him.

The readers of both whig and tory papers really ought to receive with
distrust the statements which they find in those papers disadvantageous
to France. They ought to consider how great an interest those papers
have, or think they have, in putting the worst colour on French affairs.
It is the only chance of preventing Edition: current; Page: [1112]
reform. There is no way now of discrediting reform without blackening
France. The enemies of popular institutions have lost their most potent
weapon, fear of the unknown. Democracy, in the popular signification of
the term, exists as a fact, among our nearest neighbours. There, under
our eyes, is universal suffrage, or what is usually, though improperly,
called by that name; a sovereign assembly, elected by the whole male
population; no aristocracy as a clog on its movements; and the motto of
this government is Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity. Here, then, is an
actual trial of the experiment; with what success depends on
circumstances of which no one is yet in a condition to judge; but if the
result should be a social system, which, with any amount of allowance
for human imperfection, does sincerely, and in a manner not to be
mistaken, aim at guiding its practice by the spirit of its motto, surely
it cannot have other than a beneficial influence? Other countries will
not fear anything worse for themselves from popular institutions than
France suffers, or than they can be made to believe that France suffers.
We may be certain, therefore, that the bad side of everything will be
made the most of; that every idle or malicious rumour of mischief will
be circulated as a fact, and when each particular rumour is proved to be
false, the general impression made by such false assertions will be
studiously kept up, and that, fairly or foully, events in France will
continue to be represented in the blackest colours in which there is any
hope of representing them successfully. And such is, unfortunately, the
general ignorance in this country respecting foreign affairs, that a
large amount of misrepresentation may as yet be ventured upon without
any considerable danger of detection.


377.: LANDED TENURE IN IRELAND
 DAILY NEWS, 12 AUG., 1848, P. 2

Mill was encouraged to return to his main Irish themes by the article on
large and small farms in the Agricultural and Industrial Journal, I
(July 1848), 147-71, by Robert John Kane (1809-90), Irish chemist and
Professor of Natural Philosophy, appointed in 1845 President of the
as-yet unopened Queen’s College at Cork, and a member of the commission
investigating the potato blight. Mill’s quotations are from the article.
This unheaded third leader is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
leading article on landed tenure in Ireland, in the Daily News of 12th
August 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 70).

the journal of the agricultural society of ireland for last month
contains an article by Sir Robert Kane, entitled, “The Large or Small
Farm Question Considered,” in which he promulgates his sentiments on the
economical condition of Ireland. The reputation of Sir Robert Kane, and
the public position which he has held, give a sort of scientific, and at
the same time official, weight to his opinions, and therefore common
sense and common arithmetic, coming from him, may carry an authority
which, on the wretched Edition: current; Page: [1113] subject of
Ireland, they seldom obtain by their intrinsic merits. The clamourers
against small holdings and the division of the land may perhaps give
heed to him, when he proves by figures that small farms, in the existing
circumstances of Ireland, are a necessity; since on the large farm
system there would be employment for no more than two-fifths of the
present agricultural population, the other three-fifths becoming
paupers, to be supported from the produce raised by the labour of the
former. Perhaps, too, such an authority will be believed when he says
that a small farm (meaning not the thirty acres of the Farmers’ Estate
Bill,1 but farms of from ten to fourteen acres), “will always,” when the
skill of the farmer and his appliances are equal, “produce more, acre
for acre, and pay a higher rent than the large farm;” and he sees no
reason why the appliances should not be equal, for there is, according
to him, among the cultivating classes of Ireland, “a vast quantity of
capital which would be rapidly drawn forth under a proper small-farm
system.” [Pp. 165, 166.] “If the real circumstances of the small farmers
of Ireland be looked into, it will be found that the investment of a
capital of from 80l. to 90l. on a farm of fourteen acres” would be by no
means beyond their capability. [P. 165.] “There exists,” he continues,
“amongst our poorer classes a show of poverty beyond what even the
reality would justify. . . . They are afraid to let it be known they
have money, lest their rent should be raised; they are afraid to improve
their land, lest their rent should be raised; they are afraid to wear
good clothes, lest they might appear to be deriving more from the
produce of their farm than the miserable means of physical existence
which their landlord will allow them to retain. Hence the money hid in
thatch and buried in barns. Hence the secret and illegal deposits in
savings’ banks in fictitious names.” [Ibid.]

It is hardly possible, we should think, for the most exclusive admirer
of English farming to read this paper, and continue to believe that the
most available remedy for Irish poverty is the clearing of estates and
consolidation of small farms into large ones; and if the writer is
correct in his opinion that there exists in the hands of small farmers
sufficient capital for carrying on “a proper small-farm system” in such
a manner as to yield, acre for acre, a greater produce than that of
large farms, the road to the economical regeneration of Ireland is
sufficiently plain. The reader who has followed Sir Robert Kane thus far
is anxious to know how, in his opinion, this “proper small-farm system”
is to be arrived at. We are sorry to be obliged to tell him that, on
this subject, he will get no help from Sir R. Kane. The evils Sir Robert
can understand, but on the subject of remedies nothing can be more lame
and impotent than his conclusion.2 The Edition: current; Page: [1114]
same fear which paralyses every minister, every member of parliament,
and almost every public writer when the real evils of Ireland come into
question, ties his tongue. Most gladly would they do anything for
Ireland, only there must not be a word said of the one vital point in
the constitution of society as it exists in Ireland—the tenure of land.
To fill Ireland with soldiers, blockade her with ships, to seize
presses, confiscate newspapers, and imprison men without trial under a
Habeas Corpus Suspension Act3—these things are easy; but to brave the
clamour of the men who call even the sale of land to pay the debts of
the proprietor a “confiscation of all the land of Ireland,”4 is a thing
which cannot be risked even to get rid of the main source of Irish
misery and Irish disaffection together. And Sir Robert Kane, although
not privileged, like a minister of state, to be ignorant of his
business, can propose nothing as a remedy for Ireland but to instruct
the people in agriculture: as if any quantity of instruction in farming
would make people improve their farms who, on his own showing, hide
their money in the thatch, for fear that if their landlord knew of it he
would raise the rent! Is it not a mockery to talk of doing any good to
the peasantry of a country in such a state of things as this? Who can
expect agricultural improvement where the rent depends on the good
pleasure of the landlords, and of such landlords?

Yet Sir Robert Kane writes strongly and boldly, while confining himself
to generals:

The landlord [he says] has to learn that feudalism is extinct; that
Great Britain and Ireland are the only places in the world where feudal
landlordism is not extinct, except where the people are still slaves,
and that there is a very large and intelligent class who think that the
time is close at hand for reforming landlordism here also. The landed
interests of this country, shut out by their insular position, by their
ignorance and their pride, from making themselves acquainted with the
forces of thought that have grown up within the last half-century, and
which now govern the opinion of Europe, will only endanger their
legitimate influence and position if they attempt to retain for the
future the feudal privileges and territorial powers which were the
natural social circumstances of the ancient times. Even in Ireland, the
hospital for the aged and disabled ideas of Europe, feudalism, and the
divine power of land, is dying—its worn out form crushed by the iron
power of the industrial spirit.

[Pp. 167-9.]

This is excellent; but, unfortunately, Sir R. Kane does not mean it in
the sense in which it can be of any practical use. For the old, worn out
theory which he so justly repudiates, that landlords have the duties and
are entitled to the rights of governors, he would substitute the
doctrine that land falls under the same rules as any other article of
commerce, and that neither law nor opinion has anything to do with the
mode in which the owner manages it for his own interest.

A landowner is simply a dealer in land—a capitalist who has, either by
himself or by his ancestor, invested his capital or his skill in land;
he hires out the use of it to certain Edition: current; Page: [1115]
parties, who pay him therefor, as they pay for the cloth for their
clothes, or the furniture for their rooms; and not merely the right, but
the plain duty of the landlord is, to get the highest possible price he
can for his land, and to compel the payment of that price by law.

[Pp. 148-9.]

We will not comment on this absurd notion of “duty,” nor will we discuss
the question—How many of the 8,000 Irish landlords ever did, either by
themselves or their ancestors, invest any particle of “capital or
skill,” in their land; because we readily allow that the right of
property in land in the present day ought not to depend on the manner in
which the land was acquired centuries ago. But we do say that this
theory of the purely commercial character of contracts for land,
wherever else it may be applicable, does not and cannot apply to a
country in the exceptional situation of Ireland. The contract for rent,
in Ireland, is not between the landlord and a capitalist farmer, who is
able to take care of his own interest, and makes no bargain but such as
he believes to be commercially advantageous to him. The Irish landlord’s
contract is with a peasant labourer, who cultivates not for profit but
for existence, and who, if he cannot obtain a piece of land, has no
choice but beggary or the poor-rate. It is not peasant farming that is
objectionable; on this point we wholly agree with Sir R. Kane; but
peasant-farming in an over-peopled country, and at a rent fixed by
competition, we hold to be the main cause of all Ireland’s evils. The
competition of superabundant numbers makes the tenants promise, and
legally bind themselves, to pay nominal rents, exceeding not merely
their means of payment, but the entire capabilities of the soil. On the
“commercial principle” the landlord could sweep away the last potato;
and the only estates in Ireland which are exceptions to the general
wretchedness are those of which the owners, abandoning the commercial
principle altogether, have taken upon themselves the tenant’s side of
the question as well as their own, and have considered, not what the
tenant will offer, but what the landlord ought to accept. The public,
therefore, is interested, and very greatly so, in the mode in which
landlords manage their estates; and if it is their general practice to
manage them on a system of which all that we see in Ireland is the
natural result, it will not do to say, with Sir R. Kane, that “it is the
simple right of an owner of land to sell or let it at the highest price
the market will afford.” [P. 169.] It is time to revert to just
principles, and to regulate the supposed right of an owner of land in
such a manner as to make it at least consistent with the essential
conditions of industry, prudence, and material comfort, in the
agricultural population.


378.: THE FRENCH LAW AGAINST THE PRESS
 SPECTATOR, 19 AUG., 1848, P. 800

On 11 Aug., 1848, the National Assembly in France promulgated a law
severely restricting the freedom of the press (Bull. 60, No. 621), which
Mill here quotes in Edition: current; Page: [1116] translation. The
article, headed “[From a Correspondent.],” is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “An article headed ‘from a Correspondent’ on the French
law against the press, in the Spectator of 19th August 1848”

(MacMinn, p. 70).

the decree against the press, just passed almost with unanimity by the
National Assembly of France, is one of the most monstrous outrages on
the idea of freedom of discussion ever committed by the legislature of a
country pretending to be free. It is the very law of Louis Philippe—the
September law, once so indignantly denounced—with scarcely any
alteration but the substitution of the word “Republic” for “Monarchy.”1

This precious specimen of Liberal legislation declares punishable by
fine and imprisonment all attacks on “the rights and authority of the
National Assembly—on the rights and authority which the members of the
Executive derive from the decrees of the Assembly—on the Republican
institutions and the Constitution—on the principle of the sovereignty of
the people and of universal suffrage—on the liberty of worship, the
principle of property, and the rights of family”; [Art. 1] besides
which, it ordains similar punishments for “exciting hatred and contempt
towards the Government of the Republic,” [Art. 4] and for “public
outrage committed (in their public character) against one or more
members of the National Assembly, or against a Minister of any religion
paid by the State.” [Art. 5.]

This list of subjects on which discussion is prohibited, or permitted
only on one side, includes all the great political and social questions
of the age. If only one set of opinions is to be permitted on any matter
which involves the right of property, the rights or obligations of
family, the question of Republicanism, of universal suffrage, even the
particular constitution which the Assembly may hereafter adopt, or the
rightfulness of abolishing that constitution—what are the subjects,
worth discussing, on which freedom of political discussion is to exist?
“The acts of the Executive,” says the decree. “The present provision is
not to affect the right of discussion and censure on the acts of the
Executive and of the Ministers.” [Art. 4.] A most liberal concession,
truly! The law is worse, with only this reservation in favour of
freedom, than if there were no reservation at all; for the most
tyrannical court of justice which could now exist in civilized Europe
would reserve more than this. It is not declared that even the actions
of the Legislature may be censured, but only those of the Executive; and
with regard to laws or institutions, no liberty of censure is reserved
at all. There was a wretched pretence by one or two of the speakers,
that no restraint was intended on the “freedom of philosophical
discussion”—that nothing was to be forbidden but incitements to hatred
and contempt.2 But the decree says nothing of the kind. Edition:
current; Page: [1117] The decree prohibits “any attack.” [Art. 1.] The
distinction is good for nothing, even if it were made. To say that
attacks are permitted, but not incitements to hatred and contempt, would
be to say that discussion shall be lawful on condition that it be cold,
dry, and unimpressive; that the dull and the indifferent shall be
allowed to express opinions, but that persons of genius and feeling must
hold their peace. Under such laws, it has been truly said in one of the
French journals, Rousseau’s discourse on Inequality never could have
been published.3 Nor could any great writings of great reformers,
religious or political, have seen the light if such laws had existed and
had been obeyed.

How long shall we continue to see the regard for freedom of opinion,
which all parties profess while they are on the oppressed side, thrown
off by them all as soon as they are in the majority? How much longer
must we wait for an example, anywhere in Europe, of a ruler or a ruling
party who really desire fair play for any opinions contrary to their
own? Is it not shameful that no sooner has a reforming party
accomplished as much change in the institutions of the country as itself
deems desirable, than it proceeds to decree that every person shall be
fined or imprisoned, who proposes either to go a single step further or
a step back? We are aware of the allowances to be made for men lately
engaged in a desperate and at one time a doubtful contest against a
determined attempt at insurrection;4 and we know too that this decree is
avowedly a temporary measure, to be hereafter superseded by more
deliberate legislation.5 But we lament to say, that in the tone assumed,
and the doctrines professed by the speakers, we see no ground of
assurance that the permanent measure will be at all different, in spirit
and principle, from the transitional one.

It is not, however, for English Conservatives, either Whig or Tory, to
indulge any self-complacent triumph over French Republicans. The new act
of the French Assembly does not make the laws of France on the freedom
of the press worse than those of England have always been. The freedom
of the press, in England, is entirely an affair of opinion and custom,
not of law. It exists because the laws are not enforced. The law of
political libel, as laid down in all the books,6 is as inconsistent with
free discussion as the laws of Russia. There is no censure of any
established institution or constituted authority which is not an offence
by law. And within these few months it has been seen how eagerly the
Edition: current; Page: [1118] English Parliament, under the influence
of a far less degree of panic, have rushed to make the laws against what
was deemed seditous speaking or writing more stringent than before.7

A government cannot be blamed for defending itself against insurrection.
But it deserves the severest blame if to prevent insurrection it
prevents the promulgation of opinion. If it does so, it actually
justifies insurrection in those to whom it denies the use of peaceful
means to make their opinions prevail. Hitherto the French Government has
been altogether in the right against all attempts to overthrow it. But
by what right can the Assembly now reprobate any future attempt, either
by Monarchists or Socialists, to rise in arms against the Government? It
denies them free discussion. It says they shall not be suffered to bring
their opinions to the touchstone of the public reason and conscience. It
refuses them the chance which every sincere opinion can justly claim, of
triumphing in a fair field. It fights them with weapons which can as
easily be used to put down the most valuable truth as the most
pernicious error. It tells them that they must prevail by violence
before they shall be allowed to contend by argument. Who can blame
persons who are deeply convinced of the truth and importance of their
opinions, for asserting them by force, when that is the only means left
them of obtaining even a hearing? When their mouths are gagged, can they
be reproached for using their arms?


379.: BAIN’S ON THE APPLICATIONS OF SCIENCE TO HUMAN HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
 EXAMINER, 2 SEPT., 1848, P. 565

Alexander Bain (1818-1903), Mill’s friend and future biographer, who had
written for the Westminster and helped Mill to revise his Logic, had
held several posts as lecturer in moral and natural philosophy in
Scottish universities. The pamphlet here reviewed was the first of four
lectures, all on the same subject, which he had given at the Edinburgh
Philosophic Institution in 1847. Mill’s review, in the “Literary
Examiner,” is headed “On the Applications of Science to Human Health and
Well-being, being a Lecture, introductory to a Course ‘on the
Application of Physics to Common Life,’ delivered at the Edinburgh
Institution in June, 1847. By Alexander Bain, [London:] A.M. Taylor [in
fact, John J. Griffin]. [Glasgow: Richard Griffin, 1848.]” This review
is not in Mill’s bibliography, but may be confidently attributed to him
on the basis of the comment by Bain: “Chadwick had the fancy that my
introductory lecture to the Edinburgh Course would be a recommendation
in procuring the official consent to my being appointed [to Edition:
current; Page: [1119] the Metropolitan Sanitary Commission].
Accordingly, I threw off a number of copies, and gave them as presents,
and exposed some for sale with Griffin, the publisher. John Mill
prepared a notice of the lecture in the Examiner newspaper.” (Bain,
Autobiography [London: Longmans, Green, 1904], p. 197n.)

there is no more popular subject at present than the applications of
physical science; and there can be none more appropriate for a popular
lecturer, combining as it does an inexhaustible store of wonders with a
direct influence on the most obvious and universal interests of life.
Few persons are so competent to treat this class of topics usefully and
attractively, as Mr. Bain. His knowledge of the leading departments of
physical science is accurate and profound; and he has a happy faculty
for clearly explaining and familiarly illustrating what he knows. To
these he adds the still rarer attribute, of a mind which looks ever
through and beyond its immediate subject; scrupulously exact in details,
yet not treating them like a mere man of detail, but as materials
towards building up a nobler and happier scheme of human existence.

These general ideas and aspirations naturally come most distinctly to
view in the present publication, which is but an introductory lecture.
The following extract is illustrative of this portion of the author’s
views:

There are two great stages in the progress of the various arts and
productive occupations of human life. The earliest set of devices are
derived from men’s ordinary and unassisted observation of the usual
course of nature. The methods of mining, building, ploughing, sowing,
spinning, dyeing, metal working, carrying from place to place,
navigating, and so forth, are got at after trying many different methods
and implements until it is seen that some answer better than the rest,
these being once approved of, are then handed down to posterity, and
they may often remain unchanged for a long course of ages. In fact,
unassisted reason soon comes to a stand-still; as we see in such nations
as the Hindoos and Chinese, who have never reached scientific methods of
acquiring a knowledge of Nature. The second stage of progress is entered
on, when, by the perfection of the knowledge-seeking art, the hidden
laws of things are brought to light, and a vast number of additional
properties discovered in the various objects of the world; when, for
instance, by looking into the composition of vegetable bodies, and into
the matters making up the soil that nourishes them, we can specifically
and exactly suit the one to the other, instead of depending on a vague
experience of gross results. On this second stage the European world
entered last century, in regard to the mechanical arts; so that, in
fact, we are only beginning to develop the vast resources of our planet,
and we have now to look forward to a long and unremitted series of
improvements.

But I must next call your attention to the difference between the Arts
of Life, and the Art of Living,—or between man’s powers in farming,
building, manufacturing and trading, and his ability to apply the
results of all these to his own life and well-being; for this is the
final intention of such manifold labours. Because we have very much
improved the Arts of Life, it does not follow that we have equally
improved the Art of Living. We may increase our abundance of the things
that are useful and good, without acquiring the skill to apply them in
proper measure, and in well-timed arrangement to the highly complex
structure and constitution of our living framework.

It is, beyond all question, desirable that each one of us should
contrive our Edition: current; Page: [1120] arrangements and daily
ongoings so as to make the very most of life; to render our existence as
rich and effective, and great and brilliant, as it can be made; to
combine the choicest enjoyments with the most wide-ranging and
beneficial activity. Now it is only by knowledge and skill going along
with adequate force of resolution, that we can so use the resources of
the world on the one hand, and so control the impulses of our own nature
on the other, as to maintain the highest possible pitch of vitality, and
cause a constant current of our finest emotions and activities.

The Art of Living is the method of stretching out the resources of the
world to the measure of human wants, desires, and capabilities. Each
person has to consider his own peculiar situation and framework, and to
select from among his possessions and opportunities, what will do most
to yield him a grand and beautiful existence. We have all a certain
command of what supports and gratifies body and mind; we have our homes,
our city, our companions, our books, our means of accomplishment and
instruction, our walks and excursions, the face of nature, the
inspiration of art, the ongoings of the world, and many other things
capable of influencing us to our very inmost being; on the other side,
we are liable to burdens and toils, to violent shocks and slow miseries,
to weariness and depression, to temptations and failures; and it becomes
our task to dispose all these things to the making our lives joyous
rather than grievous, powerful and benignant, rather than empty and
hurtful.

[Pp. 6-8.]

After showing the insufficiency of merely empirical observation, without
a scientific study of the powers of nature to form an adequate basis for
the regulation of life, the author continues:

That the Art of Living has not yet come to great perfection is testified
by the deplorable experience of the human race. The perplexity, and
discord, and difficulties of life have been the theme of complaints that
ring through all the ages of men; yielding Cynic and Stoic philosophies,
self-inflicted tortures and immolations, voluntary banishment from the
world, gloomy speculations, suicides and crimes. It is surely worth
while trying whether a better knowledge of the actual course of things,
and of the beneficial agencies wrapt up in the womb of nature, may not
help, among other causes, to stem such a torrent of despair, and prove
the possibility of a great and harmonious existence for man.

For this end we are anxious that the Art of Living should be based, not
as heretofore, upon vague experience, however extensive, but on the
well-sifted and thoroughly tested experience that constitutes our Exact
Sciences. And it is a satisfaction to know that several of these
sciences have already yielded important contributions to this great
practical object.

[Pp. 10-11.]

A brief survey follows of what has been done, and of much more which is
yet to be done by the various sciences, in furnishing means to lighten
the burdens and increase the enjoyments and powers of human existence;
not omitting the, as yet, infant sciences of the human mind and of human
society.

A brief syllabus is annexed of the course, consisting of four lectures,
of which the one now published was the first. The topics treated appear
to have been chiefly the application to the health and comfort of life,
and of what science has ascertained respecting the laws and properties
of heat, water, air, and the effects of action and repose. A portion of
the second lecture is given at length, relating to the bath and its
uses, which affords a favourable idea of the lecturer’s talent for
popular exposition of the details of his subject.

Edition: current; Page: [1121]


380.: GROTE’S HISTORY OF GREECE [3]
 SPECTATOR, 3 MAR., 1849, PP. 202-3

This third newspaper review of Grote’s History (see Nos. 304 and 368) is
the first of two dealing with Volumes V and VI (see No. 381 for the
second part). Writing to Grote in January 1849, Mill notes that he has
just finished reading the two volumes (published in December 1848) with
“the greatest pleasure and admiration,” adding that “Every great result
which you have attempted to deduce seems to me most thoroughly made out”
(LL, CW, Vol. XIV, p. 3). The review, in the “Books” section, is headed
“Grote’s History of Greece,” with the heading footnoted: “History of
Greece. By George Grote, Esq. Volumes V and VI. Published by Murray.
[London, 1848.]” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A first
notice of the 5th and 6th volumes of Grote’s History of Greece, in the
Spectator of 3d March 1849” (MacMinn, p. 70). A large portion of this
review was quoted by Mill when he revised “Grote’s History of Greece
[II],” Edinburgh Review, XCVIII (Oct. 1853), 425-47 (a review of Vols.
IX-XI), for incorporation into his Dissertations and Discussions, 1st
ed. (1859), Vol. II, pp. 510-54 (CW, Vol. XI, pp. 307-37); in the
variant notes, “59” indicates D&D.

in his former volumes Mr. Grote brought down the Grecian history only to
the battle of Marathon and the repulse of the first Persian invasion. He
had thus barely arrived at the times for which the historian possesses
the advantage of detailed information derived from contemporary
authorities; and the view which he was able to exhibit of early Grecian
events was necessarily so general, was collected from such scattered
sources, and required so much of inference and even conjecture to piece
it together, that, except in the few concluding chapters, the author’s
powers as a mere narrator were not brought to any decisive test. With so
little of story to tell, he had nevertheless, by a skilful manner of
grouping the few known or ascertainable facts, and by the high character
of the personal and political interest with which he was able to invest
the early stages of Grecian freedom and civilization, given earnest of
what he was likely to accomplish when he reached the period during which
it is given us to know, not only the great events in the life of the
Hellenic states, but the steps by which these were brought about, and
many of the striking incidents which marked their course.

In the present volumes, Mr. Grote has the assistance throughout of
eminent contemporary historians. In the earlier chapters, he travels
under the guidance of the candid and inquisitive Herodotus, whose
veracity he successfully vindicates against its ancient and modern
assailants: a writer now known to be as trustworthy as he is
picturesque, and who is here speaking of events contemporaneous with his
own childhood—events with the actors in which, in many cases, he must
have familiarly conversed. Where Herodotus fails, a still higher
authority, the thoughtful, experienced, and accurate Thucydides,
succeeds. A consecutive and authentic narrative therefore is here
possible. In these volumes the recital of events assumes for the first
time a marked Edition: current; Page: [1122] predominance over the
investigation of obscure facts, the discussion of evidence, and
political and philosophical reflection. It is at this point, therefore,
that the amount of Mr. Grote’s skill as a narrator can for the first
time be decisively judged of.

The result of the trial is highly satisfactory. The sixth volume,
especially, is a specimen of narrative which it would be difficult to
surpass, in its own kind, from the writings of any English historian.
Its excellence does not consist (any more than that of some of the most
successful specimens of historical narrative which English literature
already possessed) in the painting of mere externals. But in the truth
and vividness of his conception of the events and in their essentials,
and in his power of imparting this to the reader, we should be inclined
to place him at the head of all English historians; and in what may be
termed historical imagination—in the power of taking into his mind, at
every period, the whole of the situation, and of making the reader do
the same—it would not be easy to find his superior among the historians
of any country. Certainly no writer on Greece had ever manifested this
power; and the consequence is, that the most unexpected new lights are
continually thrown even upon familiar facts of Grecian history, not by
long discussion and argument, but by merely confronting them with one
another.

aNor is the narrative deficient in the commoner sources of interest. The
apt selection and artistic grouping of the details of battles and
sieges, Mr. Grote had found done to his hand by the consummate narrators
whom he follows, and in this respect he could do no better than simply
to reproduce their recital. There is much more that belongs peculiarly
to himself in the series of remarkable characters whom he exhibits
before us, not so much (generally speaking) in description or analysis,
as in action. In the earlier period, the prominent characters are
Themistocles and Aristides: Themistocles, the most sagacious, the most
far-sighted, the most judiciously daring, the craftiest, and
unfortunately also one of the most unprincipled of politicians; who
first saved, then aggrandized, and at last would have sold his country:
Aristides, the personification of public and private integrity, the one
only Grecian statesman who finds grace before the somewhat pedantically
rigid tribunal of the Platonic Socrates.1

bBut theb figure which most brightly illuminates cthis divisionc of Mr.
Grote’s history is Pericles—“the Thunderer”—“the Olympian Zeus,” as he
was called by his libellers, the comic dramatists of Athens.2 Seldom, if
ever, has Edition: current; Page: [1123] there been seen in a statesman
of any age, such a combination of great qualities as were united in this
illustrious man: unrivalled in eloquence; eminent in all the
acquirements, talents, and accomplishments of his country; the associate
of all those among his dcontemporariesd who were above their age, either
in positive knowledge or in freedom from superstition; though an
aristocrat by birth and fortune, a thorough democrat in principle and
conduct, yet never stooping to even the pardonable arts of courting
popularity, but acquiring and maintaining his ascendancy solely by his
commanding qualities; never flattering his countrymen save on what was
really admirable in them, and which it was for their good to be taught
to cherish, but the determined enemy of their faults and follies; ever
ready to peril his popularity by giving disagreeable advice, and when
not appreciated, rising up against the injustice done him, with a
scornful dignity almost amounting to defiance. Such was Pericles: and
that such a man should have been practically first minister of Athens
during the greatest part of a long political life, is not so much
honourable to him as to the imperial people who were willing to be so
led; who, though in fits of temporary irritation and disappointment,
excusable in the circumstances, they several times withdrew their favour
from him, always hastened to give it back; and over whom, while he
lived, no person of talents and virtues inferior to his was able to
obtain any mischievous degree of influence. It is impossible to estimate
how great a share this one man had in making the Athenians what they
weree, the greatest people who have yet appeared on this planete. A
great man had, in the unbounded publicity of Athenian political life,
extraordinary facilities for moulding his country after his own image;
and seldom has any people, during a whole generation, enjoyed such a
course of education, as forty years of listening to the lofty spirit and
practical wisdom of Pericles must have been to the Athenian Demos.

As the next in this gallery of historical portraits, we quote the
character of another but a far inferior Athenian statesman,3 whom Mr.
Grote is, we think, the very first to appreciate correctly, and bring
before us in the colours and lineaments of life.

fCharacter of Niciasf

Though Nikias, son of Nikeratus, had been for some time conspicuous in
public life, and is said to have been more than once Strategus along
with Perikles, this is the first occasion on which Thucydides introduces
him to our notice.4 He was now one of the Edition: current; Page: [1124]
Strategi or generals of the commonwealth, and appears to have enjoyed,
on the whole, a greater and more constant personal esteem than any
citizen of Athens, from the present time down to his death. In wealth
and in family, he ranked among the first class of Athenians: in
political character, Aristotle placed him, together with Thucydides son
of Melesias and Theramenes, above all other names in Athenian
history—seemingly even above Perikles.5 Such a criticism, from
Aristotle, deserves respectful attention, though the facts before us
completely belie so lofty an estimate. It marks, however, the position
occupied by Nikias in Athenian politics, as the principal person of what
may be called the oligarchical party, succeeding Kimon6 and Thucydides,
and preceding Theramenes. In looking to the conditions under which this
party continued to subsist, we shall see that during the interval
between Thucydides (son of Melesias) and Nikias, the democratical forms
had acquired such confirmed ascendency, that it would not have suited
the purpose of any politician to betray evidence of positive hostility
to them, prior to the Sicilian expedition and the great embarrassment in
the foreign relations of Athens which arose out of that disaster. After
that change, the Athenian oligarchs became emboldened and aggressive, so
that we shall find Theramenes among the chief conspirators in the
revolution of the Four Hundred:7 but Nikias represents the oligarchical
party in its previous state of quiescence and torpidity, accommodating
itself to a sovereign democracy, and existing in the form of common
sentiment rather than of common purposes. And it is a remarkable
illustration of the real temper of the Athenian people, that a man of
this character, known as an oligarch but not feared as such, and doing
his duty sincerely to the democracy, should have remained until his
death the most esteemed and influential man in the city. He was a man of
a sort of even mediocrity, in intellect, in education, and in oratory:
forward in his military duties, and not only personally courageous in
the field, but also competent as a general under ordinary circumstances:
assiduous in the discharge of all political duties at home, especially
in the post of Strategus or one of the ten generals of the state, to
which he was frequently chosen and rechosen. Of the many valuable
qualities combined in his predecessor Perikles, the recollection of whom
was yet fresh in the Athenian mind, Nikias possessed two, on which, most
of all, his influence rested,—though, properly speaking, that influence
belongs to the sum total of his character, and not to any special
attributes in it. First, he was thoroughly incorruptible as to pecuniary
gains,—a quality so rare in Grecian public men of all the cities, that
when a man once became notorious for possessing it, he acquired a
greater degree of trust than any superiority of intellect could have
bestowed upon him: next, he adopted the Periklean view as to the
necessity of a conservative or stationary foreign policy for Athens, and
of avoiding new acquisitions at a distance, adventurous risks, or
provocation to fresh enemies. With this important point of analogy,
there were at the same time material differences between them even in
regard to foreign policy. Perikles was a conservative, resolute against
submitting to loss or abstraction of empire, as well as refraining from
aggrandizement. Nikias was in policy faint-hearted, Edition: current;
Page: [1125] averse to energetic effort for any purpose whatever, and
disposed not only to maintain peace, but even to purchase it by
considerable sacrifices. Nevertheless, he was the leading champion of
the conservative party of his day, always powerful at Athens: and as he
was constantly familiar with the details and actual course of public
affairs, capable of giving full effect to the cautious and prudential
point of view, and enjoying unqualified credit for honest purposes—his
value as a permanent counsellor was steadily recognized, even though in
particular cases his counsel might not be followed.

Besides these two main points, which Nikias had in common with Perikles,
he was perfect in the use of those minor and collateral modes of
standing well with the people, which that great man had taken little
pains to practise. While Perikles attached himself to Aspasia, whose
splendid qualities did not redeem in the eyes of the public either her
foreign origin or her unchastity,8 the domestic habits of Nikias appear
to have been strictly conformable to the rules of Athenian decorum.
Perikles was surrounded by philosophers, Nikias by prophets—whose advice
was necessary both as a consolation to his temperament and as a guide to
his intelligence under difficulties: one of them was constantly in his
service and confidence; and his conduct appears to have been sensibly
affected by the difference of character between one prophet and another,
just as the government of Louis XIV and other Catholic princes has been
modified by the change of confessors. To a life thus rigidly decorous
and ultra-religious—both eminently acceptable to the Athenians—Nikias
added the judicious employment of a large fortune with a view to
popularity. Those liturgies (or expensive public duties undertaken by
rich men each in his turn, throughout other cities of Greece as well as
in Athens) which fell to his lot were performed with such splendour,
munificence, and good taste, as to procure for him universal encomiums;
and so much above his predecessors as to be long remembered and
extolled. Most of these liturgies were connected with the religious
service of the state; so that Nikias, by his manner of performing them,
displayed his zeal for the honour of the gods at the same time that he
laid up for himself a store of popularity. Moreover, the remarkable
caution and timidity—not before an enemy, but in reference to his own
fellow citizens—which marked his character, rendered him pre-eminently
scrupulous as to giving offence or making personal enemies. While his
demeanour towards the poorer citizens generally was equal and
conciliating, the presents which he made were numerous, both to gain
friends and to silence assailants. We are not surprised to hear that
various bullies, whom the comic writers turn to scorn, made their profit
out of this susceptibility, but most assuredly, Nikias as a public man,
though he might occasionally be cheated out of money, was greatly
assisted by the reputation which he thus acquired.

[Vol. VI, pp. 385-90.]

We have the more willingly extracted this passage, because, like many
others in these volumes, it contains lessons applicable to other times
and circumstances than those of Greece; Nicias being a perfect type of
one large class of the favourites of public opinion, modern as well as
ancient. And the view here incidentally presented of some points in the
character and disposition of the Athenian Many, will afford to readers
who only know Athens and Greece through the medium of writers like
Mitford, some faint idea of how much they have to unlearn.a

Edition: current; Page: [1126]
In personal contrast as well as in political opposition to Nicias,
stands the celebrated Cleon;9 usually taken as the representative of
everything hateful that can be ascribed to the character of a successful
demagogue, combined with all that is contemptible in political
imbecility and presumption. We shall quote the first introduction of
this noted character upon the scene, for this among other reasons, that
we have seen Mr. Grote accused of being prejudiced in his favour;10 and
as, from considerable familiarity with many of Mr. Grote’s authorities,
we have in vain attempted to discover in his volumes a single instance
of deviation from impartiality, it is but just to him to repel this
accusation. It is true that, in his opinion, the devil is not so black
as he is painted. Posterity has been unwilling to believe that Cleon
could ever be in the right; the outline of his character, supplied by
his political and personal enemy Thucydides,11 having been filled up by
a literal adoption of the bitter jests of that buffoon of genius
Aristophanes,12 although in other cases, such as that of Socrates, we
possess certain evidence how remote those jests were from having even so
much of truth as is contained in a caricature. The following is Mr.
Grote’s discriminating and unprejudiced view of Cleon’s character.

He is described by Thucydides in general terms as a person of the most
violent temper and character in Athens—as being dishonest in his
calumnies, and virulent in his invective and accusation. . . . The
general attributes set forth by Thucydides (apart from Aristophanes, who
does not profess to write history) we may well accept—the powerful and
violent invective of Kleon, often dishonest—together with his
self-confidence and audacity in the public assembly. Men of the middling
class, like Kleon and Hyperbolus,13 who persevered in addressing the
public assembly and trying to take a leading part in it, against persons
of greater family pretension than themselves, were pretty sure to be men
of more than usual audacity. Had they not possessed this quality, they
would never have surmounted the opposition made to them: we may well
believe that they had it to a displeasing excess; and even if they had
not, the same measure of self-assumption which in Alkibiades14 would be
tolerated from his rank and station, would in them pass for
insupportable impudence. Unhappily, we have no specimens to enable us to
appreciate the invective of Kleon. We cannot determine whether it was
more virulent than that of Demosthenes and Aeschines,15 seventy years
afterwards; each of those eminent orators Edition: current; Page: [1127]
imputing to the other the grossest impudence, calumny, perjury,
corruption, loud voice and revolting audacity of manner, in language
which Kleon can hardly have surpassed in intensity of vituperation,
though he doubtless fell immeasurably short of it in classical finish.
Nor can we even tell in what degree Kleon’s denunciations of the veteran
Perikles were fiercer than those memorable invectives against the old
age of Sir Robert Walpole with which Lord Chatham’s political career
opened.16 . . . The fact of Kleon’s great power of speech, and his
capacity of handling public business in a popular manner, is better
attested than anything else respecting him, because it depends upon two
witnesses, both hostile to him—Thucydides and Aristophanes. The assembly
and the dikastery were Kleon’s theatre and holding-ground: for the
Athenian people taken collectively in their place of meeting—and the
Athenian people taken individually—were not always the same person, and
had not the same mode of judgment: Demos sitting in the Pnyx was a
different man from Demos at home.17 The lofty combination of qualities
possessed by Perikles exercised ascendancy over both one and the other;
but the qualities of Kleon swayed considerably the former without
standing high in the esteem of the latter.

[Vol. VI, pp. 332-4.]

The following passage characterizes the real nature of Cleon’s position
in the Athenian commonwealth.

To employ terms which are not fully suitable to the Athenian democracy,
but which yet bring to view the difference intended to be noted better
than any others, Nikias was a Minister or Ministerial man, often
actually exercising and always likely to exercise official functions:
Kleon was a man of the Opposition, whose province it was to supervise
and censure official men for their public conduct. We must divest these
words of that sense which they are understood to carry in English
political life—a standing Parliamentary majority in favour of one party:
Kleon would often carry in the public assembly resolutions, which his
opponents Nikias and others of like rank and position—who served in the
posts of Strategus, ambassador, and other important offices designated
by the general vote—were obliged against their will to execute. . . .
While Nikias was thus in what may be called ministerial function, Kleon
was not of sufficient importance to attain the same, but was confined to
the inferior function of opposition. . . . As an opposition man, fierce
and violent in temper, Kleon was extremely formidable to all acting
functionaries; and from his influence in the public assembly, he was
doubtless the author of many important positive measures, thus going
beyond the functions belonging to what is called opposition. But though
the most effective speaker in the public assembly, he was not for that
reason the most influential person in the democracy: his powers of
speech in fact stood out the more prominently, because they were found
apart from that station and those qualities which were considered, even
at Athens, all but essential to make a man a leader in political life.
To understand the political condition of Athens at this time, it has
been necessary to take this comparison between Nikias and Kleon, and to
remark, that though the latter might be a more victorious speaker, the
former was the more Edition: current; Page: [1128] guiding and
influential leader; the points gained by Kleon were all noisy and
palpable,—sometimes, however, without doubt, of considerable moment,—but
the course of affairs was much more under the direction of Nikias.

[Vol. VI, pp. 392-5.]

We cannot help adding Mr. Grote’s very instructive comment on the first
and almost only oration of Cleon, the substance of which has been
preserved to us.18 His remarks go deep into the inmost essence of
demagogy, and may teach some persons to recognize it in forms to which
it is usual to apply much more honourable names.

If we are surprised to find a man, whose whole importance resided in his
tongue, denouncing so severely the licence and the undue influence of
speech in the public assembly, we must recollect that Kleon had the
advantage of addressing himself to the intense prevalent sentiment of
the moment; that he could therefore pass off the dictates of this
sentiment as plain, downright, honest sense and patriotism, while the
opponents, speaking against the reigning sentiment and therefore driven
to collateral argument, circumlocution, and more or less of manoeuvre,
might be represented as mere clever sophists, showing their talents in
making the worse appear the better reason19—if not actually bribed, at
least unprincipled and without any sincere moral conviction. As this is
a mode of dealing with questions both of public concern and of private
morality, not less common at present than it was in the time of the
Peloponnesian war—to seize upon some strong and tolerably widespread
sentiment among the public, to treat the dictates of that sentiment as
plain common sense and obvious right, and then to shut out all rational
estimate of coming good and evil as if it were unholy or immoral, or at
best mere uncandid subtlety—we may well notice a case in which Kleon
employs it to support a proposition now justly regarded as barbarous.

[Vol. VI, pp. 340-1.]

There are so many topics in Mr. Grote’s volumes which demand notice,
that it is impossible to do them anything like justice in the space of a
single paper: we shall return to some of them in another article.


381.: GROTE’S HISTORY OF GREECE [4]
 SPECTATOR, 10 MAR., 1849, PP. 227-8

This fourth newspaper review by Mill of Grote’s History (see Nos. 304,
368, and 380) is the second of two reviews of Volumes V and VI. It
appeared in the “Books” section, headed “Grote’s Greece—Volumes V and
VI,” and is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A second notice of the
same [i.e., Vols. V and VI of Grote], in the Spectator of 10th March
1849” (MacMinn, p. 70). Two quotations from Grote in this review are
also quoted by Mill in his Edinburgh Review notice of 1853, represented
by “53” in the variant Edition: current; Page: [1129] notes, while one
passage was incorporated into the 1859 revision of that notice for D&D,
represented by “59” in the variant notes; see No. 380 for the
bibliographical details.

one of the most interesting features in the sixth volume of Mr. Grote’s
History is the large use which he has made of the speeches in
Thucydides. This rich mine of materials had been little if at all worked
by any former writer. Mr. Grote considers the substance of these
speeches to be authentic, though the form and phraseology are
unmistakeably those of the Attic historian. The following is, as nearly
as we can translate it, the declaration of Thucydides himself as to
their composition. “To remember accurately the very things which were
said, was difficult both to myself (as to what I heard delivered) and to
my various informants: but I have ascribed to each speaker what seemed
to me most appropriate to the occasion, keeping as close as I could to
the general opinion of what was said in reality.”1 From this we should
conclude, that an outline supplied by memory or testimony was filled up
from invention. And this opinion is confirmed by the internal evidence.
But in whatever proportions the matter of these speeches must be shared
between the orators and the historian, no documents which have descended
from the ancients, except perhaps the Politics of Aristotle, contain so
much of what was thought by the most instructed and able Greeks
concerning themselves and their condition. One of the most important of
these discourses is the famous Funeral Oration of Pericles; which is
full of valuable remarks on the Athenian national character and
institutions. Our space does not allow us to quote from the speech at
any length, but we must make room for Mr. Grote’s comments on one
sentence of it. The text is this—a“bOurb social march is free, not
merely in regard to public affairs, but also in regard to tolerance of
each other’s diversity of cdailyc pursuits. For we are not angry with
our neighbour for what he dmay dod to please himself, nor do we eevere
put on those sour looks, whichf, though they do no positive damage, are
not the less sure to offendf.”a2 On this important testimony to the
liberality and tolerance of Athenian social life, Mr. Grote observes as
follows—

This portion of the speech of Perikles deserves peculiar attention,
because it serves to correct an assertion, often far too
indiscriminately made, respecting antiquity as contrasted with modern
societies—an assertion that the ancient societies sacrificed the
individual to the state, and that only in modern times has individual
agency been left free Edition: current; Page: [1130] to the proper
extent. This is preëminently true of Sparta: it is also true in a great
degree of the ideal societies depicted by Plato and Aristotle; but it is
pointedly untrue of the Athenian democracy, nor can we with any
confidence predicate it of the major part of the Grecian cities. . . .
There is no doubt that he [Perikles] has present to his mind a
comparison with the extreme narrowness and rigour of Sparta, and that
therefore his assertions of the extent of positive liberty at Athens
must be understood as partially qualified by such contrast. But even
making allowance for this, ghtheh stress which he lays upon the liberty
of thought and action at Athens, not merely from excessive restraint of
law but also from practical intolerance between man and man, and tyranny
of the majority3 over individual dissenters in taste and ipursuiti,
deserves serious notice, and brings out one of those points in the
national character upon which the intellectual development of the time
mainly depended. The national temper was indulgent in a high degree to
all the varieties of positive impulses: the peculiar promptings in every
individual bosom were allowed to manifest themselves and bear fruit,
without being suppressed by external opinion or trained into forced
conformity with some assumed standard: antipathies against any of them
formed no part of the habitual morality of the citizen. While much of
the generating causes of human hatred was thus rendered inoperative, and
while society was rendered more comfortable, more instructive and more
stimulating—all its germs of productive fruitful genius, so rare
everywhere, found in such an atmosphere the maximum of encouragement.
Within the limits of the law, assuredly as faithfully observed at Athens
as anywhere in Greece, individual impulse, taste, and even eccentricity,
were accepted with indulgence, instead of being a mark as elsewhere for
the intolerance of neighbours or of the public. This remarkable feature
in Athenian life will help us in a future chapter to explain the
striking career of Sokrates [Chap. lxviii; Vol. VIII, pp. 545-676]; and
it jfurtherj presents to us, under another face, a great part of that
which the censors of Athens denounced under the name of “democratical
licence.” The liberty and diversity of individual life in that city were
offensive to Xenophon, Plato, and Aristotle4—attached either to the
monotonous drill of Sparta, or to some other ideal standard, which,
though much better than the Spartan in itself, they were disposed to
impress upon society with a heavy-handed uniformity. That liberty of
individual action, not merely from the over-restraints of law, but from
the tyranny of jealous opinion, such as Perikles depicts in Athens,
belongs more naturally to a democracy, where there is no select One or
Few to receive worship and set the fashion, than to any other form of
government. But it is very rare even in democracies: nor can we
dissemble the fact that none of the governments of modern times,
democratical, aristocratical or monarchical, presents anything like the
picture of generous tolerance towards social dissent, and spontaneity of
individual taste, which we read in the speech of the Athenian statesman.
In Edition: current; Page: [1131] all of them, the intolerance of the
national opinion cuts down individual character to one out of a few set
types, to which every person, or every family, is constrained to adjust
itself, and beyond which all exceptions meet either with hatred or with
derision. To impose upon men such restraints either of law or of opinion
as are requisite for the security and comfort of society, but to
encourage rather than repress the free play of individual impulse
subject to those limits—is an ideal, which if it was ever approached at
Athens, has certainly never been attained, and has indeed comparatively
been little studied or cared for, in any modern society.g

[Vol. VI, pp. 199-202.]

There have been few things lately written more worthy of being meditated
on than this striking paragraph. kThe difference here pointed out
between the temper of the Athenian and that of the modern mind, is most
closely connected with the wonderful display of individual genius which
made Athens illustrious, and with the comparative mediocrity of modern
times. Originality is not always genius, but genius is always
originality; and a society which looks jealously and distrustfully on
original people—which imposes its common level of opinion, feeling, and
conduct, on all its individual members—may have the satisfaction of
thinking itself very moral and respectable, but it must do without
genius. It may have persons of talent, who bring a larger than usual
measure of commonplace ability into the service of the common notions of
the time; but genius, in such a soil, is either fatally stunted in its
growth, or if its native strength forbids this, it usually retires into
itself, and dies without a sign.k

The portion of Mr. Grote’s History which we are now reviewing comprises
the most brilliant period of the Athenian republic; including the last
stage in the growth of her democratic constitution, and the rise,
progress, and fullest development of her maritime empire. On both these
subjects there were deep-rooted prejudices to be removed; prejudices
long fostered by the modern enemies of popular government. Mr. Grote,
without disguising the faults of the Athenian people or institutions,
shows the vast superiority of the latter over all other political
institutions known to the age, or which probably would have been
compatible with its circumstances. The following instructive
appreciation of the multitudinous dikasteries, or popular courts of
justice, throws also what to most readers will be a new light on the
state of society and manners in Athens and other cities of Greece.

In appreciating the practical working of these numerous dikasteries at
Athens, in comparison with such justice as might have been expected from
individual magistrates, we have to consider, first, that personal and
pecuniary corruption seems to have been a common vice among the leading
men of Athens and Sparta, when acting individually or in boards of a few
members, and not uncommon even with the kings of Sparta; next, that in
the Grecian cities generally, as we know even from the oligarchical
Xenophon, (he particularly excepts Sparta,) the rich and great men were
not only insubordinate to the magistrates, but made a parade of showing
that they cared nothing about them. We know also from the same
unsuspected source, that while the poorer Athenian citizens who Edition:
current; Page: [1132] served on shipboard were distinguished for the
strictest discipline, the hoplites or middling burghers who formed the
infantry were less obedient, and the rich citizens who served on
horseback the most disobedient of all.5 To make rich and powerful
criminals effectively amenable to justice has indeed been found so
difficult everywhere, until a recent period of history, that we should
be surprised if it were otherwise in Greece. When we follow the reckless
demeanour of rich men like Kritias, Alkibiades, and Meidias,6 even under
the full-grown democracy of Athens, we may be very sure that their
predecessors under the Kleisthenean constitution would have been often
too formidable to be punished or kept down by an individual archon of
ordinary firmness, even assuming him to be upright and well-intentioned.
Now the dikasteries established by Perikles were inaccessible both to
corruption and intimidation: their number, their secret suffrage, and
the impossibility of knowing beforehand what individuals would sit in
any particular cause, prevented both the one and the other. And besides
that the magnitude of their number, extravagant according to our ideas
of judicial business, was essential to this tutelary effect, it served
further to render the trial solemn and the verdict imposing on the minds
of parties and spectators; as we may see by the fact, that in important
causes the dikastery was doubled or tripled. Nor was it possible by any
other means than numbers to give dignity to an assembly of citizens, of
whom many were poor, some old, and all were despised individually by
rich accused persons who were brought before them—as Aristophanes and
Xenophon7 give us plainly to understand. If we except the strict and
peculiar educational discipline of Sparta, these numerous dikasteries
afforded the only organ which Grecian politics could devise, for getting
redress against powerful criminals, public as well as private, and for
obtaining a sincere and uncorrupt verdict.

Taking the general working of the dikasteries, we shall find that they
are nothing but jury-trial applied on a scale broad, systematic,
unaided, and uncontrolled, beyond all other historical experience; and
that they therefore exhibit in exaggerated proportions both the
excellences and the defects characteristic of the jury system, as
compared with decision by trained and professional judges. . . . Both
the direct benefits ascribed to jury-trial in insuring pure and
even-handed justice, and still more its indirect benefits in improving
and educating the citizens generally, might have been set forth yet more
emphatically in a laudatory harangue of Perikles about the Athenian
dikasteries. If it be true that an Englishman or an American counts more
certainly on an impartial and uncorrupt verdict from a jury of his
country than from a permanent professional judge, much more would this
be the feeling of an ordinary Athenian, when he compared the dikasteries
with the archon. . . . As to the effect of jury-trial in diffusing
respect to the laws and constitution—in giving to every citizen a
personal interest in enforcing the former and maintaining the latter—in
imparting a sentiment of dignity to small and poor men through the
discharge of a function exalted as well as useful—in calling forth the
patriotic sympathies, and exercising the mental capacities of every
individual—all these effects were produced in a still higher degree by
the dikasteries at Athens; from their greater frequency, numbers, and
spontaneity of mental action, without any professional Edition: current;
Page: [1133] judge upon whom they could throw the responsibility of
deciding for them. On the other hand, the imperfections inherent in
jury-trial were likewise disclosed in an exaggerated form under the
Athenian system. Both juror and dikast represent the average man of the
time and of the neighbourhood, exempt indeed from pecuniary corruption
or personal fear,—deciding according to what he thinks justice, or to
some genuine feeling of equity, mercy, religion, or patriotism, which in
reference to the case before him he thinks as good as justice—but not
exempt from sympathies, antipathies, and prejudices, all of which act
the more powerfully because there is often no consciousness of their
presence, and because they even appear essential to his idea of plain
and straightforward good sense.

[Vol. V, pp. 512-25.]

Of the maritime empire of Athens Mr. Grote furnishes an unprejudiced
account, and as much of a justification as the case admits of. [Ibid.,
pp. 390-472; Chap. xlv.] It was originally an equal alliance, growing
out of the operations against Xerxes, and intended for the naval defence
of Greece, against Persian domination. Of this confederacy (which
consisted of the islands, and the Greek cities of the Asiatic and
Thracian coasts, recently freed from the dominion of the Persian
satraps) Athens was the acknowledged head, but was only primus inter
pares, performing the functions of an executive; the supreme regulation
of the alliance belonging to a synod of the confederates periodically
meeting at Delos. Each of the states contributed either in money or in
ships of war towards the common objects of the alliance; the contingent
of each having been fixed by Aristides in a manner so equitable as to
command universal applause. The steps by which, without any preconceived
plan of usurpation on the part of Athens, her originally equal
confederates sunk into the condition of dependent or subject-allies, are
traced with great clearness by Mr. Grote. When this change had been
consummated, each state paid a compulsory annual tribute, in
consideration of which Athens undertook the military and naval defence
of the tributaries against all enemies. They were not permitted to have
any fortifications or ships of war of their own, and their differences
with other states they were required to refer to the judicial tribunals
of Athens. With their internal institutions or administration Athens did
not meddle; not even to establish democracy; for though her own example
tended to make democratic principles predominate within the sphere of
her influence, many of the subject-allies of Athens were, and continued
to be, under oligarchical government. In this the Athenian dominion
differed greatly from the subsequent supremacy of Sparta, who not only
subverted the democracies and established oligarchies everywhere, but
appointed Spartan governors under the name of harmosts, whose yoke was
always oppressive and often intolerable. The subjects of Athens had few
if any practical grievances, and scarcely pretended to have them: the
tribute was a cheap price for complete military and naval protection.
Their complaint was, that they were degraded by being deprived of the
common privilege of autonomy or city-independence, so indissolubly
connected in the Greek mind with all ideas of freedom and collective
dignity.

Edition: current; Page: [1134]
This complaint, whether judged by an abstract standard or by the ideas
and sentiments of the time, was well grounded. Yet let it be remarked,
that this coveted autonomy was a privilege which most of the states
composing the Athenian league were entirely incapable of maintaining by
their own strength. Athens found them under the dominion of Persia; when
separated from Athens they fell under the far harder yoke of Sparta. Let
it be considered also, that it was precisely this narrow spirit of
independence, this intolerance on the part of each petty town of
permanent connexion with any other, which ultimately caused the ruin of
Grecian freedom by the absorption of all Greece into the Macedonian
monarchy. Doubtless, the true remedy for the inherent weakness of so
divided a state, would have been found in a free and equal
confederation. But a federal government was of all things the most alien
to Grecian habits. Even in the most pressing danger, when half Greece
was overrun and occupied by the troops of Xerxes, the evidence, never
before so fully brought out as by Mr. Grote, showed the radical
incapacity of these little communities for acting in free voluntary
concert. If there was any means by which Grecian independence and
liberty could have been made a permanent thing, it would have been by
the prolongation for some generations more of the organization of the
larger half of Greece under the supremacy of Athens; a supremacy
imposed, indeed, and upheld by force—but the mildest, the most
civilizing, and, in its permanent influence on the destinies of human
kind, the most brilliant and valuable, of all usurped powers known to
history.

That events took another course was the fault of no one so much as of
the Athenians themselves, who, intoxicated by success, and having no
longer a Pericles to keep them in the path of practical wisdom, were
tempted to aggressive enterprises like that on Sicily, both unjust and
beyond their strength. The next volume of Mr. Grote will contain the
recital of this sad disaster, one of the turning-points in universal
history, and one of those portions of it which are richest in epic and
dramatic interest.

It is impossible to predict what number of further volumes will be
necessary for the completion of Mr. Grote’s design; but no one who reads
his work can wish that it were more abridged. It is not a mere summary
of events known and admitted, and requiring only to be agreeably laid
before the reader. It is an exploration of the sources of Grecian
history; an investigation of facts previously unknown or misrepresented;
a labour performed once for all; and the book is a storehouse from which
future writers may draw their materials, without repeating the same
toilsome and operose researches. To be this, and to be also an
attractive specimen of narrative, and, more valuable than all, a
profound estimate by a philosophical politician of one of the most
important periods in the political history of mankind, is a threefold
achievement which it has been given to few works, whether called
histories or by any other denomination, to realize.

Edition: current; Page: [1135]


382.: THE ATTEMPT TO EXCLUDE UNBELIEVERS FROM PARLIAMENT
 DAILY NEWS, 26 MAR., 1849, P. 4

In a speech on 19 Feb., 1849 (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 102, cols. 906-17),
Lord John Russell introduced “A Bill to Alter the Oaths to Be Taken by
Members of the Two Houses of Parliament Not Professing the Roman
Catholic Religion,” 12 Victoria (23 Feb., 1849), PP, 1849, IV, 419-24.
The bill, similar to an unsuccessful one of the year before, was
designed to admit Jews to Parliament. It was debated in the Commons on
19 and 23 Feb., 7 May, and 11 June, when it passed second reading, and
in the Lords on 26 June, but was not enacted. On 21 Feb., 1849, Mill had
written Harriet Taylor, in France for her health, pointing out that
Russell, “although he is actually abolishing the old oaths & framing
new, still has the meanness to reinsert the words ‘on the true faith of
a Christian’ for all persons except Jews, & justifies it by saying that
the Constitution ought not avowedly to admit unbelievers into
Parliament.” She replied in a letter now lost, and on 17 Mar. he said:
“As you suggested I wrote an article on Russell’s piece of meanness in
the Jew Bill and have sent it to [Eyre Evans] Crowe [editor of the Daily
News] from whom I have not yet any answer—there has been no time
hitherto fit for its publication—the time will come when the subject is
to come on again in Parlt. But I fear the article, even as ‘from a
correspondent’ will be too strong meat for the Daily News, as it
declares without mincing the matter, that infidels are perfectly proper
persons to be in parliament.” (In fact it appeared as first leader, not
as “from a correspondent.”) He continues: “I like the article myself. I
have carefully avoided anything disrespectful to Russell personally, or
any of the marks, known to me, by which my writing can be recognized.”
Four days later he reported again: “Crowe’s answer was ‘I shall be but
too happy to print the article. The Jews bill is put off till after
Easter, but if you will allow me I will insert it immediately.’ ” Mill
adds, in what is now a mysterious as well as unpleasant allusion, “There
is nothing like kicking people of the D[aily] N[ews] sort it appears. I
answered telling him if he thought it would be of as much use now as
about the time when the bill comes on by all means to print it now. It
has not yet made its appearance.” (LL, CW, Vol. XIV, pp. 13, 18, and
20.) This first leader, headed “London, Monday, Mar. 26,” is described
in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on the attempt to exclude
unbelievers from parliament, in the Daily News of 26th March 1849”

(MacMinn, p. 71).

the bill of lord john russell for the admission of Jews into parliament,
affords by the mode it adopts of effecting that purpose, an example of
the rooted aversion of our practical politicians to anything like a
principle. If there is a principle which is supposed to be sacred in the
eyes of a Russell, it is religious freedom. If there is a maxim in
politics which whigs are understood to cherish, it is that no one should
be subjected to civil disabilities on the ground of any opinions which
he may entertain in matters of religion. Yet a whig and a Russell,1
finding the Jews excluded from parliament by the imposition of certain
Edition: current; Page: [1136] words interpreted as expressing a belief
in Christianity proposes to dispense with the words, but to dispense
with them for Jews only. For all who do not declare themselves to be
Jews, he not only leaves the words as he found them, but actually
re-enacts them. He is proposing to abolish the old oaths and to
establish new, and in the oaths which he establishes he introduces de
novo these very words, granting to Jews a special exemption from their
use.2 He opens the door of parliament just wide enough to allow one
particular class of dissenters from Christianity to slip in, and closes
it, as far as depends upon him, against all others.

Why is this? If we take his own account of the matter, it is because he
does not think it right to announce that sceptics and infidels ought to
be admitted into parliament; therefore he declares ineligible, not only
sceptics and infidels, but Hindoos, Buddhists, and Mahomedans, none of
whom are commonly counted among infidels, and who compose nearly
three-fourths of the population of the British dominions. But we will
discuss the question as if it concerned only those whom Lord John would
have it believed that he actually cares about rendering ineligible.

First, what sort of sceptics and infidels does he really suppose that
his oaths will keep out of parliament? Those who take his side of the
question usually profess the charitable belief that infidels are persons
whom oaths will not bind. It is certain at least that an infidel who can
be excluded by such words as those used, “on the true faith of a
Christian,” words which rather insinuate than profess a belief in
Christianity—equivocating, jesuitical words, which seem chosen on
purpose to afford a loophole to the conscience—must be a person more
than ordinarily under the influence of honour and moral obligation, and,
therefore, more than ordinarily fit to be a member of any assembly where
honest men are required; and more than usually undeserving to have any
discreditable mark put upon him.

But (it will be said by Lord John Russell, or by somebody for him) the
measure will not really keep anybody out. It is not meant to do so. It
is only meant as a declaration that certain persons ought to be kept
out. It is an admission under protest. It is a national testimony that
nobody who disbelieves in Christianity can be a fit person to sit in
parliament.

If it be so, it is a testimony to something which every one who has any
knowledge of life knows to be not true. We say nothing about Jews, whom
this very measure is intended to let in. Were Hume and Gibbon improper
persons to sit in parliament?3 Conservatives, at least, will hardly be
of that opinion; for they were both tories; and the sons and daughters
of tories to this day get their first Edition: current; Page: [1137]
notions of English politics from a History written by one of them,4 and
very false notions they are. Liberals, again, would deem them valuable
members of parliament for different reasons. It is not possible to
imagine an assembly where great questions are to be discussed and
important public business transacted, in which no good use could be made
of such powers of mind as these men possessed.

It is unnecessary, however, to go back to a past age. The present times
are sufficient. We should like to put a question to Lord John Russell.
Let him mentally reckon up (if they are not too numerous to be
reckoned), among persons now in parliament or in office, or who have
been so since he entered into public life, all those whom he either
positively knows, or has good ground for believing, to be disbelievers
in revelation—many of them in more than revelation. We put it to him as
a man of the world. Many good Christians, in their innocence and
inexperience, would be astonished and shocked at the supposition we are
making, but Lord John must know enough of his time, and of the men of
his time, to be more or less a competent judge. We wish that after
revolving in his mind the various members of the present or any former
House of Commons, whom he has known or believed to be what are usually
termed infidels, he would ask himself whether, among all the members
composing it, these, taken collectively, were the persons whom, in his
sincere opinion, the House of Commons could have best spared? We do not
mean that many, or perhaps any, of these persons are Humes and Gibbons,
or have ever made any public attack on religion, or are at all likely to
avow unbelief; if they did, they would emperil, among many other things,
all their chances of re-election. The truth is, that there is generally
nothing in their conduct by which they could, as a class, be
distinguished from the great majority of believers. This ought not to
be: a great difference in the conscientious convictions of human beings
ought to make a visible difference of some kind or other in their
conduct, but in point of fact it seldom does. Certain it is that neither
Lord John Russell, nor any other man of the world, would trust the
unbelievers less in any relation of life, or would consider them less
eligible for the great majority of public functions, than the average of
Christians. On this point we should not fear to take the opinion of any
man who has been minister of England in the last thirty years, could we
be sure that he would speak his real sentiments.

If Lord John Russell really believed that the words he proposes would
exclude from parliament all the sincere unbelievers who are now or may
hereafter become members of it, we are convinced that he never would
have proposed them. Why, then, has he done so? Because he believes that
the exclusion will not exclude, but will be a mere brutum fulmen; and,
with the usual indifference of Edition: current; Page: [1138] our
statesmen to a bad principle, when they do not expect that it will be
followed by specific bad consequences, he thinks he may as well make
this sacrifice at the shrine of bigotry, if it will gain him an
additional vote for letting in Mr. Rothschild.5 He has yet to learn that
a legislature which either introduces or confirms a bad principle does
more harm than is compensated by twenty good practical measures
involving no principle: for it is by the principles contained in them
that institutions educate the national mind, thus producing more effect
for good or evil than “laws or kings” by their direct influence can
either “cause or cure.”6 As long as the laws keep up nominal persecution
on account of opinion, whether practically operative or not, the seal of
bigotry will be upon us; and no letting in of one set of excluded
persons after another by the backdoor of the constitution will avail
much to make us otherwise.


383.: CORPORAL PUNISHMENT
 DAILY NEWS, 14 JULY, 1849, P. 4

This article responds to the report “Police. Southwark,” The Times, 6
July, 1849, p. 7 (from which the quotations are taken), concerning the
case of Alexander Smith, heard on 5 July before Isaac Onslow Secker
(1799-1861), barrister, magistrate at Greenwich and Woolwich. This
unheaded fourth leader, the seventh jointly authored by Harriet Taylor
and Mill on injustice and cruelty (for background, see No. 303), is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on corporal
punishment, in the Daily News of 14th July 1849. A joint production,
very little of which was mine.”

(MacMinn, p. 71.)

while, in the popular discussions on criminal law, the idea of
punishment is more and more sunk in that of reformatory discipline;
while what were once deemed the main ends of penal
infliction—retribution to the culprit, and the deterring of future
offenders—are well-nigh sinking out of view, and prisons, in the opinion
of many well-meaning persons, are regarded as little more than a sort of
hospitals for the morally sick, where they are to be cured of their
soul’s diseases by mild alternatives; while this twist of the moral
sentiment in the direction of shortsighted tenderness is increasingly
manifest; in the actual administration of our criminal law, the tide is
setting in the contrary direction, towards a revival of the brutal and
barbarous practices of the middle ages and of the East. Amidst our talk
of reformatory treatment we are returning to the most demoralising, the
most brutalising, because the most degrading of punishments, Edition:
current; Page: [1139] the bastinado. There have been other instances
lately of this, but none hitherto that comes up to what we extract from
a Southwark police report of Friday last:

Alexander Smith, described as a commission agent, was brought before Mr.
Secker, charged with illegally pawning a gold watch, value 20 guineas,
the property of James Mills, the master of a West India trader.

It appeared that the complainant formed a casual acquaintance with the
prisoner, who prevailed upon him to accompany him to Astley’s to witness
the horsemanship.1 Previously, however, to their entering the theatre,
the prisoner suggested the propriety of the complainant leaving a
valuable gold watch in the hands of the landlord of a public-house
adjacent, where they had partaken of refreshment, adding, that the
article would be much safer there than at the theatre. The complainant
at once assented to this suggestion, and the watch was accordingly left
with the landlord of the house. Before the performance was over, the
prisoner made some frivolous excuse, and quitting the theatre proceeded
to the public-house and got possession of the complainant’s watch, which
it was subsequently ascertained he had pledged at a pawnbroker’s shop
for 10l. Upon the discovery of the theft he promised to redeem the
article, or pay the full value, neither of which he had since done; and
the complainant, finding that there was no chance of obtaining
restitution, gave the prisoner into custody on the charge of illegally
pawning the watch.

The prisoner, a well-dressed middle-aged man, said that he had given the
complainant his note of hand to pay at the rate of 10s. a week until the
debt was paid.

Mr. Secker said that the mild term of “debt” could not be applied to
such a fraudulent transaction. The prisoner had acted a most dishonest
part in taking advantage of the absence of complainant to obtain
possession of his watch.

The complainant admitted having taken a written guarantee from the
prisoner, but said he did it for the purpose of strengthening the case
against him.

The prisoner asserted that the watch was given him to pawn, which was
flatly contradicted by the owner.

Mr. Secker denounced, in strong terms, the conduct of the prisoner, and
sentenced him to pay a penalty of 5l. for illegally pawning the watch,
besides 12l., the lowest value put upon the watch; and, in default of
payment, to be committed for three months; and that, in addition to the
above, if the prisoner omitted to pay the above sums within three days
of the expiration of his imprisonment, he should be once publicly
whipped within the precincts of the gaol.

The prisoner, who heard the latter part of the sentence with
astonishment depicted on his countenance, was then removed from the bar.

Well might he be astonished; and his astonishment will be participated,
we believe, by the majority of readers. We know that the office of
police magistrate is one to which a man is appointed usually because he
is fit for nothing else; because, being too stupid to fill any other
appointment, he is thought good enough to be the dispenser of law,
justice, and moral instruction to those who most need all these. But
even a Mr. Secker must, we suppose, have some law to bear him out in
such a decision as this. What law? and how has such a law been smuggled
through parliament? a law permitting the infliction of the bastinado for
Edition: current; Page: [1140] a pecuniary fraud—by which, if
impartially enforced, half the bankrupts in England would be publicly
flogged, and a London magistrate would become a Turkish Cadi. But there
is another peculiarity in the case which must be wholly Mr. Secker’s.
The flogging, after all, is not to be inflicted for the offence. The
punishment of that is a fine of 5l., added to another of 12l., or, “in
default of payment,” to be committed for three months. But, after
suffering the imprisonment, he is still “to pay the above sums within
three days,” and to be flogged if he “omits” to pay them. He is to be
flogged therefore, not for the fraud, but for being unable to pay 17l.
This is a person to be entrusted with the power of flogging!

But the pranks of police magistrates are not the worst of the political
and social vices which this case illustrates. It exemplifies the total
absence of true moral feeling which pervades our criminal legislation
and all the functionaries who administer it, from the judges of the
Court of Queen’s Bench down to this Mr. Secker. If a brutal punishment
can ever be appropriate, it is in the case of a brutal offence. Every
day’s police reports contain cases of ruffianly assaults, committed in
the mere wantonness of brutality, against creatures whose sole offence
is to be inferior in physical strength, oftenest of all against helpless
children, or the slaves called wives, whose death, by a long continuance
of personal torture, has of late been so frequently brought to light,
and without a single exception so leniently passed over, that this has
apparently become one of the safe ways of getting rid of those
incumbrances. To such ruffians as these the degradation of corporal
punishment would be very suitable. It does not make them brutes, it only
stamps them as what they are. A coward who beats another because he is
the stronger, would perhaps even be benefited by finding himself for
once in the hands of a stronger than himself, and tasting of the
degradation he has inflicted. But who ever hears of corporal punishment
for assault? One or two months’ imprisonment is all we hear of in the
most atrocious cases; while, if property is in question—if pounds,
shillings, and pence have been tampered with, years of imprisonment,
with hard labour (not to mention transportation) are almost the smallest
penalty. And this is not peculiarly the fault of the police magistrates,
whose power of inflicting punishment for assault is very limited. It is
the crime more especially of legislators and of the superior courts.
They, it seems, have yet to learn that there is a thing infinitely more
important than property—the freedom and sacredness of human personality;
that there is an immeasurable distance in point of moral enormity
between any the gravest offence which concerns property only, and an act
of insulting and degrading violence perpetrated against a human being.
Mankind could go on very well, have gone on in time past (as well as
they have ever yet gone on), with property very insecure. But subject to
blows, or the fear of blows, they can be no other than soulless,
terror-stricken slaves, without virtue, without courage, without peace,
with nothing they dare call their own. Yet because persons in the upper
Edition: current; Page: [1141] and middle ranks are not subject to
personal outrage, and are subject to have their watches stolen, the
punishment of blows is revived, not for those who are guilty of blows,
but for middle-aged men who pawn watches. Is this to be endured?

A few weeks ago, the punishment of flogging, in the case of the young
man who shot at the Queen, was omitted, it is said, at the special
desire of the Queen herself.2 The forbearance was uncomplimentary to the
legislatorial wisdom which had recently enacted that penalty as
peculiarly fit for that particular offence: but no one can be surprised
by an example of good sense, good taste, and good feeling, given by the
Queen. The crime of Hamilton was not of a degraded or brutal kind,
though of a wicked and grave kind, deserving, in truth, and requiring, a
severer punishment than it received. To refuse so disgusting a tribute
as the revival of a brutalising degradation as a punishment for offences
against herself, was a worthy lesson to legislators and judges; and it
was magnanimity, not like but most unlike a sovereign, to punish so
serious an offence only as if it had been directed against the meanest
subject. Would that her Majesty would take in hand this vast and vital
question of the extinction of personal violence by the best and surest
means—the illegalising of corporal punishment, domestic as well as
judicial, at any age. We conscientiously believe that more large and
lasting good, both present and future, to the moral and social character
of the whole people, would be achieved by such an act of legislation,
than fifty years of legislative efforts without it would be required to
supply.


384.: THE CZAR AND THE HUNGARIAN REFUGEES IN TURKEY [1]
 DAILY NEWS, 3 OCT., 1849, P. 2

In 1848, Hungary had revolted against the Austrian Empire, but by May of
1849 Russia had rigorously suppressed the rebellion in the name of the
Holy Alliance of 1815 between herself, Austria, and Prussia. During the
summer of 1849 public opinion in England rallied against Austria. A
crisis arose over the demand by Russia and Austria that Turkey extradite
the leaders of the revolution, Kossuth, Bem, and others. The Sultan,
Abd-ul-Mejid (1823-61), refused to do so. Mill’s letter, headed as title
with subhead, “To the Editor of the Daily News,” is described in his
bibliography as “A letter signed J.S.M. Edition: current; Page: [1142]
in the Daily News of 3d October 1849 on the case of the Hungarian
refugees in Turkey” (MacMinn, p. 71). (Mill’s evident wish to be
identified by his initials was perhaps frustrated by the misprinting of
“I.” for “J.”; however, the correct initials appeared in the second
letter on the subject, No. 385.)

sir,—

Many thousands in England, and millions, I will venture to say, in
Europe, are waiting anxiously to see whether the noble conduct of the
Sultan in refusing to deliver up the defenders of Hungarian liberty to
the crowned employers of the scourgers of women, the butchers of Warsaw
and Pesth, is to have the support of England or not.

We are told that our enormous naval force is and must be kept up on
account of the state of the Continent. If we ever could be called upon
to use that force by any occurrence on the Continent, it is now.

Wait not for the support of France. France, in a moment of insanity, has
given herself up for four years to the discretion of the relative (by
marriage), and servile tool of the Emperor of Russia, by whose help he
hopes to be made Emperor of France.1 But France must follow, if England
at once takes the lead.

The Czar ought instantly to be told that the first movement of troops
across the frontiers of Turkey in this quarrel will be a signal for the
blockading of all his ports in the Baltic and the Black Sea, to be
followed, if needful, by the destruction of his naval arsenals.

Any trifle is thought sufficient cause for summoning a public meeting.
Shall there be no meeting to save England from the infamy of standing by
while men and women, who ought to be carried in triumph through every
city in Europe, are torn by main force from the protection of the
Mussulman prince, who dares defy a power ten times stronger and ten
times more barbarous than his own, rather than deliver up fugitive
victims to the slaughterer?

A month ago it would have seemed quite needless that a public
demonstration should warn a liberal ministry of such a duty. But since
we have a Colonial Secretary and a Prime Minister either so base, or so
infantinely weak and credulous, as to be capable, the one of
sanctioning, the other of defending, the conduct of More O’Ferrall,2 it
is quite time that the public should rouse itself, Edition: current;
Page: [1143] and give strength to the only member of the government who
stands between us and the Aberdeen policy, between us and a mean
complicity with the new “Holy” Alliance.3

J.S.M.


385.: THE CZAR AND THE HUNGARIAN REFUGEES IN TURKEY [2]
 EXAMINER, 6 OCT., 1849, P. 627

This paragraph follows a letter headed “What Is England to Do?” and
signed “A Cambridge Man,” which calls on the public to trust the Foreign
Minister, Palmerston, in his very cautious and moderate support for the
Hungarian refugees (for the context, see No. 384). Mill’s paragraph is
introduced by this editorial comment: “Since this letter was in type,
another, with the signature of J.S.M., has been forwarded to us, taking
a different view of the duty of the public in reference to this
question. The writer professes no faith in the conduct or courage of the
Ministers (with one exception), and speaks indignantly of the affair at
Malta and its recent extenuation.1 But he adds with much truth:”. The
item, which appears in the “Political Examiner,” is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter on the same subject and with the same
signature [as No. 384] but of which a part only was printed, in the
Examiner of 7th [sic] October 1849”

(MacMinn, p. 72).

but let the public also take its share of blame. If the public cannot
trust the Ministers, neither can the Ministers trust the public for
support in any energetic and generous course of action in foreign
affairs. The Ministers think that the people care for nothing but
reducing the taxes and preventing any interruption of trade. Or that if
they are capable of being moved by any idea larger than this, it is by
the idea of a silly, goody kind of peace. If, six months ago, we had
possessed a government with spirit enough to announce as the
determination of England, that neither at Rome, nor in Hungary, nor in
any other place in Europe, should any foreign intervention be suffered
unless England was a party to it—a declaration which, if believed, would
have effectually prevented any intervention and any war—could they have
expected to be supportd by the nation in assuming this attitude? Would
not a junction of all the office-seeking parties Edition: current; Page:
[1144] against them have been suffered by the nation to expel them from
power? The official people believe that, though England will bear to be
overtaxed on all sorts of idle and dishonest pretexts, no cause is so
sacred in her eyes that she would be willing, rather than abandon it, to
add a million to the taxes. Let England come forward and declare that
this is not true. Let public meetings proclaim that England will go to
war with Russia rather than suffer Turkey to be bullied into giving up
vanquished fugitives to the executioner; and the fugitives will be
saved, and the character of England vindicated, without a chance of war.


386.: M. CABET
 DAILY NEWS, 30 OCT., 1849, P. 3

In the course of a leading article, 29 Oct., p. 4, on the Catholic
Church in French politics, the Daily News incidentally brought in
accusations against Etienne Cabet as a swindler; Mill quotes from this
article. Cabet, who had associated with Owen when in exile in England
1834-39, announced in 1847 the founding of a communal settlement,
Icaria, in America. A group of settlers left in January 1848 and tried
to establish themselves in a particularly unsuitable part of Texas,
where they were joined by Cabet early in 1849. He took his followers to
Nauvoo, the abandoned Mormon settlement in Illinois, a few months later,
but the enterprise was a failure. By September he had been charged with
defrauding his followers (see The Times, 20 Oct., p. 5). Condemned in
his absence to two years in prison, on his return to France in 1851 he
was acquitted. The letter is headed as title, with subhead, “To the
Editor of the Daily News.” It is identified in Mill’s bibliography as “A
letter signed D in the Daily News of 30th October 1849 on M. Cabet”

(MacMinn, p. 72).

sir,—

I have seen with surprise, in your paper of to-day, a leading article
which, in the course of a discussion on a totally different subject, and
for the mere purpose of illustration, aims a mortal stab at the honour
and character of a man now suffering under the persecution of the
authorities in his native country—M. Cabet. I have sufficient confidence
in your sense of justice to feel convinced that you have only joined in
the hue and cry against this ill-treated man from inadvertence, and
ignorance of the real facts of the case. No one is surprised that the
tory press (whether calling itself liberal or the contrary) and their
foreign correspondents, who must be better informed if the editors are
not, should think any amount of suppressio veri quite fair, or at least
not likely to be found out, when directed against a known socialist. But
as you are not to be classed with writers of this description, you will
be glad to be informed or reminded of that important part of the truth
which has escaped your notice. The judgment against M. Cabet on the
charge of escroquerie was pronounced by default, and therefore without a
hearing, M. Cabet being at the time necessarily absent, living in the
midst of the very people whom he is accused of having defrauded. The
judgment, which in the absence of the accused the court had perhaps no
Edition: current; Page: [1145] alternative but to pass upon him, is of
so little practical effect, that notwithstanding the sentence he has the
power of returning at any time and standing his trial. But though the
case, as it affects M. Cabet, on account of his absence was not tried at
all, his friend and co-defendant, M. Krolikowski,1 who was present, was
tried on the same charge, and acquitted, after having made in behalf of
M. Cabet the following protest contained in the Démocratie Pacifique of
22nd September last:

Citizen Cabet, whose presence is indispensable in the Icarian colony of
Nauvoo (United States), cannot possibly appear unless the court consents
to postpone the trial to next April; but I will defend him in every
manner. Our cause is common; and there has been so much calumny against
the Icarians, and against citizen Cabet in particular, accusing him
sometimes of proposing a chimerical undertaking, and sometimes of
abandoning his associates, after having invited them to emigrate, that I
think it necessary for our defence to publish the unanimous protest of
the Icarians established at Nauvoo, which shall be produced before the
judges.2

The following is the document alluded to; it bears 189 signatures of
emigrants, male and female:

One of those great iniquities which would suffice to dishonour an age
is, perhaps, about to be accomplished in France. Ignoble calumnies
attempt to disgrace the name of Cabet, of the Christian philosopher who
has consecrated the whole of a long life to the moral education of
mankind; the regenerator, the intrepid apostle, who, abandoning country,
family, and fortune, prepares, in remote climates, amidst dangers and
privations, the happiness of the human race. We, the witnesses and
objects of his affection and of his devotedness—we, already enjoying the
fruits of his sacrifices and of our own perseverance, protest against
accusations as absurd as infamous, the triumph of which would be a new
stain on our unfortunate country.3

These are the feelings entertained towards this “convicted swindler” by
his victims, he living in the midst of them—and this is the man whom
your article, with a contemptuously pitying reservation in his favour as
a sincere fanatic, declares culpable of “falsehood,” of “treachery,” and
of attempting “to form a socialist republic, without sagacity, industry,
honesty, or truth.” By what authority does your writer thus asperse a
man of whose principles the very words he uses show that he knows
nothing? The illusion of communists, so far as it is an illusion,
consists, on the contrary, in flattering themselves that a socialist
community can be founded on “sagacity, industry, honesty, and truth”
alone, without the vulgar incentives of private interest.

Edition: current; Page: [1146]
It need hardly be added, that the English newspapers, which have seldom
let a week pass since M. Cabet’s trial without some insulting reference
to him as a convicted cheat and impostor, take care never to say that he
was condemned unheard, and have carefully kept from their readers the
indignant protest of those whom he is pretended to have defrauded and
ruined.

D.


387.: LECHEVALIER’S DECLARATION
 SPECTATOR, 8 DEC., 1849, P. 1165

André Louis Jules Lechevalier (1800-50) was an economist and journalist,
an ardent follower of Victor Considérant and the school of Charles
Fourier. On the strength of his experiences in the French colonies, he
became Colonial Secretary (1843). His ideas on the emancipation of the
blacks were proposed in his Rapport sur les questions coloniales, 2
vols. (Paris: Imprimerie royale, 1843-44). On 13 June, 1849, Lechevalier
had taken part in protests against armed intervention by French troops
in the siege of Rome. The government imposed martial law; the offices of
the Tribune des Peuples, of which Lechevalier was then an editor, were
closed, and three of his fellow editors were arrested. Lechevalier
thereupon addressed a letter (21 June, 1849) to the Minister of the
Interior, M. Dufaure, which effected the release of the three men but
resulted in his own arrest and subsequent trial and conviction by the
Court at Versailles (November-December 1849). Anticipating these
consequences, Lechevalier, along with others, exiled himself to London
in July. It was from London that he wrote his Déclaration on 8 Oct.,
1849. Lechevalier had the Déclaration translated by a friend as
Declaration of Citizen Andre-Louis-Jules Lechevalier (London: n.p.,
1849), and sent copies to a number of British papers, but, for his
quotations in this notice, Mill is evidently using the French version
(not located) in his own translation. The notice appears, in square
brackets (like the other brief notices) in the “Publications Received”
column, headed “Déclaration du Citoyen André-Louis-Jules Lechevalier
junior, accusé, ex-membre du Comité de la Presse et du Comité
Socialiste.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A few words on
M. Jules [Lechevalier’s] letter to [Dufaure] and [his Declaration]; in
the Spectator of 8th December 1849”

(MacMinn, p. 72).

the manifesto of one of the condemned by default in the late political
trial at Versailles; and containing a brief recital of the exertions of
a life passed in labouring for the cause of philanthropy and social
improvement. M. Jules Lechevalier is known to those who have attended to
the course of public discussion in France, as one of the most
enlightened and most reasonable of those Reformers who, with great
variety of opinions and objects, are confounded under the name of
Socialists. To the general public he is best known by his efforts during
many years for the abolition of Negro slavery, and for replacing it by
an “organization of labour”;1 for which no more favourable practical
Edition: current; Page: [1147] opportunity could possibly have presented
itself, and which if tried in our Colonies would have had a chance of
preventing their present difficulties. In this little brochure M.
Lechevalier maintains, that “the protest on the 13th of June last was
legitimate, legal, and constitutional; that in principle, insurrection
would have been legitimate, but” (and of this, whoever has read the
evidence on the trial must be already convinced) “in point of fact no
insurrection took place, and none was desired or projected.”2 It is in
itself almost a reductio ad absurdum of the alleged conspiracy, that one
who is so essentially a man of peace as M. Jules Lechevalier should have
been condemned and sentenced as of the number of its authors and
contrivers.


388.: THE CALIFORNIAN CONSTITUTION
 DAILY NEWS, 2 JAN., 1850, P. 4

This article quotes a letter from California announcing the results of
the convention that had met at Monterey on 4 Sept., 1849, to draw up a
constitution for the new state. The constitution was adopted on 13 Oct.,
and submitted to the people for a vote on 13 Nov. (See Constitution of
the State of California 1849 [San Francisco: printed at the Office of
the Alta California, 1849].) The first legislature of the new government
met on 15 Dec., 1849. This unheaded first leader is described (twice, in
identical terms) in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on the
California Constitution, in the Daily News of 2nd January 1850”

(MacMinn, p. 72).

the last mail from California has brought intelligence possessing a
different kind of interest from that which attaches itself to stories of
masses of gold picked up in the beds of rivers and speculations on a
possible depreciation of currencies by the cheapening of their standard.
The Californians have not been solely occupied with “the diggings.” They
have found time also to construct a set of institutions. With the active
self-help characteristic of the energetic people from whom they are an
offshoot, and of whose broad federation they already form a part, this
motley assemblage coming together from many quarters, united by no
previous tie, and finding on their arrival no constituted government to
protect them, proceeded first to organize and enforce a system of
voluntary governent, with the requisite sanctions, sufficient for their
protection, and then nominated a convention, after the usual American
manner, to prepare a Republican Constitution. It is worthy of remark how
instantaneously any body of American emigrants, as soon as they have
formed a settlement, proceed to make a constitution; though European
authorities of no small account in their own estimation, are never tired
of assuring us that constitutions cannot be made. But Edition: current;
Page: [1148] while these sages are stoutly denying the possibility of
motion, the Americans, one after another, like Diogenes, rise up and
walk;1 and not one stumble has yet occurred to mar the completeness of
the practical confutation. Whatever other faults have been found with
the Anglo-American constitutions, no one has yet said that they will not
work; a fate so often denounced against all constitutions except those
which, like the British, “are not made but grow,”2 or, it should rather
be said, come together by the fortuitous concourse of clashing forces.
Perhaps the truth is, that the constitutions which will not work are
those which are made for the people, while those which do work, such as
the American, are made by the people; a fact which is in itself a
guarantee that the ideas which they embody are such as the people are
already familiar with, and attached to, and are therefore both capable
and desirous of making them “work.” It is so with the constitutions
which spring into existence in the North American continent at the rate
of one in every three or four years, namely, whenever either a new state
is added to the Union, or the population of one of the older states
resolves (like that of New York recently) on a general revision of its
institutions.3 All these systems of government have, as might be
expected, a family resemblance, but each new one affords in some one or
other of its features a significant indication of the direction in which
the general mind of America is tending.

The convention at Monterey, comprising about four-fifths of new settlers
with Anglo-Saxon or German names, and one-fifth of old Spanish
inhabitants (which is probably not an unfair proportion to the
population), has concluded its labours; and the product of its
deliberations is about to be submitted for approval or rejection to the
general suffrages of the inhabitants. This proposed fundamental law of
the state comprises many provisions not usually classed under the
department of constitutional or political law: it includes, in fact,
everything which is considered too important or sacred to be entrusted
to the discretion of an ordinary legislature, and which is therefore
inscribed in a sort of charter of rights and liberties, not to be
altered except with peculiar formalities, and by an assembly chosen for
the express purpose.

On the vital question of negro slavery, this constitution is
irreproachable. By an express provision, “neither slavery, nor
involuntary servitude, unless for the punishment of crimes, shall ever
be tolerated in this state.” [P. 4; Art. I, Sect. 18.] California has
thus the honour of being the first southern state which has Edition:
current; Page: [1149] constituted itself free from that curse; and if
the example be followed by New Mexico and the other states which will be
formed in the newly-acquired territory, the iniquity is doomed. The
slave-owners are well aware of this result; they have long ago declared
that the question of the extension of slavery is the question of its
existence; that once hemmed in within a corner of the confederation, it
cannot long survive; that the joint moral and economical effects of
closing the new territories to the export of slaves, will be rapidly
fatal to the institution. In this point of view, the determined
rejection of slavery by the first new state constituted in the territory
which was sought and conquered (it is said) mainly for the perpetuation
of slavery, is the heaviest blow which that form of tyranny has received
in the United States, and is thus no unimportant event in history. In
the first draft of the constitution the interdiction of slavery was
accompanied by the exclusion of free negroes from settling in the state;
but this provision was ultimately rejected by a vote of 31 to 8. Real
improvement, however, is a slow process; a considerable remnant of
injustice is still left. The negro inhabitant will be free, but not
equal; the right of suffrage, otherwise virtually universal, is limited
to “every white male:” and though there is a provision, expressed in
grudging terms (the result, it is said, of a compromise), which permits
the legislature to admit to the suffrage “Indians or the descendants of
Indians,” in such “special cases” as two-thirds of the legislative body
“may deem just and proper,” there is no such latitude given in favour of
negroes. [P. 4; Art. II, Sect. 1.]

On one subject connected with the rights and interests of women, the
Californian delegates have afforded an example which legislatures of
greater importance in the world must ere long imitate. They have deemed
it a fit thing to be not only enacted, but to form a part of the
constitution of the state, that women shall have a right to their own
property. The laws of most of the American states are on this point less
unjust and irrational than those of England and of other countries of
Europe. “All property, both real and personal, of the wife,” say the
Californians, “owned or claimed by her before marriage, and that
acquired afterwards by gift, devise, or descent, shall be her separate
property; and laws shall be passed more clearly defining the rights of
the wife, in relation as well to her separate property, as to that held
in common with her husband.” [P. 13; Art. XI, Sect. 14.] It must be by
an oversight that the wife’s earnings are not included in the property
which is to be at her separate disposal. As the words stand, she will
have (if the phrase “separate property” is to be understood in its
obvious sense) exclusive control over what may devolve on her by any
mode of acquisition except her own labour. But even thus, how superior
to the law of England4—which on this, as on many other subjects, remains
very little altered Edition: current; Page: [1150] from what it was in
those times of barbarism when the wife was literally the slave of the
man by whom she had been appropriated. It is a proof of the ineffectual
and unpractical character of the law reform movement that the law
respecting the property of married women remains in the state it is: a
law of which every one feels the injustice in the case of any women in
whom he is himself interested; and consequently, parents or relatives
who give or bequeath property to women, almost always endeavour to
frustrate the law (which, however, they can only do very imperfectly) by
the circuitous, expensive, and often unsafe mode of a settlement in
trust. Yet, imperfect as is the protection which this contrivance
affords to the woman, and serious as are the hazards incurred by it in
case of dishonesty or rashness in the trustee, it never occurs to
parliament to render all this in a great measure unnecessary by the
simple expedient of doing common justice to the woman—by letting what is
hers be hers, and not, as it is by “common law,” the husband’s.

Another highly creditable part of the Californian constitution consists
of its provisions for education. A superintendent of public instruction,
elected by the people, is to be one of the regular officers of the
government. [P. 11; Art. IX, Sect. 1.] All lands belonging to the state,
and all property of persons dying intestate and without heirs, together
with a tax (to be solicited from Congress), of five per cent on all
sales of land within the state, belonging to the federal government, are
to be formed into a permanent fund for the support of common schools
[pp. 11-12; Art. IX, Sect. 2]; and a grant of unappropriated land is to
be solicited from Congress for the support of a university [p. 12; Art.
IX, Sect. 4]. This is according to the laudable example of the New
England States, which, of all communities existing, have made, in
proportion to their population, the most munificent provision for
general education:5 and of whose people it has been said, that they
would as soon expect to be made to pay individually for the use of the
streets, as for that of the common schools.

The Californians have taken precautions against both the burthen of a
national debt, and the scandal of repudiation, by prohibiting their
legislature from incurring debts or liabilities exceeding in the
aggregate 300,000 dollars, “except in case of war, to repel invasion, or
suppress insurrection;” or unless expressly “for some specified object
or work.” [P. 11; Art. VIII.] In this last case, the law which
authorises the work must provide ways and means for paying off the
loans, with all interest, within twenty years; and this law must be
submitted to the direct suffrages of the people, and is irrepealable
until the debt is wholly Edition: current; Page: [1151] paid. There
will, we think, be few questioners of the justice and policy of this
article of the constitution.

There are some other provisions, the policy of which is disputable—such
as the entire prohibition of paper money in all its forms, and of all
banks, except for the deposit of the precious metals [p. 7; Art. IV,
Sect. 34]; and again, the exemption of “a certain portion of the
homestead and other property of all heads of families” from “forced
sale” by process of law—that is, from the claims of creditors [p. 13;
Art. XI, Sect. 15]; a kind of entail, scarcely more defensible than
those entails of a more ordinary description which, under the name of
“perpetuities,” are prohibited by the constitution. [Ibid., Sect. 16.]
By another article, whoever fights a duel, or sends or accepts a
challenge, or is concerned as a second or otherwise in the transaction,
is to be punished by being deprived of the suffrage, and disqualified
from all public offices of profit. [Ibid., Sect. 2.] This looks like a
serious intention to put down a practice which in some parts of the
United States amounts to an evil of considerable magnitude: and the
means used are more likely to be effectual than any others which we have
heard proposed, since they attack the offence through motives of the
same kind with those which generally prompt it, motives derived from the
love of reputation and consideration.

The remaining provisions of the new constitution do not vary materially
from the familiar features of representative democracy, as found in the
older free states of the Union.


389.: THE CASE OF MARY ANN PARSONS [1]
 DAILY NEWS, 5 FEB., 1850, P. 4

This article, the eighth on injustice and cruelty by Harriet Taylor and
Mill (for the background, see No. 303), responds to “Horrible Cruelty,”
The Times, 2 Feb., 1850, beginning on p. 8 and continuing in Supplement,
p. 1, which describes the coroner’s inquest and subsequent examination
before magistrates resulting from the brutal death of Mary Ann Parsons
at the hand of Robert Curtis Bird, a farmer, and Sarah Bird, his wife;
Mill’s quotations are all from p. 8. The witnesses mentioned are James
Morrish, a shoe-maker, and Richard Hooper; the victim’s mother’s name
was Grace Parsons. For further comment on the case, see No. 392. This
unheaded third leader is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading
article on a case of atrocity near Bideford, in the Daily News of 5th
Febry 1850. Very little of this article was mine.”

(MacMinn, p. 72.)

we would earnestly call the attention of our readers to one of the most
horrible cases of brutality which have ever disgraced the superficial
civilisation of our time and country: we were going to call it the most
horrible, but cases approaching to it in atrocity are so incessantly
recurring in the police reports, that we hesitate to pronounce even this
case unrivalled in those disgraceful annals.

Edition: current; Page: [1152]
Mary Ann Parsons, a girl of fifteen, said by the master of the
workhouse1 to have been “strong and healthy, although not particularly
bright,” was hired as a servant from the workhouse of the Bideford
union, by a man and woman named Bird, in September last. On the 5th of
January she died, of such an accumulation of wounds, mutilations, and
other horrible injuries, that we will not repeat the sickening list as
given in the examinations before the magistrates. On the Friday before
Christmas-day, the evidence of a man named Morrish shows that he saw her
standing in the middle of the room where the prisoners and their four
children were; that she was ordered “to go into the slee house, or back
house;” that as she “went across the kitchen” he “saw that her neck and
shoulders were covered with blood, which appeared to have flowed just
before” he “came in;” that about ten minutes afterwards the man Bird
“opened the slee door and ordered her to wash the blood off her neck.”
Another man named Hooper saw her the day after Christmas day, when she
“appeared to be very ill: she could not stand upright.” He “heard her
making a horrid noise after she got up stairs: she was crying, and
making a ‘wist’ or ‘moaning’ noise as she was going up.” This creature
had seen her repeatedly flogged by both the man and woman, and neither
he nor the former witness ever interfered even by a word of
remonstrance. During the whole three months that she was in the service
of these wretches, she appears to have been utterly friendless, uncared
for, unenquired after. Her mother, who was an inhabitant of the same
workhouse, never once saw her, and was ignorant of her fate until made
aware of it by the ghastly spectacle which the body presented when in
the coffin. The only person who seems to have said anything about the
girl after she entered their service, was the master of the workhouse;
this man, meeting the woman prisoner, who after a month’s trial had told
him that she was an “honest, good, industrious girl,” and hearing on
this occasion some complaint, gave his advice to “properly chastise”
her. The instrument of torture is said in the report to have excited the
horror of the spectators; it was “a strong stick of about a foot in
length, to which were fastened eighteen stout sharp leather thongs,
about two feet long. This formidable cat was capable of inflicting the
most cruel laceration, as bad as the army whip, and worse than the
cowhide of the American slave owner.” With this it was that the girl was
reduced to the state in which her body appeared. The man Sermon, who
gave the brutal recommendation to flog this girl of fifteen, and who
admitted that he had “punished children in the workhouse,” though he
“never served a child anything like that,” declared that in the army,
where he had served, and had frequently seen sentences of flogging
executed, the manner in which this poor victim had been treated would
not have been considered fair flogging. With how much of this evidence
before them does not appear, the coroner’s jury, under the direction of
the coroner,2 found that the girl died “from congestion of the brain,
caused by Edition: current; Page: [1153] external injuries, but how or
by what means such injuries were caused there was no evidence to shew.”
Fortunately for justice, the “means,” though mysterious to this “jury of
respectable (!) yeomen,” were apparent enough to others. An application
having been made to a magistrate, the culprits have most properly been
committed to take their trial for murder; and heartily were it to be
wished that the wretch who counselled “chastisement,” and the two base
slaves who looked on calmly and saw—one of them the brutality
itself—both of them its consequences—could be reached as accessories to
the crime. From the report it would appear that justice might have been
entirely defeated and the monsters might have escaped punishment, but
for the clear, distinct, and manly evidence of the surgeon, Mr. Turner.3
Too many of this gentleman’s profession, in similar cases, give their
evidence in softened terms, and profess doubt, from fear of injuring
themselves with the lower class of their customers.

Our law, or at least its administration, takes abundant care of
property, but the most atrocious personal violence it treats with a
lenity amounting to actual license: even when death follows, the offence
is generally pronounced to be manslaughter, and the criminal escapes
with a year or two’s imprisonment. Yet whether we look to the torments
inflicted, or to the depravity indicated in the perpetrators, the crime
against Mary Ann Parsons is of far deeper atrocity than that of a Rush,
who fires a pistol at a man and kills him.4 Rush intended death, but
they intended torture, and inflicted death by torture. What the law is,
and what its administrators thought of such crimes as this poor child
has been the victim of, was shown in the case of the notorious Mrs.
Brownrigg, who was hanged for murder, and has remained the traditional
type of the worst and most odious species of murderers.5 Brownrigg
flogged two of her apprentices to death—exactly what these people have
done to this unfortunate servant girl. The question in law was not
whether she had premeditated their death: it was enough in law and
justice that she had carried diabolical cruelty to the point which
caused it.


390.: THE CASE OF ANNE BIRD
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 13 MAR., 1850, P. 5

This article is the ninth on injustice and cruelty by Harriet Taylor and
Mill (for the background, see No. 303). It comments on the trial of Anne
Bird (b. 1805) for the brutal beating of a two-year-old child, Ellen
Welsh, held on 8 Feb. at the Marylebone Police Edition: current; Page:
[1154] Office, before George Long (1780-1868), magistrate and author.
The case had been reported in “Police Intelligence—Friday. Marylebone,”
Morning Chronicle, 9 Feb., p. 8. This unheaded third leader is described
in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on the state of the law
respecting assault, in the Morning Chron. of 13th March 1850. Very
little of this was mine.”

(MacMinn, p. 73.)

much has been said and written, although as yet to very little purpose,
on the effect which the progress of society in wealth, numbers, and
education produces on the nature and amount of crime. Among many
differences of opinion on this much-debated question, there is on one
point a very general agreement. However it may be with offences against
property, crimes of violence tend, it is generally believed, to
diminution. There is nothing in which we seem to have so much the
advantage over our fathers as in mildness of manners; and the
delinquencies which prevail in the present generation are, according to
common opinion, those which have their source in poverty or cupidity,
but not in ferocity.

Though we do not deny the truth of this representation as it affects
some classes of society and some offences, yet, as a general fact, we
are sorry to say that it is not borne out by that authentic register of
the manners and habits of the populace—the Police Reports. Far from
exhibiting any decrease in crimes of violence, hardly a day passes in
which that record does not bear frightful witness to their unabated
prevalence. And the crimes which thus abound are, in point of moral
turpitude, the worst order of crimes of violence—not the outbursts of
offended irascibility against an equal, but the habitual abuse of brute
strength, and the indulgence of wanton cruelty. Women and children, or
young persons, are usually the sufferers. Cases succeed one another with
hardly any intermission, in which men are proved to have killed their
wives by brutal maltreatment; every such death being the termination of
a series of sufferings, extending through years, against which the vital
principle was at last unable longer to bear up. For every such extreme
case, we may be assured there are hundreds which stop just short of the
infliction of death, or in which death is inflicted, but not ascribed to
its true cause. In another very numerous class of cases, a man or a
woman is found to have kept an unhappy child for weeks and months in
some disgusting domestic dungeon, until it is nearly dead from cold,
hunger, and neglect—or to have scourged it day after day, until it is
brought into a state which strikes horror when at last exhibited, and
from which in many cases the child never recovers. In other instances a
parish apprentice, or a young person hired as a servant from the
workhouse, is the miserable victim.

Whoever has sufficiently attended to the proceedings of the Police
Courts to have observed the deplorable frequency of these cases, must
have been no less forcibly struck with the scandalous impunity of the
culprits. Often, even when the victim has died from their maltreatment,
they are not sent to trial. If tried, they are, in a majority of
cases,acquitted—sometimes in the face of the clearest Edition: current;
Page: [1155] evidence. Even if found guilty, it is only of manslaughter,
and they get off with a year or two of imprisonment. Cases short of
death are very seldom tried at all, but are disposed of summarily by the
police magistrate. A recent instance at the Marylebone Police-office
exemplifies the sort of justice usually administered. The case was one
of peculiar enormity, the victim being a child two years old. The
culprit, a woman named Anne Bird, was proved to have cruelly maltreated
this infant with a whip. The magistrate did what magistrates in such
cases usually do; he talked of the extreme atrocity of the case—as if
strong words would do away with the effect of weak acts—and then
sentenced the woman to the greatest penalty he could summarily inflict—a
fine of five pounds, or, in default of payment, two months’
imprisonment. If this woman, under the pressure of poverty, had stolen
five shillings, the magistrate would not have failed to commit her for
trial, and if found guilty she would probably have been transported. But
her offence being brutal cruelty, practised on a creature utterly
helpless and unoffending, he did not deem it worth while to try whether
a higher court would be of opinion that a case of extraordinary atrocity
deserved greater punishment than two months’ imprisonment. At the end of
the two months the child, no doubt, will be given back to its torturer;
unless before that time, as happened in a similar case not long ago, it
dies of the injuries received.

The fault is partly in the administration of the law, but chiefly in the
law itself. The whole state of the law on the subject of offences
against the person urgently requires revision.1 Towards offenders
against property the law until very lately was ferocious, and even now
it does not err on the side of gentleness; but in case of personal
violence, short of premeditated murder, it is chargeable with
confounding together offences the most widely separated, both in kind
and degree of criminality, and with the most excessive and unwarrantable
lenity towards all but the lightest. Legislators and judges have
bestowed little consideration on the amount of guilt and suffering which
lie disguised under the mild and euphonious designation of “common
assault.” That gentle phrase stands for nearly every sort of bodily
maltreatment of which death or maiming is not obviously the result.
There is but that one term to denote the whole range of acts of personal
violence, from a quarrel between two strong and equally matched men, one
of whom knocks the other down in a fair fight, to that habitual and
wanton abuse of muscular strength against the weak and defenceless which
makes life a martyrdom. Even if this confounding of the gravest moral
Edition: current; Page: [1156] distinctions were a mere matter of theory
and classification, it would be very far from harmless in its effects on
the popular mind; but, carried out as it is, to the full, in daily
practice—some of the most detestable actions which one human being can
perpetrate against another being punished, when punished at all, with
about the amount of penalty which would be due to a simple breach of the
peace—it would show a profound ignorance of the effect of moral agencies
on the character not to perceive how deeply depraving must be the
influence of such a lesson given from the seat of justice. It cannot be
doubted that to this more than to any other single cause is to be
attributed the frightful brutality which marks a very large proportion
of the poorest class, and no small portion of a class much above the
poorest.

Persons who are not conversant, either by their own knowledge or through
the proceedings of courts of justice, with the breadth and depth of
popular brutality, have very little idea of what is comprehended in the
meaning of the words, “domestic tyranny.” This is now the only kind of
tyranny which, in the more improved countries of the world, still exists
in full vigour. Even in the worst governed countries, of any tolerable
degree of civilization, it is now but rarely that Kings or public
functionaries have it in their power personally to maltreat any one. The
barbarities of which history is full, and which in barbarous countries
flourish as rankly as ever, very few persons in a civilized country now
suffer from political authorities—millions are liable to them from
domestic ones. The great majority of the inhabitants of this and of
every country—including nearly the whole of one sex, and all the young
of both—are, either by law or by circumstances stronger than the law,
subject to some one man’s arbitrary will. Every now and then the public
are revolted by some disclosure of unspeakable atrocities committed
against some of these helpless dependents—while, for every such case
which excites notice, hundreds, most of them as bad, pass off in the
police reports entirely unobserved; and for one that finds its way, even
for that brief instant, into light, we may be assured that not hundreds
but thousands are constantly going on in the safety of complete
obscurity. If, through the accidental presence of some better-hearted
person than these poor creatures are usually surrounded by, complaint is
made to a magistrate, the neighbours—persons living in the same
house—almost invariably testify, without either repentance or shame,
that the same brutalities had gone on for years in their sight or
hearing, without their stirring a finger to prevent them. The sufferers
themselves are either unable to complain, from youth or ignorance, or
they dare not. They know too surely the consequences of either failing
or succeeding in a complaint, when the law, after inflicting just enough
punishment to excite the thirst of vengeance, delivers back the victim
to the tyrant.

As a matter either of justice or of humanity, these things speak so
plain a language as ought to be in no need of commentary. What it is of
more importance to insist upon, is their demoralizing effect. Attention
has of late been much Edition: current; Page: [1157] directed to the
overcrowding of the labouring population as a source of moral evils.2
Let any one consider the degrading moral effect, in the midst of these
crowded dwellings, of scenes of physical violence, repeated day after
day—the debased, spirit-broken, down-trodden condition of the
unfortunate woman, the most constant sufferer from domestic brutality in
the poorer classes, unaffectedly believing herself to be out of the
protection of the law—the children born and bred in this moral
atmosphere—with the unchecked indulgence of the most odious passions,
the tyranny of physical force in its coarsest manifestations, constantly
exhibited as the most familiar facts of their daily life—can it be
wondered if they grow up without any of the ideas and feelings which it
is the purpose of moral education to infuse, without any sense of
justice or affection, any conception of self-restraint—incapable in
their turn of governing their children by any other means than blows?
The law, whose utmost exertions would not be more than enough to
withstand this mass of depraving influences, makes so little use of its
powers and opportunities, measures out its reproofs and punishments by
such a scale, that the culprits believe almost the worst of these
brutalities to be venial, and all minor ones to be actually
permitted—while the victims regard their suffering and debasement as the
regular course of things, which the law sanctions and the world allows;
and when not crushed entirely, they seek a wretched compensation by
tyrannizing in their turn, when any hapless fellow-creature comes within
their power.


391.: GROTE’S HISTORY OF GREECE [5]
 SPECTATOR, 16 MAR., 1850, PP. 255-6

This review is Mill’s fifth and last in a newspaper of Grote’s History
(for the context, see No. 304). It appears in the “Books” section,
headed “Grote’s Greece—Volumes VII and VIII,” with the heading
footnoted: “History of Greece. By George Grote, Esq. Volumes VII and
VIII. Published by Murray.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
notice of the 7th and 8th Volumes of Grote’s History of Greece, in the
Spectator of 16 March 1850” (MacMinn, p. 73). Four passages from the
review were incorporated by Mill into his 1853 Edinburgh Review notice
of Grote when he revised that notice for publication in the first
edition of his Dissertations and Discussions (1859), represented in the
variant notes as “59”; see No. 380 for bibliographical details.

the two preceding volumes of Mr. Grote’s History exhibited the Athenian
empire in its ascending and stationary periods. The present publication
contains Edition: current; Page: [1158] the still more interesting and
impressive recital of its decline and fall. Commencing at the temporary
suspension of hostilities with the Peloponnesian confederacy, termed the
Peace of Nicias, it comprises the tragedy of the Sicilian expedition;
the wonderful exertion of energy by which Athens rallied after that
unparalleled disaster, and succeeded once more in balancing the whole
strength of her enemies, though aided by her revolted allies and by the
treasures of the “Great King”;1 the closing years of the Peloponnesian
war, varied by some remarkable passages in the internal history of the
Athenian republic; the catastrophe of Aegospotami, the subjugation of
Athens by Lysander,2 the annihilation of her maritime power and
dissolution of the democracy. The narrative is continued through the
brief despotism of the Thirty Tyrants,3 to the restoration of the
Athenian democracy (but not of the Athenian empire,) by Thrasybulus and
his associates, and the settlement of affairs which followed, so
remarkable for its good sense and absence of reactionary violence. In
the last two chapters Mr. Grote suspends the political, and takes up the
intellectual movement; passing in review the dramatists, the
rhetoricians, the sophists, and lastly, the memorable character and
career of Socrates, to whom the closing chapter is exclusively
dedicated. [Vol. VIII, pp. 434-676; Chaps. lxvii-lxviii.]

Both in stirring incident, and in topics for thought and reflection,
these volumes are richer than any of their predecessors; and the
execution worthily corresponds to the material. Those who have read Mr.
Grote’s former volumes will have observed that he invariably rises with
his subject, and is found most adequate to it where its requirements are
greatest. The better acquainted any one is with Grecian history, and
with the manner in which that history has heretofore been written, the
higher will be his estimation of this work. Few books are more
calculated to impress the instructed reader both with admiration of the
thorough manner in which everything which the author attempts to do is
done, and with surprise that almost everything was left for him to do.
An enumeration of the points of Grecian history on which he has thrown
new light, would comprise almost every one of its important phaenomena,
or even of its interesting incidents. Yet there is not only no
ostentation of originality, but the author’s mind is of the quality most
remote from that which catches at glittering novelties and indulges an
intellectual appetite for ingenious hypotheses. If there is anything
which can be confidently predicated of Mr. Grote it is that he is a safe
Edition: current; Page: [1159] historian; one who requires, not less,
but more, positive evidence than common inquirers, before adopting a
conclusion. His new results are not obtained by divination or
conjecture; but by more diligent study and more acute cross-examination
of the authorities than had ever been applied before, and by that
greater power of interpreting recorded facts which flows from the
possession of broader, deeper, and more many-sided views of human
affairs.

With the exception of the last two chapters, the whole of both volumes
is continuous narrative; without admixture of discussion beyond what was
required for criticism of the evidence, or moral appreciation of the
facts. During the entire period, the historian has the benefit of the
high contemporary authorities, Thucydides and Xenophon: on the general
march of events there is little trustworthy information except what
these writers afford. The difference between one modern historian and
another, as to this period, is chiefly shown by the manner in which they
supply what is not told by contemporary writers, because not required by
contemporary readers—namely, that basis of permanent facts, of which the
passing facts recorded by the historian stand out as it were on the mere
surface. Thucydides, writing for Greeks, related the incidents which
disturbed the stream of Greek life, the battles, conspiracies, and the
like; but what the stream in its natural state consisted of, he did not
need to tell his readers, for they knew it as well as himself. Those
familiar facts, however, which to them would have been superfluous
information, are what it most concerns the modern historian to know. He
has to discover them from the incidental hints given by Thucydides, and
from the indications scattered through the mass of Greek literature.
Owing to the insufficiency of the materials, a very imperfect conception
is all that can be obtained; but there is a vast difference between this
imperfect conception and none at all. Now the modern historians of
Greece who preceded Mr. Grote, have started with what it is scarcely
injustice to call, no distinct conception whatever of the general state
of things in Greece, the opinions, feelings, personal relations, and
actions, habitual to the persons individual or collective, whom they are
writing about; and hence, when they come to speak of any particular
event, they hardly ever understand what other things it implied, or what
impression it must have produced on those who saw and heard it—for want
of a proper understanding of what may be termed “the situation.” To
illustrate our meaning, as well as to show the extent of this deficiency
in former historians of Greece: we do not believe that any one of them
has made (for example) these obvious remarks—that few Greek statesmen or
generals were superior to pecuniary corruption, and that there were
still fewer Greeks whose heads were not turned, and their capacity of
rational judgment destroyed, by brilliant success. Yet even such simple
general reflections as these, in the hands of Mr. Grote, help to render
many things intelligible which hitherto have been either unaccounted for
or totally misunderstood. To take another and a less obvious example:
the curious incident of the mutilation of the statues called Edition:
current; Page: [1160] Hermae,4 and the violent excitement at Athens
consequent upon it, are for the first time made comprehensible by Mr.
Grote, because he is the first who has mentally realized the effect of
such an incident upon the religious feelings of Greeks. [Vol. VII, pp.
227ff., 267ff.] The matter had always been written about as if horror at
the mere act of sacrilege had been the only religious sentiment
concerned: whereas Mr. Grote points out that it was much rather a
religious terror; that, according to the belief of the Athenians, such
an insult to the god was certain to draw down his severest wrath upon
the whole state, to the extent of utter ruin, unless they could
reconcile themselves to him by detecting and rooting out all who were
concerned in the impiety. This aspect of the matter both suggests a
possible motive on the part of the perpetrators of an act hitherto the
most enigmatical in Greek history, and explains the course of subsequent
events.

Perhaps the most unmistakeable as well as the most attractive of Mr.
Grote’s excellences as a narrator, consists in this ever-present and
lively sense of “the situation.”ab One of the beneficial fruits of this
quality is that it makes the history a philosophic one without apparent
effort. There is no need of lengthened discussion to connect causes with
their effects; the causes and effects are parts of the same picture, and
the causes are seen in action before it appears what they are to
produce. For example, the reader whose mind is filled with the greatness
attained by Athens while her councils were ruled by the commanding
intellect and self-restraining prudence of Pericles, might almost
anticipate the coming disasters when he finds, in the early chapters of
the cpresent volumesc, into the hands of what advisers Athens had
already fallen. And, mark well, these evil advisers were not the
demagogues, but the chiefs of the aristocracy, the richest and most
highborn men in the republic—Nicias and Alcibiades. Mr. Grote had
already shown grounds for believing that Cleon, and men of his stamp,
had been far too severely dealt with by historians;5 not that they did
not frequently deserve censure, but that they were by no means the worst
misleaders of the Athenian people. The demagogues were, as he observes,
essentially opposition speakers. The conduct of affairs was habitually
in the hands of the rich and great, who had by far the largest share of
personal influence, and on whose mismanagement there would have been
hardly any check, but for the demagogues and their hostile criticism.
These opinions receive ample confirmation from the course of affairs,
when, there being no longer any lowborn Cleon or Hyperbolus to balance
their influence, Nicias and Alcibiades had full scope to ruin the
commonwealth. The contrary vices of these two men, both equally fatal,
are exemplified in the Edition: current; Page: [1161] crowning act of
their maladministration; the one having been the principal adviser of
the ill-starred expedition to Syracuse, while the other was the main
cause of its ruinous failure, by his intellectual and moral incapacity.a

One of the most important results of Grecian history, as conceived and
written by Mr. Grote, is the triumphant vindication, so far as
historical evidence goes, of Democracy. The moral of the history, as
related by most modern historians, is that democracy is a detestable
kind of government, and that the case of Athens strikingly exemplifies
its detestable qualities. Mr. Grote, on the contrary, shows that the
Athenian government was of surpassing excellence, its time and
circumstances considered; that no other form of society known to the
ancients realized anything approaching to an equal measure of practical
good government; and that this was mainly owing to the nearer approach
which it made to democratic institutions. A democracy in the full sense
of the term it of course was not, since women, slaves, and a multitude
of permanent residents of all ranks and classes who were not citizens,
were “unknown to the constitution.”6 But it had many important points in
common with democracy. It was a government of unlimited publicity, and
freedom of censure and discussion. Public officers were subject to
effective responsibility. The tribunals, being multitudinous and
appointed by lot, were, like modern juries, generally incorrupt. And
there was no distinction in political rights and franchises between poor
and rich, lowborn and highborn. That the Athenian institutions on the
whole were eminently favourable to progress, is shown by the splendid
development of individual intellect during the three or four generations
that this form of society lasted. It was reserved for Mr. Grote to show
that the conditions also of order were realized in a degree unknown in
any other community of the ancient world. Nowhere else in antiquity was
respect for law so deep-rooted a principle as at Athens. Constitutional
forms, and the salutary checks which the wisdom of Solon, Kleisthenes,
and Pericles had provided against the inconsiderate impulses of a
multitudinous popular assembly, had the strongest hold on the minds of
the Demos; very rarely indeed in Athenian history were those barriers
overstepped, even by the most impetuous impulse of popular passion.
Nowhere in Greece were life and property so secure against every kind of
legal or illegal violence: even those who were not citizens were less
exposed to insult and injury than in other ancient states. In all these
points the Athenian people were honourably distinguished, not only from
the Greek oligarchies, but from their own oligarchical party; who showed
during two intervals of ascendancy, the periods of the Four Hundred7 and
of the Thirty, of what enormities they were capable; and who dought
always to be present to the mind, not merely as ethee dark Edition:
current; Page: [1162] background to the picture of the Athenian
republic, but as an active power in itd: for during the whole of its
existence, such men as Critias and his compeers were prominent in the
first ranks of public discussion, and continually filled the high
offices of the state.

Among Mr. Grote’s views of Grecian history, the most startling by its
apparent novelty will be, we think, his defence of the Sophists. [Vol.
VIII, pp. 479-544.] If there is one opinion on Grecian affairs more
accredited than another, it is that the sophists ruined the Grecian
states by corrupting their morality. This opinion will appear to the
reader of Mr. Grote to be one of those baseless fancies which have so
long usurped the place of historical knowledge. Mr. Grote denies the
fact of the corruption; and honourably acquits the sophists of any
corrupting influence. It is not necessary to inform any reader of the
Greek authors, that the word sophist was not used by them in its modern
sense. fThat term was the common designation for speculative inquirers
generally, and more particularly for instructors of youth; and was
applied to Socrates and Plato, as much as to those whom they confuted.
The sophists formed no school, had no common doctrines, but speculated
in the most conflicting ways on physics and metaphysics; while with
respect to morals, those among them who professed to prepare young men
for active life, taught the current morality of the age in its best
form: the apologue of the Choice of Hercules was the composition of a
sophist.8 It is most unjust to the sophists to adopt, as the verdict of
history upon them, the severe judgment of Plato, although from Plato’s
point of view they deserved it. He judged them from the superior
elevation of a great moral and social reformer: from that height he
looked down contemptuously enough, not on them alone, but on statesmen,
orators, artists—on the whole practical life of the period, and all its
institutions, popular, oligarchical, or despotic; demanding a
reconstitution of society from its foundations, and a complete
renovation of the human mind. One who had these high aspirations, had
naturally little esteem for men who did not see or aspire to see beyond
the common ideas of their age; but, as Mr. Grote remarks, to accept his
judgment of them would be like characterizing the teachers and
politicians of the present time in the words applied to them by Owen or
Fourier. [Vol. VIII, p. 538.] Even Plato, for the most part, puts the
immoral doctrines ascribed to the sophists (such as the doctrine that
might makes right) into the mouths not of sophists, but of ambitious
active politicians, like Callicles.9 The sophists, in Plato, almost
always express Edition: current; Page: [1163] themselves not only with
decorum but with good sense and feeling on the subject of social duties;
though gby his Socratic dialectics heg always succeeds in puzzling them,
and displaying the confusion of their ideas, or rather of the common
ideas of mankind, of which they are the exponents.f

This brings us to the chapter on Socrates; which, after so much that is
valuable, is in our estimation the most instructive chapter in the book.
hWe have not space to give ithe briefest analysis of a dissertation so
rich in matter, ori the smallest specimen of the delineation of this
remarkable character, now brought into clearer light than ever before—a
philosopher inculcating, under a supposed religious impulse, pure reason
and a rigid discipline of the logical faculty. But we invite attention
to the estimate, contained in this chapter, of the peculiarities of the
Socratic teaching, and of the urgent need, at the present and at all
times, of such a teacher. Socrates, in morals, is conceived by Mr. Grote
as the parallel of Bacon in physics. He exposed the loose, vague,
confused, and misleading character of the common notions of mankind on
the most familiar subjects. By apt interrogations, forcing the
interlocutors to become conscious of the want of precision in their own
ideas, he showed that the words in popular use on all moral subjects
(words which, because they are familiar, all persons fancy they
understand) in reality answer to no distinct and well-defined ideas; and
that the common notions, which those words serve to express, all require
to be reconsidered. This is exactly what Bacon showed to be the case
jinj respect to the phrases and notions commonly current on physical
subjects. It is the fashion of the present day to decry negative
dialectics; as if making men conscious of their ignorance were not the
first step—and an absolutely necessary one—towards inducing them to
acquire knowledge. “Opinio copiae,” says Bacon, “maxima causa inopiae
est.”10 The war which Bacon made upon confused general ideas, “notiones
temere a rebus abstractas,”11 was essentially negative, but it
constituted the epoch from which, alone, advancement in positive
knowledge became possible. It is to Bacon that we owe Newton and the
modern physical science. In like manner, Socrates, by convincing men of
their ignorance, and pointing out the conditions of knowledge,
originated the positive movement which produced Plato and Aristotle.
With them and their immediate disciples that movement ceased, and has
never yet been so effectually revived as to be permanent. The common
notions of the present time on moral and mental subjects are as
incapable of supporting the Socratic cross-examination as those of his
own age: they are, just as much, the wild fruits of the undisciplined
Edition: current; Page: [1164] understanding—of the “intellectus sibi
permissus,”12 as Bacon phrases it; rough generalizations of first
impressions, or consecrations of accidental feelings, without due
analysis or mental circumscription.h As the direct antagonist of such
unsifted general notions and impressions on moral subjects, Socrates
occupies an unique position in history; and the work which he did
requires to be done again, as the indispensable condition of that
intellectual renovation, without which the grand moral and social
improvements, to which mankind are now beginning to aspire, will be for
ever unattainable.


392.: THE CASE OF MARY ANN PARSONS [2]
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 26 MAR., 1850, PP. 4-5

See No. 389 for earlier comment on this case; the subsequent trial of
the Birds had been reported in “Assize Intelligence. Western
Circuit—Exeter, March 22,” Morning Chronicle, 25 Mar., p. 7, from which
the quotations are taken. This is the tenth of the joint articles on
injustice and cruelty by Harriet Taylor and Mill (for the background,
see No. 303). This unheaded third leader is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A leading article on the Bideford case, in the Morning
Chronicle of 26th March 1850. Very little of this was mine.”

(MacMinn, p. 73.)

the case of mary ann parsons, who died a cruel death from maltreatment,
at Buckland, near Bideford, in January last, has terminated in a more
complete frustration of public justice than, in our worst surmises, we
had imagined possible. The criminals, Robert and Sarah Bird, have not
been convicted of murder—nor of manslaughter—nor even of a common
assault. They have escaped totally unpunished—unpunished, except by
public execration, which, it is to be hoped, will cling to them the more
closely that they have not expiated their guilt by the retribution which
the law appoints for such malefactors, but which in this instance, as in
too many others, it has failed to inflict. Let any one who reads the
report of the trial which appeared in our paper of yesterday, judge
whether there can be the faintest shadow of doubt as to the
facts—whether the two prisoners will not carry to their graves the
merited designation of acquitted murderers. The worst features of the
case, as it appeared against them in the preliminary investigation, were
all confirmed, and more than confirmed, by the evidence on the trial.
Several witnesses swore to repeated acts of brutal maltreatment. Several
others swore to admissions of such acts by the female prisoner, both as
respected herself and her husband. The state in which the poor girl’s
body was found was sworn to by Mr. Turner, the surgeon who made the
post-mortem examination, in these clear and straightforward terms:

On the legs and thighs I saw several wounds, varying in extent, and
evidently inflicted Edition: current; Page: [1165] by some irregular or
rough weapon. It struck me to have been by a birch. There was a bruise
on the chest. The face was discoloured, and the forehead, and some
abscesses were on the arms and fingers. The skin over the bowels was
discoloured. On the left arm there was an abscess, and the skin
immediately round it was discoloured, as if it had been bruised some
time, perhaps a fortnight. The abscess had burst below the elbow. There
was another abscess just forming. The nails of the little and fore
finger were gone, apparently some time. The two middle finger nails were
also gone, apparently more recently, and in one the bone protruded. On
the right arm there was also an abscess that had also burst. On the
right hip there was a large slough. On the posterior part of the hips
were several wounds, apparently inflicted some time. They were covered
with plaster, and appeared to be old sores. Between the shoulders were
two trivial bruises. There was also a mark on the face, from the temple
down to the cheek. On removing the scalp I found another bruise on the
back of the head, with considerable extravasation of blood diffused
between the scalp and the skull.

Then, after stating that he observed congestion of the membranes of the
brain, and at the base of the brain extravasation of blood, and that he
“found the cause of death in the head,” Mr. Turner continued:

In my judgment, death was the result of the external injuries. I could
not form a judgment how that violence had been inflicted. I don’t think
the injuries I saw in the head were produced from falls. The condition
of the girl must have been extremely reduced before death, and the
powers of life weakened. The injuries I observed would have produced an
effect on the nervous system, which is connected with the brain.

Another medical witness, Mr. Edge, a surgeon to the hospital at Exeter,
“conceives that Mr. Turner is correct in the opinion that he formed, as
to the time of death, and the cause.”

After such evidence—unless the testimony was disbelieved, which it was
not—it seems incredible that the Judge (Mr. Justice Talfourd) should
have charged the jury for an acquittal. Every reader must be astonished
at such a course, and must be anxious to know how so extraordinary a
judgment came to be pronounced on such a state of facts. The
explanation, however, is instructive, by the illustration which it
affords of the state either of the law, or of the mind of this
Judge—certainly not one of the worst of its administrators. Though there
were statements and physical facts sufficient to convince the mind most
recalcitrant to evidence, that the death of the girl was the work of the
two prisoners, there was not, it seems, legal evidence to bring it home
to them. “The case,” in the opinion of the judge, “had failed.” But when
we see in what points it was considered to have failed, we cease to
wonder—or rather, our astonishment changes its object, and we wonder how
there should ever be legal evidence of a murder committed in the manner
in which these two culprits caused the death of their victim.

The grounds of acquittal were two; and which of them is the strangest it
would not be easy to decide. The first was, that although there was
superabundant evidence of brutality by the prisoners sufficient to cause
the frightful state of the corpse, it was not proved that anybody struck
the particular blow on the head to Edition: current; Page: [1166] which
the congestion of the brain, said to be the immediate cause of death,
was thought to be more especially owing. The second reason was, that
even if the blow had been struck by one of the prisoners, there was no
evidence “to fix it upon one of these parties more than the other.” But
it is by no means clear that, in the opinion of the medical witnesses,
the blow on the head was exclusively the fatal injury. Mr. Turner,
according to our report, “found the cause of death in the head”—meaning
the congestion; but he distinctly said, “In my judgment death was the
result of the external injuries.” “The injuries I observed”—being those
on the body generally—“would have produced an effect on the nervous
system, which is connected with the brain.” The other medical witness
professed an unqualifed agreement in Mr. Turner’s opinion. It would thus
appear that neither of these gentlemen ascribed the cerebral congestion
to any local injury to the head, but to general injuries, affecting the
brain not directly, but indirectly through “the nervous system.” Even
assuming, however (what, it is fair to say, some of the reports of the
trial appear to bear out),1 that death was more immediately caused by
that particular injury, among the many of which the sufferer bore the
hideous marks—that circumstance does not abate one iota from the moral
certainty of the prisoners’ guilt. They were proved to have been in the
habit of inflicting, up to nearly the time of the girl’s death,
cruelties quite equal to the one assumed to have caused it. There was no
direct proof that either of them struck that particular blow; but there
was not the smallest evidence accounting for it in any other way. It was
for them to rebut the presumption raised by their other brutalities. An
adequate cause had been shown for any result, however fatal, in their
daily treatment of their victim. On them lay the burden of disproving
the connection by proving the existence of some other cause for the
catastrophe. If a man were found murdered on the highway, his body
covered with wounds, some of which only were mortal, the assassins who
were proved to have fallen upon him, and to have inflicted some of those
wounds, would not be suffered to escape because no one could swear that
the particular wounds inflicted by them were the mortal ones. It would
be enough that they did wound him, that no other cause of death
appeared, and that he died.

With respect to the very nice and scrupulous doubt—as to which of the
two prisoners is answerable—it is easily disposed of. Both are
answerable. The guilt rests on both, until one of them can get rid of it
by throwing it exclusively on the other. If the atrocious acts—some one
or all of which destroyed the victim—had been proved only against one of
the prisoners, that one would justly have been made responsible for the
catastrophe. But those acts were proved against both, and against both
equally. Both, therefore, are accountable; just as is the case if a
person is found with a gang of robbers at the commission of a crime—it
is on himself that the burden rests of proving his non-participation in
their guilt.

Edition: current; Page: [1167]
Under the jurisprudence of Mr. Justice Talfourd, it is virtually
proclaimed to such people as Robert and Sarah Bird that there is
impunity for murder, on condition of their adopting the commonest
precautions. If the person to be murdered is an inmate of their house,
and under their power, they must be dull indeed if they cannot effect
their purpose without supplying those links of evidence for want of
which the death of Mary Ann Parsons goes unpunished. It matters not
though the whole neighbourhood testifies to daily cruelties more than
adequate to produce death. It matters not that the corpse excites
universal horror by its glaring manifestations of those cruelties. They
can surely contrive that no one shall be able to swear to the particular
wound inflicted on a particular day, or to prove that this wound was
given by one of the murderers, that by another—and the victim, who alone
knew, is not alive to tell. This is not justice. If it be law, which, in
opposition to a judge’s dictum, we do not pretend to decide, it is law
which cannot too soon be altered. When the law places any one—and that a
person of inferior physical strength—under the power of another, who may
be such a creature as these Birds, it exposes the individual to peculiar
risks, and ought, therefore, to guard him by peculiar precautions. What
is called the ordinary protection of law is not sufficient. The ordinary
protection of law is protection to those who can help themselves—who can
in general keep themselves out of harm’s way, or, at least, who can tell
their own story. The victims of domestic brutality cannot protect
themselves; and there is no protection for them, if, when death ensues,
and violence is proved sufficient to cause death, the prosecutors are
obliged to produce direct evidence connecting the death with the
brutality. It is on the accused that the burden of exculpating
themselves should in such cases rest. Death, and maltreatment sufficient
to cause death, are the sole facts of which positive evidence ought to
be required. Those to whom power over others is given, and who brutally
misuse that power, should be thus far held responsible for the safety of
those over whom they tyrannise. Otherwise there is no security even for
the lives of any of those who have the wretched and disgracefully common
lot of being in the power of a brute.2


393.: THE CASE OF SUSAN MOIR
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 29 MAR., 1850, P. 4

This article, quoting from “The Inquest on Mrs. Moir,” Morning
Chronicle, 28 Mar., p. 2, is the eleventh by Harriet Taylor and Mill on
injustice and cruelty (for background, see No. 303). This unheaded third
leader is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article on the
Coroner’s Inquest on Susan Moir, in the Morning Chronicle of 29th March
1850. A joint production.”

(MacMinn, p. 73.)

Edition: current; Page: [1168]
only three days have elapsed since we held up to public indignation the
frightful details of the Bideford abominations, and the scandal of an
acquittal, decisive of Mr. Justice Talfourd’s calibre both as a judge
and as a man.1 Already another case has presented itself, fully equal in
its atrocious features, and in which, unless the public look well to it,
similar impunity will probably be the result.

Our yesterday’s paper contained the Coroner’s inquest on Susan Moir,
wife of Alexander Moir, carrying on business as a baker at No. 24,
Brydges-street, Covent-garden. “When the sheet,” says our report, “with
which the remains were covered was thrown aside, an expression of horror
escaped all present, the body, from head to foot, being literally
covered with bruises and contused wounds of old and recent date.” The
surgeon, Mr. Watkins,2 deposed—“The integuments and muscles of the head
were contused in a manner I never saw before—in fact they were a perfect
jelly.” The following are the statements of the other witnesses:

The first witness, Mary Ann Bryant, a cousin of the deceased, said that
she

called upon her on Saturday last, about half-past one o’clock, when
deceased complained of having been very much ill-used by her husband.
Deceased begged witness to ask him to allow her to go to bed, as she had
been up all the previous night. She said to witness, “You might say to
him, let Susan go and lie down.” Witness did ask her husband, as
requested, but he refused to allow her to go to bed, and said she must
mind the shop. Witness remained with deceased until half-past three
o’clock, and during that interval her husband frequently boxed her ears
as hard as he could with his open hand, and once, when she got up to
serve a customer in the shop, he kicked her behind with great force,
because, as he said, she did not move quick enough. He requested witness
to examine her head, remarking that he knew he had hurt her. Witness did
so, and found her left ear and all that part of the head dreadfully
bruised. There were also cuts upon the head, and the hair was matted
with congealed blood that had issued from them. Witness told deceased’s
husband how much she was injured, but he did not appear to take any
notice of it.

About six the same afternoon, on returning to the house,

he asked her whether she had supplied certain customers; and she replied
that she had not; upon which he swore at her, and boxed her ears as hard
as he could. He then directed her to put some bread in the shop-window;
and while she was in the act of doing so she fell insensible on the
shop-floor. Witness ran towards her, and saw that the blood was spirting
from a wound in her temple. Witness then called out, “Oh, good God,
uncle; cousin is in a fit—pick her up.” He replied that he would not.
Deceased presently revived a little, and walked with witness into the
back parlour. While doing so, she said, “I am in a fit, and a very bad
fit. Don’t leave me, for God’s sake—don’t leave me, Mary Ann.” These
were the last words she ever uttered. Witness wished to put her to bed,
but her husband said she should never go into a bed of his again.
Deceased was then standing over a sink; and presently her strength
appeared to fail, and she sank down upon the floor with her head resting
on the kitchen step.

Edition: current; Page: [1169]
She never rallied, and died on the following Monday morning.

John Johnson, a journeyman baker in this wretch’s employment, said that
on Tuesday night, soon after eleven o’clock,

he heard a great noise overhead, as of two persons quarrelling, and a
cry of distress from the deceased woman. The noise was similar to that
of one person dragging another across the room, and it continued up to
three o’clock to such an extent that witness could not get any sleep.
Witness did not hear any words distinctly, but he could tell that his
master was speaking in a very ferocious manner. On the Saturday
afternoon witness saw his master knock deceased about, and shortly
afterwards she fell down insensible. Deceased’s cousin asked witness to
assist in raising her, but his master would not allow him. He said, “D—n
her, let her get up herself.”

Amelia Meredes, who had lodged in the house for the last two months,

had frequently seen deceased with black eyes in that time; and on
Saturday, about five o’clock, during a dreadful noise of quarrelling,
she came down stairs into the passage, and while there heard deceased
scream out and cry, “Oh, oh! you’ll kill me, you’ll kill me!” Her
husband replied, “Yes, I will kill you. I’ll murder you before I have
done with you.” Witness also heard deceased’s little boy call out at the
same time, “You’ll kill my mother, father.”

It was after such evidence as this that the Coroner’s jury brought in a
verdict of manslaughter! And were the ruffian to be tried (as he has
been committed) on this verdict, and not on a bill of indictment sent
before the grand jury, he would be tried for manslaughter only, and not
for murder! We have, however, much satisfaction in perceiving, from the
result of the examination which took place at Bow-street yesterday,3
that public justice will be spared this indescribably outrageous insult;
and that, despite the enormous folly and heartlessness of the fifteen
“highly respectable” jurymen, the prisoner will be put on his trial for
the capital offence.4

To prevent justice from being foiled in instances like these ought ever
to be the primary object of all who have any power in the case. The
parish officers, or any other public authority within whose competence
it is to see that the most horrible crimes do not escape unpunished, are
under a deep responsibility if they do not, when others fail in their
duty, indict such culprits for murder. And when the case is not taken up
by those who are most bound to do so, a public subscription ought to
enable the relatives or friends of the unfortunate victim to take the
proper means of invoking condign punishment on the murderer.

It is necessary that it should be, once for all, understood by juries
that to beat a human being to death is not manslaughter, but murder. If
it were otherwise, the Edition: current; Page: [1170] famous Mrs.
Brownrigg was hanged contrary to law.5 What she was convicted of was a
series of brutalities exactly resembling this, and the Bideford case.
And she would most assuredly have been acquitted had she been tried
before Mr. Justice Talfourd. He would have said that there had been
“chastisement of which he did not approve,” but that there was no proof
that the death of the victim was caused by the “chastisement.”6

In the Brydges-street case it is in evidence that the prisoner actually,
and at the very time, said to the unhappy victim that he would murder
her; and though this, or any other ruffianly speech under such
circumstances, does not amount to proof that the speaker meant the full
import of his words, experience shows what interpretation would have
been put upon them if the case had been reversed, and if the woman had
been charged with killing the man. If the husband had died in
circumstances similar to the case of Ann Merrett,7 and such a speech
could have been proved to have been uttered by the wife—no matter under
what circumstances of just exasperation—she would not have had a chance
to escape a capital conviction.

Is it because juries are composed of husbands in a low rank of life,
that men who kill their wives almost invariably escape—wives who kill
their husbands, never? How long will such a state of things be permitted
to continue?


394.: QUESTIONABLE CHARITY
 SUNDAY TIMES, 19 MAY, 1850, P. 2

This letter to the editor was introduced by an editorial comment: “A
correspondent, in the following letter, finds fault with our strictures,
under the above heading, upon an institution lately opened in
Marylebone, by certain charitable ladies, for the instruction of young
friendless and poor children, in needle work and other pursuits
calculated to enable them to procure an honest livelihood.” The
paragraph Mill quotes was headed “Questionable Charity,” Sunday Times, 5
May, p. 2. The letter was the twelfth newspaper contribution jointly
authored by Harriet Taylor and Mill (for background, see No. 303), and
their first to appear in the Sunday Times. Headed as title, it is
described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter signed D in the Sunday
Times of 19th May 1850, commenting on a paragraph in that paper headed
‘Questionable Charity.’ A joint production.”

(MacMinn, p. 74.)

mr. editor,—

Agreeing cordially with many of the sentiments expressed in your journal
of Sunday, May 5, and with much of the tone and spirit of your Edition:
current; Page: [1171] paper generally, I regret to see one paragraph in
which, as it appears to me, you not only give blame where praise is
deserved, but countenance erroneous opinions on such important subjects
as the direction of charity and the employment of labour. The following
is the passage:

In Marylebone, a society of ladies has formed a female school for the
purpose, as they state, of instructing the poor in such branches of
useful knowledge as are calculated to enable them, in after life, to
gain a honest livelihood. So far, excellent. The object is laudible, but
is greatly defeated by the very founders of this charitable institution,
who, in order to save the money which they should otherwise pay for the
making of their apparel, bring that apparel to the school, and get it
made free of cost by the children. Thus in the name, and under the guise
of charity, they unintentionally inflict a gross injustice, rob honest
industry of its fair reward, and drive to the workhouse or to
prostitution the industrious and deserving female, who is willing to
toil from the rising to the setting sun, and even half the night during
the whole week, for a pittance scarcely sufficient to keep body and soul
together.

I know nothing of the facts, and assume them to be as here stated. What
I object to is the doctrine that, whenever, in return for charitable
assistance, the recipients are required to do anything useful, to
perform any productive labour which any other persons might be paid to
do, an injustice is done to those other persons, and a wrong to the
world at large.

Your objection, if good at all, is good against every possible
employment of labour. You cannot employ anybody without enabling it to
be said that you prevent yourself from employing somebody else. If it is
wrong to employ children, because of taking employment from needlewomen,
by the same reasoning to employ one needlewoman, is taking employment
from another. If it is wrong to employ children in needlework, instead
of employing needlewomen, it must be wrong to teach the children
needlework, for the express purpose of enabling them “in after life to
gain an honest livelihood” by practising needlework, and so competing
with the needlewomen.

You will, perhaps, say that, at all events, the assistance so conferred
is no longer charity, but an ordinary commercial transaction. I contend,
on the contrary, that charity is much more charity, because much more
useful when conferred in this way. The best kind of relief or assistance
is that for which, as far as the case admits, a return is required to be
made in useful labour. Especially is this the case when the very object
in view is to train up children to gain their living by labour. If they
are to be taught needlework they must be made to do needlework, and
would it be an improvement in their education that it should be useless
needlework, as paupers have been employed to dig holes and fill them up
again, for fear of displacing other labour?

But there is another aspect of the matter which is of still wider
application. You seem to think that if you pay labourers to do nothing
at all, or nothing useful, you do not take away employment from any one,
but that you do so if you require a return in productive industry. The
truth, I apprehend, is the very Edition: current; Page: [1172] opposite.
It is by what you give to one person that you diminish your means of
employing others; not by the work you make him do in return; on the
contrary, making him work in return is the only mode by which, while you
give to him, you can still have undiminished means of employing others.
If what you have given to a labourer comes back in the value of that
which he produces, or, what amounts to the same thing, in the saving of
an equal sum of money, which you must otherwise have expended at a shop,
you have conferred the benefit on him, and yet have as much money in
your possession to make purchases, or employ labourers with, as if you
had not given him anything. I do not mean to say that this money will
find its way to the same shops, or the same labourers, but it will be
spent at other shops, or on other labourers; if there is a disadvantage
to some people, there is an advantage to others, and no detriment to the
labouring class on the whole.

Objections are sometimes made, on similar erroneous grounds, to the
introduction of useful labour into prisons—although useful labour is the
only production of good prison discipline, and of the reformation of
criminals—for want of considering, that since the prisoners must at any
rate be supported, whatever they cause to be withdrawn from the support
of honest labour is equally withdrawn, whether the prisoners work or
not; while, by making them work, the value, or part of it, is got back,
and may be used in giving employment to other labourers.

This subject, sir, will amply repay a more attentive consideration than,
as it seems to me, the writer of the paragraph in your last Sunday’s
paper has yet given to it, and if what I have written should induce him
to meditate further on things so closely connected with many of the
important questions which come under the notice of journalists, I shall
feel that I have been of some use.

D.1


395.: THE LAW OF ASSAULT
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 31 MAY, 1850, P. 4

This article is the thirteenth by Harriet Taylor and Mill on injustice
and cruelty (for background, see No. 303). An unheaded third leader, it
is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article in the Morning
Chronicle of 31st May 1850 (except the second sentence) on the state of
the law of assault. Very little of this article was mine.”

(MacMinn, p. 75.)

we have on former occasions pointed out the defective state of the law
and of its administration with respect to crimes of personal violence,
and we have Edition: current; Page: [1173] especially commented on the
absence of protection for women and young persons, and for all those who
are under the power of others, against domestic brutality. The case on
which the Court of Queen’s Bench pronounced judgment yesterday,1
exceptional as it is in some material respects—more particularly as
regards the apparent absence of habitual or deliberate cruelty on the
part of the defendant—recalls our attention to this very important
subject; and we proceed to offer some further remarks on the general
question of the social and legal wrongs affecting the most helpless
portion of the community.

It is evident to all who take any pains to read the indications of the
feelings of the populace, that they are impressed with the belief of
their having a right to inflict almost any amount of corporal violence
upon their wife or their children. That any one should claim to
interfere with this supposed right, causes them unaffected surprise. Is
it not their wife or child? Are they not entitled to do as they will
with their own?2 These phrases are not, to their apprehension,
metaphorical. The shoes on their feet, or the cudgel in their hand—the
horse or ass that carries their burdens, and that dies a lingering death
under their cruelties—the wife and children—all are “theirs,” and all in
the same sense. They have the same right, in their own opinion, over
their human as over their inanimate property. Doubtless they are aware
that they are not at liberty to inflict death; but when they actually do
so, and find that they are to be tried for murder, they seem to receive
the information with a kind of stolid astonishment; and it may well
appear to them anomalous that a creature is given up to their power to
be kicked or beaten, at the peril of life, as often as temper or
intoxication may prompt—and yet that, on some one day when they have
done no worse than they had done hundreds of times before, they are told
that they are liable to be hanged. Not that they ever are hanged for
these enormities, even though death ensue. If they are tried at all
(which in general they are not), the jury are not convinced that they
intended death, and they consequently escape with a verdict of
manslaughter. This interpretation of the law had the sanction of Mr.
Baron Alderson, in the recent case of Alexander Moir.3 If it be a
correct interpretation, the law is, in this matter, grossly
inconsistent; for many acts, venial in comparison with Moir’s, are held
by law to be murder when death ensues as an unintended consequence. “If
one intends,” says Blackstone, “to do another felony, and undesignedly
kills a man, this is murder.” If any one kills an officer of justice, or
even a private person, who is endeavouring to suppress an affray or to
apprehend a felon, it is murder. “It were endless,” continues
Blackstone, “to go through all the cases of homicide which have been
adjudged either expressly or impliedly malicious,” and which are,
therefore, legally regarded as murder.4 Edition: current; Page: [1174]
According to Mr. Baron Alderson, a wretch like Moir is less criminal in
the eye of the law than a person who, intending only to take the
property of another, undesignedly causes death. But surely a man who,
though he does not intend to kill, perpetrates such ruffian-like
maltreatment that death is a natural consequence, commits an offence
that is at least equal in depravity to most cases of murder.

Some good would be done, if, even in this extreme case, it were felt
that there is no immunity for domestic ruffianism, and that the law has
as much severity for the man who kills those whom he is peculiarly bound
to protect, as it has for the one whose victim had no claims on him save
those inherent in humanity. But, though even this would be some
improvement, much more is required. It would be but a feeble restraint
on habitual brutality to make the offender responsible for an extreme
consequence which may or may not happen, and which may or may not be
capable of being traced to its real cause. The arm of the law should be
made to reach the tyranny of bodily strength in every instance in which
it comes to light. The atrocious cases now summarily disposed of by
magistrates with a forty-shilling fine or two months’ imprisonment,
should be tried with judicial solemnity in the courts which try other
grave offences, and should be visited with a just gradation of
penalties, rising to the highest secondary punishment. Whatever
additional legislation is required for this purpose should be provided.
Legislation is also needed to disabuse the people of false notions of
their legal rights. At present it is the universal belief of the
labouring class, that the law permits them to beat their wives—and the
wives themselves share the general error. We assume that it is an error.
We take for granted, that the old saw, which most people have heard—if
it ever was law in the savage times of our ancestors—has long been
obsolete.5 If there be any doubt of this, there is the more reason why
there should, without delay, be an authoritative termination to the
doubt. There should be a declaratory Act, distinctly setting forth that
it is not lawful for a man to strike his wife, any more than to strike
his brother or his father. This would be merely doing what was done by
the first settlers of New England. The seventeenth century was not
remarkable for the mildness of its manners, nor were the Puritans by any
means moderate in their notions of family discipline and authority.
Their standard of social morals was taken from the Old Testament and the
Patriarchs, not from Christ and the Sermon on the Mount.6 Yet the
fundamental regulations of the first Puritan colonists in New England,
as we read them in the latest published history of the United States,
formally abrogated that provision, or reputed provision, of the common
law of England, which permitted men to beat their wives.7 We hope that
it is not too much to Edition: current; Page: [1175] expect from the
English Legislature now, the same amount of justice and humanity which
was shown by its cast-out children two hundred years ago. It seems
almost inconceivable that the smallest blow from a man to a man should
be by law a criminal offence, and yet that it should not be—or should
not be known to be—unlawful for a man to strike a woman.

There is yet another feature in the law and in its administration,
connected with this subject, which, we would fain hope, need only be
pointed out to be irrevocably condemned by public opinion. At present,
no amount of brutal violence, nor even of deliberate cruelty, although
judicially proved, has the legal effect of depriving the criminal of the
power which he has misused. A man is convicted and imprisoned for the
horrible maltreatment of his wife—and yet, when his imprisonment
expires, the victim is again delivered into his hands, to suffer
everything which brutality infuriated by revenge, or malignity made more
cautious by detection, may inflict. Any words which might be used to
characterize such a state of the law could hardly strengthen the
impression which ought to be made by the simple knowledge of it. Apart
from all that is revolting in the fact itself, and viewing the question
in the coldest manner as one of mere legislative expediency, it is
impossible to expect that these domestic atrocities should ever attain
judicial publicity except by accident, when such are the consequences
which the sufferers have to expect from complaining. Accordingly, these
cases are hardly ever made known by the injured parties themselves; and
if they happen to be brought before a magistrate or a criminal court by
some one who casually becomes cognizant of them, the charge continually
breaks down from the impossibility of inducing the trembling victim to
speak the truth with sufficient plainness to procure a conviction, or to
adhere to it when it has been spoken in the first instance.

It is a dictate of common sense—recognised and acted upon by the laws of
almost all countries—that legal rights may be either suspended or
forfeited for a certain amount of judicially proved misuse. If this is a
reasonable and proper provision with regard to legal rights generally,
it is so, above all, with respect to the powers which any one is allowed
to exercise over the persons of human beings. The law confers every such
power on the presumption (however fallacious) that it will be exerted
for the good of those over whom it is given, and it cannot be justified
except on that presumption. That there should be a slavery in civilized
life, from which the most savage maltreatment, judicially proved, cannot
liberate the victim, would be scarcely credible, if it were not
notoriously true; and such a state of things cannot, we hope, be much
longer tolerated, unless existing laws are deemed more sacred than the
primary ends for which all laws profess to exist.

Edition: current; Page: [1176]
This evil might be removed without interfering with existing
institutions on any other point, or raising discussion on any more
general question. All that would be requisite is a short Act of
Parliament, providing that judicial conviction of gross maltreatment
should free the victim from the obligation of living with the oppressor,
and from all compulsory subjection to his power—leaving him under the
same legal obligation as before of affording the sufferer the means of
support, if the circumstances of the case require it. We earnestly
recommend this subject to the attention of those philanthropists who
desire to signalize themselves by an eminently useful contribution to
the work of mitigating the sufferings and raising the moral condition of
the poor and the dependent.


396.: PUNISHMENT OF CHILDREN
 SUNDAY TIMES, 2 JUNE, 1850, P. 2

Edward Vaughan Hyde Kenealy (1819-80) was tried before Lord Campbell for
assaulting his illegitimate six-year-old child, Edward Hyde, on 11 May,
1850. See “Law Intelligence. Court of Queen’s Bench—Saturday. The Queen
v. Kenealy, Esq.,” Standard, 13 May, 1850, p. 7, from which the
quotations are taken. Kenealy, who had acknowledged the child and taken
responsibility for rearing him, was sentenced to imprisonment for only
one month; the punishment was not decreed until 30 May (The Times, 31
May, p. 7). This article, the fourteenth by Harriet Taylor and Mill on
injustice and cruelty (for background, see No. 303), is the seventh
leader in the “Political Enquirer,” headed as title. It is described in
Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article in the Sunday Times of 2nd
June 1850, headed ‘Punishment of Children.’ Very little of this article
was mine.”

(MacMinn, p. 75.)

the case of edward kenealy, a man holding the rank of a barrister, who
has been convicted by the Court of Queen’s Bench of an assault on his
illegitimate child, a boy six years old, cannot be allowed to pass
without comment. The facts of the case, disgusting though they be, are
such as we are accustomed to see in every day’s newspaper, and no
wonder, while, not police magistrates only, but a Chief Justice, like
Lord Campbell in the present case, treats ferocious personal violence as
if it were the merest peccadillo—a pardonable overstepping of the strict
limits of the law, hardly deserving any moral blame. We shall first
quote the evidence of the surgeon:1

I saw the child on the day after it was found. I found a mark round the
front and sides of the neck, but not on the back part of the neck. On
the front of the throat the skin had been removed by pressure. Scabbing
had taken place in some portion. Others were undergoing suppuration,
that had been produced by pressure, or some substance rubbing. The whole
of the back, from the shoulders to the lower part of the posteriors, was
covered with Edition: current; Page: [1177] bruises. They were long in
form, as if inflicted by castigation, and were in different states of
inflammation. From the posteriors to the ankles there were marks of the
same castigation. Great violence must have been used. From the shoulders
to the hands there was evidence of the same kind of treatment, and
apparently by the same instrument—by a rod or cane.

The following were Lord Campbell’s remarks:

There must be a verdict of guilty against the defendant. His
chastisement of the child, for some unaccountable reason, had been
infinitely beyond moderation. Though there was no doubt that a parent
had a right to correct a child, and that the defendant here seemed to
have had the welfare of the child in view, still, after the evidence of
the surgeon, it was clear that he had done what the law did not justify.
It was impossible to say that this was moderate chastisement of a child
six years old.

It will hardly be believed, after such evidence, and after such an
opinion given by himself on the evidence, that Lord Campbell, in his
address to the jury, could say—

He rejoiced that the whole truth had come out, and that no serious stain
would attach to the character of Mr. Kenealy, who appeared to have taken
some care of this child, which was his illegitimate child, and to have
bestowed pains upon it in giving it an education. Was not the charge
here made out? The defendant, though not the legitimate father of the
child, was its parent by the law of nature, and was entitled, under the
circumstances of its living with him, to all the authority and rights of
a father. Still, in exercising those rights in the way of punishment of
the child, he was bound to observe moderation. The jurors would declare
whether, with a good conscience, they could say that he had done so; for
if not, as immoderate punishment could not be justified in law, he must
be found guilty.

Whether because the offender’s station in life was nearer than usual to
his own, or from a total absence of moral sense in the mind of the
judge, we know not, but his address is almost an apology to the prisoner
for convicting him; and he tells the offender—he, the guardian and
vindicator of the law, declares to a man who, in his own showing, has
broken the law, by such treatment of a child of tender years as the
surgeon’s evidence discloses, that “no serious stain would attach to his
character,” and this because the poor infant said in his evidence that
the prisoner kissed and gave him playthings and toys, and taught him “to
spell, and read, and say his prayers,” as if the most brutal parents in
anything like Mr. Kenealy’s rank of life did not do such things as
these. Lord Campbell would seem to have adopted the doctrine of Mr.
Whately,2 the prisoner’s counsel, who thought it “a thing to be
applauded,” in the defendant, “that he did not, like many other people,
leave his illegitimate child to poverty and misery.”

Why does not the unbrutal part of the public—the part which does not
sympathise with cruelty, rouse itself and demand of the legislature how
much longer the flogging of children shall be sanctioned by law? On the
flogging of grown-up persons public opinion is made up. That practice,
at last, by force of Edition: current; Page: [1178] general feeling
against the vehement remonstrances of those who had the power of
inflicting the brutality, has been almost abolished.3 But it is assumed,
and goes uncontradicted, that a punishment which is brutalising and
degrading to grown men is quite fit and proper for helpless infancy;
unfit to be inflicted, according to prescribed rules, by men called
judges, after solemn inquiry and in the full light of publicity, but,
“by the law of nature” (as Lord Campbell says), quite proper to be
administered at discretion by men called fathers in the secrecy of their
own houses, subject, when some peculiarly atrocious case accidentally
comes to light, to a gentle admonition. It is only the other day that
the House of Commons decided, after a long debate, that boys might be
scourged at the discretion of two magistrates, but that men might not;
the distinction, it appeared, between men and boys being the difference
between thirteen years and fourteen.4 It is as possible to govern
children without the aid of the lash as grown persons. It is even much
easier; their bad habits, if they have been allowed to acquire any, not
being deeply rooted. A parent or teacher who cannot rule without the
lash shows as much incapacity as brutality. There is no difference of
nature between grown persons and boys, that what is most deeply
degrading to the character of the one should not be so to the other. If
the boy has no consciousness of his degradation the worse for him: it is
a proof that his character is irreclaimably imbued with it. Mr. Whately
said that they had all—judge, jury, and counsel—been flogged in their
boyhood, and were much the better for it. This merely proves that Mr.
Whately’s sense of degradation depends, not on the fact, but on other
people’s opinion, and that nothing is revolting to him which is legal
and customary. Take any naturally sensitive boy, who has been habitually
flogged, and one who has never suffered that indignity, compare them,
observe the difference in self-respect, and in all that depends on
self-respect, which will mark those two human beings throughout life? On
a boy of a dull, hard nature, its effect is to render him ten times
harder than he would be without it—to qualify and prepare him for being
a bully and a tyrant. He will feel none of that respect for the
personality of other human beings which has not been shown towards his
own. The object of his respect will be power. He will crouch to power in
others, and will have nothing in his own nature to prevent him from
trampling on those whom he has power over. If he does not do so, it will
be from nothing better than fear of opinion or fear of punishment.

Edition: current; Page: [1179]


397.: CONSTRAINTS OF COMMUNISM
 LEADER, 3 AUG., 1850, P. 447

In the previous issue of the Leader, 27 July, p. 416, over the signature
“Ion,” appeared “One of the Consequences Considered,” by George Jacob
Holyoake, the paper’s manager. This response, which was Mill’s first
contribution to the Leader, appeared in the regular “Open Council”
section, which was introduced by the editorial comment: “In this
department, as all opinions, however extreme, are allowed an expression,
the editor necessarily holds himself responsible for none.” The letter
is dated “Aug. 1, 1850,” and headed “Constraints of Communism,” though
the entry in Mill’s bibliography says: “A letter signed D. and
(improperly) headed ‘Restraints of Communism’ in the Leader of 3d August
1850”

(MacMinn, p. 75).

sir,—

A correspondent of your last week’s paper, writing in defence of what he
calls “associative views,” meaning, I suppose, the organization of
industry on the communistic principle, employs himself in combating
people who, he says, find fault with communism, because “the harmony and
competence likely to result” are supposed to be “so overwhelming that a
surfeit of enjoyment is dreaded;” and this absurdity he attributes to “a
recent work” called Principles of Political Economy,1 which, he says,
“foreshadowed the inanity and monotony which must supervene when the
spur of animal want was conquered and withdrawn.” Your correspondent has
misunderstood the argument in the Political Economy. No such notion is
there to be found as that “the sharp pangs of hunger” are necessary to
prevent life from being inane and monotonous. So far is this from the
truth, that the drudgery to which hunger, and the fear of hunger,
condemn the great mass of mankind, is the chief cause which makes their
lives inane and monotonous. If communism, or what is generally called by
that name, would make life a dull routine, it is not because it would
make everybody comfortable. When the rich are ennuyés it is not because
they are “above the fear of want,” it is generally because they are not
“above the fear” of other people’s opinions. They do not cultivate and
follow opinions, preferences, or tastes of their own, nor live otherwise
than in the manner appointed by the world for persons of their class.
Their lives are inane and monotonous because (in short) they are not
free, because though able to live as pleases themselves, their minds are
bent to an external yoke. Now, it is this bondage which I am Edition:
current; Page: [1180] afraid of in the coöperative communities. I fear
that the yoke of conformity would be made heavier instead of lighter;
that people would be compelled to live as it pleased others, not as it
pleased themselves; that their lives would be placed under rules, the
same for all, prescribed by the majority; and that there would be no
escape, no independence of action left to any one, since all must be
members of one or another community. It is this which, as is contended
in the Political Economy, would make life monotonous; not freedom from
want, which is a good in every sense of the word, and which might be
ensured to all who are born, without obliging them to merge their
separate as well as their working existence in a community. No order of
society can be in my estimation desirable unless grounded on the maxim,
that no man or woman is accountable to others for any conduct by which
others are not injured or damaged.

D.


398.: STABILITY OF SOCIETY
 LEADER, 17 AUG., 1850, P. 494

Mill here comments on W. Thomas, “Speaking Out,” Leader, 13 July, 1850,
pp. 374-5, from which the first set of quotations is taken. This letter
to the editor, like No. 397, appeared in the “Open Council” section. It
is dated 14 Aug., 1850, and headed as title. The entry in Mill’s
bibliography reads: “A letter signed C. and headed ‘Stability of
Society’ in the Leader of 17th August 1850”

(MacMinn, p. 75).

sir,—

Your “Open Council,” I presume, is an arena for the discussion, not
merely of opinions, but of modes of arguing; and few things require
discussion more. Availing myself of this liberty, I will put a few
questions to one of your correspondents (signing himself W. Thomas) who
is a very active questioner of others, and is much dissatisfied that
nobody is willing to be “plain” and “precise.” Mr. Thomas stands up for
the indissolubility of the marriage contract for the following plain and
precise reason: “The stability of society rests upon the permanence of
the marriage tie; loosen that, and society is on a sandbank.” These he
thinks threatening words, since he puts them in italics. I ask, what he
intends to be understood by them. “The stability of society” is an
expression I have often heard before; but I cannot say I have ever been
instructed what it meant. Indeed, I have remarked that it is mostly used
by people who are not in the habit of attaching any very particular
meaning to what they say. If the foundations of a house give way, the
house falls, and there is no longer a house. What is it that happens if
society falls? And what is this thing called “society” that requires to
be protected from falling? Has it anything to do with you, and me, and
the remainder of the men and women in the world? Does it mean the men
and women themselves? If so, what is meant by the stability of the men
and Edition: current; Page: [1181] women? If it does not mean the men
and women, does it mean anything belonging to them? And if so, what? And
what is the precise nature of the mischief to be apprehended in case
this something, I know not what, should come upon a “sandbank”? When a
ship comes upon a sandbank, I know what happens; the ship breaks to
pieces and the passengers are drowned. I want to have it made equally
clear to me what would happen if, in consequence of permitting facility
of divorce, “society” should, as Mr. Thomas says it will, come upon a
sandbank.

I am the more desirous to be enlightened on this matter as I cannot call
to mind any great improvement in human affairs, or the eradication of
any deep-rooted and long-standing evil, which was not, at the time when
it happened, represented as subverting the foundations of society. The
abolition of slavery; what a laying prostrate of the whole fabric of
society was there! There was a time when even the boldest speculators
were afraid to entertain such an idea. The destruction of the temples
and altars of the old divinities, by the introduction of Christianity,
was, according to the gravest people, the demolition of society
altogether. The Reformation! another dreadful blow to the stability of
society. The Revolution of 1688, which expelled God’s anointed and set
up the people’s delegate;1 nay, the Reform Bill, and even Catholic
emancipation, all made society crack and totter. Cheap newspapers,
teaching the people to read; this last was a thing after which, we were
told by many people, society could not much longer exist. A Turk thinks,
or used to think (for even Turks are wiser now-a-days), that society
would be on a sandbank if women were suffered to walk about the streets
with their faces uncovered. Taught by these and many similar examples, I
look upon this expression of loosening the foundations of society,
unless a person tells in unambiguous terms what he means by it, as a
mere bugbear to frighten imbeciles with. The utmost it can mean is, that
the thing so characterized would be a great change—of some sort; which
change may either be for the better or for the worse. I am one who
thinks that not only divorce, but great changes in most matters are
needed; and I confidently hope for many more as complete subversions of
the foundations of “society” as were made by Christianity, the
Reformation, and the enfranchisement of the slave.

I cannot conclude without a word or two on the naïve selfishness of
another letter, in the same number of your paper and on the same
question, but on the contrary side of it, in favour of Divorce. The
writer shows the most unaffected unconsciousness that anybody has an
interest in the matter except the man, whom he purposes to liberate from
the consequences of an “act of youthful folly or inexperience.”2 Not a
word of the woman, who is in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred the
chief sufferer, as is inevitable so long as the law gives all the power
Edition: current; Page: [1182] to the man; and on whose account, far
more than even on that of the man, it is necessary that the yoke should
be lightened. But this entire ignoring of women, as if their claim to
the same rights as the other half of mankind were not even worth
mentioning, stares one in the face from every report of a speech, every
column of a newspaper. In your paper of the 27th ultimo, there is a long
letter signed Homo, claiming the “right of the suffrage” as justly
belonging to every man, while there is not one line of his argument
which would not be exactly as applicable if “woman” were read instead of
“man;” yet the thought never appears to occur to him.3 In a Conservative
this would be intelligible—monopoly, exclusion, privilege, is his
general rule; but in one who demands the suffrage on the ground of
abstract right, it is an odious dereliction of principle, or an evidence
of intellectual incompetence. While the majority of men are excluded,
the insult to women of their exclusion as a class is less obvious. But
even the present capricious distribution of the franchise has more
semblance of justice and rationality than a rule admitting all men to
the suffrage and denying it to all women.

C.


399.: RELIGIOUS SCEPTICS
 UNPUBLISHED LETTER TO THE WEEKLY DISPATCH [1 FEB., 1851]

The MS draft, Brotherton Library, Leeds, bears a note in Mill’s hand:
“left at the office 1st Feb. 1851.” The “office” was that of the Weekly
Dispatch, a Sunday paper, in which appeared the article to which Mill is
objecting, “The Round of the Clerical Circle,” 26 Jan., p. 49, from
which the quotations are taken. Being unpublished, the letter is not
listed in Mill’s bibliography.

sir,—

I cannot remain quite silent on the unjust and unfounded attacks made by
the Dispatch on those whom it calls by the old-fashioned appellation of
sceptics. In the first article of the number for January 26th, there is
a charge against all who hold merely negative opinions on religion, of
being “Epicureans” who “take the world as they find it”—of “believing in
nothing,” being “earnest in nothing,” being “merely a speculative,
disquisitive, logical, thinking machine.” Whoever wrote these
accusations, believing them to be true, is as ignorant of life and the
world, and of the opinions of instructed persons in the present age, as
a Church of England parson. I affirm that nearly all the persons I have
known who were, and are, eminently distinguished by a passion for the
good of mankind, hold the opinions respecting religion which your
article stigmatizes, that is, they Edition: current; Page: [1183] think
that nothing can be known on the subject. The very phrase “believing
nothing” as a synonyme for believing no religious creed, as if nothing
were true or false, right or wrong, except with reference to some theory
of creation, is one of the calumnies of shortsighted and ignorant
intolerance. But your writer, like other heretics, must have a
scapegoat, to whom to pass on the slanders thrown upon themselves, and
be able to say to the bigots, It is not I, it is my brother. According
to him, those who pull down one positive religion, if it is to put up
another, however slight and flimsy, are heroes, but if they see no
sufficient evidence for any belief as to the origin and purpose of the
world, and will not succumb to the vulgar by professing any, against
them you indorse the accusations of the orthodox. The smallest rag of
dogmatic religion is enough, in the opinion of its professors, to
entitle them to call themselves infinitely higher and worthier than
those who profess no dogmatic belief. But as all my own experience and
observation lead me to an exactly opposite conclusion, I strenuously
deny the accusation in the Dispatch, and charge the writer of it with
bearing false witness against his neighbour.1

J.S.M.


400.: WIFE MURDER
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 28 AUG., 1851, P. 4

This is the fifteenth newspaper article on injustice and cruelty by
Harriet Taylor Mill and J.S. Mill, who had married in April 1851; for
the background, see No. 303. An unheaded second leader, it is described
in Mill’s bibliography as “A leading article in the Morning Chronicle of
August 28th 1851, on some cases of wife murder. This, like all my
newspaper articles on similar subjects, and most of my articles on all
subjects, was a joint production with my wife.”

(MacMinn, p. 76.)

in his recent charge to the grand jury at the opening of the Central
Criminal Court, the Recorder said—

He was sorry that he could not congratulate them on the lightness of the
calendar; for, although it did not contain any charge of murder, yet he
was sorry to see that there were several charges of manslaughter, and
also a great number of cases of personal violence; and it was very much
to be regretted that, in a great majority of the cases, the violence was
committed by men upon the persons of those whom they were bound to love
and protect—namely, upon their wives.1

Edition: current; Page: [1184]
It is well that Mr. Wortley should have said thus much—little though it
was—on this disgraceful subject; and it is to be hoped that the feelings
which dictated his brief remarks will still be in operation when, in the
course of the next few days, it may become his duty to pass sentence on
cases of this description. But he need not have confined his observation
to the present sessions; for every sessions, every assizes, afford proof
of the lamentable prevalence of this class of crimes, and of the
impunity, or next to impunity, with which they are passed by. Within
these few days we have recorded, almost simultaneously, four cases of
men tried, or committed for trial, on the charge of killing their wives;
and among these the case of Edmund Curtis stood conspicuous, both in
atrocity and in the flagrant inadequacy of the punishment.2 The wife, an
industrious woman, had passed the day in working as a charwoman, to earn
money for the husband. In the evening, according to the testimony of the
woman for whom she worked, he came to the house, and the wife

spoke to him, desiring him to come home. He refused. She said his place
was at home, and he said, “So is yours.” They then both left the room.
He was sober. After they left the house—about three minutes after—I
heard a violent shriek. I went out, and saw her lying across a low iron
railing in my garden. He had hold of her over the left shoulder with his
right hand, and was striking her on the head with his clenched fist.
When I got out the shriek had ceased. I heard no noise after. I told him
he would kill her, if he had not done so, and desired him to loose her.
He did not do so. I called out William Kirkland, who pulled him from
her, and she fell on her left side on the ground, apparently lifeless. I
told him he had killed her. I called assistance. She was lifted up and
put in a chair. She fetched three sighs and died.3

These were the facts; and now for Mr. Baron Martin and his judgment. He
said that nothing could justify a man in striking a woman; that the
prisoner “indulged in a very violent degree of passion,” but that he
could “well believe” that he “did not mean to kill her;” that “no doubt,
when this result occurred,” he was “sincerely sorry for it;” and that,
“considering all the circumstances,” the “justice of the case” would be
satisfied by imprisoning him for six months with hard labour!4 Such are
the judgments which are to protect all the women of the country against
domestic ruffianism; and such is the caprice which presides over
Edition: current; Page: [1185] the apportionment of penalties in English
criminal justice. The day afterwards, in a case not more atrocious, the
culprit was sentenced by the same judge to transportation for life.5 If
Curtis had killed, in any similar manner, some other man’s wife instead
of his own—instead of the woman whom, as Mr. Wortley said, he was bound
to protect—there can be little doubt that he would have been indicted
for murder, and probably hanged. The vow to protect thus confers a
licence to kill.

Two of the cases adverted to in the Recorder’s charge have since come on
for trial before Mr. Justice Wightman.6 In one, the prisoner was
acquitted on the ground of insanity. In the case of Andrew Maclean also,
the culprit was acquitted, to the disgrace both of the jury and of the
judge. The report says,

Early in the morning of the 4th of August, the persons lodging in the
next room were disturbed by the cries of the prisoner’s children, and
their calling out, “Oh, father, let mother down.” They got up in
consequence, and went into the prisoner’s room, where they found his
wife hanging by the neck from the cupboard, and the prisoner was sitting
upon the bed. The body of the unfortunate woman was quite suspended, and
she was nearly black in the face. Upon the prisoner being told that he
was a good-for-nothing villain for attempting to hang his wife, he
replied that he would do it effectually the next time; and one of the
witnesses answered that he would have done it effectually this time, if
his wife had not been cut down. The prisoner was slightly intoxicated,
it appeared, at the time of the occurrence. The prisoner, in his
defence, asserted that his wife had hanged herself.7

The wife was not called as a witness, the reason of which appears from
the previous examination before the magistrate—on which occasion the
unfortunate creature, either from habitual fear or from the expectation
that she would be given back into his power, exculpated the man, stating
that she had spoken provokingly to him, and also that he had hanged her
only in jest. Her dread of appearing against him was not surprising; for
what would have been the consequence to her of having given strong
evidence against him, in the event of his acquittal? But her testimony
was not needed to show the state of the case, after proof of such facts
as those contained in the above extract. Yet “Mr. Justice Wightman, in
summing up, said that the case was undoubtedly left in some obscurity by
the absence of the wife’s testimony. If she had been called, she could
have proved distinctly how the matter occurred; and in the face of the
prisoner’s declaration that his wife had hung herself, it was for the
jury to say whether the other evidence was sufficient to justify them in
convicting him of so serious an offence.”8 On this encouragement the
jury returned a verdict of not Edition: current; Page: [1186] guilty;
and consequently the woman is again given in to the power of the man,
that he may, as he threatened, “do it effectually the next time.” We
scarcely believe that there is an offence in the whole criminal code of
which a prisoner would have been acquitted, in the face of such
evidence, except that of an attempt at wife-murder.

In default of the judges, it is for the Legislature to apply vigorous
measures of repression to this growing evil. The baser part of the
populace think that when a legal power is given to them over a living
creature—when a person, like a thing, is suffered to be spoken of as
their own—as their wife, or their child, or their dog—they are allowed
to do what they please with it; and in the eye of the law—if such
judgments as the preceding are to be taken as its true
interpretation—they are justified in supposing that the worst they can
do will be accounted but as a case of slight assault. It is the duty of
the Legislature to teach them the contrary. There ought to be severer
penalties for killing or ill-treating a wife or child than for killing
or ill-treating, in a similar manner, any other person. A greater
severity is enjoined by all the motives which ought to regulate the
adaptation of punishment to crime. The crime is greater; for it is a
violation of more solemn obligations—it is doing the worst injury where
there is the most binding duty to cherish and protect. It is also
baser—for it is committed upon one who has trusted the culprit, who is
in his power, and who is generally without sufficient bodily strength to
resist or retaliate. Those who are exposed to these atrocities—the wives
and children of the brutal part of the population—have not the means
which all other persons possess of guarding themselves against the evil.
Other people are but occasionally and rarely liable to ill-treatment;
but these are exposed to it at every hour and every moment of their
lives. Being thus far more in need than any other persons of the
protection of the law, they ought to have it in fuller measure. The
domestic tyrant can perpetrate his tyrannies with the utmost facility,
and need never wait for an opportunity; and a stronger motive therefore
is required, where the brutality exists, to deter from its indulgence.
Finally, there is no crime in the whole catalogue of offences in which
the single act which incurs the penalty of the law is an index to such
an amount of undetected and unpunished wickedness, and to so vast a mass
of horrible suffering. Such a spectacle as the final scene of the life
of Hester Curtis is unspeakably revolting; but what is the suffering of
a few minutes, to the prolonged death which in every such case must have
been suffered for years previously, and to the pangs of thousands of
women in the power of similar miscreants, who have enough of caution
just to stop short of the point which terminates the existence of their
victims? There is not to be imagined a position so degraded, or so
hopelessly miserable, as that of the women thus at the mercy of
ruffians; and it is a deep disgrace to our Government that, in the
fifteenth year of the reign of a woman, nothing has yet been done for
their relief.

Edition: current; Page: [1187]


401.: STREET ORGANS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 28 OCT., 1851, P. 6

In this letter Mill is responding to the report of the judgment against
an Italian organ player, Jean Zanezzi, by Thomas Henry (1807-76), a Bow
Street magistrate: “Police Intelligence—Friday. Bow Street,” Morning
Chronicle, 25 Oct., p. 7. The letter, headed as title, with subhead, “To
the Editor of the Morning Chronicle,” is described in Mill’s
bibliography as “A letter headed ‘Street Organs’ and signed D in the
Morning Chronicle of October 28, 1851”

(MacMinn, p. 76).

sir,—

Will you allow me to draw attention to a case of great injustice,
reported in Saturday’s papers. An Italian organ player was brought
before Mr. Henry, the Bow-street magistrate, charged by a tradesman with
having, though desired by the tradesman to leave off, continued to play
on his instrument, whereupon the tradesman’s horse, left in charge of a
boy, ran away with and damaged his gig.1 The Italian denied having heard
the order to cease playing, and said that he had plied his instrument
for six years in the streets of London, and had never before been
charged with any offence—a plea which, in the case of English offenders,
always carries great weight. It carried none, however, in this instance.
The magistrate fined the Italian 40s., besides £10, the amount of the
damage; and unless he pays this sum, which doubtless he never in his
life possessed, sentenced him to a month’s imprisonment.

I would ask this magistrate—is the business of a street organ player an
unlawful occupation? If so, the police are strangely neglectful of their
duty in allowing it to be carried on. But if the Italian had a legal
right to grind his organ in the streets, was he to leave off playing
every time a carriage passed by? Has every man in a gig a right to
prohibit this man from gaining his subsistence? As to frightening the
horse, it must be uncertain whether this was the particular noise, among
all others, at which the horse took fright. And, supposing that it was,
the fault was more the owner’s than the organ player’s. Horses which
cannot bear London noises ought not to be brought into London streets.
If a tradesman in the pursuit of a livelihood drives a gig into the
clang and crash of the streets of London, other people are not bound to
cease pursuing their livelihood till he has gone by. Whether it would be
right or wrong to suppress these people, they ought not to be punished
by an ex post facto law. While their occupation is unprohibited, to fine
and imprison them for practising it is gross injustice.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

D.

Edition: current; Page: [1188]


402.: THE RULES OF THE BOOKSELLERS’ ASSOCIATION [1]
 REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF A MEETING (1852), P. 8

John Chapman (1821-94), physician, bookseller and publisher, now
proprietor and editor of the Westminster Review, undertook in January
1852 to sell imported American books at a larger discount than that
permitted by the group of London publishers who controlled the
Booksellers’ Association. As a consequence Chapman was excluded from the
Association and undertook a campaign against their monopoly. He appealed
to many authors for support, and in the Westminster for April 1852 (n.s.
I, 511-54) published his article “The Commerce of Literature,” an
effective attack on the Association’s policies. The Booksellers met on 8
Apr. and decided to submit their case to a committee headed by Lord
Chief Justice Campbell. On 4 May, Chapman was host to a meeting of
rebels, particularly authors, presided over by Charles Dickens, and
including such well known writers as Francis W. Newman, Wilkie Collins,
G.H. Lewes, and Herbert Spencer. Dickens read letters from some who
could not attend, including Carlyle, Cobden, Gladstone, and this one
from Mill. Resolutions against the monopoly were forwarded to Lord
Campbell’s committee, which on 19 May voted unanimously against the
Booksellers’ Association and in favour of free trade in books. Mill’s
letter, dated “East India House, March 5, 1852,” is printed in A Report
of the Proceedings of a Meeting (Consisting Chiefly of Authors), Held
May 4th, at the House of Mr. John Chapman, 142, Strand, for the Purpose
of Hastening the Removal of the Trade Restriction on the Commerce of
Literature (London: Chapman, 1852), p. 8. This and No. 403 are described
in Mill’s bibliography as “Two Letters on the Rules of the Booksellers’
Association, printed in two pamphlets on that subject circulated in
1852, the one by Mr. John Chapman, bookseller, the other by Messrs.
Parker” (MacMinn, p. 76). The MS of Mill’s letter is in the Hollander
Collection, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The text below
is the printed version, which agrees in substantives with the MS. Both
are dated “East India House, March 5, 1852.”

sir,—

There is no case to which, in my opinion, the principles of free trade
are more completely applicable than to the question in dispute between
the London Booksellers’ Association, and those who claim a right to sell
books at a less profit than that prescribed by the rules of the
Association.

Not only in the book trade, but in all others, I conceive that the
profits of distributors absorb at present a very undue proportion of the
proceeds of industry; and it appears to me impossible to maintain that
their contenting themselves with a lower rate of remuneration would be
injurious to the producers. It is self-evident, that whatever part of
the profits publishers and retailers are willing to forego, must be
gained either by authors or buyers, and if by buyers it would still
benefit authors by increasing the sale of books.

I am, Sir, Your obedient servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [1189]


403.: THE RULES OF THE BOOKSELLERS’ ASSOCIATION [2]
 THE OPINIONS OF CERTAIN AUTHORS
 ON THE BOOKSELLING QUESTION (1852), P. 47

On 30 Apr., 1852, John William Parker (1792-1870), Mill’s publisher from
the time of his Logic, had circulated a letter “To Authors, and Others
Connected with Literary Property,” which he also sent to The Times, in
which, saying the publishers and booksellers had had their say, he put
this question: “If a retail bookseller, of ascertained credit and
respectability, applies to the publisher to purchase any book in which
you may be directly or indirectly interested, on the terms at which
those books are offered to the trade at large, but with the avowed
intention of retailing his purchases at a smaller profit than that
provided for between the wholesale rate and the selling price of single
copies, do you consider the intention to sell at a low rate of profit a
good and sufficient reason why the publisher should refuse to sell the
books, which such retailer is ready to purchase and to keep in stock at
his own risk?” He gathered the replies in The Opinions of Certain
Authors on the Bookselling Question and Additional Letters on the
Bookselling Question (both London: Parker, 1852). Mill’s reply (in the
former) is dated “East India House, May 8th, 1852.” See No. 402 for the
bibliographic entry describing this letter.

dear sir,—

I think that there is no case in which a combination to keep up prices
is more injurious than in the sale of books; and I wish success to the
booksellers in their resistance to the trade regulations which restrict
their liberty of selling books at a low price.

I am, yours, very truly,

J.S. Mill


404.: THE INDIA BILL, I
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 5 JULY, 1853, P. 5

The 1833 renewal of the charter of the East India Company, 3 & 4 William
IV, c. 85, was due to expire in 1854. On 30 June, after four nights of
debate in the Commons, the second reading was approved of “A Bill to
Provide for the Government of India,” 16 Victoria (9 June, 1853), PP,
1852-53, III, 181-96 (enacted as 16 & 17 Victoria, c. 95). (For the
debate see PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 128, cols. 605-74, 734-78, 814-903, and
977-1074.) The proposals had been introduced on 3 June by Sir Charles
Wood, then President of the Board of Control in the Aberdeen
administration (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 127, cols. 1092-1169). In his nearly
five-hour-long speech Wood (see especially cols. 1147-50) had frequently
cited opinions of Mill’s that resemble those here expressed. For further
discussion, see No. 405. The article, headed as title (but without the
“I”), with the subtitle, “[From a Correspondent],” is described in
Mill’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘The India Bill—from a
Correspondent’ in the Morning Chronicle of 5th July 1853”

(MacMinn, p. 79).

Edition: current; Page: [1190]
according to the parliamentary maxim that the second reading of a Bill
implies the adoption of its principle, the assent of the House of
Commons to the second reading of the India Bill has decided the
continuance, in some form, of what is called the double government.1 So
far as depends on the House of Commons, the government of a hundred
millions of people, who, in almost every point of character and social
condition, are unlike and opposed to Europeans, will not be given up to
the sole administration of a Secretary of State, having no acquaintance
but with European ideas, no experience but of European life, and who is
both selected at first, and changed every two or three years, according
to the exigencies, not of India, but of English party politics. A voice
in the government, and even the decisive voice, must necessarily reside
in the Minister; but, unless by the rarest accident, no Minister
possesses, when he comes into office, a particle of the special
knowledge without which he is unfit to carry on the administration of
Indian affairs, and which it is the business of many years to acquire.
There is, then, no safety but in associating with the Indian Minister a
Board or Council possessing this special knowledge, and sufficiently
independent of him to command his deference, and, when necessary, to
resist his will.

At present, the Court of Directors is such a council, and that it shall
continue to exist is the first point which the vote of the House of
Commons has decided. The second is, that in maintaining its existence an
attempt shall be made to improve its composition. The maintenance of the
Court of Directors, and its improvement, are the leading objects of the
Bill. To both, the House has now in principle assented. In what the
improvement shall consist, and by what means it may be effected, remains
to be considered in committee.

When two powers are required to act together, either for joint
deliberation or mutual check, whatever else may be requisite, this at
least is essential—that one of the two authorities shall not be
appointed by the other. If it is, there are not two powers, but only
one. Yet, by the present Bill, the Crown—that is, the Indian
Minister—has the appointment of one-third of the co-ordinate body.2 This
provision is no less inconsistent with the principle of the Bill than
with Sir Charles Wood’s declared opinions, and can be defended on no
principle.3 It does not go far enough, if the intention is that the
Court of Directors should be simply an instrument of the Indian
Minister. It goes too far, if they are intended as a check and restraint
upon him. If only an instrument, all authorities should have the choice
of their own instruments; the Minister should nominate, not six—not a
mere fraction—but the whole eighteen or twenty-four. But if the Court of
Directors are to remain, as they have hitherto been, a power in the
Indian Edition: current; Page: [1191] government, having an opinion and
a will of their own, which the Minister may overrule, but cannot pass
by—without whose initiative he cannot act, to whose reasons he is
compelled to listen, and, if he does not adopt, is bound to answer and
confute them—then neither the whole nor any part of the body which is to
be a check to his power, ought to hold their offices by his appointment.
It would not be borne that the House of Lords should appoint a third of
the House of Commons. There are many bad modes of selecting a jury, but
the worst of all would be that it should be nominated by the judge; yet
the judge would be the fittest person to select the jury, if any man
could be allowed to select those who are to check himself. In judicial
matters, Englishmen so feel the necessity of a check, and so prize
entire independence as the condition of its efficacy, that to make sure
of it they place even the ignorance of the jury as a check upon the
knowledge of the judge; but this Bill proposes that a Minister should
appoint those whose knowledge is to be a check on his ignorance.

It is not Sir C. Wood, nor the Government, that need to be reminded how
considerable a check, limited as their power is, the Court of Directors
have hitherto been. The body who recalled Lord Ellenborough,4 who
recorded an indignant condemnation of the greatest iniquity in modern
Indian history—the seizure of Scinde (the joint act of their two
bitterest enemies, Lord Ellenborough and Sir Charles Napier)—who were
willing to go to prison rather than sign the spoliation of Oude for the
benefit of a set of grasping money-lenders, and by their resistance
compelled the Cabinet to investigate the case, and to retract the
honestly-intended but ill-considered mandate of the then President of
the Board of Control, Lord Glenelg5—such a body is a power which no
Indian Minister can despise, and whose remonstrances, in any important
case, he must think twice before he disregards. These are the glorious
pages in the recent history of the Court of Directors; and if actual
collisions have not been frequent—if, like other checking bodies, the
Directors sacrifice much to keep on harmonious terms with the stronger
authority—there is the more reason against adding so great a weight to
the side of obsequiousness and subservience as would probably divest the
body altogether of the character of a check, and convert it into a
screen.

Edition: current; Page: [1192]
There is no need to go further than Sir C. Wood’s speech, and his
correspondence with the Directors, to find the principles which condemn
the nomination clause. To the Directors he says, “We are most anxious to
preserve the independence of that body, and its freedom from all undue
political influence, on which we believe that its efficiency for
executing the high trust reposed in it so essentially depends.”6 To the
House of Commons he said that it had been suggested that the six
Directors should be appointed by their colleagues, but that this was
objectionable, because, thus appointed, they would be dependent on those
who appointed them.7 Mutato nomine de te8—it is proposed that they be
appointed by the Minister; is it intended, therefore, that they should
be dependent on the Minister? What becomes, then, of the “anxiety to
preserve their independence”? How explain this inconsistency between the
words of the President of the Board of Control and his acts? Is it that
the words express his own opinion—the acts, what he thinks the
necessities of his position? There was a clamour without, which seemed
formidable, and to which it was thought necessary to make concessions.
It was not very obvious what was to be done—therefore what is condemned
in principle is adopted in detail, by way of doing something. But it is
better to make no change than a change decidedly for the worse. It were
better to leave the Court of Directors as it is, than to make a change
in its constitution unfitting it for its most important function.

The difficulty of framing a constitution for the Court of Directors is
great and serious, and lies in the very nature of things. There is no
unexceptionable organ of choice. Nomination could only be by the
Minister, or his majority in Parliament; and there are no good materials
for a constituency. It is impossible to find any body of electors in
England whose interest is identified with the good government of India.
The present electors, slightly as they are connected in personal
interest with India are as much so as any other constituency which could
be framed. Yet many modes of extending the franchise have been
suggested, which would be admissible in principle, and might possibly be
beneficial in practice. The present electors are a particular class of
Indian fundholders;9 all other holders of Indian debt might be included.
All who have served a certain length of time in India, and returned to
England, might be added to the constituency. The suffrage might even be
extended to all who have lived in India some given number of years. In
any case, the choice ought to rest with persons likely to be more or
less acquainted with the public repute of candidates who have served in
India; and the more numerous body would be less accessible to the
Edition: current; Page: [1193] corrupt influences which have been so
ludicrously exaggerated in speeches and pamphlets, but which, if they
were twenty times greater than they are, would be worth no more, as an
argument for the changes proposed, than the bribery at Parliamentary
elections is worth as an argument for abolishing popular representation,
and giving to the Crown the nomination of the House of Commons.

The only practical defect alleged in the present composition of the
Court of Directors is, that it does not contain a sufficient number of
experienced Indian functionaries; and for this reason, it is to be
presumed, the nominees of the Crown are to be selected from Indians
exclusively.10 It will surprise most people to be told that the real
tendency of the present constitution of the Court is to make the Indian
services engross it entirely. Before the last Charter, the Company was a
commercial body, and naturally included among its Directors many
commercial men. When its mercantile character ceased, this ceased also.
Of the thirty present Directors, seventeen have been elected since 1834;
and of these, all but two had served the Company many years, either in
India, in China, or in the naval service—several of them being, by
universal admission, among the most eminent of the public officers of
their time—while no Indian of eminence who has offered himself, and has
chosen to persevere, has failed to be elected. But, it is said, many
have been deterred from offering themselves by the “degradation” of the
canvass.11 It is a new doctrine in England that canvassing is a
degradation, especially from members of the House of Commons. Will they
vote for prohibiting it at elections, as the Bill proposes that it
should be prohibited at the India House?12 We may take for granted that
what men of such a nice sense of honour as members of Parliament claim
to be, find not too insupportable to be gone through once in every few
years, cannot be too shocking for the susceptibilities of men who aim at
a seat in the direction. The labour and expense of the canvass (though
not its degradation) do, we believe, deter some of the fittest men from
the one contest as from the other; and we therefore heartily wish
success (though with no confident hope) to the attempt made by the Bill
to prevent canvassing altogether. If this succeeds, the evil complained
of is at an end, and needs no further remedy. But if it be indeed
necessary to reserve a certain number of seats for men too diffident, or
too dignified, or too little desirous of the office, to stand a popular
election, it would be far better that those seats should be filled by
the choice of the other Directors, who have a stronger interest than
anyone else in whatever sheds lustre on their body. Yet appointment even
by the Directors, subject to the veto of the Minister, would be Edition:
current; Page: [1194] objectionable, being likely in practice to become,
as the appointment of the Governor-General now is, appointment by the
Minister.13


405.: THE INDIA BILL, II
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 7 JULY, 1853, P. 5

For the background, see No. 404, the argument of which is here
continued. The article, headed as title, with the subhead, “[From a
Correspondent],” is described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article
headed ‘The India Bill No. II—from a Correspondent’ in the Morning
Chronicle of July 7th 1853”

(MacMinn, p. 79).

the clause in the india bill which diminishes the total number of
Directors from 24, or more properly 30, to 18, or (excluding the six
Government nominees) to 12, forms no essential part of the measure, and
is liable to such serious objections that its omission would not only
not impair, but would greatly improve the Bill.1 A reason has been
assigned for the change in the mode of appointment of a portion of the
Directors; namely, that some, and, it is affirmed, even a considerable
number, of those who are fittest for the office, do not find their way
to it in the mode hitherto provided.2 But, granting that the expedient
adopted in the Bill for correcting this defect were the best or the only
one that could be invented—supposing it were a conceded, instead of a
disputed point, that a certain number of Directors should derive their
office from nomination by the Minister, and that these nominated
Directors cannot possibly be added, but must necessarily be substituted
for an equivalent number of the elected—even then no reason would have
been shown for a greater diminution of the elective body than is
sufficient to make room for the additional members. But the Bill does
more—its destructive operation is threefold as great as its
constructive. It abolishes six Directors to replace them by nominees,
six to get rid of the rotation system, and six for no reason at all.

We say no reason, because the reason which the case itself would suggest
is barred by the emphatic declarations of the Ministers. One who knew
nothing of the objects of the Bill but what the Bill itself indicates
would be at no loss in assigning a motive for this provision. He would
say, The elected Directors are reduced to 12, instead of 18 or 24, in
order to give greater power to the six nominees. But Sir Charles Wood,
both in his own behalf and on that of his colleagues, distinctly
disavows this purpose.3 It has never been professed by Edition: current;
Page: [1195] Ministers that the object of introducing nominees into the
Court of Directors is to exercise ascendency over the body by means of
them. On the contrary, this is an effect which Ministers, if they
thought there was any danger of it, would earnestly deprecate; for it is
impossible to affirm more distinctly than they do, that the independence
of the Court of Directors, and its freedom from undue political
influence, are indispensable conditions of fitness for its duties. The
reason which they give for introducing a new mode of appointment, is to
admit some persons—they do not say better qualified, but—as well
qualified as the best of the present Directors, and who are unwilling to
go through the labour and expense of an election by the proprietors. If
six be the number requisite for this purpose, six will suffice for it,
whether the number of the remaining Directors be twelve or twenty-four.
It is not in the smallest degree necessary to the object that these six
should be a third of the whole. On the contrary, as Directors appointed
by a Minister are, to say the least, less independent, and more liable
to political influence, than those elected by the proprietors, it must,
we imagine, be the wish of the Government to attain the specific object
of admitting the excluded class, with the least possible diminution of
the independence of the body; and, therefore, to take no artificial
means of enabling the nominees to exercise greater power in the Court
than the same number of persons can do under its present constitution.
It is hardly necessary to point out that the proposed diminution in the
aggregate number of Directors is entirely at variance with this purpose.

Apart from any question as to the mode of appointing the Court, we are
at a loss to imagine on what principle it can be expected that a
diminution of its numbers will render it better adapted to its
functions. If the Court of Directors, or any other public body, could be
purged only of its least efficient members, retaining the most
efficient, nobody can deny that it would be improved. But the proposed
purgation is indiscriminate. There is no ground for supposing that, in
future elections, the able will bear a larger proportion to the
incompetent in the smaller than in the more numerous body. The reduction
of the total number would in the end subtract as great a proportion from
the best as from the inferior members; and, unfortunately, while by the
one consequence much would be lost, by the other very little would be
gained. If, by the abstraction of eighteen out of thirty, only three
superior men should be sacrificed, it would be more than an equivalent
for getting rid of fifteen mediocrities. The value of any public body is
equal to that of the able men contained in it; a few more or less of the
others are of little moment, for they are sure to be numerous enough to
outnumber the men of eminence, were it not that, in the long run,
mediocrity is always led by talent. The Court of Directors is rather
remarkable among public bodies for the small number it contains of
decidedly inferior men, and the more than ordinary proportion of men of
ability; but those who disparage its merits ought strenuously to oppose
any reduction of its numbers, for the fewer able men it habitually
contains, the less it can afford to lose any of its chances of obtaining
them.

Edition: current; Page: [1196]
All principle, in the case of a body like the Court of Directors, is in
favour of maintaining at least the present number. An executive body
should be small, to secure vigour and promptitude of action; but a
deliberative body ought to be numerous, that it may include the needful
variety of knowledge and experience. The Court of Directors is not an
executive Board, but a Council, a sort of Parliament of India; and every
department of the Indian services should be represented in that body. It
should contain persons from Bengal, from Madras, from Bombay, the North
West Provinces, and, hereafter, the Punjaub; engineer officers, military
officers, naval officers; persons of fiscal, judicial, and political or
diplomatic experience; persons who have administered the zemindaree
system, the village system, and the ryotwar system.4 As now constituted,
the Court generally does contain persons of all these classes, and more
than one of each: with the reduced number, it is not likely to do so.
Besides, the Court is regularly divided into three Committees, each of
which superintends and controls an amount of business corresponding to
that of five or six Ministerial departments and public Boards in
England.5 Every despatch sent to India, except in the Secret Department,
passes through one of these Committees, and there undergoes a minute
examination and criticism; every act sanctioned by the Court of
Directors originates in one or other of them. Seven or eight members for
each Committee is not too ample a provision, allowing for illness,
relaxation, and accident, and supposing the average proportion of the
ineffective to be no greater than in the best constituted Board of seven
or eight persons which performs any portion of the public business of
England.


406.: A RECENT MAGISTERIAL DECISION
 MORNING POST, 8 NOV., 1854, P. 3

This article reports on the trial of William Ebbs, an elderly bootmaker,
for attempting to cut the throat of his wife, Matilda. Evidence was
given by George Ebbs, their son. The case was heard on Friday, 3 Nov.,
before George Chapple Norton (1800-75), who had Edition: current; Page:
[1197] been M.P. for Guilford 1826-30, and a stipendiary magistrate at
the Lambeth Street Police Court since 1845; however, it was on Saturday,
4 Nov., that Norton discharged the man (see 1197b-b). Mill quotes from
the report “Police. Lambeth,” The Times, 6 Nov., 1854, p. 9. The letter,
Mill’s only contribution to the Morning Post, is related to the series
on domestic cruelty that he wrote with Harriet (see No. 303), though he
does not identify it as a joint production. It is dated 6 Nov., 1854,
and headed as title, with the subhead, “To the Editor of the Morning
Chronicle.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter signed
M. and headed ‘A recent Magisterial decision’ in the Morning Post of
Nov. 8, 1854” (MacMinn, p. 88). The text below is that of the Morning
Post, which has been collated with the MS draft in the Mill-Taylor
Collection. In the variant notes the manuscript reading is signalled by
“MS”.

sir,—

Will you allow me to call your attention to the extraordinary decision
of Mr. aNortona, in the case of a man named William Ebbs, on bFridayb
last? This ruffian, after brutally beating his unfortunate wife (then
ill of a fever, and with her baby in her arms), deliberately attempted
to cut her throat with a razor, which was only prevented by the son,
scarcely less brutal than the father, who advised the father not to beat
his mother any more, because he had given her enough now! This son, who
was himself brought to the police-court for assaulting the officer in
order to rescue the father, made, to screen him, the evidently false,
and, if true, frivolous excuse, that his mother had given provocation by
her ill temper. The fellow, on being remanded for a week, threatened
that he would do worse when he went home, or would not go home at all.
At the end of the week Mr. cNortonc releases the man, gives him money
(sent for his use by a “benevolent gentleman”), and warns the
unfortunate woman not to make “such free use of her tongue in abuse of
her husband.”

Is it thus that Parliament intended the new act for the protection of
wives to be carried into effect?1 The man Ebbs, on the showing even of
the son who begged him off, had been in the frequent habit of brutally
ill-using his wife. After his threatening, and attempting, to cut her
throat, she is again given into his power, without his being even
required to give security for keeping the peace, which, from his
circumstances, he probably could have given. Can it be doubted that only
the most atrocious cases come to light? dAndd is it to be wondered at
that even these are not at all diminished in frequency, when the
perpetrators may hope for complete impunity, and the victims are
entirely insecure of getting any eredress? Whilee, failing of redress,
their situation, in the absolute power of a vindictive master, is
frightful to contemplate.—I am, sir, your obedient servant,

M.

Edition: current; Page: [1198]


407.: THE LAW OF LUNACY
 DAILY NEWS, 31 JULY, 1858, P. 4

According to the provisions of 16 & 17 Victoria, cc. 96 and 97 (1853),
to be committed to a lunatic asylum a person did not have to be
certified by a Commission of Lunacy (which generally employed a jury) if
relatives or friends applied to a magistrate for a reception order; in
that case, the person could be committed on the strength of a private
hearing and a certificate signed by two people, each “a physician,
surgeon, or apothecary.” Mill’s letter, headed as title, with the
subhead, “To the Editor of the Daily News,” is described in his
bibliography as “A letter signed P. and headed ‘The Laws of Lunacy’ in
the Daily News of July 31, 1858”

(MacMinn, p. 92).

sir,—

It has become urgently necessary that public attention should be called
to the state of the law on the subject of Lunacy, and the frightful
facility with which any persons whom their heirs or connexions desire to
put out of the way, may be consigned without trial to a fate more cruel
and hopeless than the most rigorous imprisonment.

Recent circumstances have made it a matter of notoriety, that
confinement in a madhouse is the easiest means of getting rid of, or
bringing to terms, refractory wives. Your paper of Monday contained one
instance, on which you have very rightly and ably commented;1 within the
last fortnight the whole country has heard of another;2 and the number
which never see the light does not admit of any probable estimation.

A criminal cannot be sentenced to six months’ imprisonment without the
Edition: current; Page: [1199] verdict of a jury, preceded by a public
investigation and opportunity of defence. But a perfectly innocent
person can be fraudulently kidnapped, seized, and carried off to a
madhouse on the assertion of any two so-called medical men, who may have
scarcely seen the victim whom they dismiss to a condition far worse than
the penalty which the law inflicts for proved crime. Convicts are not
delivered over to the absolute power of their gaoler; nor can be
subjected to the ruffianly treatment revealed by the York inquiry.
Convicts can appeal against ill treatment; but to the other unfortunates
the ordinary use of speech is virtually denied; their sober statements
of fact, still more their passionate protests against injustice, are
held to be so many instances of insane delusion. And this fate any two
medical men may secretly inflict. Any practitioner may be
selected—knaves who will give every certificate desired for the sake of
their fee; or weak creatures who will certify to anything affirmed by a
gentleman and a man of position; or men who, knowing nothing, either
practically or theoretically, about the signs of insanity, can be made
to see with the eyes of their prompter. In a few days the victim perhaps
succumbs, and having consented to every demand, is pronounced not mad by
a different authority, and restored to real or nominal liberty, with a
statement from the successful party that there has been a satisfactory
arrangement. I am not speculating as to what has been, but describing
what evidently may be.

The obvious remedy is to require the same guarantees before depriving a
fellow-creature of liberty on one pretext as on another. The inquiry by
a jury, which is now the exception, ought to be the rule; it should be
an imperative preliminary to the putting an alleged lunatic in a place
of confinement. A jury could be as speedily impanelled in a case of
sudden madness as of sudden death; and if any restraint be necessary in
the short interval, let it be in the patient’s home. Juries, in such
cases, are foolish and credulous enough, and only too willing to treat
any conduct as madness which is ever so little out of the common way;
but at least the publicity of the inquiry is some protection, and tends
to fix attention on any unavowed motive which may actuate the promoters
of the proceeding. It would also apprise others of the existence of the
alleged lunatic, and the place where he, or she, is confined; and would
thus render somewhat more difficult the evasion which it is so easy to
practise on the vigilance of the Commissioners at their annual
visitation of lunatic asylums. Many other improvements in the law and
procedure in these cases are urgently needed, and might easily be
suggested; but my object is to indicate the importance of the subject,
its growing urgency, and the large scope which it affords for the
exertions of intelligent reformers in and out of Parliament. I earnestly
intreat you to continue your efforts at rousing public opinion on a
matter so vital to the freedom and security of the subject.

P.

Edition: current; Page: [1200] Edition: current; Page: [1201]


March 1863 to July 1873


408.: POLAND
 PENNY NEWSMAN, 15 MAR., 1863, P. 9

The Polish uprising of 1830-31 had been followed by a period of
repression, during which Poland had been reduced to the status of a
Russian province; attempts to extinguish Polish nationality continued
under the milder rule, beginning in 1855, of Tsar Alexander II
(1818-81). The revolt of January 1863 had as its immediate cause an
ordinance conscripting Poles into the Russian army at the arbitrary
discretion of the government. By the time of Mill’s letter, a
Provisional Government had been formed by the rebels.

On 8 Mar., p. 1, the Penny Newsman, edited by Mill’s friend of forty
years, Edwin Chadwick, published “The Polish Insurrection,” which
prompted Mill to write to Chadwick on 9 Mar.: “I send a paper on the
Polish question, in the form of a letter to the Editor. If you like you
can alter the form to that of an article from a correspondent; but on
the whole probably it is better as it is. I have signed it with my
initials, and have no objection to being known as the author. . . .
Proofs would be agreeable if there is time and it is not inconvenient.”
The next day he wrote again: “I have returned the proof, corrected, to
the Editor. [paragraph] I have no objection to being named in your
leader, but I wish only my initials to be put to the letter itself; and
I would rather that, in your first sentence, my name was introduced more
indirectly. You might say ‘we feel thankful to a correspondent, whose
initials sufficiently indicate his name’ or some such words, and you
might then go on mentioning me by name as at present. [paragraph] I
would rather you did not add the sentence proposed in your letter,
because I do not wish to be understood as having peculiar sources of
information. Herzen’s and Ogareff’s writings are open to all the world,
and the notification by the Insurrectionary Committee to which my letter
refers was mentioned by the correspondents of some of the English
newspapers. [paragraph] Many thanks for your offer of separate slips,
but I do not care to have any.” (LL, CW, Vol. XV, pp. 847, 847-8.) In a
long introductory paragraph (pp. 8-9), Chadwick followed Mill’s wishes.

Mill’s letter, headed “(To the Editor of the Penny Newsman),” is his
only contribution to that paper. It is described in his bibliography as
“A letter on Poland, signed J.S.M. in the Penny Newsman for March 15,
1863”

(MacMinn, p. 94).

sir,—

The view which you have taken in your last and some previous
numbers1—or, I should rather say, the view which you appear disposed to
take of—Polish and Hungarian affairs, seeming not to be characterised by
your usual accuracy of information, you will, I hope, permit a warm
friend and admirer of your principles and purposes to endeavour to set
right what he regards as a complete misapprehension of the events now
taking place in those countries.

Edition: current; Page: [1202]
You appear to look with suspicion on the great national movements in
Poland and in Hungary as being aristocratic movements; not likely to
confer any good upon the mass of the population; not provoked by the
tyranny under which aristocracy and people alike suffer, but rather by
the benefits which the Emperors of Russia and Austria are desirous of
conferring upon the people, and which the aristocracy would be glad to
intercept.2

The true state of the case, both in Poland and in Hungary, is very far
from this. I limit myself for the present to Poland, leaving Hungary
for, perhaps, a future occasion. In Poland, then, the present
insurrection is essentially a popular one. The higher nobility and great
landholders have, hitherto, for the most part stood aloof; not from want
of sympathy with the movement, but because they regarded it as
premature. The Insurrectionary Committee have, in consequence, thought
it necessary to issue a general summons to the aristocracy, both in
Poland and in exile, threatening that if they do not join the
insurrection they shall be deprived of their lands.3

Next, as to the benefits which the Emperor designs for the labouring
classes, and which you seem to think are a cause of displeasure to the
authors of the insurrection. Let me first say, the enfranchisement of
serfs is not now the matter in question. There are no serfs in Poland;
and there are none in Russia since the 2nd March.4 Let the Emperor
Alexander have all honour for this great triumph of justice. But though
there is now no question between the peasantry and their former masters
respecting their personal freedom, there is a great and fundamental
question still open relating to the land. The peasants maintain that,
along with their freedom, they ought to receive, in full ownership, the
portion of land which was previously assigned to them to be cultivated
by themselves and their families. This claim is resisted by the
landowners. From the peculiar character of the agricultural economy of
the country, which it would be too long at present to enter into, both
sides have much that they can justly urge for their view of the
question. The Emperor has decided the point in favour of the landlords.
The leaders of the insurrection have decided it in favour of the
peasants.

The Insurrectionary Committee have entered into a public engagement that
the land, which is the subject of dispute, shall be given absolutely
(without any payment, present or future) to the peasants who have
hitherto tilled it; and that Edition: current; Page: [1203] the
landowners shall receive compensation at the cost of the State, the only
mode by which the burthen can be fairly shared between the two parties.
Some months before the insurrection broke out, the leaders had already
announced to their friends in England, as part of their programme, what
they have now pledged themselves in the face of the world to carry into
effect.5

Thus, if the insurrection were successful, the labouring population of
Poland would acquire, without internal conflict or wrong to any one,
that proprietorship in the land which the rural population of France
gained by the Revolution, and the acquisition of which was an ample
return for the sacrifice of a whole generation.

Even if this great benefit to the masses were not, as it is, one of the
direct objects of the insurrection, I submit that, in the more backward
countries of Europe any revolution, any bursting of the bonds by which
all the energies of the people are now cramped and paralyzed, must be an
improvement, must be the commencement of a new era. The resurrection of
Polish nationality would at least let in the light. It would bestow a
free press, freedom of public discussion, representative assemblies,
national education. It would let in the ideas of civilised Europe; and
not the ideas only, but the industry and capital also; and before these
combined influences, the barbarism, which has been prolonged till now
chiefly by the benumbing influence of foreign bondage, would rapidly
pass away. A foreign tyranny necessarily regards intelligence and
education as its greatest dangers. Any national government in the
situation of Poland, much more one which is certain to be a free and
popular government, will feel its safety and prosperity entirely
dependent on the amount of popular intelligence and popular energy which
it can array in its defence.

If you would only learn what the Liberals and Democrats of Russia itself
think and feel about Poland; if you would inquire what is thought and
felt by the editors of the Bell, Mr. Herzen and Mr. Ogareff, who, by
their newspaper, clandestinely circulated at St. Petersburg, are already
shaking the whole fabric of Russian despotism;6 if you will ascertain
their opinion, you will no longer mistake one of the most unanimous and
profoundly popular political manifestations in history Edition: current;
Page: [1204] for a class movement to perpetuate the domination of an
aristocracy. If you would see, on the other hand, a vivid representation
of the old type of a haughty aristocrat, sincerely zealous for the
dignity and nationality of his country, as identified with his class,
but reckless of any amount of cruel oppression inflicted upon the
multitude, read the sketch in last week’s Spectator of the principal
agent of Russian tyranny over Poland at the present moment, the Marquis
Wielopolski.7

J.S.M.


409.: THE CIVIL WAR IN THE UNITED STATES
 OUR DAILY FARE (PHILADELPHIA), 21 JUNE, 1864, PP. 95-6

Our Daily Fare was issued from 8 to 21 June, 1864, in connection with
the Great Central Sanitary Fair of that year held in Philadelphia by the
United States Sanitary Commission. Established in the spring of 1861,
this was a voluntary civilian organization that supplied medical aid,
financial relief, and material and spiritual comfort to the soldiers and
sailors of the Union forces. Mill’s interest in their work continued: a
year later, the Daily News (3 Apr., 1865, p. 3), reported from Boston
papers that Mill, “who has all along been a good friend of the United
States, has directed that whatever copyright may be allowed by the
American publishers of his works shall be given to the Sanitary
Commission or some similar object of national charity.” The Editorial
Committee, to whom the letter here printed is addressed, was chaired by
George W. Childs (1829-94), publisher and philanthropist, to whom Mill
had earlier written (LL, CW, Vol. XV, pp. 729-30). Dated “Avignon, May
25,” and headed, “Written to the Editorial Committee of Our Daily Fare,”
this letter is Mill’s only contribution to the paper. It was republished
in the Daily News, 25 July, p. 5, and the Penny Newsman, 31 July, p. 1,
and also in the New York Times, 10 July, p. 6, and the National
Reformer, 6 Aug., p. 327. It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
letter to the Philadelphia Sanitary Paper dated May 25, 1864, reprinted
in the Daily News of [July 25] and in the Newsman of July 31, 1864”
(MacMinn, p. 95). The variant notes derive from collation with the Daily
News and Penny Newsman, signified in the notes by “DN” and “PN”.

i am sincerely thankful to the Editing Committee for including me among
those from whom they have invited a public expression of sympathy with
the cause in which the Free States of America are so heroically shedding
their best blood.

aThe war, justifiable and laudable even if it had continued to be, as it
was at first, one of mere resistance to the extension of slavery, is
becoming, as it was easy to foresee it would, more and more a war of
principle for the complete extirpation of that curse. And in proportion
as this has become apparent, the Edition: current; Page: [1205]
sympathies of nearly all in Europe whose approbation is worth having,
are resuming their natural course, and the cause of the North will soon
have no enemies, on this side of the Atlantic, but those who prefer any
tyranny, however odious, to a triumph of popular government.

bIt would be unpardonable, did I omit, on an occasion like this, to
express my warmest feelings of admiration for the Sanitary Commission.
History has caffordedc no other example—though it is to be hoped that it
will hereafter afford many—of so great a work of usefulness extemporized
by the spontaneous self-devotion and organizing genius of a people,
altogether independently of the Government.

dBut while the present struggle has called into brilliant exercise all
the high qualities which the institutions of the American Republic have
made general among her citizens, it has also laid open—as eis the nature
of trying times to do—all the weak points in her national habits, and in
the working of her institutions. These are doubtless far better known to
thoughtful Americans than they are likely to be to any foreigner, and
this great historical crisis will be doubly blessed if it directs
attention to them. In all states of society the most serious danger is
that the national mind should go to sleep on the self-satisfied notion
that all is right with it; but the great awakening of the public
conscience which is taking place on the one political and social
abomination which has done more than all other causes together to
demoralize American politics, has probably removed all danger of this
sort for one generation at least; and warrants the hope that the
American people will not rest satisfied with the great advantages which
no other people and no other Government fpossessf in so high a degree;
but will resolve that their democracy shall not be behind any nation
whatever in those elements of good government which have been thought to
find a more congenial soil in other States of society and gunderg other
political institutions.

John Stuart Mill


410.: ENGLAND AND EUROPE
 DAILY NEWS, 1 JULY, 1864, P. 5

In February 1864 Austria and Prussia invaded Denmark to take possession
of Schleswig and Holstein. The Liberal British cabinet under Palmerston,
though sympathetic to the Danish cause, resolved on 28 June not to
intervene. Disraeli moved a motion censuring Edition: current; Page:
[1206] the government for its inaction, which was debated at length on
4, 5, 7, and 8 July in the Commons (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 176, cols.
709-817, 826-930, 952-1073, 1198-1300). Mill’s letter, headed as title,
with the subhead, “To the Editor of the Daily News,” is described in his
bibliography as “A letter headed ‘England and Europe’, signed J.S.M. in
the Daily News of July 1st 1864” (MacMinn, p. 95). It is probably
referred to in a letter of 4 July to Chadwick, editor of the Penny
Newsman, giving him permission to reprint an article which had appeared
in another paper (LL, CW, Vol. XV, p. 946); at any rate it was reprinted
in the Penny Newsman, 10 July, p. 7. The text below is that of the Daily
News, which has been collated with the Penny Newsman, yielding one
substantive variant; in the note the reading of the latter is signalled
by “PN”.

sir,—

Allow me to invite your attention to one of the aspects of the question
about to be tried next week between the present Government and the
Tories, which does not seem to have received the amount of attention
that is its due.

The Government of this country is called to a severe account for conduct
which is said to have lowered the country in the estimation of the
world. And what has thus impaired the reputation of the country is
supposed to be, that it has used strong language when it did not intend
to support that language by fighting; that it spoke its mind about the
perpetration of a great public iniquity, which it was not willing to go
to war to prevent. This is what England lately did in the case of
Poland,1 and what it is reproached with doing in the present case of
Denmark.

Now this is simply complaining that England has done what as
civilisation advances the more high-principled nations are certain to do
more and more; and that it has set the example of a practice which, when
it becomes general, will be one of the greatest steps in advance ever
made in international proceedings.

In times past nations have scarcely ever gone to war unless for their
own supposed interest or dignity. It appears to be the general opinion
that they ought to persist in thus acting, and I am not going to discuss
just now whether, or how far, this opinion is right. But there is one
point in which the practice of past times may very properly be altered,
even if the alteration goes no further. In former days, governments,
when a wrong did not affect themselves, did not care enough about the
interests of others, or about wrong merely as such, to put themselves
out of their way to incur the ill will of powerful neighbours by giving
to wrong its proper name. The present government, though not the first,
have been among the first, to break through this selfish and cowardly
forbearance. As the British government, and in the name of the British
nation, they have, in the two cases of Poland and of Denmark, given
public expression to the reprobation of a crime, although its
consequences did not touch themselves, and although they were not
Edition: current; Page: [1207] prepared to brave all the evils and
difficulties involved in arresting the crime by armed interference.

There are those who think this a fit subject for reproach. To me it
appears to be the inauguration of the practice of bringing international
and political wrongs under a moral police, by a demonstration of
disinterested disapproval. Not an insignificant thing in itself; and if
the time ever comes when such wrongs will be repressed by a sharper mode
of interference on the part of disinterested bystanders, this milder
method will be the necessary precursor and preparation for it.

But this plan of speaking our mind without backing our expression of
asentimenta by blows is a new thing in a government, because governments
have never yet cared enough about justice and honesty for their own
sake, or been sufficiently indignant against violations of them, to
adopt it. The majority of governments are still in this condition of
moral callousness and indifference, and are not even able to understand
that any government can care about a wrong which is no prejudice to
itself. In consequence, a government which begins the practice of
speaking out honestly when circumstances do not allow it to act
chivalrously, must lay its account with incurring, in the first
instance, some loss of what is termed consideration. The consideration
of a government still depends, as that of an individual once did, upon
the degree of readiness ascribed to it to draw its sword whenever any of
its sentiments is offended. If, therefore, it shows any offended
feeling, and the sword does not come forth, it is for a time suspected
of being wanting either in sincerity or in spirit. But England is able,
and should be willing, to show that the kind of consideration which is
given to a Drawcansir is a kind that she can do without.2

The feeling of the country did not allow the government to go to war for
Poland, and would not, probably, allow it to go to war for Denmark. But
this being granted, I hope there are very few Englishmen who would have
preferred that, not intending to fight, England should have remained
silent. I trust that if Poland had been desolated and Denmark plundered
without a word of protest on our part there would have been far greater
dissatisfaction with our government, and a far deeper sense of shame and
national humiliation, than I believe to exist now. As it is, we need not
fear any permanent loss of prestige, even with those with whom the only
thing which gives it is the power and willingness to resort to force.
They will soon find out whether the change which has taken place in us
is that we have grown more afraid of war, or only more prone to denounce
and stigmatise great public iniquities, even when the sacrifices
required for stopping Edition: current; Page: [1208] their perpetration
are greater than it is the duty of a single power to incur in a quarrel
not its own.—I am, &c.,

J.S.M.


411.: ON HARE’S PLAN
 SPECTATOR, 29 APR., 1865, P. 467

In his A Treatise on the Election of Representatives, Parliamentary and
Municipal (1859), Thomas Hare (1806-91) put forward a scheme for
proportional representation that Mill immediately adopted (see, e.g.,
CW, Vol XIX, pp. 358-70). Hare advanced particular proposals for
applying the plan to Metropolitan elections in On an Organization of the
Metropolitan Elections (London: National Association for the Promotion
of Social Science, 1865), a paper read at the Association’s meeting in
London on 10 Apr., 1865, at which Mill spoke (see “Metropolitan
Elections,” Daily News, 11 Apr., p. 2). The issues were taken up in the
article referred to in Mill’s first sentence, “Metropolitan Elections,”
Spectator, 15 Apr., pp. 405-6. The letter, headed “Mr. John Stuart Mill
on Mr. Hare’s Plan,” with subhead, “To the Editor of the ‘Spectator,’ ”
is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A letter on Hare’s System in the
Spectator of April 29th 1865”

(MacMinn, p. 96).

sir,—

In your paper of Saturday, the 15th, while commenting on the proposal of
Mr. Hare for the experimental adoption of his system of representation
in the metropolitan constituencies, you give to that system the credit
which it deserves of opening the representation of the capital to the
eminent men of the whole empire; but you seem to think that it would
exclude all others, and that local men, qualified and disposed to attend
to the local interests of the constituency, would under that system no
longer be elected.

Nothing can more strongly exemplify the need of discussion on the
subject than the appearance of such a misconception in a paper like
yours; for it seems to me evident that Mr. Hare’s plan could not have
the effect which you apprehend, and that of all the objections which
have been made to it this is one of the most untenable.

Mr. Hare’s plan would enable every person to be elected for the
metropolis who was voted for by a twenty-second part of the whole number
of votes given. Is it supposed that not so many as a twenty-second part
of the metropolitan electors would desire a local representative? Were
this so, it would be a clear proof that local representatives were not
needed. But they are needed, and they would consequently be voted for,
not by once or twice or three times, but by ten or twelve times the
number of the quota. In Mr. Hare’s system, as in the present, the real
danger would be lest local feelings and interests should predominate too
much. They would certainly fill as great a place in the representation
as they do in the minds of the represented; for Mr. Hare’s system does
not swamp the real wishes of any portion of the electors, all other
systems do.

Edition: current; Page: [1209]
The misapprehension is probably occasioned by a momentary forgetfulness
of the main difference between Mr. Hare’s mode of election and the
existing one. If the result of the poll were to be determined in the
present way, by comparative majorities, it would be possible, though not
probable, that men of national reputation, known to all, and voted for
in every part of the metropolis, might obtain a majority over all the
local candidates, each of whom might be known and supported only by the
inhabitants of a particular district. But under Mr. Hare’s system, the
man of general celebrity could not have an unlimited number of votes
counted for him, but a certain number only; when he had obtained that
number, he would be returned, and the remainder of his supporters would
have their votes counted for some one else. The return of the useful and
hardworking local candidate would not depend upon his obtaining more
votes, for example, than Mr. Gladstone;1 he would be sure of his
election if he obtained the 2,000 or 5,000 suffrages which might
represent a twenty-second part of the total number of votes given. The
clubs and political parties whose influence you dread, would be well
aware of this, and as it would be their strongest interest that their
list should be composed of such names as would conciliate every large
section of the constituency, they would be sure to include in it a
sufficient number of the most competent local men of their party.

The power which would undoubtedly be exercised by these clubs and
managers of parties, is a consideration of greater moment, which
deserves and requires a full discussion. Lord Stanley touched on it at
the Social Science meeting, not as an objection, but as a difficulty;
unfortunately towards the close of the discussion, when time did not
admit of its receiving the prominence due to it.2 My answer would be,
that party organization will always be a great power, but that the power
is at present greater instead of less than it would be under the
proposed system. As things now are, the party which can obtain the
numerical majority returns all the members, and nobody else is
represented. If neither party is confident of a majority the two
parties, by an understanding with one another, can divide the
representation without a contest between regular party men of both
sides. And these party men, in the majority of cases, are not the best
or ablest men of either party, but its landed or moneyed nullities.
Under the proposed system, no party, however well organized, could
engross all the representation, unless it embraced all the constituency:
it could never be represented in a greater proportion than that of its
numerical strength, and to thus much it is indisputably entitled. If the
opposite party, or if independent electors, anxious only to elect the
best man, could make up, not a half, or a third, or a tenth, but a bare
twenty-second part of the number of actual voters, they would obtain
one, at Edition: current; Page: [1210] least, of the twenty-two
representatives. Meanwhile the great parties, though they would of
course strive for the election of their political friends, would be
obliged to select from among their friends those who would do most
credit to the proposers. It would not do for them to make up a list of
less worthy or less distinguished names than the rival lists. They would
have the strongest motives for proposing among party men those who were
also something more than party men; who, besides the party support,
might have a chance of obtaining by their personal merit votes which
would have been refused to them as mere party organs. For the electors
who care for things above party would not then, as now, have only a
choice between party candidates; if the party names proposed did not
satisfy them they would have the power of returning some candidates of
their own.

Allow me, Sir, in conclusion, to entreat your more deliberate
consideration of this great subject. Your paper is honourably
distinguished from most others by looking forward to a perhaps distant
future, which instead of deprecating, you desire, but because you are
sufficiently interested in it to perceive in what direction its special
difficulties and chances of failure lie, you are anxious to provide it
in time with the appropriate correctives. I have the deepest conviction
that no corrective ever yet thought of for the peculiar inconveniences
of a commercial and industrial democracy approaches in efficacy to the
system of Mr. Hare; while it is equally suitable to the state of things
under which we now live, since it would at once assure to that minority
in the constituencies which consists of the operative classes, the share
in the representation which you demand for them, and which they cannot
obtain in any other mode yet proposed except by extruding from the same
privilege other large and important portions of the electoral body.—I
am, &c.,

J.S. Mill


412.: THE WESTMINSTER ELECTION [1]
 UNPUBLISHED [CA. 28 APR., 1865]

This item and No. 414 are concerned with the parliamentary election of
1865, in which Mill was a successful candidate. One of the two
Westminster seats had become vacant with the retirement of George de
Lacy Evans (1787-1870), who had represented the borough 1833-41 and
1846-65; the other was held by Sir John Villiers Shelley (1808-67), like
Evans a Liberal, and M.P. since 1852. The first new Liberal candidate
for the election of 1865 was Robert Wellesley Grosvenor (1834-1918), a
representative of the wealthy Grosvenor family, headed by the Duke of
Westminster, whose estates included much of Westminster. On 13 Feb.,
however, the Liberal electors held a meeting at which they resolved to
solicit eminent men to run as their representatives; Mill and Viscount
Amberley were suggested (see The Times, 14 Feb., 1865, p. 6). Mill
explained his principles in two letters, which were published, to James
Beal (1829-91), the Committee Chairman, who Edition: current; Page:
[1211] had announced to him that he was their choice (see LL, CW, Vol.
XVI, pp. 1005-7). He also urged the Committee to persevere in their
proposed plan of soliciting names of candidates from the Liberal
electors at large. The following MS draft of a letter to be used for
this purpose is in Mill’s hand in University College London, attached to
a copy of his letter to Chadwick of 28 Apr., 1865 (LL, CW, Vol. XVI, pp.
1038-9). Whether it is of Mill’s own composition, or is a revision of
someone else’s is not known. It is not listed in the bibliography of his
published writings, and no published version has been found; however,
the opinions are those he expressed elsewhere.

“a committee of —” or “The Liberal Committee” (or whatever is its proper
designation) having taken into consideration the prospect of a vacancy
in the representation of Westminster, have determined, before nominating
any candidate to ascertain by a direct appeal to the electors, what
candidates they would prefer, and have appointed a Special Committee for
carrying this resolution into effect, whose names are adjoined.

You are therefore, as an elector of Westminster, earnestly requested to
read and consider the documents herewith submitted, and having done so,
to fill up the form hereunto annexed, with the names of the two persons
for whom, without any personal solicitation, you would be willing to
vote.

The Committee have adopted this mode of proceeding for the following
reasons.

1st. To afford to the electors a wider range of choice, and enable them
to obtain a better quality of representatives. They do not think it
worthy of Westminster to accept the first man, of wealth or aristocratic
connexion, who offers himself under the appellation of a Liberal. The
largest and most intelligent constituencies in the Kingdom should aim at
being represented by persons of proved capacity for public service, and
of a high order of intellect. It is for the electors to select, among
such persons, those whom they would most wish to adopt as their
candidates, in order that the necessary steps may be taken to give
effect to their wishes.

2dly. To avoid the useless and wasteful expenses, by which the choice of
the electors is virtually limited to rich men, and seats in parliament
are, in effect, made purchaseable by money, for no higher purposes than
personal distinction or party convenience.

3dly. To give to every elector an equal opportunity for expressing his
opinion, with the least possible trouble and inconvenience, and without
the intrusion of paid canvassers, or the exertion of undue influence to
obtain the promise of his vote.

The Committee were desirous of bringing before the electors, along with
the names now submitted, the greatest number possible of other persons
whose character, and proved qualifications, would render them suitable
representatives of a place which, like Westminster, has for a century
aspired to be represented by the most eminent names in the party of
Reform and Progress. But, of the persons Edition: current; Page: [1212]
known to possess such qualifications as would make them worthy to be
elected without personal solicitation and free of expense, some were
prevented by other engagements, and some by personal reasons, from
consenting to be proposed to the electors. The Committee have been thus
precluded from submitting authentic statements of the claims of any
other candidates than those herein specified. They do not, however,
presume or desire to put any restrictions on your choice, but will
gladly receive and record the expression of your preference in favour of
any person by whom it would be more agreeable to you to be represented.

After the receipt of replies from a sufficient number of electors, the
two persons for whom the greatest number of preferences have been
expressed, will be put in nomination at the hustings. It would have been
gratifying to the Committee if the friends of the sitting member, and
those of the gentleman who first presented himself to supply the
vacancy, would have consented to refer the pretensions of their
candidates to the same test. This, however, they have refused. It now,
therefore, rests with the electors to declare, whether they are so
perfectly satisfied with the qualifications of these gentlemen, as to
prefer them to the candidates now submitted for your choice, and to all
others who could be obtained. The Committee earnestly hope that by
returning the paper with the blanks filled up, you will afford them the
means of judging whether this is the case with yourself.


413.: ROMILLY’S PUBLIC RESPONSIBILITY AND THE BALLOT
 READER, 29 APR., 1865, PP. 474-5

Mill’s review is of Public Responsibility and Vote by Ballot. By an
Elector (London: Ridgway, 1865), by Henry Romilly (1805-84), businessman
and magistrate, son of Sir Samuel Romilly and brother of John, 1st Baron
Romilly. Romilly included Mill’s review (calling it a “letter,” perhaps
because it was signed with Mill’s initials) in the 2nd ed. of his
pamphlet, which had the subtitle: To Which Are Appended, A Letter from
John Stuart Mill to the Editor of the Reader, 29 Apr., 1865, and
Observations Thereon (London: Ridgway, 1867). (A copy is in SC, without
marks.) Mill’s only contribution to the Reader, this notice is in the
“Current Literature” section, headed “Public Responsibility and the
Ballot,” with the subhead, “Public Responsibility and Vote by Ballot. By
an Elector. (Ridgway.) 1865.” It is described in Mill’s bibiliography as
“Review of a pamphlet on the Ballot (by Mr. Henry Romilly) in the Reader
of April 29, 1865; afterwards reprinted by Mr. Henry Romilly, in a
pamphlet replying to it”

(MacMinn, p. 96).

this pamphlet is a defence of the Ballot, or, rather, an answer to the
objections to it. The writer is evidently a man of intelligence and
knowledge, and accustomed to discussion. It is always fortunate when
disputed questions are treated, not in a rhetorical, but in a
dialectical spirit. The pamphlet contains Edition: current; Page: [1213]
incidentally many true and useful thoughts, and some others which excite
surprise that the writer can have gone through the process of putting
them on paper without perceiving their untenableness. To the present
reviewer (who must be understood as speaking for himself only) the
discussion appears, as to its main object, a failure.

The arguments for and against the Ballot are so trite and familiar, that
the world is excusably tired of them. But in the answers to them there
is still room for novelty, and it is in these that the main stress of
the practical controversy lies. The author of the pamphlet directs his
principal efforts against one of the anti-Ballot arguments, which he is
quite right in regarding as the strongest; namely, that the franchise is
a trust for the public, and the voter should be responsible to the
public for the use made of it.

There are two ways in which a writer might meet this argument. He might
admit the moral responsibility of the elector, and the beneficial effect
on his mind of fulfilling his trust under the eye and criticism of those
who are interested in its right fulfilment; but, he might say, the
voters are in such a state of helpless dependence—each of them, so to
speak, has a tyrant with eyes so fiercely glaring on him—that since his
vote, if known to his friends and family, will be known to his master,
the salutary influences of honour and shame cannot be admitted without
letting in, along with them, the more powerful ones of terror. Darkness
is the only element in which the voter can be free to do his duty; and
we must trust, for a good vote, to such spontaneous feelings of
conscience and patriotism as may not need the support of publicity. This
would reduce the question to one of fact, on which every one would form
his own opinion. He who thinks that the electors, or a large proportion
of them, are in this state of compulsory subjection, will probably be a
supporter of the Ballot; though, even then, he ought to ask himself
whether this slavish dependence is likely to last, whether the whole of
the changes now taking place in society do not tend to its diminution,
and even extinction. There might be a good case against its being yet
time to abolish the Ballot, if we had always had it, and yet no case in
favour of introducing, for a temporary purpose, a novelty which, when
the time comes for which we ought to be looking, will be mischievous,
and which has a decided tendency to unfit men for that coming time.

This, however, in our judgment, is the only line of defence for the
Ballot which can ever be, to a certain extent, tenable. The author of
the pamphlet has not chosen this mode. He prefers to reject the
principle of electoral responsibility altogether. He does not deny the
voter to be discharging a duty, for which he is accountable to
conscience; on the contrary, a high sense of duty to the public is
always present to the author’s mind. But he thinks that responsibility
to public opinion will seldom operate with much force; that, when it
does, it will as often operate on the wrong side as on the right; and
that the voter is more likely to vote well if left to his personal
promptings, uninfluenced by praise or blame from Edition: current; Page:
[1214] anyone. For, “if you place him by the Ballot quite beyond the
reach of the improper control of other men, you leave to the elector no
intelligible interest except that of the body of which he is a
member—his interest as a citizen.” (P. 12.) It would hardly be fair to
hold the author to this dictum, to which, we are sure, he could not, on
consideration, adhere. Has no elector any private interest but what
other people’s bribes or threats create for him? We will not take
advantage, against the author, of his own exaggerations. We will give
his argument a liberal construction. He means, and in many places says,
that in the absence of other motives to an honest vote, we may safely
rely on the voter’s interest as a citizen; his share of the public
interest.

Now, we venture to say that this motive, in the common course of things,
does not operate at all, or only in the slightest possible degree, on
the mind either of an elector or of a member of Parliament. When he
votes honestly, he is thinking of voting honestly, not of the fraction
of a fraction of an interest which he, as an individual, may have in
what is beneficial to the public. That minute benefit is not only too
insignificant in amount, but too uncertain, too distant, and too hazy,
to have any real effect on his mind. His motive, when it is an
honourable one, is the desire to do right. We will not term it
patriotism or moral principle, in order not to ascribe to the voter’s
state of mind a solemnity that does not belong to it. But he votes for a
particular man or measure because he thinks it the right thing to do,
the proper thing for the good of the country. Once in a thousand times,
as in a case of peace and war, or of taking off taxes, the thought may
cross him that he shall save a few pounds or shillings in his year’s
expenditure if the side he votes for prevails. But these cases are few,
and, even in them, the interested motive is not the prevailing one. It
is possible, indeed, that he or his class may have a private interest
acting in the same direction with the public interest, as a man who has
speculated for a fall in corn has an interest in a good harvest; and
this may determine his conduct. But, in that case, it is the private
interest that actuates him, not his share of the public interest.

Since, then, the real motive which induces a man to vote honestly is,
for the most part, not an interested motive in any form, but a social
one, the point to be decided is, whether the social feelings connected
with an act, and the sense of social duty in performing it, can be
expected to be as powerful when the act is done in secret, and he can
neither be admired for disinterested, nor blamed for mean and selfish
conduct. But this question is answered as soon as stated. When, in every
other act of a man’s life which concerns his duties to others, publicity
and criticism ordinarily improve his conduct, it cannot be that voting
for a member of Parliament is the single case in which he will act
better for being sheltered against all comment.

The author, indeed, says with truth, and it is his strongest point, that
public opinion is itself one of the misleading influences. In the first
place, the public opinion nearest to the voter may be that of his own
class, and may side with, Edition: current; Page: [1215] instead of
counteracting, the class interest. Besides, the opinion of the general
public has its aberrations, too, and its most violent action is apt to
be its worst. “At periods of political excitement, the practical sense
to an elector of the phrase, ‘Responsibility to public opinion,’ is too
often this: Go up to that polling-booth and, at your peril, vote for any
candidate but the popular candidate.” (P. 42.) Such cases of physical
violence are not what we have here to consider. If voters are liable to
be mobbed, and if the state of society, as at Rome in the time of
Cicero, is so lawless that the public authorities cannot protect them,
cadit quaestio the Ballot is indispensable; though, in that case, even
the Ballot is a feeble protection. We are for leaving the voter open to
the penalties of opinion, but not to those of brute force. The author
overlooks what, under this limitation, is the most important feature of
the case; he supposes that, if public opinion acts on the elector at
all, it must act by dictating his vote. When it is violently exerted, it
does so; but its more ordinary operation consists in making the voter
more careful to act up to his own sincere opinion. It operates through
the quiet comments of relatives, neighbours, and companions; noting
instances of variance between professions and conduct, or in which a
selfish private purpose or a personal grudge prevails over public duty.
In countries used to free discussion, it is only in times of fierce
public contention that a man is really disliked for voting in conformity
to the opinion he is known to hold. If he is reproached even by
opponents, it is for something paltry in the motive; and, if there is a
paltry motive, it is generally no recondite one, but such as the opinion
of those who know him can easily detect, and therefore may be able to
restrain.

The author deems it a fallacy to distinguish between the election of
members of a club and that of members of Parliament, on the ground that
the voters in a club have no public duty. [Pp. 4-12.] They have a duty,
he says, to the members of the club. This we altogether dispute. A club
is a voluntary association, into which people enter for their individual
pleasure, and are not accountable to one another. What is there wanted
is, that each should declare by his vote what is agreeable to himself;
whatever has then a majority is proved to be agreeable to the majority,
and whoever dislikes it can leave the association. But if we were all
born members of a club, and had no means, except emigration, of
exchanging our club for any other, then, indeed, the voter would really
be bound to consult the interests of the other members, the case would
be assimilated to that of an election to Parliament, and the Ballot,
accordingly, would be objectionable.

There is no room to follow the writer though all his arguments, but we
cannot leave unnoticed the answer he makes to the objection that the
Ballot would lead to lying. To this he replies, that lies are of very
different degrees of criminality; that there are many greater moral
delinquencies than “the lie of legitimate self-defence;” [p. 67] that a
dishonest vote, given from a selfish motive, is worse; that such a vote
ought to be called a falsehood; and that to think so rigorously of the
mere breach of verbal truth, and so gently of a grave violation Edition:
current; Page: [1216] of public duty, is shallow and false morality. In
all this we heartily concur; but the fact remains, that the majority of
mankind do feel the lie an offence and a degradation, and do not so feel
respecting the breach of public duty. We would gladly make them think a
dishonest vote as bad as a lie, but it is to be feared we should only
succeed in making them think a lie no worse than a dishonest vote. When
people have only a few of the moral feelings they ought to have, there
is the more danger in weakening those few. This is a truth which many
moral saws in general circulation overlook. We are often told, for
example, that an equivocation is as bad as a lie. It is well for mankind
that everybody is not of this opinion, and that not all who will
equivocate will lie. For the temptation to equivocate is often almost
irresistible; indeed, the proposition, that everything which can be
termed an equivocation is necessarily condemnable, is only true in those
cases and those relations in life in which it is a duty to be absolutely
open and unreserved. But to confine ourselves to what is really
culpable: a person may be a habitual equivocator of a bad kind, he may
have no scruple at all in implying what is not true, and yet, if when
categorically questioned he shrinks from an express falsehood, this
ultimate hold on him makes it still possible for his fellow-creatures to
trust his word. Let no one underrate the importance of what mankind
would gain if the precise literal meaning of men’s assertions could be
kept conformable to fact. There may be much unworthy cunning and
treachery notwithstanding, but the difference for all human purposes is
immense between him who respects that final barrier and those who
overleap it.

Did space permit, we might point out some cases in which the author,
though habitually candid, yields to the temptation of caricaturing an
opponent’s argument; as in charging a writer (pp. 31-2 and 48) with
arguing as if all votes, given under the shelter of the Ballot, would be
base or selfish, when the only thing asserted, or needed was that some
would.1 But we prefer to quote a passage which tells strongly against
the writer, and in favour of our own case:

A century ago, before the virtuous example of the first William Pitt had
made it dishonourable in members of Parliament to hold their votes at
the disposal of the dispensers of the public money, it might almost have
been a question whether the incontestable advantages of publicity were
not too dearly bought at the cost of that mass of political turpitude
which it would have been possible, by means of the Ballot, to sweep from
within the walls of Parliament.

(P. 24.)

If, at the time spoken of, our ancestors, to get rid of this mass of
turpitude, had introduced the Ballot into the House of Commons, they
would have done the exact parallel of what we should do if we adopted it
in Parliamentary elections. And ought not the fact that all this
profligacy has been got rid of without the Edition: current; Page:
[1217] Ballot to be a lesson to us for the other case? We see that the
progress of the public conscience could and did, in the space of a
single generation, correct political immoralities more gross and
mischievous than those which now remain, and apparently harder to
remove, because affecting the élite, socially speaking, of the nation.
Such an example in times when the public conscience was much less alive,
and its improvement far less rapid than now, ought to reassure us, to
say the least, as to the necessity of the Ballot, and should deter us
from putting on the badge of slavery at the very time when a few more
steps and a very little additional effort will land us in complete
freedom.

J.S.M.


414.: THE WESTMINSTER ELECTION [2]
 THE TIMES, 22 JULY, 1865, P. 2

For the background, see No. 412. William Henry Smith (1825-91), head of
the well-known bookselling firm, a liberal-conservative, had since
entered the race, and Sir John Villiers Shelley had retired; on 12 July
Mill and Grosvenor were elected with votes of 4525 and 4534
respectively. Mill’s letter of thanks appeared in other papers on 22
July, including the Daily News. Headed “Westminster Election,” the
letter (not listed in Mill’s bibliography) is introduced by this note:
“The following letter from Mr. J.S. Mill, M.P., to the Liberal electors
of Westminster, has been forwarded to us for publication:”. In the Daily
News it is dated “Blackheath Park, July 21.” The text below is that of
The Times, which has been collated with the Daily News, 22 July, 1865,
p. 2; in the variant notes the text of the latter is signalled by “DN”.

gentlemen,—

The triumphant reassertion of the principle of purity of election in its
largest sense, by the selection of a representative in Parliament on
public grounds alone, against an unexampled combination of personal and
pecuniary influences, is a lasting honour to Westminster and benefit to
the popular cause. The victory is wholly yours, not mine, since I only
appeared among you in the last stage of the contest to meet the desire
expressed for a fuller explanation of my opinions. But the address just
issued by the committee1 seems to demand that I should join with them in
hearty and grateful acknowledgments to the Liberal electors generally,
and especially to the great number who, by their strenuous and
disinterested personal exertions, renewed the lesson so often forgotten,
of the power of a high and generous purpose over bodies of citizens
accustomed to free political action.

aElectors!a your work is done, and mine has now to be commenced. The
Edition: current; Page: [1218] unsought confidence which you have placed
in me has laid on me an obligation which it would heavily tax powers far
superior to mine adequately to fulfil. That I may not fall so far below
your hopes as to make you regret your choice, will be my constant and
earnest endeavour.

bI am, cgentlemen, most sincerely and respectfully yours,c

J.S. Mill


415.: THE BALLOT
 DAILY NEWS, 31 JULY, 1868, P. 5

John Bright (who had been closely allied with Mill on many issues in the
House of Commons) gave a speech to his constituents on 24 July, 1868, in
which he predicted that the ballot, especially in the large
constituencies, would be required “merely as a matter of election
machinery.” He went on: “Even Mr. Stuart Mill, who had long objected to
the ballot, was becoming a convert, and was of opinion that it might be
tried in Ireland” (“Mr. Bright at Birmingham,” The Times, 25 July, p.
12). Mill’s response (not listed in his bibliography) is headed “Mr.
Mill on the Ballot” with the subhead, “To the Editor of the Daily News,”
and is dated “Blackheath-park, July 29.” It appeared also in the
Beehive, 8 Aug., 1868, p. 7, without substantive variants.

sir,—

As it would appear from the report of Mr. Bright’s eloquent speech at
Birmingham that there exists some misapprehension concerning my present
opinion on the ballot, I should be obliged by your permitting me to
state that my opinion is as decidedly unfavourable to the ballot as it
ever was; that I should see its adoption with regret in any part of the
United Kingdom; that I spoke against it in a meeting of my constituents
on the same evening on which Mr. Bright was speaking at Birmingham; and
that I voted against its adoption in Ireland at the division on it this
session.1—I am, etc.,

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [1219]


416.: GLADSTONE FOR GREENWICH
 THE TIMES, 22 SEPT., 1868, P. 7

Gladstone having become unpopular in his constituency of South
Lancashire because of his position on the Irish Church, he was put
forward as a candidate for Greenwich without his solicitation, and in
the event elected there, while losing his South Lancashire seat. The
committee proposing him called a meeting at Deptford on 16 Sept.,
inviting Mill and others to speak. (See “Election Intelligence.
Greenwich,” The Times, 17 Sept., p. 10.) As Mill explained in a letter
to William Cox Bennett on 14 Sept., “Mr. Dickson, whom I understand to
be the Secretary for Deptford, wrote to me during your absence, asking
me either to attend or to write a letter; and as I was unable to attend,
I sent him a letter for the purpose of being read at the meeting, the
receipt of which he has acknowledged” (LL, CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1440). The
letter, dated “Avignon, August 28,” and headed “Mr. John Stuart Mill and
Mr. Gladstone,” is introduced by the following sentence: “The following
is the text of the letter from Mr. John Stuart Mill, read at the meeting
held at Deptford, on Wednesday evening, to support the election of Mr.
Gladstone for the borough of Greenwich:”. A shortened version of the
letter appeared also in the Daily News, 17 Sept., 1868, p. 3, under the
heading “Election Intelligence / Greenwich.” The letter is not listed in
Mill’s bibliography.

dear sir,—

I am greatly honoured by your invitation to be present at your meeting
for promoting the election of Mr. Gladstone for the borough of
Greenwich, and should have been very happy to attend it had I been in
England. The example which Greenwich is now setting is a valuable one,
which we may hope to see more generally followed when the true
importance of political action is more justly appreciated, and when
politics arouse more of the interest that is justly due to them. The
example of electing a public man, without any solicitation on his part,
and without any consideration of whether he may also be elected
elsewhere, as a tribute to his character, and as an expression of the
strength of the feeling in his favour, is happily not new in our
political history. It is too natural a thing to do, when people feel as
warmly as they often ought to feel, and the unanswerable evidence of
public confidence it gives in a great man too obviously must strengthen
him and the cause he serves, for the example not to have been set on
several occasions (in the cases of Mr. Cobden and Lord Brougham, among
others),1 when political feeling was strong and the merits of the public
man conspicuous. It would be much to be regretted if such examples as
these were allowed to die out; and Greenwich is doing a public service
by reviving them, by strengthening a statesman whose public services
have aroused Edition: current; Page: [1220] a bitterness which is the
best tribute of their value, and by adding to his power to carry through
some more of the many important reforms that must not be long retarded
if England is to hold its honourable place among nations.—I am, &c.,

J.S. Mill


417.: BOUVERIE VERSUS CHADWICK
 THE TIMES, 22 OCT., 1868, P. 3

For the election of 1868, Mill wished to find a seat for his friend
Edwin Chadwick; by strongly endorsing him for the borough of Kilmarnock,
he incurred the ire of Edward Pleydell Bouverie (1818-89), a Liberal
hostile to Gladstone who had represented the borough since 1844. The
Times of 16 Oct., 1868, p. 10, printed a letter of Bouverie’s to Mill
complaining of Mill’s sowing dissension in the Liberal party, as well as
Mill’s reply, and Bouverie’s further rejoinder (Mill’s reply is in LL,
CW, Vol. XVI, pp. 1453-4). The paragraph printed here introduces another
reply by Mill (ibid., pp. 1460-4), which is not listed in his
bibliography. On the envelope of the MS draft of that reply at Johns
Hopkins is written in Mill’s hand “For publication as chiefly Helen’s”
(i.e., his step-daughter Helen Taylor’s). The letter is headed “Mr. Mill
and Mr. Bouverie,” with the subhead, “To the Editor of The Times,” and
is dated “Avignon, Oct. 19.” On the same day the letter appeared in the
Daily News (p. 5) under the heading “Mr. Mill on the Character of
Liberal Candidates. / To the Editor of the Daily News.”

sir,—

Mr. Bouverie having forwarded to you a correspondence between us, and
his last letter having appeared in The Times before I had received it, I
take the liberty of asking permission to reply to it through The
Times.—I am, &c.,

J.S. Mill


418.: NEW ENGLAND WOMAN’S SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION
 NEW YORK TRIBUNE, 27 MAY, 1869, P. 1

This letter was addressed to Julia Ward Howe (1819-1910), reformer and
author, the President of the New England Woman’s Suffrage Association,
founded in Boston in 1868 chiefly by Lucy Stone (1818-93) and including
prominent reformers such as Wendell Phillips. The association, having
been unsuccessful in enfranchising women along with negroes in the 15th
amendment to the Constitution, was now working for a 16th. The letter,
dated “Avignon, April 18, 1869,” is not listed in Mill’s bibliography.
It appeared, under the heading “Woman Suffrage / Letter from J. Stuart
Mill—the XVIth Constitutional Amendment,” as part of an account
beginning, “Boston, May 26. A Public meeting, which was largely
attended, was held by the New-England Woman’s Suffrage Association, in
Horticultural Hall, today, Julia Ward Howe presiding. Prayer was offered
by the Rev. Mrs. P.N. Hannaford. Letters, sympathizing with the
movement, were received from Robert Collyer, Anna Dickinson, J. Stuart
Mill, George William Curtis, Mrs. E.D. Cheeny, and the Hon. George T.
Hoar. The following is the letter of Mr. Mill:”.

Edition: current; Page: [1221]
dear madame,—

I am very much honored by the wish of the New-England Woman’s Suffrage
Association that I should be present at their annual meeting, but they
have been misinformed as to my having any present intention of visiting
America. Should I ever contemplate such a visit, there are no persons on
your side of the Atlantic with whom it would give me more pleasure to
exchange marks of sympathy than with those who are working so
energetically for a cause so dear to me as that of the equal claim of
all human beings, independent of sex, to the full rights of citizenship,
and freedom of competition, on equal terms, for all social advantages.

I am, etc., very sincerely yours,

J.S. Mill


419.: THE CASE OF WILLIAM SMITH
 UNPUBLISHED LETTER TO THE DAILY NEWS [LATE 1869 TO EARLY 1870]

William Smith, police constable, had been tried and punished for
striking an Irish labourer and felt-maker, Patrick Macgovern, in the
course of stopping Macgovern’s assault on his wife Eliza. The case was
reported in “The Police Courts. Thames,” Daily News, 25 Dec., 1869, p.
2, from which Mill quotes. For Mill’s efforts to interest the
Attorney-General, Sir Robert Porrett Collier, and the editor of the
Daily News, Frank Harrison Hill, in Smith’s reinstatement, see LL, CW,
Vol. XVII, pp. 1677-9, and 1705-6. A long leader appeared in the Daily
News, 18 Jan., 1870, pp. 4-5; one may assume that a fair copy of this
unsigned draft (MS, Yale) was sent to the Daily News (which did not
print it) as part of Mill’s unsuccessful campaign. The letter, being
unpublished, is not in Mill’s bibliography.

sir,—

I beg you to receive the inclosed £5 as the commencement of a
subscription for the benefit of the police constable William Smith, No.
151 K, who as I learn from your paper of Dec. 25 has been sentenced by
Mr. Benson, the Thames Police magistrate,1 to a month’s imprisonment and
hard labour for striking with his staff a man who had only knocked down
his own wife in the street.

“The assault,” said Mr. Benson, meaning not the man’s assault upon his
wife but the constable’s assault upon the man, “was unprovoked, brutal,
and unjustifiable” and it has gone forth from the seat of justice to the
whole brutal part of the population, that for a man to knock down a
woman, provided that woman is his wife, is no “provocation” and that a
month’s penal servitude is a proper penalty, not for the ruffian himself
but for the appointed guardian of the public peace who interferes with
his authorized brutality.

For my own part, it seems to me that the policeman who thinks that men’s
wives are within the pale of legal protection and who, astonishing as
the idea Edition: current; Page: [1222] was to the man himself and to
the magistrate, thinks it his duty not to look on passively and see them
maltreated, deserves a signal mark of public approbation, which cannot
in this instance take a better shape than that of a subscription to
compensate him for the suffering and degradation as well as the
pecuniary loss inflicted on him by this iniquitous sentence.


420.: THE EDUCATION BILL
 SPECTATOR, 9 APR., 1870, P. 465

At a National Education League meeting, held Friday, 25 Mar., 1870,
chaired by Sir Charles Dilke, Mill was the principal speaker (The Times,
26 Mar., p. 5). The meeting was called to protest the power given to
School Boards to found denominational schools at public expense, in the
Government’s “Bill to Provide for Public Elementary Education in England
and Wales,” 33 Victoria (17 Feb., 1870), PP, 1870, I, 505-42. (In the
event, when the Bill became law as 33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75, the powers
of the denominations were much curtailed.) The Spectator commented on
the issues and Mill’s views in “The Secularists in Full Cry,” 2 Apr.,
pp. 425-6, from which the quotations are taken. Mill’s letter, not
listed in his bibliography, is in the “Letters to the Editor” column,
headed “Mr. J.S. Mill and the Education Bill,” with the subhead, “To the
Editor of the ‘Spectator.’ ”

sir,—

Having full belief in your not intending to misrepresent, though (if you
will allow me to say so) not equal confidence in the carefulness and
accuracy of all your representations, I do not doubt that you will
permit me to correct a serious misstatement which pervades the whole of
your last Saturday’s comments on the Education meeting at St. James’s
Hall. The writer affirms again and again, with sundry uncomplimentary
remarks on the inconsistencies and other irrationalities therein
implied, that in my speech at that meeting I advocated and asked for the
system of the British Schools,1 which he describes as the merely formal
reading of a portion of the Bible “as a kind of grace before meat to
secular lessons.” I challenge your writer to point out a single word of
my speech which either expresses or implies approval of the “British
system,” or of the employment of the Bible in rate-supported schools at
all. I referred to the British system only as a proof that the
Dissenters do not desire their distinctive doctrines to be taught in
schools, and would consequently derive no advantage from the fund which
the Bill gives them, where they are the stronger party,2 of practising
this injustice to the detriment of the Established Church.

For myself, though I regard the British system as greatly preferable to
the Edition: current; Page: [1223] merely denominational, yet, on any
other footing than as the less of two evils, I decidedly object to it,
as unjust to Catholics, Jews, and the Secularists, and for other
reasons.

I am, Sir, &c.,

J.S. Mill3


421.: THE TREATY OF 1856 [1]
 THE TIMES, 19 NOV., 1870, P. 5

On 31 Oct., 1870, the Russian government issued a declaration
repudiating the neutralization of the Black Sea required by the Treaty
of Paris of 1856. The declaration, sent by Prince Gortschakoff to Baron
Bunnow, was communicated to Earl Granville on 9 Nov. (see “The Treaty of
1856: Prince Gortschakoff’s Note,” The Times, 18 Nov., p. 3). The action
caused a war scare in England. Mill sent this letter to The Times
through Leonard Courtney (see LL, CW, Vol. XVII, p. 1775), who was a
leader writer for The Times, and may have been responsible for leading
articles on 16, 17, and 19 November professing the attitudes to which
Mill was objecting. In her continuation of Mill’s Autobiography, Helen
Taylor says this and the following letter (No. 422) “were called forth
by a cry, that arose at that time in a portion of the English press, for
plunging England into a war with Russia. They were the first protest
that appeared in any well known name against such a war; they called
forth others and helped calm down the warlike excitement that was being
aroused.” (CW, Vol. I, p. 626.) Mill’s “Treaty Obligations” in December
took up the same issues (CW, Vol. XXI, pp. 341-8), as does No. 423. This
letter, headed “Mr. Mill on the Treaty of 1856,” with the subhead, “To
the Editor of The Times,” is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A
letter in the Times of Nov. 19, 1870 on the threatened war with Russia”

(MacMinn, p. 99).

sir,—

Without wishing, at least for the present, to discuss the character of
the declaration just made by the Russian Government—a discussion which
would raise questions, both moral and political, more intricate and
difficult than people Edition: current; Page: [1224] seem to be aware
of—may I hope from your impartiality that you will allow expression to
be given through your columns to the opinion of at least one Englishman,
which he believes to be shared by multitudes of his countrymen, that for
England to let herself be drawn into war by this provocation or on this
account would be nothing less than monstrous.

This is not the doctrine of a partisan of peace at any price. Had we, at
the first breaking out of the present hateful war,1 declared that
whichever nation first invaded the territory of the other should have
England also for its foe, we should, at an extremely small risk to
ourselves, in all human probability have prevented the war, and perhaps
given commencement to a new era in the settlement of international
differences. To effect this great good to humanity and to public morals,
we did not choose to incur a mere chance of being involved in a war, and
in my opinion we were wrong, and have exposed ourselves to the just
recriminations of the suffering people—I do not speak of the
governments—of Germany and France. Were we now to plunge into a war
infinitely more dangerous to ourselves, and for which we are materially
speaking totally unprepared, those among us who are the causes of our so
doing will, in my judgment, deserve and receive the execration of the
people of England.

The honour of England is not concerned either in the protection of
Turkey or in the humiliation of Russia. Treaties are not made to be
eternal, and before we go to war for the maintenance of one it behoves
the nation at least to consider whether it would enter into it afresh at
the present day.2 We should have learnt little, indeed, from the
spectacle that has been going on before our eyes during the last four
months if we allow our journalists to hurry us into a war under the plea
of honour, merely because of the manner or the form in which Russia has
thought fit to throw off an obligation the substance of which we all
admit we ought to be ready to reconsider.

I am, &c.,

J.S. Mill


422.: THE TREATY OF 1856 [2]
 THE TIMES, 24 NOV., 1870, P. 3

Anthony Ashley Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury, criticized the views of
Mill expressed in No. 421, in a letter headed “Lord Shaftesbury on the
Russian Note,” The Times, 22 Nov., p. 3, from which Mill quotes in this
reply, headed “The Treaty of 1856,” with the subhead, “To the Editor of
The Times.” It is described in Mill’s bibliography as “A further letter
on the same subject [as No. 421] in the Times of Nov. 24, 1870”

(MacMinn, p. 99).

Edition: current; Page: [1225]
sir,—

The letter in which Lord Shaftesbury, in your paper of Tuesday, the 22d,
animadverted upon a letter of mine which you did me the favour to
insert, deserves so much respect for its manifestly conscientious
feeling, and states the question, besides, so neatly and compactly, that
I must address myself to your courtesy for an opportunity of, if
possible, setting myself right with him.

The opinion which I maintain concerning treaties is very remote indeed
from that which Lord Shaftesbury ascribes to me. He understands me to
have said that a country is not bound “to observe” the terms of a treaty
“unless they be so convenient that the country would be ready to enter
on them afresh.” What I did say is, that a country is not bound to
enforce the observance of terms which it has imposed on others, “until
it has considered whether it would impose them afresh at the present
day.”1 And if it not only would not, but, according to its present
judgment, ought not to impose them afresh, it is not merely not bound to
go to war for their enforcement, but would commit a great crime if it
did so.

There is a wide difference between affirming that I may break a promise,
as soon as it is inconvenient to me to keep it, and maintaining that if
another person breaks a promise made to me I am not necessarily bound to
shed his blood. I cannot believe that Lord Shaftesbury, with the two
doctrines before him, will hold the latter to be “one in principle” with
the former.

Let the people of England, then, deliberately consider whether a
stipulation denying to a country the legitimate liberty possessed by all
other countries, of maintaining military and naval defences on its own
coast, is one which they think they have a right permanently to impose.
If not, then in however objectionable a manner the claim may be disputed
we shall be criminal if we go to war to enforce it.

Having now, as I hope, cleared myself from the very serious charge
brough against me by Lord Shaftesbury, allow me to make one more remark.

Treaties are the promises of nations; and in the breach of a treaty, as
in that of a private promise, there are all degrees of guilt, from some
of the gravest to some of the most venial. The degree of Russia’s guilt
in this particular repudiation of treaty is not to be decided off hand.
I have no desire to extenuate it, but it is not pertinent to the
question. It is sufficient that treaties and other engagements will be
broken if they are imposed without limit as to duration. An individual,
however, has no power of promising anything beyond the duration of his
mortal life; but nations have the wild folly to make, and to exact,
engagements for all time. Mankind, happily, are now beginning to find
out that anything whatever to which a nation attempts to bind either
itself or others in perpetuity, be it a Constitution, a dynasty, an
irrevocable law, a particular disposition of public or private property,
or whatever else, will assuredly, at some time or other, require to be,
and will actually be, shaken off by those to whom it is injurious. The
present generation has had sufficiently convincing experience that to
this rule Edition: current; Page: [1226] treaties are no exception. Lord
Shaftesbury warns England, if the Russian doctrine be admitted, to “take
good care never to contract another” treaty. The warning I would give
is, if we wish to be able successfully to combat the Russian doctrine,
to make no more treaties except for terms of years.

I am, &c.,

J.S. Mill


423.: DE LAVELEYE ON THE EASTERN QUESTION
 THE TIMES, 30 NOV., 1870, P. 6

Seeking support for the views expressed in Nos. 421 and 422, Mill sent
this letter to The Times as a cover for one from Emile Louis Victor,
baron de Laveleye (1822-92), a Belgian political economist for whom he
had a high regard. The letter, headed “M. de Laveleye on the Eastern
Question,” with the subhead, “To the Editor of The Times,” is not listed
in Mill’s bibliography.

sir,—

I shall be obliged if you will give a place in The Times to the
accompanying extract from a private letter written by M. Emile de
Laveleye, and showing in what light the war which we are urged to
undertake is regarded by one of the most enlightened public writers of
the Continent, from the impartial position of a Belgian citizen.

I am, &c.,

J.S. Mill1


424.: THE SOCIETY OF ARTS
 DAILY NEWS, 27 MAR., 1871, P. 5

In the Daily News of 25 Mar., p. 5, the following notice appeared: “Mr.
John Stuart Mill is expected to take the chair, next Wednesday, at the
Society of Arts, when Miss Emily Faithfull will read a paper on ‘Women’s
work, with special reference to industrial employment.’ ” Faithfull
(1835-95) was the founder of the Victoria Press, which employed women
compositors and printed, among other things, the Transactions of the
National Association for the Promotion of Social Science. The address
she delivered at the meeting on 29 Mar. was printed as “Woman’s Work,
with Special Reference to Industrial Edition: current; Page: [1227]
Employment,” Journal of the Society of Arts, XIX (31 Mar., 1871),
378-83. Mill’s letter (not in his bibliography), is dated only from
“Blackheath-park, Kent,” and headed “Mr. Mill and the Society of Arts,”
with the subhead, “To the Editor of the Daily News.” A copy also
appeared under the heading “The Penalties of Celebrity,” in The Times,
27 Mar., p. 12. The text below is that of the Daily News, which has been
collated with that in The Times; in the variant notes the latter is
signalled by “TT”.

sir,—

The assertion which appeared in ayour papera of Saturday, bMarch 25b,
that I am expected to take the chair at a meeting of the Society of Arts
next Wednesday is without any foundation. I have no intention of being
present at the meeting at all. I am glad to take this opportunity of
protesting against a habit which is growing up, of making those
misleading statements through the medium of the public press or
otherwise. It has gained ground to such a degree as to have become a
nuisance to almost every man whose name is well known; placing him under
the alternative of making public contradictions of such statements, or
of allowing his name to be used for the purpose of exciting false
expectations. I shall be obliged by your giving publicity to this, and
remain, sir,

your obedient servant,

J.S. Mill1


425.: ADVICE TO LAND REFORMERS
 EXAMINER, 4 JAN., 1873, PP. 1-2

In 1869 Mill was Chairman of the Provisional Committee to establish the
Land Tenure Reform Association, and was responsible in large measure for
its proposals, published as Programme of the Land Tenure Reform
Association, with an Explanatory Statement by John Stuart Mill (London:
Longmans, et al., 1871); in CW, Vol. V, pp. 687-95. The work of the
Association, along with the women’s suffrage movement, absorbed most of
his energy in his last years, and it is appropriate that his last three
newspaper writings should be on land tenure, and that they should appear
in the Examiner, where the bulk of his journalism appeared. Helen
Taylor’s continuation of Mill’s Autobiography concludes: “In the autumn
and winter [of 1872] he wrote . . . two articles for the Examiner
(published January 4th and 11th, 1873) on Land Reform” (CW, Vol. I, p.
627). In a letter to Cairnes of 8 Jan., 1873, after welcoming Cairnes’
agreement with him on the question of the land held by endowed
institutions, Mill remarks that he and his daughter are occasionally
sending articles to the Examiner now, hoping to help build it up once
more as “an organ of opinion allied to our own” (LL, CW, Vol. XVII, p.
1933).

This article, in the “Political and Social” section, is headed as title,
and is described in his bibliography as “An article headed ‘Advice to
Land Reformers’ in the Examiner of 4 Edition: current; Page: [1228]
January 1873” (MacMinn, p. 101). The article was combined by Helen
Taylor with No. 426 and printed in the posthumous fourth volume of
Dissertations and Discussions (London: Longman, et al., 1875), under the
title “Advice to Land Reformers,” pp. 266-77 (in which this article ends
at p. 272.31).

now, when the question of the constitution and limits of property in
land has fairly come to the front, and a majority of Liberal politicians
find it needful to include in their programme some improvement in the
existing arrangements on that subject, it is time to consider which
among the minor modifications that alone find favour with the more timid
or more cautious innovators deserve to be supported by those who desire
greater changes, and which are those that should be opposed, either as
giving a renewed sanction to wrong principles, or as raising up new
private interests hostile to a thorough reform. There are at present two
proposals affecting property in land which engage a considerable and
increasing amount of public attention: one, the abrogation of the right
of primogeniture, and the abolition or great restriction of the power of
making settlements of land;1 the other, that corporations and endowed
institutions should be required to sell their lands, and invest the
proceeds in the funds or other public securities.2 The difference
between these two projects affords an illustration of the principles
which, we think, should guide the judgment of land tenure reformers in
matters of this nature. The former of the two is, in our opinion,
entitled to their full support; the latter should be strenuously
resisted by them.

Before proceeding farther, it is right to explain whom we mean by land
tenure reformers. On so new a question there are naturally many shades
of opinion. There are some with whose plans we agree, others from whom
we differ; we address ourselves equally to both. There are those who aim
at what is called the nationalisation of the land; the substitution of
collective for individual property in the soil, with reasonable
compensation to the landowners. Their doctrine is far from being so
irrational as is pretended; they have much to say for themselves. Nor is
theirs a wholly untried theory. It has the feudal traditions, and the
general practice of the East, on its side. Nevertheless, for reasons
which we shall have many opportunities of stating, we are decidedly of
opinion that, whatever may possibly be the case in a distant future,
this scheme is altogether unsuited to the present time. But, short of
this, there are modifications of the rights of landed property of a more
or less fundamental character, which have already numerous supporters,
and are likely, as we believe, before long to become widely popular.
Edition: current; Page: [1229] There is the principle asserted by the
Land Tenure Reform Association; that, inasmuch as land in a prosperous
country brings in a constantly increasing income to its owner, apart
from any exertion or expenditure on his part, it may and ought to be
subjected to special taxation in virtue of that increase.3 Again, it is
maintained that, inasmuch as the acknowledged end for which land is
allowed to be appropriated, is that it may be made more productive, the
right of property ought not to extend to that which remains
unproductive: and that if large tracts of land are kept in a wild state
by their owners, either for purposes of amusement, or because they
cannot be let at a rent (though they might amply remunerate a labourer
cultivating for himself) the State should resume them, paying only their
present value.4 Again, there might be a limit set to the extent of
territory which could be held by a single proprietor.5 Many other
changes might be proposed, more or less extensive, more or less
expedient, but all compatible with the maintenance of the institution of
landed property in its broad outlines. Now, the reforms which are
proposed on the subject of primogeniture, and of entails and
settlements, are of a different character. Instead of limiting, they
would increase the power over the land of the existing generation of
landowners; and accordingly, the supporters of more drastic changes are
much divided as to whether these particular measures ought or ought not
to be supported.

Among the reasons for getting rid of the law of primogeniture and the
existing laws of entail and settlement, the one which we oftenest hear,
and which carries most weight with many of the assailants of those laws,
is that by keeping land out of the market they detain it in too few
hands, and that their abolition would increase the number of landed
proprietors. The long and obstinate prejudice which existed against
peasant properties, grounded on the densest ignorance of their actual
operation in the countries where they prevail, has given way before more
correct information. Those who fancied that peasant proprietors must be
wretched cultivators because cottier tenants are so, have learnt that
some of the best agriculture in the world is to be found where such
properties abound: those who thought that peasant proprietorship breeds
over-population, and converts a country into a “pauper-warren,”6 now
know that its tendency is rather towards the other extreme. Within a few
years, therefore, the existence of peasant properties has come to be
regarded by English philanthropists as eminently desirable, and the
removal of all obstacles to it has become an aim of advanced
politicians; and primogeniture and entail being such obstacles, their
abolition is advocated on that ground. But it has come to pass that the
same thing which recommends this measure to one class of land reformers,
renders another class worse than indifferent to it. Multiplication of
proprietors is not the kind of reform Edition: current; Page: [1230]
which finds favour with a large section of the more thoroughgoing land
reformers. Many of them believe that an addition to the number of
private owners of land is but an addition to the number of the enemies
of the larger changes which they meditate. They think, and in this they
are not mistaken, that the wide diffusion of landed property in some
Continental countries, and especially in France, is in these countries
the great obstacle to any improvement in the conditions of ownership:
and they look with no good will on anything which tends, in ever so
small a degree, to approximate, in this respect, the British state of
things to the French.

We agree, to a considerable extent, with the general views on which this
judgment is grounded; but we do not think that the question of
abolishing primogeniture and entail is a case for their application.
Whether the creation of a class of peasant-proprietors would be a good
thing or a bad, we are of opinion that the reforms in question would not
have that effect; while they would produce benefits which, even from the
exclusive point of view of the land-reformers, might well outweigh some
amount of the inconvenience they apprehend.

To what extent these measures would practically operate in causing land
to be brought into the market, it is very difficult at present to
foresee; but there is no probability that, of such as might be sold,
much would come into the hands of small proprietors. As long as the
private wealth of the country and its social condition are what they
are, the rich will always outbid the poor in the land market. We are
speaking, of course, of rural land, of which alone the possession is an
object of desire to the wealthy classes. Land in towns, or so close to
them as to be available for streets, might often obtain a higher price
in small lots; such lots as would enable prudent and economical working
people to become the owners of the houses they live in; which we hold to
be an unqualified good: nor is it likely that even the most extreme
plans of land reform would disturb such persons in the possession. The
land of the country at large outside the towns might possibly come to be
shared among a greater number of rich families than at present; but
sales by the rich to the rich do not really add to the number of those
whose interests and feelings are engaged on the side of landlordism; for
the rich who wish to be landlords are already as much wedded to landlord
privileges as they would be when they actually became so. Reformers,
therefore, either moderate or extreme, need have no fear that the
facilitation of the sale of land already appropriated should raise up
additional obstacles to their projects.

On the other hand, the measures in question would be attended with no
small amount of positive benefit. In the first place, whatever transfers
of landed property might really be occasioned by these changes would be
in the direction of agricultural improvement. True it is that, according
to the present ideas of landed property, landlords are neither required
nor expected to do anything for the land; but some landlords are more
disposed to do so than others; and the purchasers are Edition: current;
Page: [1231] almost always a more improving class of landowners than
those from whom they purchase. It is the capitalist and man of business
who buys; it is the needy and the spendthrift who sell. The whole
tendency is thus to improve the cultivation and increase the produce of
the country. But there is a still greater benefit than this, and one
which is often not sufficiently appreciated. The principle of the laws
of primogeniture and entail is radically wrong; and to get rid of a bad
principle, and put a better in its place, is equivalent to a very
considerable amount of practical gain. The preference of one child above
all the rest, without any superiority of personal claims, is an
injustice. The power given to an owner of property to exercise control
over it after it has passed into the hands of those to whom it devolves
on his death, is, as a rule (with certain obvious exceptions), both an
injustice and an absurdity. Moreover, the end for which these
institutions are kept up ought to be their sufficient condemnation in
the eyes of advanced reformers. The purpose of their existence is to
retain the land, not only in the families which now possess it, but in a
certain line of succession within those families, from eldest son to
eldest son. They are a contrivance for maintaining an aristocratical
order in unimpaired territorial wealth from generation to generation, in
spite of the faults which its existing members may commit, and at the
sacrifice both of justice between the heir and the other children, and
of the interest which all the existing members of the family may have in
selling the land. The aristocratic spirit, more powerful than the
personal interest of each living member of the body, postpones the
private wishes of the existing generation to the interest of the order
in maintaining an aristocratic monopoly of the land. The possession of
the land is the centre round which aristocratic feeling revolves; and
the removal of the two props of the monopoly, though its immediate
practical effect would probably be small, should be welcome to all who
wish to dissolve the connection between landed property and aristocratic
institutions.

We think, then, that all land reformers, whatever may be their ulterior
views, should unite in supporting the abrogation of the law of
primogeniture and the reform of the law of settlement. We must reserve
for another article our reasons for thinking quite otherwise of the
proposal recently broached (and which has derived importance from the
strong advocacy of the Times and from the interpretation put upon a
speech of Mr. Goschen) for requiring all corporate bodies and endowed
institutions to part with their lands by sale to private individuals.7

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [1232]


426.: SHOULD PUBLIC BODIES BE REQUIRED TO SELL THEIR LANDS?
 EXAMINER, 11 JAN., 1873, PP. 29-30

For the background of Goschen’s proposal and The Times’ support, and for
the article’s appearance in Dissertations and Discussions, Vol. IV, pp.
272-7, see No. 425. This leader, in the “Political and Social” section
and headed as title, is described in Mill’s bibliography as “An article
headed ‘Should public bodies be required to sell their lands?’ in the
Examiner of 11th January 1873” (MacMinn, p. 101). This is the final
entry in Mill’s bibliography.

a considerable sensation seems to have been excited by the quite
unexpected appearance a few weeks ago, in the Times, of two articles
strenuously contending that corporate bodies and endowed institutions
should no longer be permitted to withhold land from the market, and that
the principle of the Mortmain Acts1 should be so far extended as to
compel all such bodies or institutions to sell their lands and invest
the proceeds in Government securities. The coincidence of this
manifestation by the Times with a speech of Mr. Goschen, some
expressions in which were supposed to point to a similar conclusion, has
led to a suspicion that the Government is throwing out feelers
preparatory to some actual proposal of the kind suggested. And the
papers that are bitterly hostile to the present Government, whenever its
political and social policy is other than that of keeping things as they
are, have not missed the opportunity of upbraiding the Government with
making an unworthy concession to the land tenure reformers, who are
represented as grasping at the opportunity of attacking landed property
at its most easily assailable point.2

It is an odd supposition that reformers who are asserted to have, and
some of whom really have, for their object the extinguishing of private
and hereditary landed property altogether, desire to begin their
operations by making a great mass of landed property private and
hereditary which was not so before. Nothing could be more opposed to the
principles and purposes of thorough-going land tenure reformers of every
shade of opinion, than any further conversion of what is still, in some
sense, a kind of public property, into private. The point on which they
are all agreed, whether they desire anything further or not, is that, at
all events, the appropriation of the land of the country by private
individuals and families has gone far enough; and that a determined
resistance should be made to any further extension of it, either by the
stealing, euphemistically termed the inclosure, of commons, or by the
alienation of lands held upon trust for public or semi-public objects.
Far from allowing any land which is not already private Edition:
current; Page: [1233] property to become so, the most moderate of these
land reformers think that it may possibly be expedient, in districts
where land not already appropriated does not abound, to redeem some part
of that which is in private hands, by repurchasing it on account of the
State.

Those countries are fortunate, or would be fortunate if decently
governed, in which, as in a great part of the East, the land has not
been allowed to become the permanent property of individuals, and the
State consequently is the sole landlord. So far as the public
expenditure is covered by the proceeds of the land, those countries are
untaxed; for it is the same thing as being untaxed, to pay to the State
only what would have to be paid to private landlords if the land were
appropriated. The principle that the land belongs to the Sovereign, and
that the expenses of government should be defrayed by it, is recognised
in the theory of our own ancient institutions. The nearest thing to an
absolute proprietor whom our laws know of is the freeholder, who is a
tenant of the Crown; bound originally to personal service, in the field
or at the plough, and, when that obligation was remitted, subject to a
land tax intended to be equivalent to it. The first claim of the State
has been foregone; the second has for two centuries been successfully
evaded:3 but the original wrongdoers have been so long in their graves,
and so much of the land has come into the hands of new possessors, who
have bought it with their earnings at a price calculated on the unjust
exemption, that the resumption of the land without indemnity would be
correcting one injustice by another, while, if weighted with due
compensation, it would be a measure of very doubtful profit to the
State. But, though the State cannot replace itself in the fortunate
condition in which it would now have been if it had reserved to itself
from the beginning the whole rent of the land, this is no reason why it
should go on committing the same mistake, and deprive itself of that
natural increase of the rent which the possessors derive from the mere
progress of wealth and population, without any exertion or sacrifice of
their own. If the Grosvenor, Portman, and Portland estates belonged to
the municipality of London, the gigantic incomes of those estates would
probably suffice for the whole expense of the local government of the
capital.4 But these gigantic incomes are still swelling; by the growth
of London they may again be doubled, in as short a time as they have
doubled already: and what have the possessors done, that this increase
of wealth, produced by other people’s labour and Edition: current; Page:
[1234] enterprise, should fall into their mouths as they sleep, instead
of being applied to the public necessities of those who created it? It
is maintained, therefore, by land reformers, that special taxation may
justly be levied upon landed property, up to, though not exceeding, this
unearned increase; excess being guarded against by leaving the
possessors free to cede their land to the State at the price they could
sell it for at the time when the tax is imposed, but no higher price to
be claimable on account of any increase of value afterwards, unless
proved to have been the effect of improvements made at the landlord’s
expense.5 Now, if the nation would be justified in thus reasserting its
claim to the unearned increase of value, even when it has allowed the
legal right to that increase to pass into the hands of individuals; how
much more ought it to prevent further legal rights of this description
from being acquired by those who do not now possess them? The landed
estates of public bodies are not family property; the interest that any
individual has in them is never more than a life interest, often much
less; the increase of value by lapse of time would go to enrich nobody
knows whom, and its appropriation by the State would give no one the
shadow of a moral title to compensation. But if these lands are sold to
individuals, they become hereditary, and can only be repurchased by the
State at their full value as a perpetuity.

Neither would this compulsory sale be attended with any of the
advantages in the form of increased production, which would result from
facilitating the voluntary sale of land by individual to individual. As
long as, by the theory and practice of landed proprietorship, the
landlord of an estate is a mere sinecurist quartered on it, improvement
by the landlord is an accident dependent on his personal tastes. But he
who sells his land, voluntarily or from necessity, is almost always
below the average of landlords in disposition and ability to improve;
the tendency of the change of proprietors is, therefore, in favour of
improvement. But there is no reason to think that public bodies in
general are worse than average landlords in any particular; it is matter
of common remark that they are less grasping: and, if they do not come
up to the most enterprising landlords in what they themselves
accomplish, they leave more power of improvement, and more encouragement
to it, to their tenants, than the majority of private landlords. It
would, therefore, be no gain, but all loss, to reinforce the enemies of
the reform of landed tenure by the addition of a new class of wealthy
hereditary landholders, quartered upon land which is as yet devoted more
or less faithfully to public uses. If public bodies are required to part
with their lands, they should part with them to the State, and to that
alone.

Whether it is desirable that such bodies should be holders of lands;
whether it is wise that their time and attention should be divided
between their appointed duties, certain to be enforced with increasing
strictness as improvement goes on, and the management of a tenantry,
with the duties which, if private property in Edition: current; Page:
[1235] land continues to exist, are sure to be more and more attached to
it,—is a question of the future, which it may be left to the future to
decide. We do not think it can be properly decided, until the
fermentation now going on in the public mind respecting the constitution
of landed property, has subsided into a definite conviction respecting
the end to be aimed at and the means of practically drawing nearer to
that end. But the time has come for announcing with the utmost decision,
and we hope to see land reformers uniting as one body in the demand,
that no private appropriation of land, not yet private property, shall
hereafter take place under any circumstances or on any pretext.

J.S. Mill


427.: THE RIGHT OF PROPERTY IN LAND
 EXAMINER, 19 JULY, 1873, PP. 725-8

This is the last of three articles on land reform (see Nos. 425-6). Not
listed in Mill’s bibliography, it appeared posthumously, headed as
title, in the “Political and Social” section of the Examiner, Mill
having died in Avignon on 7 May, 1873. A footnote to the title reads:
“We regret that, owing to unexpected delays, it has not been possible to
compare the following paper with the original manuscript of Mr. Mill.
This paper was written for the Land Tenure Reform Association.—Ed. Ex.”
It appeared as a pamphlet, The Right of Property in Land. Reprinted from
the Examiner of July 19, 1873 (London: Dallow, [1873]), and, edited by
Helen Taylor, in Dissertations and Discussions, Vol. IV, pp. 288-302. A
version printed from the MS (now lost) appeared as Appendix B in The
Letters of John Stuart Mill, ed. Hugh S.R. Elliot, 2 vols. (London:
Longmans, Green, 1910), Vol. II, pp. 387-95. The text below is that of
the Examiner, which has been collated with those of the pamphlet,
Dissertations and Discussions, and Elliot. In the variant notes, “E”
signals Elliot’s version, and “P” signals the pamphlet and Dissertations
and Discussions (which agree in substantives).

rights of property are of several kinds. There is the property which a
person has in things that he himself has made. There is property in what
one has received as a recompense for making something for somebody else,
or for doing any service to somebody else, among which services must be
reckoned that of lending to him what one has made, or honestly come by.
There is property in what has been freely given to one, during life or
at death, by the person who made it or honestly came by it, whatever may
have been the motive of the gift,—personal affection, or because one had
some just claim on him, or because he thought one would use it well, or
as he would awish it to be used. All these are rights to things which
are the produce of labour; and they all resolve themselves into the
right of every person to do as he pleases with his own labour, and with
the produce or earnings of his labour, either by applying them to his
Edition: current; Page: [1236] own use, or exchanging them for other
things, or bestowing them upon other persons at his own choice.

But there is another kind of property which does not come under any of
these descriptions, nor depend upon this principle. This is the
ownership which persons are allowed to exercise over things not made by
themselves, nor made at all. Such is property in land; including in that
term what is under the surface as well as what is upon it. This kind of
property, if legitimate, must rest on some other justification than the
right of the labourer to what he has created by his labour. The land is
not of man’s creation; and for a person to appropriate to himself a mere
gift of nature, not made to him in particular, but which belonged as
much to all others until he took possession of it, is primâ facie an
injustice to all the rest. Even if he did not obtain it by usurpation,
but by just distribution; even if, at the first foundation of a
settlement, the land was equitably parcelled out among all the settlers
(which has sometimes been the case), there is an apparent wrong to
posterity, or at least to all those subsequently born who do not inherit
a share. To make such an institution just, it must be shown to be
conducive btob the general interest, in which this disinherited portion
of the community has its part.

The general verdict of civilised nations chasc hitherto been that this
justification does exist. The private appropriation of land has been
deemed to be beneficial to those who do not, as well as to those who do,
obtain a share. And in what manner beneficial? Let us take particular
note of this. Beneficial, because the strongest interest which the
community and the human race have in the land is that it should yield
the largest amount of food, and other necessary dord useful things
required by the community. Now, though the land itself it not the work
of human beings, its produce is; and to obtain enough of that produce
somebody must exert much labour, and, in order that this labour may be
supported, must expend a considerable amount of the savings of previous
labour. Now we have been taught by experience that the great majority of
mankind will work much harder, and make much greater pecuniary
sacrifices for themselves and their immediate descendants than for the
public. In order, therefore, to give the greatest encouragement to
production, it has been thought right that individuals should have an
exclusive property in land, so that they may have the most possible to
gain by making the land as productive as they can, and may be in no
danger of being hindered from doing so by the interference of eany onee
else. This is the reason usually assigned for allowing fthef land to be
private property, and it is the best reason that can be given.

Edition: current; Page: [1237]
Now, when we know the reason of a thing, we know what ought to be its
limits. The limits of the reason ought to be the limits of the thing.
The thing itself should stop where the reason stops. The land not having
been made by the owner, nor by any one to whose rights he has succeeded,
and the justification of private ownership ging land being the interest
it gives to the owner in the good cultivation of the land, the rights of
the owner ought not to be stretched hfartherh than this purpose
requires. No rights to the land should be recognised which do not act as
a motive to the person who has power over it, to make it as productive,
or otherwise as useful to mankind, as possible. Anything beyond this
exceeds the reason of the case, and is an injustice to the remainder of
the community.

It cannot be said that landed property, as it exists in the United
Kingdom, conforms to this condition. The legal rights of the landlord
much exceed what is necessary to afford a motive to improvement. They do
worse; they tend, in many ways, to obstruct, and do really obstruct,
improvement.

For one thing, the landlord has the right, which he often exercises, of
keeping the land not only unimproved, but uncultivated, in order to
maintain an inordinate quantity of wild animals for what he calls sport.
This right, at all events, cannot be defended as a means of promoting
improvement.

Again, if the purpose in allowing private ownership of the land were to
provide the strongest possible motive to its good cultivation, the
ownership would be vested in the actual cultivator. But in England
almost all the land of the country is cultivated by tenant-farmers, who
not only are not the proprietors, but, in the majority of cases, have
not even a lease, but may be dispossessed at six months’ notice. If
those lands are well cultivated, it cannot be in consequence of the
rights of the landlord. If those rights have any effect iat all on
cultivation,i it must be to make it bad, not good. If farmers with such
a tenure cultivate well, it is a proof that property in land is not
necessary for good cultivation.

Butj, it will be saidj, if the mere cultivation can be, and is,
satisfactorily carried on by tenants-at-will, it is not so with the
great and costly improvements which have converted so much barren land
into fertile. The returns to kthosek improvements are slow; and a
temporary holder, even if he has the lnecessaryl capital, will not make
them. They can seldom be made, and, in point of fact, seldom are made,
by any one but the proprietor. And, as a certain number of landed
proprietors do make such improvements, the institution of property in
land is thought to be sufficiently vindicated.

Giving all the weight to this consideration which it is entitled to, the
claim it gives to the landlord is not to all the possible proceeds of
the land, but to such Edition: current; Page: [1238] mpartsm of them
only as are the result of his own improvements, or ofn improvements made
by predecessors in whose place he stands. Whatever portion of them is
due, not to his labour or outlay, but to the labour and outlay of other
people, should belong to those other people. If the tenant has added
anything to the value of the land beyond the duration of his tenancy,
the landlord should be bound to purchase the improvement, whether
permanent or temporary, at its full value. If the nation at large, by
their successful exertions to increase the wealth of the country, have
enhanced the value of the land independently of anything done by othe
landlord or the tenant, that increase of value should belong to the
nation. That it should do so is not only consistent with the principles
on which landed property confessedly depends for its justification, but
is a consequence of those very principles.

Now, the labours of the nation at large do add daily and yearly to the
value of the land, whether the landlord plays the part of an improver or
not. The growth of towns, the extension of manufactures, the increase of
population consequent on increased employment, create a pconstantlyp
increasing demand for land both for the habitations of the people and
for the supply of food and qthe materials ofq clothing. They also create
a constantly increasing demand for coal, iron, and all the other produce
of mining industry. By this increase of demand the landed proprietors
largely profit, without in any way contributing to it. The income from
rural lands has a constant tendency to increase; that from building
lands still more: and with this increase of their incomes the owners of
the land have nothing to do except to receive it.

The Land Tenure Reform Association claim this increase for those who are
its real authors.1 They do not propose to deprive the landlords of their
present rents, nor of anything which they may hereafter add to those
rents by their own improvements. The future Unearned Increase is what
the Association rseekr to withdraw from them, and to retain for those to
whose slabourss and sacrifices, from generation to generation, it will
really be due. The means by which it is proposed to accomplish this is
Special Taxation. Over and above the fair share of the landlords in the
general taxation of the public, they may justly be required to pay
hereafter a special tax, within the limits of the increase which may
accrue to their tpresentt income from causes independent of themselves.

Against this proposal it is objected that many landholders have bought
the Edition: current; Page: [1239] lands they hold, and in buying them
had in view not only their present rental, but the probability of future
increase; of which increase, therefore, it would be unjust to deprive
them. But the Association do not propose to deprive them of it without
compensation. In the plan of the Association the landlords would have
the right reserved to them of parting with their land to the State,
immediately or at any future time, at the price for which they could
sell it at the time when the plan is adopted. By availing themselves of
this option, they would not only get back whatever they had paid for the
prospect of future increase, but would obtain the full price for which
they could have sold that future prospect at the time when the new
system was introduced. They would be left, therefore, in a pecuniary
sense, exactly as well off as they were before: while the State would
gain the difference between the price of the land at the time and the
higher value which, according to all probability, it would afterwards
rise to. There would be no transfer of private property to the State,
but only an interception by the State of an increase of property, which
would otherwise accrue at a future time to private individuals without
their giving any value for it; since they would have been reimbursed
whatever money they had given, and would even have received the full
present value of their expectations.

There is another objection commonly made, which is disposed of by the
same answer. It is often said that land, and particularly land in towns,
is liable to lose value as well as to gain it. Certain quarters of
London cease to be fashionable; and are deserted by their opulent
inhabitants; certain towns lose a portion of their trading prosperity
when railway communication enables purchasers to supply themselves
cheaply from elsewhere. Those cases, however, are the exception, not the
rule: and when they occur, what is lost in one quarter is gained in
another, and there is the general gain due to the prosperity of the
country besides. If some landlords, for exceptional reasons, do not
partake in the benefit, neither will they have to pay the tax. They will
be exactly where they are now. If it be said that as they took the
chance of a diminution they ought to have the counter-balancing chance
of an increase, the answer is that the power of giving up the land at
its existing price, in which both chances are allowed for, makes the
matter even. Indeed, more than even. No one would benefit so much by the
proposed measure as those whose land might afterwards fall in value; for
they would be able to claim the former price from the State, although
they could no longer obtain so much from individuals. By giving up the
rise of value, they would obtain an actual State guarantee against a
fall. And this would be no loss to the State; for every such fall in one
quarter, unless owing to a decline of the general prosperity, implies a
corresponding rise somewhere else, of which rise the State would have
the benefit.

A third objection is sometimes made. Land, it is said, is not the only
article of property which rises in value from the mere effect of the
advance of national wealth, independently of anything done by the
proprietor. Pictures by the old Edition: current; Page: [1240] masters,
ancient sculptures, rare curiosities of all sorts, have the same
tendency. If it is not unjust to deprive the landlord of the unearned
increase of the value of his land, by the same rule the increase of
value of Raphaels uandu Titians might be taken from their fortunate
vpossessorv and appropriated by the State.

Were this true in principle it would lead to no consequences in
practice, since the revenue which could be obtained by even a very high
tax on these rare and scattered possessions would not be worth
consideration to a prosperous country. But it is not true, even in
principle.

Objects of art, however rare or incomparable, differ from land and its
contents in this essential particular, that they are products of labour.
Objects of high art are products not only of labour but of sacrifice.
The pains, patience, and care necessary for producing works which will
be competed for by future ages, are far from being those from which the
greatest immediate, and especially the greatest pecuniary, advantage is
reaped by the artist. Such works almost always imply renunciation of a
great part of the gains which might easily have been obtained by hasty
and marketable productions; and often could not be produced at all,
unless the few purchasers who are able to distinguish the immortal from
the ephemeral, could feel that they might, without imprudence, pay a
high price for works which would be a fortune to their descendants. The
prospective rise in price of works of art is by no means an unearned
increase: the best productions of genius and skill alone obtain that
honour, while the increasing value of land is indiscriminate.
Governments do not think it improper to disburse considerable sums in
order to foster high art and encourage the taste for it among the
public. Much more, then, should they not grudge to the artist what may
come to him spontaneously from the estimate which good judges form of
what his productions wwillw sell for long after he is dead. xWex grant
that in many cases the increased value does not reach the artist
himself, but is an addition, and sometimes an unlooked-for addition, to
the gains of a middleman, who may have bought, at a very moderate price,
works which subsequent accident or fashion suddenly ybringsy into vogue.
This is a contingency to which artists, like all other workmen, are
liable; if they are unable to wait they may be obliged to sell their
future chances below the true value, to somebody who can. But they
obtain, on the average, a higher remuneration for their labour than they
could obtain if they had no such chances to sell. And it must be
remembered that, along with his chances of profit, the dealer takes the
risk of loss. Changes in the public taste and judgment may take place
either way: if some works which may have been bought cheap acquire a
high value, others for which a high price has been paid go out of
fashion, gradually or even suddenly. If dealers are exposed to the one
chance, Edition: current; Page: [1241] they must have the benefit of the
other. Were they deprived of it, their useful function, by which, until
replaced by something better, artists are greatly benefited, could not
be carried on.

Neither can it be said, as in the case of land, that receiving the
market price of the day would compensate the holder for the chances of
future increase. There is no market price of such thingsz, and the
future increase has no common standard of estimationz; it is a matter of
individual judgment; and, even if an average could be struck, it would
not compensate any one for the disappointment of his own expectation.
The objection, therefore, from the supposed parallel case fails in its
application: the cases are not really parallel.*

Other objectors say that, if it is allowable to take the unearned
increase of the value of land, it must, for the same reasons, be
allowable to take for the public the unearned increase of the price of
railway shares. But the fallacy is here so transparent as scarcely to
require pointing out. In the first place, every penny which is obtained
by railway shareholders is not the gift of nature, but the earnings and
recompense of human labour and thrift. In the next place, railway shares
fall in price as frequently as they rise, which is far from being the
case with land. If it be said that the prosperity of the country tends
to increase the gains of railway shareholders as well as those of
landlords, the same national prosperity leads to the creation of
competing railroads, and of new and comparatively unproductive branches,
so as to take away from the old shareholders with one hand nearly, if
not quite, as much as it bestows on them with the other. The two cases,
therefore, differ in the essential point.

We have now, we think, exhausted the objections of principle which are
usually made to the detention by the State of the unearned increment of
rent. It has, we think, been shown that they are all of them such as a
very little Edition: current; Page: [1242] consideration of the subject
is sufficient to dispel. But, besides these theoretical, there are
practical objections, in appearance more formidable, but, as we shall be
able to show, quite as inconclusive.

It is alleged that, granting the justice of claiming the unearned
increase for the State, there are no means of ascertaining what it is.
It would be impossiblea, it is said,a to distinguish the increase of
rent which arises from the general progress of society, from that which
is owing to the skill and outlay of the proprietor: and in intercepting
the former there would be perpetual danger of unjustly encroaching upon
the latter.

There would be some ground for this objection in a country of peasant
proprietors. The improvements made by such a class of landowners consist
more in the ungrudging and assiduous application of their own labour and
care, and in attention to small gains and petty savings, than in
important works, or in the expenditure of money. It would really be very
difficult, if not impossible, to determine how much the proprietor and
his family had done in any given number of years to improve the
productiveness or add to the value of the land.

But it is quite otherwise with the improvements made by rich landlords,
like those who own nearly all the soil of the British Islands. What they
do for the land is done by outlay of money, through the agency of
skilled engineers and superintendents. It is easy to register
operationsb, for instance,b of thorough drainage, and to ascertain and
record, as one of the elements in the case, the cost of those
operations. Their effect in adding to the value of the land has a
natural measure in the increased rent which a solvent tenant would be
willing to pay for it; and the whole of that increase, whether great or
small, we would leave to the landlord.

The possibility of a valuation of unexhausted improvements is assumed as
a matter of notoriety in all the discussions, now so common, respecting
Tenant Right. It is already a custom in many parts of England to
compensate an outgoing tenant for these cimprovements. Whatc is a custom
in many places will soon, it is probable, be made a legal obligation in
all; and among the objections made to its imposition by law, we are
never told of the impossibility of doing it. But if it is possible to
value the deffectd of temporary improvements, why should it be
impossible to value the effect of permanent improvements? A Bill
compelling a valuation of both, and giving compensation etoe both alike,
has been introduced into the House of Commons by a high agricultural
authority, Mr. James Howard, and has met with influential support.2

Edition: current; Page: [1243]
Yet if this be possible, the object is completely attained, for there is
no other difficulty. The fact of an increase of rent is easily
ascertained. There is nothing needed but the trouble and expense of
registering the facts. It might be necessary to have a survey of the
whole country, ascertaining and recording the conditions of every
tenancy, and to renew this operation periodically, say every ten or
twenty years. This is not so difficult as the cadastral operations of
some continental countries, or the revenue surveys of British India, for
these undertake to determine, by special inquiry, what rent each piece
of land is capable of yielding. In the proposed survey it would suffice
to record what it does yield; allowing the landlord, if he can, to prove
that it is under-rented, in which case he ought not to suffer for his
past moderation.

It should be understood, also, that no intention is entertained of
paring down the increment of rent to the futmostf farthing. We assert in
principle, the right of taking it all: in practice we have no desire to
insist upon the extreme right, at any risk of going beyond it. No doubt,
the option allowed to the landlord of giving up the land at its existing
value, would secure him against pecuniary wrong; but we should be sorry
to trade upon his reluctance to give up an ancestral possession, or one
endeared to him by association. We would leave, therefore, an ample
margin by way of insurance against mistakes in the ginstitutiong. We
would not insist upon taking the last penny of the unearned increase.
But we hmaintainh that within that limit taxation on the land, in
addition to the landlord’s share of all other taxes, may justly be, and
ought to be, imposed. We contend that a tax on land, not preceding but
following the future increase of its value, and increasing with that
increase, is a legitimate financial resource; and that it is for the
individual landlord, by making an authentic record of what he does for
the land, to preserve evidence that its increase of rent is the
consequence and rightful reward of his own intelligent improvements.

This is the meaning of the fourth article in the programme of the Land
Tenure Reform Association;3 and the reasons which have now been given
are its justification. The more it is considered the more general, we
believe, will be the adhesion to it of those whose regard for property
is not a superstition but an intelligent conviction, and who do not
consider landlords as entitled to pecuniary privilege but only to equal
justice.

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [1244] Edition: current; Page: [1245]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [1246] Edition: current; Page: [1247]


Appendix A


CAVAIGNAC’S DEFENCE
 EXAMINER, 24 APR., 1831, PP. 266-7

For the context and for the introduction Mill wrote to this translation
by him of Godefroy Cavaignac’s speech during his trial, see No. 101.
Cavaignac’s father, Jean Baptiste Cavaignac (1762-1829), was a
Montagnard during the Convention, which he served on various missions.
Proscribed as a regicide, he died in Brussels. In the Examiner the
speech appeared in quotation marks, here removed.

my father was one of those who, on the benches of the National
Convention, proclaimed the republic in the face of victorious Europe.1
He defended it in our armies. For this he died in exile, after twelve
years of proscription; and, while even the Restoration was forced to
leave France in possession of the fruits of that revolution which he had
sowed; while it loaded with its favours the men whom the republic had
raised, my father and his colleagues suffered alone for the great cause
which so many others betrayed; a last homage of their impotent old age,
to that country which they had so vigorously defended.

That cause, then, is bound up, gentlemen, with all my feelings as a son;
the principles which it embraced are my inheritance. Study has fortified
me in the direction which my political ideas so naturally assumed; and
now, when I have at length a fit occasion, I hasten to utter a word
which others proscribe. I declare, without affectation, as well as
without feigning, that in my heart, from conviction, I am a republican.

But it would not have been in me a sufficient reason for adopting my
opinions, that a republic seemed to me, in itself, the least imperfect
of governments: I have endeavoured to form an estimate of the times, to
judge whether a republic is practicable, and I have perceived, not only
that it is possible, but that it is inevitable; that all things are
moving in that direction; the course of events, the human mind, and
outward things. I have perceived, that it is impossible for the movement
which now rules the world to end in any thing but in a republic.

This tendency, gentlemen, has long been pointed out. Napoleon
acknowledged Edition: current; Page: [1248] it;2 M. de Châteaubriand has
more than once proclaimed it,3 although neither of them can well be
suspected of partiality for republican principles. The present
government itself has admitted this tendency: it declared itself at
first a monarchy surrounded by republican institutions:4 and, although
the union of these words is truly monstrous; although, as has been said,
they howl at finding themselves together, it was imagined that they were
seen engraved by the cannon-balls of July on the walls of the Hotel de
Ville.

Gentlemen, this futurity, now so near to us, which is perceived even by
those who turn away their faces in terror, is the true source of
republicanism in those who are capable of reflecting upon it, and who do
not embrace it from schoolboy enthusiasm. They cultivate it, for this
reason, that every man of sense prepares himself beforehand for a result
which he foresees, of which he will be a witness, and which he judges to
be infallible. They are not republicans in remembrance of Rome or of
Athens, that would be too silly: they are not so on account of the past,
but on account of the future.

Now, it is precisely because the future appears to them certain, that
they do not conspire. Why should they? If there is a party in France
that does not conspire, it is the republican party, for it is convinced
that it has only to let things alone. That those should conspire for
whom every day is a chance the less; who are obliged to have recourse to
their personal energy, to try a toss of the political dice-box, because
their age rejects them, because they have no resource but plots, no
futurity but what they must stake their heads for, that I can conceive.
No doubt, there is at least one party of this sort in France; but the
republican party must be mad if they compromised a cause of which the
success is infallible, by ineffectual attempts. They must be frantic
indeed if they exposed to the justice of kings, heads which may safely
rest themselves upon the fortune of the people.

Gentlemen, if that party had chosen to conspire, they had the power.
They had the power in the great week, and that under the open sunshine
of July, in the public streets. They had the power, and the proof is,
that it was thought advisable to negociate with them: my defender can
attest it if necessary. Even on the 30th of July several of us, among
whom were Guinard and myself, were conducted to the lieutenant-general
of the kingdom.

And I declare it openly, we spoke to him with the same freedom which I
employ now; we have long professed the opinions which I profess still;
and hence all this distrust of our intentions: but (not to mention that
it would have been a little too ingenuous) nobody asked him to proclaim
a republic. “Consult Edition: current; Page: [1249] the nation, it alone
has the right to choose its government.” That is what we advised, that
is what we think: the sovereignty of the people is the foundation of our
principles; and when we are accused of wishing to impose upon the people
an order of things which they alone have the right to establish, what is
asserted is a falsehood.

Gentlemen, with what we have to wait for, it is easy to wait. Those who
know that the future is theirs, can afford to have patience: besides, we
are young, and in these days the world moves rapidly: and to express our
idea in its completeness, I shall repeat what we have sometimes said to
those who thought that more might have been done in July. You will
understand the better, how any conspiracy must appear to us the act of
simpletons.

A revolution, however admirable, however easy it may have been, is
always followed by immense difficulties. Monarchy has taken upon itself
the task; so much the worse for monarchy, and the better for us: if it
is unsuccessful this time, all is over with it; and our conviction is,
that it cannot be successful; for nations in these days are eaten into
by so deep-seated, so inexplicable, so corrosive a disease, there is in
society so powerful a principle of dissolution acting upon all the
machinery of power, that the machine needs to be entirely renovated; and
really, looking at the wants which torment the world, it would seem that
even a God would find it easier to reconstruct it altogether than to
govern it.

This new combination, we said, satisfies many minds; it is counted upon.
General Lafayette has rallied round it, with all the ascendancy of his
immense popularity. Let us suffer the experiment to be complete; let us
leave the burthen to those who take it; let us allow men and systems to
be tried and laid down, one after another, for some time longer. When
your turn comes, you will still have enough to do. In the rapid course
into which society has been projected, men and systems succeed one
another to conduct it to its destination: the last relay is the one
which will arrive, and that one is you. We are living in the age of
suicide-governments. The monarchy will do our work; it will exhaust
itself without your interference; it will conspire for you.

Yes, it is thus, gentlemen, that we understand our position. We do not
conspire; we hold ourselves ready. At an epoch when the whole of a
people mingle in politics, there are no more conspiracies; that was well
enough at a time when the contest was among a few persons, alternately
conquerors and conquered; when an entire party was held in the hand of
one principal conspirator. In our days, there is no man who has a hand
sufficiently large, sufficiently strong. The public streets are the only
theatre large enough for those masses, which act at nobody’s will and
pleasure, which it is no more possible for any one to raise, than it is
to resist them when they have risen.

In the era of revolutions, conspiracies are good for nothing. We know it
of old. We conspired for a long time against the Bourbons. What came of
it? A mere Edition: current; Page: [1250] unavailing protest against
foreign usurpation: a break in the line of prescription, sufficient to
keep alive the consciousness of a right to resist oppression. With this,
the flight of some, the ruin of others, the death of those who have shed
upon the scaffold their blood, the purest blood of patriots. Then, one
fine day, the people, who did not conspire, threw themselves into the
streets, and extemporized in a few hours that deliverance so long sought
for.

This is what we have learnt, and what we shall not forget: and the
evidence has proved it. Let others, too, remember it, and renounce for
the future this bugbear of republican conspiracies. We hope that this
trial will put them out of conceit with it. We are not children, and we
have a better use to make of our lives than to stake them for what is
unavailing. This court has so often resounded with the words, “plot
against the safety of the state,” that there are, perhaps, here some
echoes to prolong the sound, but none will hereafter be found out of
doors. Charlatans will cease to make their profit out of this imaginary
evil, and our accuser will have done this service to the country, in
default of a better.

The accused have perhaps a right to claim some share in this service.
Placed before you, without any celebrated name to join itself to their
cause, they have had confidence in you and in themselves, for you and
they are men of honour, who need nobody’s assistance to serve the truth:
and if this trial is of use to our country, we find our reward already
in the means which it affords us of loudly and openly making answer to
our calumniators.

Our blood is not our own,—it belongs to our country—to our country which
we love, because it deserves that its children should love it; because
it has made them free, because it is great, because it is dear, useful,
and formidable, to the rest of the world. It is to the country that we
are devoted—devoted, body and soul; not like fanatics, who are
intoxicated by a word, but like brave men, who are happy to find
something in this world to which it is noble, just, and sweet to
consecrate their affections and their lives.

These, gentlemen, are our sentiments, these our principles, for we do
not separate the one from the other. And yet we are here, we are in the
place where several of our brothers stood to hear their sentence of
death pronounced in the name of Louis XVIII. Were I to turn round, and
see in the caps of the soldiers who guard us that tri-coloured cockade
which we have restored to them, I could not believe my eyes. Were they
the Swiss, or the soldiery of the royal guard, I should understand it.
Then, we should go back to the time of our dear and ill-fated Bories,5
and thinking that Charles X still reigned, we should not be astonished
that it is wished to make us victims, as Charles X would have done if he
had been the conqueror eight months ago.

Edition: current; Page: [1251]


Appendix B


LETTRE À CHARLES DUVEYRIER
 LE GLOBE, 18 APR., 1832, P. 1

For the circumstances and Mill’s bibliographical entries explaining this
letter to Le Globe, which later appeared in English in the Monthly
Repository, see No. 158, where the footnotes and variants are recorded.
Mill had planned to write a series of letters, but as Le Globe ceased
publication on 20 Apr., this remains his only contribution to the paper.
A letter of 12 Mar., 1832, from Duveyrier (who was in London) to
Enfantin was printed in Le Globe, 10 Mar., p. 1; it includes this
comment: “Je vous ai dit qu’un des plus forts penseurs de Londres, jeune
homme connu dans le monde philosophique, se proposait d’entreprendre une
série de lettres sur l’état moral et politique de l’Angleterre, surtout
dans ses rapports avec la France. Ces lettres ne peuvent être
entièrement écrites au point de vue Saint-Simonien; mais l’auteur
appelle lui-même les commentaires du Globe sur toutes les questions à
l’égard desquelles il peut conserver encore un jugement différent du
nôtre; et cette discussion, avec une puissance scientifique d’un ordre
très élevé, ne peut qu’être d’une grande utilité pour les lecteurs du
Globe.” This French version (not translated by Mill, and abridged) was
headed “Politique. / Angleterre. / (Correspondance particulière.) Lettre
à Ch. Duveyrier.”

mon cher duveyrier, vous m’avez demandé de correspondre de temps à autre
avec le rédacteur du Globe, afin de lui fournir tous les
éclaircissements qu’on ne peut attendre que d’un Anglais bien au courant
de vos doctrines. J’accepte votre proposition; j’avais déjà songé
moi-même à ce travail, et j’aurais probablement réclamé spontanément tôt
ou tard la mission honorable à laquelle vous m’appelez aujourd’hui.

Mais avant de commencer cette correspondance, je dois à moi-même et à
ceux auxquels elle est destinée, d’exposer plus amplement même que je ne
l’ai pu faire dans nos entretiens particuliers, les motifs qui me la
font entreprendre. Je le veux d’autant mieux qu’il y a là une
instruction réelle à puiser pour les lecteurs du Globe. Pour un
Saint-Simonien qui désire connaître l’Angleterre, il ne peut être
indifférent de savoir quelles sont les considérations qui engagent un
Anglais non Saint-Simonien, et même ne s’accordant avec les
Saint-Simoniens, d’une manière complète, sur aucun point, quoique sur
tous les points il partage à un certain degré leurs opinions; quelles
sont, dis-je, les considérations qui engagent cet homme à se mettre en
rapport avec la société Saint-Simonienne.

Edition: current; Page: [1252]
Vous imaginerez peut-être que le motif qui m’anime est un désir de
contribuer pour ma part au but que vous poursuivez avec tant de succès
et qui est d’amener deux nations possédant chacune tant d’éléments de
grandeur et de prospérité, à se comprendre l’une l’autre, à se rendre
mutuellement justice, et à se conformer à cette volonté de la providence
qui a donné à chacune d’elles un caractère différent, leur a, par là
même, assigné une mission différente, et leur a ainsi commandé de
poursuivre le but commun de l’association humaine par des routes
séparées quoique non pas contraires. Certes on ne peut se refuser
d’attribuer, avec les Saint-Simoniens, à cette combinaison et cette
division d’efforts un caractère providentiel. Pour toute intelligence
vaste, pour tout homme qui a soif d’une perfectibilité indéfinie, il y a
là sujet de se réjouir. Le philosophe y doit trouver une source féconde
d’observations sur l’éducation de la race humaine; et c’est là aussi la
plus grande garantie offerte au développement simultané de tous les
modes de la nature humaine où chacun doit se faire sa place sans
comprimer les autres dans leur croissance.

Vous avez raison de penser que j’ai pour ma part cet objet fort à coeur,
et que le zèle que vous mettez vous-mêmes à l’accomplir n’est pas un des
moindres liens qui existent entre vous et moi. Je sens même parfaitement
qu’au point de vue où vous êtes placés, ce doit être là le résultat le
plus essentiel que vous vous promettez de ma correspondance. Et
cependant, je dois vous le dire, ce motif n’est pas le seul ni même le
plus important à mes yeux, de ceux qui m’engagent à choisir le Globe,
autant du moins que vous me le permettrez, pour y déposer l’expression
de mes opinions et des mes sentiments; il y a pour moi, dis-je, une
raison plus puissante de le faire, et la voici: c’est que parmi les
lecteurs de ce journal seulement, et nulle part ailleurs, je puis
trouver un public capable de comprendre ces opinions et de sympathiser
avec ces sentiments; et les membres de votre société offrent la seule
réunion de penseurs et d’écrivains avec lesquels il peut être utile,
pour le présent, d’entreprendre de les discuter.

Certes il est peu nécessaire de rappeler ici que les Saint-Simoniens
sont maintenant la seule association au monde qui soulève
systématiquement par la base toutes les grandes questions sociales.
Celles-là même qui ont été fixées il y a long-temps sur un terrain que
les révolutions n’ont pas encore entièrement bouleversé; celles-là même
sur lesquelles les solutions anciennes, quelques affaiblies qu’elles
aient pu l’être dans leur influence pratique, n’ont pas cessé de
conserver une autorité généralement reconnue. Vous déclarez que toutes
les questions sociales doivent être reprises de nouveau, et tandis que,
de ce point de vue, vous proposez sur tous les sujets vos propres
solutions, vous appelez tous ceux qui ont capacité à faire de même, vous
êtes prêts à écouter, désireux de comprendre tous les hommes.

Si en France même cette tentative nous a exposés à tant de fausses
interprétations et de haines, il est tout-à-fait impossible qu’aucune
réunion Edition: current; Page: [1253] d’écrivains pût d’ici à
long-temps se lever en Angleterre et entreprendre de vous imiter. En
Angleterre il n’y a, quant à présent, aucune place pour les théories
générales: à moins toutefois qu’on ne veuille donner ce nom à ces
étroites généralisations d’étroites idées qui n’obligent point les
esprits même les moins cultivés à sortir de l’horizon rétréci de leur
sphère habituelle. Michel Chevalier a souvent présenté dans le Globe
cette idée que l’Allemagne a sur toutes les autres nations une
supériorité marquée sous le rapport de la science et de l’intelligence,
l’Angleterre, sous le rapport de l’industrie, et la France, à raison du
développement sympathique de sa population, sous le rapport de la
moralité.1 Ainsi la nation allemande est éminemment spéculative, la
nation anglaise est essentiellement pratique, et les Français présentent
l’union de ces deux qualités, puisqu’ils possèdent à un degré égal la
faculté de construire des théories générales et de réduire les théories
en pratique.

Si donc un homme a quelques idées qu’il regarde comme important de
communiquer à un public allemand, c’est une recommandation positive en
sa faveur que de les présenter comme portion d’un système plus général
fondé sur un ensemble de vues historiques, sur une conception de
philosophie, de littérature et de beaux-arts; une pareille marche
s’accorderait parfaitement avec la tendance de l’esprit germain. Des
vues très étendues, et par cette raison même ne comportant qu’une
réalisation à distance et graduée, ont plus de chances de trouver
accueil dans cette contrée que celles d’une moindre portée. En France
même, si le caractère général et systématique d’une idée n’est pas une
cause positive de succès, il n’est pas non plus une cause positive de
défaveur; mais en Angleterre c’est tout l’opposé.

Le caractère éminemment pratique des Anglais, ce caractère qui leur
donne, en tant qu’hommes d’affaires et industriels, une supériorité
incontestable sur toutes les nations de l’Europe, a en même temps pour
résultat de les rendre très peu soucieux de tout ce qui ne conduit pas à
une pratique instantanée. Les Anglais, même en politique, ne se sont
jamais laissé émouvoir par des abstractions; ils ont combattu pour
certaines lois spéciales, mais jamais pour un principe de législation.
Les doctrines de la souveraineté du peuple et des droits de l’homme
n’ont jamais jeté de profondes racines dans ce pays. Il y a eu clameurs
publiques pour obtenir certains changements particuliers dans le mode
d’élection des membres de la chambre des communes, pour provoquer
quelque acte spécial du parlement comme remède à quelque souffrance
actuelle, pour faire supprimer quelque taxe particulière, etc. Le public
anglais ne pense pas qu’un homme vaille la peine d’être écouté toutes
les fois qu’il ne propose pas Edition: current; Page: [1254] quelque
chose à faire, et même quelque chose à faire immédiatement. Il y a plus,
les seules raisons qui puissent en général faire impression sur lui sont
celles qui se rattachent aux conséquences directes d’une proposition
spéciale.

Celui donc qui désire produire un effet immédiat sur le public anglais
doit présenter chaque idée assise autant que possible sur sa propre
base, et doit je dirai presque s’efforcer de cacher le lien qui rattache
cette idée à une série d’autres idées. Si les lecteurs venaient à
soupçonner que cette proposition rentre dans un système, ils en
conclueraient que celui qui la présente ne la regarde pas comme étant
bonne intrinsèquement et par elle-même, mais comme bonne seulement par
sa liaison avec des idées chimériques, ou tout au moins avec des
principes auxquels, pour me servir d’une expression vraiment anglaise,
ils ne sont pas préparés à donner leur assentiment.

Pour vous qui savez que la politique est une science éminemment
progressive, et qu’aucune des grandes questions de l’organisation
sociale ne peut recevoir sa solution à moins d’être considérée dans ses
rapports avec un ensemble de vues qui plongent loin dans le passé et
loin dans l’avenir; pour vous il est à peine nécessaire de faire la
remarque qu’il doit y avoir dans votre langage beaucoup de choses qui
dans le moment actuel ne peuvent aucunement aller au peuple
d’Angleterre. Quand on s’adresse à des Anglais il faut avoir soin de ne
jamais les entretenir que du pas qui doit être le plus immédiatement
franchi, en ayant soin de tenir dans l’ombre tous ceux qui doivent
suivre. Quoique vous ayez à proposer, il faut resserrer votre
raisonnement dans les limites les plus étroites; il faut établir
l’opportunité de la mesure sur les considérations les plus restreintes
possibles, et ne dépenser de vérités générales que ce qui est exactement
et absolument indispensable pour arriver à la conclusion particulière
dont on a besoin.

Or puisque le peuple anglais demande à être traité de cette manière, il
faut bien se prêter à sa volonté, et ceux qui écrivent pour lui doivent
prendre le langage le plus capable de l’impressionner. Lors donc que je
vois qu’il serait bon que le parlement passât telle ou telle loi demain
ou aujourd’hui, et que je crois de mon devoir de contribuer à l’y
déterminer, je prendrai à tâche d’exposer au peuple anglais les
avantages immédiats qui me paraissent devoir résulter de cette mesure;
mais lorsque je désire amener la discussion sur le champ de la science
ou de la philosophie, établir quelques principes généraux de politique,
ou poser les questions dont la solution doit m’être donnée par d’autres,
alors il faut que je m’adresse là où je puis espérer de trouver des
lecteurs capables de comprendre et d’aimer de pareilles recherches, et
des écrivains capables de s’en occuper.

Je vais à vous comme viennent en Europe les littérateurs et les artistes
du pays de l’industrialisme pur des Etats-Unis d’Amérique: comme moi ils
doivent chercher ailleurs que dans leur propre patrie une place pour
leur vocation. Je conçois qu’en philosophie politique l’initiative
appartient à la France dans ce moment, non pas tant à raison du nombre
de vérités pratiques dont elle est en Edition: current; Page: [1255]
possession actuelle, qu’à cause de la hauteur bien plus grande à
laquelle la discussion y est parvenue, hauteur dont l’Angleterre est
encore éloignée de tout l’intervalle qui existe entre 1789 et 1832. Tout
homme donc qui peut contribuer en quelque manière à l’élaboration de
principes politiques, doit apporter le tribut de ses idées, quelles
qu’elles puissent être, à la France, et entre tous vos compatriotes, à
vous en particulier qui, sous presque tous les rapports, avez une si
énorme avance.

J’ai encore un autre motif pour me mettre en communication avec les
lecteurs du Globe. Tout Anglais que je suis, je crois les comprendre
mieux que même aucune classe de mes compatriotes; la raison en est que
vous avez des opinions bien déterminées sur tous les sujets qui
intéressent vivement l’humanité, et loin d’en garder aucune en réserve,
vous les produisez publiquement toutes les fois que l’occasion s’en
présente: chez nous au contraire, quelles que soient les opinions d’un
homme, jamais il ne les livre au public à moins d’y être naturellement
amené par quelque évènement du jour. Tout le reste il le garde pour lui,
ou le met en réserve pour quelque ouvrage philosophique. Jamais vous ne
pourrez dire quelle sorte d’hommes sont ceux que vous voyez lisant le
Times ou le Morning-Chronicle, la Revue d’Edimbourg ou le Quarterly
Review; tout au plus vous pourrez deviner s’ils sont tories, whigs ou
radicaux; souvent même sur ce point vous devinerez mal; combien
d’ailleurs cette qualification vous apprend peu des croyances
essentielles d’un homme! Vous le savez mieux que personne; mais au
contraire qu’un homme lise le Globe, ce fait seul vous révèle en grande
partie son caractère, sa manière de penser. Moi en particulier, qui
depuis long-temps suis lecteur assidu de ce journal aussi bien que de
toutes vos publications, je puis dire que je connais les opinions des
Saint-Simoniens, que j’entends leur langage, que je sais enfin de quelle
manière mes propres idées doivent être présentées pour trouver accès
auprès d’eux. Je n’en pourrais dire autant d’aucune classe de mes
compatriotes à laquelle j’essaierais de m’adresser.

A toutes ces raisons pour entrer en correspondance avec vous,
permettez-moi d’en ajouter une qui certes à elle seule serait bien
suffisante: je veux parler de la haute admiration que je ne puis
m’empêcher de ressentir pour le but que vous vous proposez et la manière
dont vous y marchez. Lorsque je vois des hommes faire tout ce que font
les Saint-Simoniens et sacrifier tout ce qu’ils sacrifient pour une
doctrine qui renferme en elle tant de vérité, et qui, bien que je ne
puisse l’adopter personnellement, doit, j’en suis convaincu, faire
infiniment plus de bien par ce qu’elle a de bon, qu’elle ne peut faire
de mal par ce qu’elle a de mauvais; avec ce spectacle devant moi il
suffit que de pareils hommes pensent que je puis leur être de quelque
utilité, pour que je réponde avec ardeur à leur appel, autant du moins
que cette tâche pourra s’accorder avec mes convictions propres, et avec
ce que peut m’imposer de travaux et de sacrifices mes devoirs supérieurs
envers ma patrie.

J.

Edition: current; Page: [1256]


Appendix C


ENFANTIN’S FAREWELL ADDRESS
 MORNING CHRONICLE, 27 APR., 1832, P. 1

After the Saint Simonians had given up Le Globe (see No. 158) and their
attempts at proselytism as a result of government hostility, their
leader Enfantin, with some forty disciples, retired to a semi-monastic
existence at Ménilmontant outside Paris. His farewell address, which
appeared translated in the Morning Chronicle, headed “St.
Simonianism—Parting Address to the Public,” is not mentioned in Mill’s
bibliography. However, it is identified as Mill’s translation in a
letter to d’Eichthal and Duveyrier: “I did as d’Eichthal wished in
regard to Father Enfantin’s parting address: after ascertaining that
Black would print it, I translated it for him & it appeared in the
Morning Chronicle (it was however very incorrectly printed)” (EL, CW,
Vol. XII, p. 109).

i, the father of the new Family—

Before I impose silence on the voice, which every day announces to the
world what we are, design that it should tell what I am.

God has given me a mission to call the poor, and women, to a new
destiny;

To give admittance into the sacred Family of Man, to all those who have
hitherto been excluded from it, or treated only as minors therein;

To realise that Universal Association, which the cries of liberty
uttered by all the enslaved classes have been calling for, ever since
the beginning of the world.

I have first addressed myself to the poor.

In the name of my Master, Saint Simon, I have announced to them the
destruction of all the privileges of birth, by which the industrious are
weighed down, and delivered up to the will and pleasure of the idle;

The termination of the wars which decimate them, and water with their
blood that earth which is already bathed in their tears, and in the
sweat of their brows;

The end of that hostile competition, which brings forth bankruptcy and
indigence, crime, and the scaffold.

I spoke these things; but I spoke them in order to be heard, especially
by those who ought to be the first to hear; by those who have the power
to enfranchise, and who domineer; who have the power to unite, and who
divide; who have the power to purify, and who corrupt.

I spoke to them, and they endeavoured not to listen; but my word has
entered into their ears in spite of themselves, and they are now pouring
it forth from their lips, though they know it not.

Edition: current; Page: [1257]
I may, therefore, now leave to them the task of propagating it.

Men of all parties! I have drawn you into a new field of discussion; I
leave you there. It is good for you that you should there see each other
face to face, and seek in vain for the guide who has led you thither.

I affirm to you, that from this day forward there are no politics for
you but that which was taught to us by our Master, and which, for the
last seven years, we have unintermittingly proclaimed.

Parliamentary Government, and its bourgeois mysticism, are expiring;

Republicanism, and its popular anarchy, are unable to struggle into
existence;

Legitimacy, and its privilégiés de château will not be resuscitated.

All social institutions must have for their end the improvement of the
condition, moral, physical, and intellectual, of the poorest and most
numerous class;

To each, labour according to his vocation, and recompence according to
his works.

This is the Charter of Equality and Subordination of the time to come.

This, I say, is henceforth the only politics. For, from the moment when
I shall have ceased to place every day under your eyes that Journal, in
which, for sixteen months past, I have caused the Charter of the time to
come to be engraven in characters ever new; from the moment when The
Globe, which I have compelled you to read by giving it to you
gratuitously, shall have ceased to appear, each of you will find in
himself some fragments of that Paper which he will recite aloud as his
own.

Once more, I affirm to you that ours is henceforth the only politics.
For the inheritance we leave behind us is an arsenal, where those who
wish to destroy will find weapons more potent than all those which they
have employed up to this time; and it is also a treasure of strength and
riches, when those who wish to preserve and to construct will find
materials finer than the finest débris of the past, more solid than the
gingerbread patchings-up of our own times.

I have next addressed myself to Woman.

I have called upon her to listen, with good-will and respect, to the man
whose life is devoted to the destruction of prostitution;

To receive with kindness and affection the word of the man who also
seeks to deliver the world from adultery;

To listen to me and sympathise with me, who have undertaken the sacred
task of saving the feeble from oppression, because I am strong, and the
strong from fraud, because I am sincere.

Now, there are still many men who consider slaves, servants, and the
poor, as their property, and who claim fidelity and devotedness from
that living property, in exchange for the imperious protection and the
contemptuous patronage which they extend to it. However, the number of
these men has been diminished every day by the preaching of Christian
paternity.

Edition: current; Page: [1258]
But, from the daughter of Kings to the daughter of the Pauper, I know
not that there exists so much as one woman from whom man does not think
himself entitled to exact fidelity, devotedness, obedience, in exchange
for the insulting guardianship which his haughty reason and his brute
strength deign to grant to the being whom he regards as a child,
destitute of strength and destitute of reason.

Had I cause, then, to be astonished, that the call to freedom and
equality which I addressed to woman should be stifled by shouts of
outrage?—No! I relied more on the effect of the reproaches which would
be cast by man upon the liberation of woman, than on the power of my own
words.

I leave to woman this inheritance of liberty. I know how great has
hitherto been the power of destruction residing in this word liberty,
when flung into the midst of slaves, fettered and gagged; but, thanks be
to God, the slave in this case is woman: and it is not by disorder and
brutality that she achieves her triumphs.

One phasis of my life is now accomplished: I have spoken: I will now
act. But I have need for some time of repose and silence.

A numerous family surrounds me, the Apostolate is now founded.

I take forty of my sons with me: I confide to my other children the task
of continuing our labours in the world; and I retire.

I retire to the place where my childhood was passed, on one of the
heights which overlook Paris: for I wish still to hear and see that
cradle of the New World, and I love also to renew the recollections of
my past life; they are good and pleasant to look back upon.

He who speaks to you has lived in the midst of you; his life has not
been solitary; he has been known to many of you, and among these he is
not aware of one who has not loved him: and yet he is now handed over to
the laughter and calumny of the world.

His mother gave him a name of good omen—Prosper—because he smiled in
coming into the world; God surrounded his young years with pleasures and
riches; his brother, a child of poetry, fed him with harmony and light;
his infancy and youth were happy, in the midst of children and young men
who cherished his friendship: this man, however, you now overwhelm with
sarcasm and outrage.

He has known what your men of science know; he has seen and done what
your men of industry do; he has appeared in your meetings and your
fêtes, and even on your battle-fields, with his brother-scholars of your
Grande Ecole (the Polytechnic School): you all came to him with
affection, because you felt that he loved you; you all had confidence in
him, because you could read in his heart. And now, because this man
takes upon himself in the name of God to moralise your lives, you fling
scorn and reproach upon him.

He who has been loved by you will not call you to account for your
inconsistencies; he will bide his time and act.

Edition: current; Page: [1259]
Consider, that one who announces to the world such promises as mine, and
who yet, in so short a time, has caused his word to be everywhere
re-echoed, cannot be accused of insanity; for his accusers would confess
their own madness in having paid so much attention to him. Listen then,
once more, before I withdraw from among you.

Your altars are no more, your thrones are shaken, your families are torn
by dissension: God, Kings, and love, are no more to be seen in the
world. A new religion, a new politics, a new morality, are what I bring
you.

The man who dares to speak thus, must be heard, for he has already
proved that he could make himself heard.

You have his word; you shall soon have his acting.

But, I repeat to you, I will now rest and hold my peace: for you have
need of my silence, that yourselves may speak.

I retire then, with my children—glory to them! who so powerfully aid
their father to accomplish the will of God.

My dear Children—This day has been glorious in the world for eighteen
centuries: this day died the Divine Liberator of the slave.

To commemorate the anniversary, let our retirement commence this day;
and let the last trace of servitude, the condition of a menial,
disappear from amongst us.

Enfantin

Edition: current; Page: [1260]


Appendix D


GEORGE SAND
 UNPUBLISHED [AFTER 9 APR., 1848]

For the background to this draft letter (dated on internal evidence),
see No. 371, the fuller French version, with its notes.

i am an old admirer of george sand and was one of the first to give her
honour public and private. When all other persons in England abused her
as an immoral and indecent writer I and my circle of friends, persons
not without influence, were the first to s’écrier against the charges
universally made 15 years ago against her writings and to appeal to all
who condemned them, from their judgment then to their judgment now, and
the event has justified the appeal. How then can I express my
astonishment, mortification and grief to find that when a great
political crisis of the world has arrived, brought about by the noble
[élan]1 of Paris, Mme G. Sand alone remains behind—not only takes no
initiative, puts forth no principles, but in a manner worthy only of a
timid and commonplace lady, repudiates the kindly flatteries made to her
in your paper.

Her letter to the Réforme protesting against the use of her name in your
paper is to me incomprehensible for its fatuity. I can only attribute it
to a fear that her literary vanity may be compromised by the connexion
of her established reputation with your unestablished—However this may
be, the reply to her letter, in your paper, is as superior in dignity
and disinterestedness to hers as her literary reputation to yours. I
have only now to say for myself and for all women of strong mind and
large heart I can only say I wish you all possible success in your
undertaking and I only hope you will treat the disavowal of connexion
with you by any woman whether George Sand or any other with the silent
pity which is the tribute one pays to weakness and timidity.

Une anglaise.

Sand is like one of our English writing women (I do not know how the
case may be in France) who always commence by declaring that they do not
intend to advocate the emancipation of women although to the partial
emancipation of women gained by more generous spirits it is alone owing
that they are able to Edition: current; Page: [1261] make their voices
heard and to take up that position in society and literary influence
which they are afraid to compromise by any attempt to help on the same
cause. English literary women have been hitherto particularly
distinguished by their little basenesses caused by timidity.

I agree with you in your expressions of admiration of her fine talent,
beautiful stories and admirable style but I think you are making a great
error and one most injurious to the cause of women in applying the term
philosophe to her. If there be anything characteristic of Sand’s
writings it is the presence of imagination and feeling and the absence
of thought.

She means to écraser them du haut de sa supériorité which as a thinker
or a practical person certainly does not exist.2 Latterly however I have
feared that she was destined, contrary to what I had hoped, to be no
otherwise useful to the cause of women (from which the best interests of
society can never be separated) than, in the manner in which all eminent
women are so, by the mere fact of being women.

Edition: current; Page: [1262]


Appendix E


DEATH OF FRANCIS PLACE
 SPECTATOR, 7 JAN., 1854, P. 13

This obituary, headed “Francis Place” and subheaded “[From a
Correspondent],” appears in the “Topics of the Day” section. Though not
listed in Mill’s bibliography, it is assigned to him by G.J. Holyoake in
his John Stuart Mill as Some of the Working Classes Knew Him (London:
Trübner, 1873), p. 6, and also in his Sixty Years of an Agitator’s Life,
2 vols. (London: Unwin, 1909), Vol. I, p. 216. Holyoake cites no
evidence; there is no corroboration elsewhere, and the piece is not
characteristic of Mill’s usual style.

another man of mark has passed from amongst us. Francis Place has
departed from the world in which he was so long a stirring mover. Few
men have done more of the world’s work with so little external sign. He
was ever ready with pen and person to aid the uplifting of humanity,
ever ready to fill full of his own knowledge any other men willing to
work and to get the credit of it. He was essentially a public man, but
his work usually lay behind the curtain as a prompter. He was no orator,
but much oratory was of his prompting. He was a man of the last age and
of the present, before the French Revolution and since. Born to no
inheritance but a clear brain, an iron will, and an indomitable love of
freedom, he was one of the few London tradesmen who achieved an ample
competence, not merely without truckling, but in spite of the odium and
discouragement cast on all Reformers under the old oppressive Tory rule.
But more remarkable than all this was the fact, that in the days when
“books, plate, and pictures,” were important items in all rich men’s
wills, he was the almost solitary tradesman who possessed a library,
earned, collected, and paid for by himself, which many public men envied
him the possession of, and to which many public men of less energy and
purpose were glad to have recourse. The room which held that library was
for many years a well-known meeting-place for Members of Parliament to
discuss popular questions.

An early member of the London Corresponding Society—an intimate
acquaintance of Hardy, Tooke, Richter, and others,1 in the days when
opinion was crime,—never losing any opportunity of promoting freedom—he
one day Edition: current; Page: [1263] stood in Covent Garden with a
friend watching a Westminster Election contested between Whigs and
Tories. The brewer candidate brought a dray to the front of the hustings
to propitiate “sweet voices.”2 The beer was staved and ran into the
kennels, and the miserable mob threw themselves on their faces and
wallowed like swine. Francis Place and his friend left the spot, vowing
never to cease their labours till the elections of Westminster were
reformed. Just as Cobden and Bright3 with their friends brought about
Corn-law abolition, so did Francis Place and his friend gather round
them a nucleus with the motto “Purity of Election.” About that time, Sir
Francis Burdett made a speech in public such as a young Greek might have
made in Athens.4 “The man for the People!” said Francis Place; and
Burdett was applied to. He returned for answer, that he had spent twenty
thousand pounds in contested elections, and would spend no more. This
was precisely what the Westminster electors meant. He was elected
triumphantly, and the very shilling was found for him on taking the oath
at the bar of the House—so runs the tradition; and from that election
dates Reform in Parliament.

There was scarcely any public man on the Liberal or professed Liberal
side that was not acquainted with Francis Place. He was the intimate
friend of James Mill the historian of India, and of Jeremy Bentham. He
was one of the original promoters of and contributors to the Westminster
Review. Godwin often came to him. Sir Samuel Romilly and Henry Brougham
held him in respect. Campbell the poet would talk to him by the hour of
“what was to be done for the Poles.”5 John Cam Hobhouse was there
indoctrinated in popular lore, and Edward Lytton Bulwer matriculated for
his first election. Neither Burdett nor Hobhouse nor Bulwer were more
than imaginations to Francis Place,—they said they were Reformers, and
he took them at their word, and they travelled by his side. When they
left the path, he went onwards just the same. People of all classes and
conditions who had purposes to serve sought him out. The engineers—the
elder Maudslay, the elder Brunel, Galloway, John Hague,6 and
others—would all Edition: current; Page: [1264] come to tell him of
their new plans, and ask for his council and influence. Mulready the
artist used to visit him.7 Joseph Hume was a constant conferrer; and
people from the new Republics ever found him out. He was an authority of
much weight amongst working people, whose condition he ever strove to
raise; and the unions always sought his help; but he was too sound a
political economist ever to give them hopes of success by strikes. He
was one of the few men whom Cobbett held in respect when he quarrelled
with the Westminster Committees. He was essentially a man of business,
the very opposite of Cobbett; and therefore it was not possible for them
to agree. If perchance a journal of his life has been preserved and it
falls into fitting hands, it will be a remarkable book—a record of the
old changing into the new.8 His industry was extraordinary; his
perceptive faculties in the direction of his sympathies, acute; and his
reasoning powers strong. In the poetical faculty, which was so strong in
Cobbett, he was entirely lacking: he was for the utter exclusion of
poetry from the pages of the Westminster Review! This will account for
much that appeared hard in his character; though there never existed a
man more ready to assist others to rise. Many now holding prominent
positions can trace their first move to the help of Francis Place. Great
faculties and abilities were ever warmly greeted by him, and he was
wholly devoid of either envy or jealousy. He had considerable mechanical
aptitude, and would have been a skilful engineer if educated to it. His
spirit was ever fresh and buoyant, and at all that spoke of the new or
the progressive he seemed to leap alive. Like most self-educated framers
of their own fortunes, he had a dislike of hereditary aristocracy, but
withal no want of “handsome acknowledgment for merit in a lord.” But he
had on the other hand not the slightest taint of the servility not
uncommon in the newly-risen. As in similarly-educated men, the spirit of
self-assertion was strong in him; a quality traceable chiefly to the
ungenerous class spirit which refuses to acknowledge rising merit till
the acknowledgment is superfluous—an ordeal that most authors have to
undergo to the great risk of their philosophy and manysidedness. He held
the manly conviction that he had earned his fellowship in the republic
of letters, and thereby was every man’s equal in the nobility of nature.
Such men are more common now, and the world thinks less of them. He had
the higher merit of working his own way out of the slough, of achieving
property hardly, and education still more hardly, at the time when books
were a costly luxury, not to be borrowed, but bought at high prices. He
was generous with his money, and generous with his books; letting all
who would drink of his fountain of knowledge, thinking it ample payment
that he was thus contributing to build up the world’s progress. The
faculties that he possessed, had they been worked in a Edition: current;
Page: [1265] worldly fashion, would have lifted him into what is called
a higher position—a greater “success”: but he did not covet it. He loved
quiet power for the purpose of promoting good ends, but never sought to
attain it by rubbing shoulders with the influential. It is true that he
would at times seek out and besiege the influential; but ever for a
public purpose. It is to be doubted if he ever asked or received a
personal favour in his life. He was the kind of man who in the United
States would have become a member of the Legislature; but being in
England, he acted only as consulting politician and economist to others.

Francis Place has died, at the ripe age of eighty-two, as he lived, in
the full possession of his faculties to the last. Statues have been
erected to and honours conferred on many less deserving. His honours
will be in the respectful memories of the worthy of all ranks, amidst
the large crowd of those who knew him.

C’est
seulement depuis la paix que l’agriculture a fait quelques progrès dans
l’arrondissement de Fougères: à partir de 1815, le mouvement
d’amélioration de son agriculture a toujours été de plus en plus rapide.
On peut dire que si, de 1815 à 1825, ce mouvement a été comme 1, il a
été comme 3 de 1825 à 1835, et qu’il est comme 6 depuis 1835. (352)

1058.5 “in good farms”] [translated from:] Il est impossible de savoir
dans quelle proportion la consommation de la viande a augmenté dans les
campagnes; on peut seulement dire que, dans les bonnes fermes, la viande
de porc est la base de l’alimentation pendant deux à trois jours par
semaine, à raison d’un kilogramme, au plus, par semaine et par personne.
(315-16)Les derniers événemens
politiques, qui ont exercé, en général, une si fâcheuse influence sur
les affaires commerciales, ont été peu sensibles, je dois le dire, dans
la fabrique de Lyon. Le travail n’a pas manqué, grâce à d’immenses
commandes faites par les Américains. L’année 1829 est celle de la plus
grande activité de la fabrication, qui s’est élévée à près de six cent
mille kilogrammes. L’année de la révolution de juillet 1830 à juillet
1831 ne diffère de ce maximum que de quinze mille kilogrammes.
Non-seulement tous les ouvriers ont été constamment occupés, mais la
durée de leur journée de travail a été beaucoup plus longue, et six
mille métiers sont restés oisifs, faute de bras. [paragraph] Dans cette
situation, cependant, les ouvriers se plaignaient: ils adressaient leurs
respectueuses doléances à l’autorité, ils se réunissaient avec ordre,
calme et décence dans une maison particulière; ils nommèrent des
commissaires pour présenter et soutenir leurs réclamations. L’opinion
publique se prononçait pour eux; ils inspiraient un intérêt général, et
tous les fabricans honnêtes avouaient que ces malheureux, en travaillant
dix heures par jour ne gagnaient pas seulement pour vivre. 

“the Destinies . . . England a heavier . . . generations”]
That the stern Destinies . . . England a terrible job of labour in these
centuries, and will inexorably (as their wont is) have it done: a job of
labour terrible to look upon, extending superficially to the Indies and
the Antipodes over all countries, and in depth, one knows not how deep;
for it is not cotton-spinning and commercing merely; it is (as begins to
be visible) governing, regulating, which in these days will mean
conquering dragons and world-wide chimeras, and climbing as high as the
zenith to snatch fire from the gods, and diving as deep as the nadir to
fling devils in chains:—and it has been laid upon the poor English
people, all this; a heavier . . . generations! (275)

Mon père
fut un de ceux qui, dans le sein de la Convention nationale,
proclamèrent la république à la face de l’Europe, alors victorieuse. Il
la défendit aux armées. C’est pour cela qu’il est mort dans l’exil après
douze années de proscription; et, tandis que la restauration elle-même
était forcée de laisser à la France les fruits de cette révolution qu’il
avait servie, tandis qu’elle comblait de ses faveurs les hommes que la
république avait créés, mon père et ses collègues souffraient seuls pour
la grande cause que tant d’autres trahissaient; dernier hommage de leur
vieillesse impuissante à la patrie que leur jeunesse avait si
vigoureusement défendue. [paragraph] Cette cause, Messieurs, se lie donc
à tous mes sentimens comme fils; les principes qu’elle embrassait sont
mon héritage. [paragraph] L’étude a fortifié cette direction donnée
naturellement à mes idées politiques, et, aujourd’hui que Edition:
current; Page: [1311] l’occasion s’offre enfin à moi, je me hâte de
prononcer un mot que d’autres proscrivent; je le déclare sans
affectation comme sans feinte, de coeur et de conviction: je suis
républicain. [paragraph] Mais il ne m’eût pas suffi, Messieurs, pour
adopter mes opinions, que la république me parût être en soi le moins
imparfait des gouvernemens; j’ai tâché de me rendre compte des faits, de
voir si elle était praticable, et j’ai compris, non pas seulement
qu’elle était possible, mais que tout marchait là, les événemens, les
esprits, les choses. J’ai compris qu’il était impossible que le
mouvement qui domine aujourd’hui le monde aboutît à rien d’autre que la
république. [paragraph] Il y a long-temps, Messieurs, que cette tendance
a été signalée. Napoléon l’a reconnue, M. de Châteaubriant l’a proclamée
plus d’une fois, quoiqu’ils ne soient ni l’un ni l’autre suspects de
partialité pour un système républicain. [paragraph] Que dis-je? le
gouvernement actuel l’a admise lui-même, cette tendance; il s’est
d’abord déclaré monarchie entourée d’institutions républicaines; et,
bien que cette alliance de mots soit vraiment monstrueuse, bien qu’ils
hurlent, comme on l’a dit, de se trouver ensemble, on a cru les lire
gravés par les balles sur les murs de l’Hôtel-de-Ville. (Sensation
marquée.) [paragraph] Messieurs, cet avenir prochain, que ceux-là mêmes
aperçoivent qui détournent la tête avec effroi, est la véritable cause
des opinions républicaines chez ceux qui veulent les réfléchir et qui ne
s’y livrent pas par un enthousiasme de collége. Ils les cultivent par la
raison que tout homme de sens se prépare d’avance à un résultat qu’il
prévoit, dont il sera le témoin, qu’il juge infaillible. Ils ne sont pas
républicains en souvenir de Rome ou d’Athènes, ce serait trop mais; ils
ne le sont pas à cause du passé, mais à cause de l’avenir. [paragraph]
Or, c’est précisément parce que l’avenir leur paraît certain qu’ils ne
conspirent pas. A quoi bon? S’il est un parti en France qui ne conspire
pas, c’est le parti républicain, car il est convaincu qu’il n’a qu’à
laisser aller les choses. Que ceux-là conspirent pour qui chaque jour
est une chance de moins, qui sont obligés d’avoir recours à leur énergie
personnelle, de tenter un coup de fortune politique, parce que leur
siècle les repousse, parce qu’ils n’ont d’autres ressources que des
complots, d’autre avenir que celui qu’ils jouaient contre leurs têtes,
je le concevrais. Il y a sans doute au moins un parti comme cela en
France; mais le parti républicain serait bien fou, de compromettre une
cause dont le succès est immanquable, par des entreprises inutiles. Il
faudrait qu’il eût bien la fureur de livrer à la justice des rois des
têtes qui peuvent se reposer sur la fortune des peuples. [paragraph]
Messieurs, si ce parti avait voulu conspirer, il le pouvait. Il le
pouvait dans la grande semaine, et cela à la clarté du soleil de
juillet, dans la place publique. Il le pouvait, et la preuve, c’est
qu’on a voulu négocier avec lui; mon défenseur l’attesterait au besoin.
Même le 30 juillet nous avons été conduits plusieurs, desquels j’étais,
ainsi que Guinard, auprès du lieutenant-général du royaume. [paragraph]
Et, je le déclare hautement, certes on lui a parlé avec la franchise que
j’emploie, on a professé devant lui les opinions que je professe encore;
et de là ces défiances dont nous avons amené l’agent devant vous. Mais,
outre que cela eût été par trop ingénu, personne ne lui a demandé de
proclamer la république. Consultez la nation; elle seule a le droit de
choisir son gouvernement: voilà ce que nous demandions, voilà ce que
nous pensons. La souveraineté du peuple est la base de nos principes, et
quand on nous accuse de songer à lui imposer un ordre de choses qu’il a
seul le droit de constituer, on ment. [paragraph] Messieurs, avec ce que
nous attendons il est facile d’attendre. Les partis qui ont de l’avenir
ont de la patience; d’ailleurs, nous sommes jeunes, et dans ce temps le
monde va vite; et, pour exprimer notre pensée tout entière, je répéterai
ce que nous avons dit quelquefois à ceux qui croyaient qu’on n’avait pas
fait en juillet tout ce qu’on pouvait: Vous en comprendrez mieux comment
toute conspiration nous semblerait une vraie duperie. [paragraph] A une
révolution, quelque belle, quelque facile qu’elle ait été, succèdent
toujours des difficultés immenses; la monarchie se charge de cette
tâche; tant pis pour elle, tant mieux pour nous; si elle ne réussit pas
cette fois, c’est fait d’elle; et, dans notre conviction, elle ne peut
pas réussir: car les nations sont travaillées aujourd’hui d’un mal si
profond, si inexplicable, si corrosif; il y a dans la société un
dissolvant si énergique de tous les moyens du pouvoir, que le pouvoir
est à refondre tout entier; et, en vérité, à voir les besoins qui
tourmentent le monde, il semble qu’un dieu même trouverait plus
difficile de le gouverner que de le refaire. (Mouvement marqueé
d’approbation dans l’auditoire.) [paragraph] Cette nouvelle combinaison,
disions-nous, satisfait beaucoup d’esprits, on y compte. Le général
Lafayette s’est rallié à elle avec tout l’ascendant de son immense
popularité. Laissons l’épreuve s’achever, laissons le fardeau à ceux qui
le prennent, laissons user encore les hommes et les systèmes. Quand
votre tour viendra, vous aurez encore assez à faire. Dans la marche si
rapide où la société Edition: current; Page: [1312] est lancée, les
hommes et les systèmes se succèdent pour la conduire au but; le dernier
relai est celui qui arrive. Eh bien! ce sera vous. Nous vivons dans le
siècle des gouvernemens suicides. La monarchie fera nos affaires; elle
s’épuisera à votre place, elle conspirera pour vous. [paragraph] Oui,
c’est ainsi, Messieurs, que nous comprenons notre position. Nous ne
conspirons pas, nous nous tenons prêts. A une époque où les peuples tout
entiers se mêlent de politique, on ne conspire plus; c’était bon du
temps que tout se passait entre quelques gens vainqueurs et vaincus tour
à tour; quand tout un parti tenait dans la main d’un chef de complot.
Aujourd’hui, il n’y a plus d’homme qui ait la main assez large, assez
forte; la place publique est seule assez grande pour ces masses qui
n’agissent au gré de personne, pour ces masses qu’on ne soulève pas plus
qu’on ne leur résiste. [paragraph] Depuis qu’on fait des révolutions,
les conjurations sont peu de chose. Eh! Messieurs, nous le savons de
reste. Long-temps nous avons conspiré contre les Bourbons. Qu’en est-il
arrivé? Que quelques hommes se sont trompés sans doute, qu’on n’a pas
laissé prescrire le droit de résistance à l’oppression, qu’on a protesté
contre l’invasion légitime; mais voilà tout, et avec cela la fuite des
uns, la ruine des autres, la mort de ceux qui ont versé sur l’échafaud
leur sang, la plus pur sang des patriotes. Puis un beau jour, ah oui! un
beau jour! le peuple, qui ne conspirait pas, le peuple s’est jeté dans
les rues, il a improvisé en quelques heures cette délivrance si
long-temps poursuivie. [paragraph] Voilà ce que nous avons appris, voilà
ce que nous n’oublierons pas, et ces débats le prouvent. Qu’on s’en
souvienne aussi, qu’on renonce désormais à tout cet épouvantail de
conspirations républicaines. Nous espérons que ce procès en dégoûtera;
nous ne sommes pas des enfans, et nous avons un meilleur emploi à faire
de notre vie que de la jouer pour des inutilités. Cette salle a retenti
tant de fois des mots de complots contre la sûreté de l’état, qu’il y a
peut-être encore ici des échos pour les grossir; mais au-dehors de cette
enceinte ils n’en trouveront plus. Les charlatans cesseront d’exploiter
ce mal imaginaire, et c’est un service qu’à défaut d’autres l’accusateur
aura rendu au pays. [paragraph] Les accusés ont le droit peut-être de
revendiquer quelque part dans ce service. Placés devant vous, sans nom
illustré qui se joignît à leur cause, ils ont eu confiance en vous, en
eux-mêmes: car vous et eux ce sont gens d’honneur, qui n’ont besoin du
secours de personne pour servir la vérité; et si ce procès est utile à
notre pays, nous trouvons déjà notre récompense dans le moyen qu’il nous
donne de répondre hautement à nos calomniateurs. [13-paragraph omission]
Ce sang, il n’est pas à nous; il est à notre pays, à notre pays que nous
aimons, parce qu’il est digne que ses enfans l’aiment, parce qu’il les a
faits libres, parce qu’il est grand, parce qu’il est cher, utile,
redoutable au reste du monde. Le pays, voilà à quoi nous sommes dévoués,
dévoués corps et âme, non comme des fanatiques qui s’enivrent d’un mot,
mais comme des gens de coeur qui sont heureux de trouver quelque chose
en ce monde à quoi il soit noble, juste et doux de consacrer ses
affections et sa vie. [paragraph] Messieurs, voilà nos sentimens, voilà
nos principes: car nous ne les séparons pas. Et pourtant nous sommes
ici, nous sommes sur le banc où plusieurs de nos frères ont entendu leur
sentence de mort au nom de Louis XVIII. Si je me retournais, et que je
visse au bonnet des soldats qui nous gardent cette cocarde tricolore que
nous leur avons rendu, Messieurs, je ne pourrais en croire mes yeux.
Qu’on amène ici des Suisses, des soldats de la garde royale, et alors je
comprendrai; alors nous nous reporterons au temps de notre cher et
malheureux Bories; et, pensant que Charles X règne encore, nous ne nous
étonnerons pas qu’on ait voulu nous frapper comme l’eût fait Charles X
il y a huit mois.

Aristophanes, in his comedy of the Knights, reproduces these features
with others new and distinct, as well as with exaggerated details comic,
satirical, and contemptuous. His comedy depicts Kleon in the point of
view in which he would appear to the knights of Athens—a
leather-dresser, smelling of the tan-yard—a low-born brawler, terrifying
opponents by the violence of his criminations, the loudness of his
voice, the impudence of his gestures—moreover, as venal in his
politics—threatening men with accusations and then receiving money to
withdraw them—a robber of the public treasury—persecuting merit as well
as rank—and courting the favour of the assembly by the basest and most
guilty cajolery. The (VI, 332)

1127.6 opened. . . . The] The talent for invective possessed by Kleon,
employed first against Periklês, would be counted as great impudence by
the partisans of that illustrious statesman, as well as by impartial and
judicious citizens; but among the numerous enemies of Periklês, it would
be applauded as a burst of patriotic indignation, and would procure for
the orator that extraneous Edition: current; Page: [1345] support at
first which would sustain him until he acquired his personal hold on the
public assembly1. [footnote omitted] [text:] [paragraph] By what degrees
or through what causes that hold was gradually increased, we do not
know; but at the time when the question of Mitylênê came on for
discussion, it had grown into a sort of ascendency which Thucydidês
describes by saying that Kleon was “at that time by far the most
persuasive speaker in the eyes of the people.” The (VI, 333-4)



142.16-33 Considering . . . costs.] [translated from:] A l’égard des
treize autres prévenus, qui déclarent eux-mêmes avoir été commissaires
d’une réunion, barrière du Maine, le 3 septembre, [paragraph] Attendu
qu’il est résulté, de l’instruction et des débats que cette réunion
n’avait pas de but positivement déterminé jusqu’à l’arrivée et à
l’intervention des authorités civiles et militaires; [paragraph] Que
c’est à l’arrivée de ces autorités que les membres de la réunion ont
nommé des commissaires, et qu’un arrêté a été pris par lequel ils se
sont engagés et ont engagé les autres ouvriers à ne pas travailler dans
les ateliers où se trouvaient des presses mécaniques; [paragraph] Que si
par cette détermination la réunion a pris le caractère d’une coalition
illégale, et a dès-lors constitué matériellement le délit prévu par les
articles 415 et 416 du Code pénal, il est en même temps constant,
d’après le débat, et particulièrement d’après les explications données à
l’audience par les autorités civiles et militaires présentes à la
délibération du 3 septembre, que les commissaires n’ont agi que dans le
but de maintenir l’ordre, et sous les yeux mêmes des autorités;
[paragraph] Que si des additions paraissent avoir été faites à l’arrêté
depuis l’instant où il avait été délibéré, cela semble être la suite
d’une méprise des membres de la réunion sur l’étendue de leurs droits;
[paragraph] Que les travaux ont repris presque aussitôt, et que les
commissaires, éclairés sur la nature de leur droit, ont invité leurs
confrères à les reprendre sans délai; [paragraph] Que si l’ensemble de
ces circonstances ne détruit pas l’existence matérielle du délit, elles
sont du moins exclusives de toute intention criminelle, intention qui
est la base des délits réprimés par la loi; [paragraph] Le tribunal
renvoie les prévenus susdits de la prévention, sans dépens. (4)


Les journaux anglais
ont une méthode très commode de traiter les affaires de France. Leurs
rédacteurs paraissent ne pas se donner la peine d’étudier ou même de
lire des organes de l’opinion dans ce pays. Les seuls journaux parisiens
qui arrivent à Londres sont ceux dont l’existence est déjà ancienne. Les
hommes sages de Londres affectent de mépriser nos journaux et semblent
s’imaginer que les Français sont trop légers, trop peu raisonnables pour
être juges dans leurs propres affaires. Même comme narrateurs de faits,
nous sommes tout à fait dédaignés par nos confrères insulaires. Leur
coutume est d’avoir ici un correspondant, aux récits et à l’opinion
solitaire duquel ils accordent une confiance implicite. Tant que ces
correspondans n’ont débité que des contradictions et des absurdités,
nous n’y avons fait aucune attention; mais comme ils ont montré une
animosité spéciale contre le National, nous devons au moins demander que
le rédacteur qui nous traite avec tant d’impolitesse prenne la peine de
s’informer qui nous sommes. [paragraph] Pendant long-temps, le
correspondant parisien du Globe de Londres a dirigé contre nous de
violentes attaques; une semaine ne se passe pas sans qu’il nous lance
l’épigramme obligée; et souvent l’éditeur de Londres, sans même daigner
jeter les yeux sur son antagoniste, la répète de son chef. Nous avons
été d’abord surpris, nous l’avouons, de ce manque de loyauté et de
politesse dans un journal qui n’est dépourvu ni de libéralisme ni de
lumières. Mais le Globe est essentiellement doctrinaire; il a jusqu’au
pédantisme de cette coterie, et comme nous sommes naturellement honorés
de la haine de cette race amphibie d’écrivains politiques, il était tout
simple que leurs confrères d’Angleterre, à demi torys, à demi whigs,
suivissent cet exemple: aussi ce n’est pas de l’animosité que nous nous
plaignons, mais de la déloyauté. En voici un exemple: [paragraph] La
semaine dernière, il a paru dans nos colonnes un article concernant
l’état de l’Irlande et le progrès que la question du rappel de l’union
fait dans ce pays. Pour appuyer notre assertion, nous disions que
l’accession de M. Shiel au parti du rappel était un des signes les plus
sûrs de ce progrès et du succès final de la proposition. Nous
raisonnions ainsi, non parce que M. Shiel possède assex d’influence
personnelle pour déterminer l’adoption de la mesure, mais parce que
c’est un homme essentiellement modéré, prudent, ennemi des extrêmes, et
n’y arrivant que lorsqu’il est impossible ou impolitique de tarder plus
long-temps, c’est-à-dire quand ces extrêmes commencent à prévaloir. Nous
avons proclamé la conversion de M. Shiel comme un signe et non comme une
cause de la grande mesure de la séparation législative de l’Angleterre
et de l’Irlande; cette conclusion peut ne pas plaire au Globe, organe de
M. Stanley, mais il n’aurait point méprisé l’argument s’il en avait pris
connaissance. [paragraph] Le Galignani’s Messenger avait réduit
l’article du National à ce peu de mots, que le rappel devait se faire,
parce que M. Shiel s’y était converti. [paragraph] Là-dessus le Globe,
qui, ce semble, lit le Galignani’s et non le National, cite la version
donnée par le premier de l’opinion du dernier, puis il ajoute à sa
citation une remarque dédaigneuse. [paragraph] Ce n’est là qu’un exemple
entre mille de la déloyauté et de la légerté avec lesquelles toutes les
affaires françaises sont traitées dans les feuilles du juste-milieu de
Londres, tandis que leurs confrères d’ici prêchent la possibilité d’une
alliance anglaise. Ces jours derniers, un autre journal, le Courier,
observait qu’il était fort à regretter que des troupes françaises
fussent entrées au service de don Pedro, parce que leur présence dans
l’armée constitutionnelle ne servait qu’à exaspérer les miguélistes.
Voilà l’oraison funèbre que ce journal publie sur ce brave bataillon
français presque anéanti pour la défense d’Oporto! [paragraph] De nos
plaintes contre les journaux d’Angleterre soi-disant libéraux, nous
excepterons cependant le Times, dont les colonnes sont ouvertes à des
correspondans de toutes les opinions sur les affaires de France. L’un
d’eux, évidemment Français et qui s’avoue tel, se montre prodigue de
louanges envers les doctrinaires; mais le langage de la bonne compagnie
ne lui est pas étranger. Seul aussi le Times paraît connaître les
journaux français, et, quoique son esprit anglican et égoïste soit dans
le fait opposé au nôtre, très souvent il le rachète par des accès de
générosité dont nous devons lui tenir compte.

