

JOHN M. robson
Jeremy Bentham’s Rationale of Judicial Evidence


PREFACE

the papers, from which the work now submitted to the public has been
extracted, were written by Mr. Bentham at various times, from the year
1802 to 1812. They comprise a very minute exposition of his views on all
the branches of the great subject of Judicial Evidence, intermixed with
criticisms on the law of Evidence as it is established in this country,
and with incidental remarks on the state of that branch of law in most
of the continental systems of jurisprudence.

Mr. Bentham’s speculations on Judicial Evidence have already been given
to the world, in a more condensed form, by M. Dumont, of Geneva, in the
Traité des Preuves Judiciaires, published in 1823: one of the most
interesting among the important works founded on Mr. Bentham’s
manuscripts, with which that “first of translators and redacteurs,” as
he has justly been termed, has enriched the library of the continental
jurist.1 The strictures, however, on English law, which compose more
than one-half of the present work, were judiciously omitted by M.
Dumont, as not sufficiently interesting to a continental reader to
compensate for the very considerable space which they would have
occupied. To an English reader—to him at least who loves his country
sufficiently well to desire that what is defective in her institutions
should be amended, and, in order to its being amended, should be
known—these criticisms will not be the least interesting portion of the
work. As is usual in the critical and controversial part of Mr.
Bentham’s writings, the manner is forcible and perspicuous. The
occasional obscurity, of which his style is accused, but which in
reality is almost confined to the more intricate of the theoretical
discussions, is the less to be regretted, as the nature of the subject
is of itself sufficient to render the work a sealed letter to those who
read merely for amusement. They who really desire to possess useful
knowledge do not grudge the trouble necessary to acquire it.

Edition: current; Page: [6]
The task of the Editor has chiefly consisted in collating the
manuscripts. Mr. Bentham had gone over the whole of the field several
times, at intervals of some length from one another, with little
reference on each occasion to what he had written on the subject at the
former times. Hence, it was often found that the same topic had been
treated two and even three times; and it became necessary for the Editor
to determine, not only which of the manuscripts should supply the basis
of the chapter, but likewise how great a portion of each of those which
were laid aside might usefully be incorporated with that which was
retained. The more recent of the manuscripts has in most cases been
adopted as the ground-work, being generally that in which the subjects
were treated most comprehensively and systematically; while the earlier
ones often contained thoughts and illustrations of considerable value,
with passages, and sometimes whole pages, written with great spirit and
pungency. Where these could conveniently be substituted for the
corresponding passages in the manuscript chosen as the basis of the
work, the substitution has been made. Where this was thought
inexpedient, either on account of the merit of the passages which would
thus have been superseded, or because their omission would have broken
the thread of the discussion, the Editor (not thinking himself justified
in suppressing anything which appeared to him to be valuable in the
original) has added the passage which was first written, instead of
substituting it for that which was composed more recently. From this
cause it may occasionally be found in perusing the work, that the same
ideas have been introduced more than once, in different dresses. But the
Editor hopes that this will never prove to be the case, except where
either the merit of both passages, or the manner in which one of them
was interwoven with the matter preceding and following it, constituted a
sufficient motive for retaining both.

The plan of the work having been altered and enlarged at different
times, and having ultimately extended to a much wider range of subjects
than were included in the original design, it has not unfrequently
happened that the same subject has been discussed incidentally in one
book, which was afterwards treated directly in another. In some of these
cases the incidental discussion has been omitted, as being no longer
necessary; but in others it contained important matter, which was not to
be found in the direct and more methodical one, and which, from the plan
on which the latter was composed, it was not found possible to introduce
in it. In such cases both discussions have usually been retained.

The work, as has been already observed, not having been written
consecutively, but part at one time, and part at another, and having
always been regarded by the author as an unfinished work, it has
sometimes, (though but rarely) occurred, that while one topic was
treated several times over, another, of perhaps equal importance, was
not treated at all. Such deficiencies it was the wish of Mr. Bentham
that the Editor should endeavour to supply. In compliance with this
wish, some cases of the exclusion of evidence in English law, which were
not noticed by Mr. Bentham, have been stated and commented upon in the
last chapter of the Edition: current; Page: [7] book on Makeshift
Evidence, and in two chapters of the sixth part of the Book on
Exclusion.* He has likewise subjoined to some of the chapters in the
latter book, a vindication of the doctrines which they contain, against
the strictures of an able writer in the Edinburgh Review.2 A few
miscellaneous notes are scattered here and there, but sparingly: nor
could anything, except the distinctly expressed wish of the Author, have
induced the Editor to think that any additions of his could enhance the
value of a work on such a subject, and from such a hand.

For the distribution of the work in Chapters and Sections, the Editor
alone is responsible. The division into Books is all that belongs to the
Author.

The original manuscripts contained, under the title of Causes of the
Exclusion of Evidence, a treatise on the principal defects of the
English system of Technical Procedure. This extensive subject may appear
not to be so intimately connected with the more limited design of a work
which professes to treat of Judicial Evidence only, as to entitle a
dissertation upon it to a place in these pages. On examination, however,
the parenthetical treatise was thought to be not only so instructive,
but so full of point and vivacity, that its publication could not but be
acceptable to the readers of the present work: and the additional bulk,
in a work which already extended beyond four volumes, was not deemed a
preponderant objection, especially as the dissertation, from the
liveliness and poignancy with which it exposes established absurdities,
gives in some degree a relief to the comparative abstruseness of some
other parts of the work. It stands as the eighth in order of the ten
books into which the work is divided.3

A few of the vices in the detail of English law, which are complained of
both in Edition: current; Page: [8] this book and in other parts of the
work, have been either wholly or partially remedied by Mr. Peel’s recent
law reforms;4 and some others may be expected to be removed, if the
recommendations of the late Chancery Commission be carried into
execution.5 The changes, however, which will thus be effected in a
system of procedure founded altogether upon wrong principles, will not
be sufficient to render that system materially better; in some cases,
perhaps, they will even tend to render it worse: since the malâ fide
suitor has always several modes of distressing his adversary by needless
delay or expense, and these petty reforms take away at most one or two,
but leave it open to him to have recourse to others, which, though
perhaps more troublesome to himself, may be even more burdensome to his
bonâ fide adversary than the former. Thus, for instance: in one of the
earlier chapters of Book VIII, the reader will find an exposure of one
of those contrivances for making delay which were formerly within the
power of the dishonest suitor; I mean that of groundless writs of
error.6 Mr. Peel has partially (and but partially) taken away this
resource,7 and the consequence, as we are informed, has been, not that
improper delay has not been obtained, but that it has been obtained by
way of demurrer,8 or by joining issue and proceeding to trial; either of
which expedients (though perhaps somewhat less efficacious to the party
seeking delay) are equally, if not more, oppressive in the shape of
expense to the party against whom they are employed, than the
proceedings in error.

The truth is, that, bad as the English system of jurisprudence is, its
parts harmonize tolerably well together; and if one part, however bad,
be taken away, while another part is left standing, the arrangement
which is substituted for it may, for the time, do more harm by its
imperfect adaptation to the remainder of the old system, than the
removal of the abuse can do good. The objection so often urged by
lawyers as an argument against reforms, “That in so complicated and
intricate a system of jurisprudence as ours, no one can foretell what
the consequences of the slightest innovation may be,” is perfectly
correct;9 although the inference to be drawn from it is not, as they
would have it to be understood, that the system ought Edition: current;
Page: [9] not to be reformed, but that it ought to be reformed
thoroughly, and on a comprehensive plan; not piecemeal, but at once.
There are numerous cases in which a gradual change is preferable to a
sudden one; because its immediate consequences can be more distinctly
foreseen. But in this case, the consequences even of a sudden change can
be much more easily foreseen than those of a gradual one. Whatever
difficulties men might at first experience (though the difficulties
which they would experience have been infinitely exaggerated) in
adapting their conduct to a system of procedure entirely founded on
rational, and therefore on new, principles; none are more ready than
lawyers themselves to admit that still greater difficulty would be felt
in adapting it to a system partly rational and partly technical.

For such a thorough reform, or rather re-construction of our laws, the
public mind is not yet entirely prepared. But it is rapidly advancing to
such a state of preparation. It is now no longer considered as a mark of
disaffection towards the state, and hostility to social order and to law
in general, to express an opinion that the existing law is defective,
and requires a radical reform. Thus much Mr. Peel’s attempts have
already done for the best interests of his country; and they will in
time do much more. A new spirit is rising in the profession itself. Of
this the recent work of Mr. Humphreys, obtaining, as it has done, so
great circulation and celebrity, is one of the most gratifying
indications.10 The reform which he contemplates in one of the most
difficult, as well as important branches of the law, is no timid and
trifling attempt to compromise with the evil, but goes to the root at
once.* And the rapidity with which this spirit is spreading among the
young and rising lawyers, notwithstanding the degree in which their
pecuniary interest must be affected by the removal of the abuses, is one
of the most cheering signs of the times,11 and goes far to shew, that
the tenacity with which the profession has usually clung to the worst
parts of existing systems, was owing not wholly to those sinister
interests12 which Mr. Bentham has so instructively expounded, but, in
part at least, to the extreme difficulty which a mind conversant only
with one set of securities feels in conceiving that society can possibly
be held together by any other.

It has appeared to the Editor superfluous to add one word in
recommendation of Edition: current; Page: [10] the work. The vast
importance of the subject, which is obvious to all men, and the
consideration that it has now for the first time been treated
philosophically, and by such a master, contain in themselves so many
incitements of curiosity to every liberal mind, to every mind which
regards knowledge on important subjects as an object of desire, that
volumes might be written without adding to their force.

* * * * *


ADDITION TO PREFACE, DECEMBER 183713

at an interval of more than ten years from the first publication of this
work, the original Editor feels that an apology is due from him for the
air of confident dogmatism perceptible in some of his notes and
additions, and for which he can only urge the palliation of their having
been written in very early youth—a time of life at which such faults are
more venial than at any other, because they generally arise, not so much
from the writer’s own self-conceit, as from confidence in the authority
of his teachers. It is due, however, to himself to state, that the tone
of some of the passages in question would have been felt by him, even
then, to be unbecoming, as proceeding from himself individually: he
wrote them in the character of an anonymous Editor of Mr. Bentham’s
work, who, in the trifling contributions which the author desired at his
hands, considered (so far as mere manner was concerned) rather what
would be accordant with the spirit of the work itself, and in Mr.
Bentham admissible, than what would be decorous from a person of his
years and his limited knowledge and experience.14 His name was
subsequently affixed, contrary to his own strongly expressed wish, at
the positive desire of the venerable author, who certainly had a right
to require it.15

* * * * *

The exclusive rules relative to evidence belong to the adjective branch
of the law: the effect of them is to frustrate and disappoint the
expectations raised by the substantive branch. The maintenance of them
has this effect perpetually: the Edition: current; Page: [11] abolition
of them, even though by the judicial power, would have no such effect,
but the contrary.

The terms, adjective and substantive, applied to law, are intended to
mark an important distinction, first pointed out to notice by this
author;16 viz. the distinction between the commands which refer directly
to the ultimate ends of the legislator, and the commands which refer to
objects which are only the means to those ends. The former are as it
were the laws themselves; the latter are the prescriptions for carrying
the former into execution. They are, in short, the rules of procedure.
The former Mr. Bentham calls the substantive law, the latter the
adjective. (Vol. I, p. 5.)

* * * * *

[Bentham argues (Vol. I, pp. 18-20) that in searching for matters of
fact, human beings are faced “every day, and almost every waking hour,”
with “questions of evidence.” He mentions specifically domestic
management, natural philosophy, technology, medicine, and then
mathematics, noting that in the last “the evidentiary facts” are
“feigned,” but nonetheless persuasion depends on evidence.]

The difference, in respect of evidence, between questions of mathematics
and questions of purely experimental science, of chemistry, for example,
is merely this; that the evidence applicable to the former, is that
description of evidence which is founded upon general reasoning; while
the evidence applicable to the latter, is evidence of that description
which is derived immediately from matters of fact, presenting themselves
to our senses. To point out the peculiar properties of these two kinds
of evidence, and to distinguish them from one another, belongs rather to
a treatise on logic than to a work like the present; which, considering
evidence almost exclusively in regard to its connection with judicature,
excludes all general speculations which have no immediate bearing upon
that subject. (Vol. I, p. 20.)

* * * * *

[Bentham refers again to the substantive and adjective branches of law.]

See ante, p. 5—note. (Vol. I, p. 25.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [12]
The state of the facts, as well as the state of the law, being such as
to confer on the plaintiff a title to such or such a right, or to
satisfaction on the score of such or such a wrong; if evidence, and that
of a sufficient degree of probative force to satisfy the judge, of the
existence of the necessary matter of fact, be wanting; the law, in that
instance, fails of receiving its due execution and effect; and,
according to the nature of the case, injustice in the shape of
non-collation of rights where due, non-administration of compensation
where due, or non-administration of punishment where due, is the
consequence. [Mill’s note is appended to “non-collation.”]

By collation of rights, Mr. Bentham means that species of service which
the judge renders to any person by putting him in possession of a
certain right. Non-collation of rights has place when that service is
not rendered,—when the person in question is not put in possession of
the right.

So, collative facts are those facts which have been appointed by the
legislator to give commencement to a right: thus, under English law, in
the case of the right to a landed estate, collative facts are, a
conveyance executed in a particular form, a devise, and the like: in the
case of the rights of a husband over a wife, and vice versâ, the
collative fact is the ceremony of marriage, and so on. Collative facts
are also sometimes called by Mr. Bentham investitive facts.

In like manner, ablative, or divestitive facts, are those which take
away rights: as in the case of property, gift or sale to another party:
in the case of several of the rights of a father over his child, the
child’s coming of age, etc. etc.17 (Vol. I, p. 26.)

* * * * *

[It is one] natural and proper object of the legislator’s care, viz. to
see that the necessary evidence be forthcoming.

There are many other judicial purposes for which it is necessary that
things and persons should be forthcoming, besides that of being
presented to the judge in the character of sources of evidence. The
subject of Forthcomingness, therefore, belongs to the general subject of
Procedure. And as the arrangements necessary to secure the
forthcomingness of persons and things to serve as sources of evidence,
do not differ from those which are necessary to secure their
forthcomingness for any other judicial purpose, they do not properly
form part of the subject of the present work. (Vol. I, p. 27.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [13]
Of evidence sine lite. An example of this is, where, to enable a man to
receive money from an officer employed in the payment of public money,
evidence shewing his title must be produced. Here, as elsewhere, the
object is to guard against deception in the most effectual way possible,
without preponderant or unnecessary vexation, expense, and delay.

On this subject a few pages had been written by Mr. Bentham, but he had
never completed the enquiry, and the manuscript in the hands of the
Editor was so incomplete that he has thought it best to suppress it.18
(Vol. I, p. 37.)

* * * * *

[Bentham proposes (Vol. I, pp. 103-6) a scale to measure the value of
witnesses’ evidence.]

M. Dumont, in a note to the Traité des Preuves Judiciaires, has brought
forward several objections against the scale which Mr. Bentham has
suggested for the measurement of degrees of persuasion and probative
force. It is fair that the reader should have the means of judging for
himself, what degree of validity these objections possess. I quote from
a recently published and very well executed translation of Mr. Dumont’s
work.

I do not dispute the correctness of the author’s principles; and I
cannot deny that, where different witnesses have different degrees of
belief, it would be extremely desirable to obtain a precise knowledge of
these degrees, and to make it the basis of the judicial decision; but I
cannot believe that this sort of perfection is attainable in practice. I
even think, that it belongs only to intelligences superior to ourselves,
or at least to the great mass of mankind. Looking into myself, and
supposing that I am examined in a court of justice on various facts, if
I cannot answer “Yes” or “No” with all the certainty which my mind can
allow, if there be degrees and shades, I feel myself incapable of
distinguishing between two and three, between four and five, and even
between more distant degrees. I make the experiment at this very moment;
I try to recollect who told me a certain fact: I hesitate, I collect all
the circumstances, I think it was A rather than B: but should I place my
belief at No. 4, or No. 7? I cannot tell.

A witness who says, “I am doubtful,” says nothing at all, in so far as
the judge is concerned. It serves no purpose, I think, to enquire after
the degrees of doubt. But these different states of belief, which, in my
opinion, it is difficult to express in numbers, display themselves to
the eyes of the judge by other signs. The readiness of the witness, the
distinctness and certainty of his answers, the agreement of all the
circumstances of his story with each other,—it is this which shows the
confidence of the witness in himself. Hesitation, a painful searching
for the details, successive connexions of his own testimony,—it is this
which announces a witness who is not at the maximum of certainty. It
belongs to the judge to appreciate these differences, rather than to the
witness himself, who would be greatly embarrassed if he had to fix the
numerical amount of his own belief.

Edition: current; Page: [14]
Were this scale adopted, I should be apprehensive that the authority of
the testimony would often be inversely as the wisdom of the witnesses.
Reserved men—men who knew what doubt is—would, in many cases, place
themselves at inferior degrees, rather than at the highest; while those
of a positive and presumptuous disposition, above all, passionate men,
would almost believe they were doing themselves an injury, if they did
not take their station immediately at the highest point. The wisest thus
leaning to a diminution, and the least wise to an augmentation, of their
respective influence on the judge, the scale might produce an effect
contrary to what the author expects from it.

The comparison with wagers and insurances does not seem to me to be
applicable. Testimony turns on past events; wagers turn on future
events: as a witness, I know, I believe, or I doubt; as a wagerer, I
know nothing, but I conjecture, I calculate probabilities: my rashness
can injure nobody but myself; and if a wagerer feels that he has gone
too far, he often diminishes the chances of loss by betting on the other
side.

It appears to me, that, in judicial matters, the true security depends
on the degree in which the judges are acquainted with the nature of
evidence, the appreciation of testimony, and the different degrees of
proving power. These principles put a balance into their hands, in which
witnesses can be weighed much more accurately than if they were allowed
to assign their own value; and even if the scale of the degrees of
belief were adopted, it would still be necessary to leave judges the
power of appreciating the intelligence and morality of the witnesses, in
order to estimate the confidence due to the numerical point of belief at
which they have placed their testimony.

These are the difficulties which have presented themselves to me, in
meditating on this new method.19

On these observations of M. Dumont it may, in the first place, be
remarked that, if applicable at all, they are applicable only to the use
of the scale by the witness, not to the use of it by the judge, which
latter use, however, is perhaps the more important of the two. In the
next place, even as regards the witness, I doubt whether any great
weight should be attached to the objections. For, first, what almost all
of them seem to imply is, that, because we cannot in all cases attain
the degree of exactness which is desirable, therefore we ought to
neglect the means of attaining that degree of exactness which is in our
power. The witness who does not know the degree of his persuasion,—the
witness to whom the scale would be useless, will not call for it: the
judge will at all events have the same means of appreciating his
testimony, as he has now, and will not be the more likely to be deceived
by a witness who does not use the scale, because it has happened to him
to have received the testimony of one who does.

Secondly, the most formidable in appearance of all M. Dumont’s
objections—I mean that which is contained in his third paragraph—seems
to me, if it prove anything, to prove much more than M. Dumont intended.
The wise, says he, will place their degree of persuasion lower than they
ought, the foolish, higher than they ought: the effect therefore of the
scale is to give greater power to the foolish than they otherwise would
have, and less power to the wise. But if this be true, what does it
prove? that different degrees of persuasion should not be suffered to be
indicated at all; that no one should be suffered to say he doubts. It is
not the scale Edition: current; Page: [15] which does the mischief, if
mischief there be. There are but two sorts of witnesses, the wise and
the foolish: grant to them the privilege of expressing doubt, or any
degree of persuasion short of the highest, and the foolish, says M.
Dumont, will make no use of the privilege, the wise will make a bad use.
But if so, would it not be better to withhold the privilege altogether?
Is it the scale which makes all the difference?

The truth seems to me to be, that the scale will neither add to the
power of the foolish witness, nor unduly diminish that of the wise one.
It will not add to the power of the foolish witness, because he cannot
place his persuasion higher than the highest point in the scale; and
this is no more than he could do without it. It will not unduly diminish
the power of the wise witness; because the wise witness will know
tolerably well what degree of persuasion he has grounds for, and will
therefore know tolerably well whereabouts to place himself in the scale.
That he would be likely to place himself too low, seems to me a mere
assumption. The wiser a man becomes, the more certainly will he doubt,
where evidence is insufficient, and scepticism justifiable; but as his
wisdom increases, so also will his confidence increase, in all those
cases in which there is sufficient evidence to warrant a positive
conclusion. (Vol. I, pp. 106-9.)

* * * * *

When, by a consideration of any kind, a man is determined to maintain a
proposition of any kind, and finds it not tenable on the ground of
reason and experience; to conceal his distress, he has recourse to some
phrase, in and by which the truth of the proposition is, somehow or
other, assumed.

Thus, in the moral department of science; having a set of obligations
which they were determined to impose upon mankind, or such part of it at
any rate as they should succeed in engaging by any means to submit to
the yoke; phrases, in no small variety and abundance, have been invented
by various persons, for the purpose of giving force to their respective
wills, and thus performing for their accommodation the functions of a
law. Law of nations, moral sense, common sense, understanding, rule of
right, fitness of things, law of reason, right reason, natural justice,
natural equity, good order, truth, will of God, repugnancy to nature.

An appropriate name for this class of phrases would be covers for
dogmatism; an appellation indicating the property common to them all, of
serving as cloaks for ipse-dixitism, for that fallacy which has been
termed by the logicians petitio principii.

To say that an act is right or wrong, because it is conformable or
disconformable to the law of nature, is merely to say that it is right
or wrong because it is Edition: current; Page: [16] conformable or
disconformable to right or wrong. What law has nature? What is nature
itself? Is it a poetical and imaginary personage, which I suppose nobody
ever seriously believed to have any real existence? Is it the physical
and psychological world, considered as a whole? Take the word in either
sense, “law of nature” is a phrase which can have no meaning; and he who
uses it means nothing by it, except his own opinions, or his own
feelings; which he thus endeavours to erect into a standard, to which
the opinions and feelings of others are to conform.

To say, in like manner, that an act is right or wrong because it is
conformable or disconformable to conscience, or moral sense, is to say
that it is right or wrong, because I, the speaker, approve or disapprove
of it. For what is conscience, or moral sense, except my own feeling of
approbation or disapprobation? By what other test am I to determine what
is conformable to conscience, what is conformable to the moral sense?

The moralists, or pretended moralists, who make use of these words, may
be said to belong to the dogmatical school of ethics: since they give
their own approbation or disapprobation, as a reason for itself, and a
standard for the approbation or disapprobation of every one else. This
appellation will distinguish them from those who think that morality is
not the province of dogmatism, but of reason, and that propositions in
ethics need proof, as much as propositions in mathematics. (Vol. I, p.
126.)

* * * * *

[In a “Note by the Author,” Bentham mentions an article by Richard Price
(1723-91), “On the Importance of Christianity, the Nature of Historical
Evidence, and Miracles,” in Four Dissertations (London: Millar and
Cadell, 1767), pp. 359-439. Bentham summarizes part of Price’s argument
thus:] Imagine a lottery, says he, with a million of blanks to a prize:
take No. 1, No. 1,000,001, or any intermediate number; and suppose
yourself to hear of its gaining the prize: would you find any difficulty
in believing it? No, surely: yet here is an improbability of a million
to one: and yet you believe it without difficulty. If this ratio does
not import sufficient improbability, instead of millions take billions:
or, instead of billions, trillions, and so on.

Well then, since we must stop somewhere, we will stop at a trillion.
This being the nominal ratio, what is the consequence? Answer—That the
real ratio is that of 1 to 1. One little circumstance of the case had
escaped the observation of the mathematical divine. Of the trillion and
one, that some one ticket should gain the prize, is matter of necessity:
and of them all, every one has exactly as good a chance as every other.
Mathematicians, it has been observed, (so fond are they of Edition:
current; Page: [17] making display of the hard-earned skill acquired by
them, in the management of their instrument) are apt not to be so
scrupulous as might be wished in the examination of the correctness and
completeness of the data which they assume, and on which they operate.
[Mill appended the following “Father Note by the Editor.”]

When Dr. Price affirms that we continually believe, on the slightest
possible evidence, things in the highest degree improbable,20 he
confounds two ideas, which are totally distinct from one another, and
would be seen to be such, did they not unfortunately happen to be called
by the same name: these are, improbability in the ordinary sense, and
mathematical improbability. In the latter of these senses there is
scarcely any event which is not improbable: in the former, the only
improbable events are extraordinary ones.

In the language of common life, an improbable event means an event which
is disconformable to the ordinary course of nature.* This kind of
improbability constitutes a valid reason for disbelief; because,
universal experience having established that the course of nature is
uniform, the more widely an alleged event differs from the ordinary
course of nature, the smaller is the probability of its being true.

In the language of mathematics, the word improbability has a totally
different meaning. In the mathematical sense of the word, every event is
improbable, of the happening of which it might have been said à priori
that the odds were against it. In this sense, almost all events which
ever happened are improbable: not only those events which are
disconformable, but even those events which are in the highest degree
conformable, to the course, and even to the most ordinary course, of
nature.

A corn merchant goes into a granary, and takes up a handful of grain as
a sample; there are millions of grains in the granary, which had an
equal chance of being taken up. According to Dr. Price, events which
happen daily, and in every corner, are extraordinary, and highly
improbable. The chances were infinitely great against my placing my
foot, when I rise from my chair, on the precise spot where I have placed
it; going on, in this manner, from one example to another, nothing can
happen that is not infinitely improbable.†

True it is, in all these cases (as well as in that of the lottery,
supposed by Dr. Price21 there is what would be called, in the language
of the doctrine of chances, an improbability, in the ratio of as many as
you please to one: yet it would obviously be absurd to make this a
reason for refusing our belief to the alleged event; and why? Because,
though it is in one sense an improbable event, it is not an Edition:
current; Page: [18] extraordinary event; there is not in the case so
much as a shadow of disconformity even to the most ordinary course of
nature. Mathematically improbable events happen every moment: experience
affords us no reason for refusing our belief to them. Extraordinary
events happen rarely: and as respects them, consequently, experience
does afford a valid reason for doubt, or for disbelief. The only
question in any such case is, which of two things would be most
disconformable to the ordinary course of nature; that the event in
question should have happened; or that the witnesses by whom its
occurrence is affirmed, should have been deceivers or deceived. (Vol. I,
pp. 137-8.)

* * * * *

[Bentham refers to revenge and malice as dyslogistic terms.]

The word dyslogistic is employed by Mr. Bentham in the sense of
vituperative; as opposed to eulogistic. (Vol. I, p. 146.)22

* * * * *

[Bentham argues that in general the “moral or popular sanction” operates
to promote truth, but that there are exceptions when there is a conflict
between the interest of the whole and those of “smaller communities or
aggregations of individuals” within it. For instance (Vol. I, pp.
214-15),] The whole community has its popular or moral sanction upon an
all-comprehensive scale; the several communities of thieves, smugglers,
and all other communities having particular interests acting in
opposition to the general interest—all those recognized, or not
recognized, as being included in the more comprehensive class or
denomination of malefactors,—have each of them a sort of section of the
popular or moral sanction to itself.

Instances in which particular classes have joined in making one moral
rule for their conduct among themselves, another and a totally different
rule for their conduct towards all other persons, are not unfrequent.
Such is uniformly found to be the case, where particular classes are
possessed of so much power, as to be in a great degree independent of
the good or ill opinion of the community at large. In the moral code of
the West India slaveholders, many acts which would be among the worst of
crimes if committed against a white man, are perfectly innocent when the
subject of them is a negro. For white and black, substitute Mahomedan
and Christian, and the same observation holds good with respect to
Turkey. Substitute Edition: current; Page: [19] orthodox and heretic, it
at one time held good in all Catholic, not to say in all Christian
countries; as well with regard to the other virtues in general as to
that of veracity in particular. (Vol. I, p. 215.)

* * * * *

[In discussing the effect of the religious sanction in procuring
complete and correct testimony, Bentham comments:] The age in which the
text of the sacred writings was first committed to writing, was not, in
the instance of any of the book-religions, an age in which any such
qualities as those of precision, accuracy, and particularity of
explanation, belonged in any considerable degree to the public mind. To
reduce the precept to a state adapted to practice, it has become more
and more the custom to fill up from the precepts of the moral sanction,
the reputed deficiencies manifested in these particulars by the
religious sanction. In a delineation, which at this time of day should
come to be given, of what the religious sanction prescribes in relation
to truth and falsehood; the exceptions above mentioned as applied by the
moral sanction to the general requisition of veracity and verity—the
particular allowances as well as counter-prescriptions made by the moral
sanction, in favour of the several classes of falsehoods, designated as
above by the several appellations of falsehoods of duty, falsehoods of
humanity, and falsehoods of urbanity,—would probably not be omitted.

Mr. Bentham might have quoted, in illustration of this remark, the
following passage from Paley—a writer of undisputed piety, who, in a
system of morals professing to be founded upon the will of God as its
principle, makes no difficulty in giving a licence to falsehood, in
several of its necessary or allowable shapes.

There are falsehoods which are not lies, that is, which are not
criminal; as, where the person to whom you speak has no right to know
the truth, or, more properly, where little or no inconveniency results
from the want of confidence in such cases; as where you tell a falsehood
to a madman, for his own advantage; to a robber, to conceal your
property; to an assassin, to defeat or divert him from his purpose. The
particular consequence is, by the supposition, beneficial; and as to the
general consequence, the worst that can happen is, that the madman, the
robber, the assassin, will not trust you again; which (beside that the
first is incapable of deducing regular conclusions from having been once
deceived, and the two last not likely to come a second time in your
way), is sufficiently compensated by the immediate benefit which you
propose by the falsehood.*

(Vol. I, pp. 233-4.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [20]
[To illustrate the inefficiency of the religious sanction in preventing
“wilful and deliberate falsehood,” Bentham cites] Cases in which, under
the influence of a manifestly-operating sinister interest in the shape
of wealth, power, dignity, or reputation, such declarations of opinion
are made, as, from the nature of the facts asserted, cannot,
consistently with the nature of the human mind, be in all points true;
but without any particular proof of falsity operating in the case of one
such false declarer more than another. To this head may be referred all
solemn declarations of opinion on the subject of controverted points
respecting facts out of the reach of human knowledge, delivered in the
shape of pre-appointed formularies; adopted and authenticated by the
signature of the witness in question, or otherwise; the declaration
enforced or not by the ceremony of an oath.

Every person taking orders in the English church, signs a declaration of
his full belief in the whole of the thirty-nine articles of that church.
Some of the most pious members of it have not, however, scrupled to
declare, that it is not necessary that this declaration should be true:
that it is allowable for a person who does not believe in the whole, but
only in a part, of the thirty-nine articles, to sign a declaration
professing himself to believe in the whole.23 (Vol. I, p. 239.)

* * * * *

[Continuing his assault on the religious sanction, Bentham says:] To
depend, on every the most important occasion of life, upon the force of
a principle which, on the occasions here in question, not to speak of
other occasions, has been demonstrated by experience to be nearly, if
not altogether, without force, would continue to lead, as it has led, to
mischievous error and deception, to an indefinite extent. The topic of
oaths, and the topic of exclusionary rules, grounded on the supposition
of a deficiency of sensibility to the force of the religious sanction,
will furnish proofs and illustrations.

See Book II, Securities, Chapter vi, and Book IX, Exclusion, Part III,
Chap. v. [Vol. V, pp. 125-45.]

Cases no doubt there are, and those very numerous, in which the
religious Edition: current; Page: [21] sanction appears to exercise a
much stronger influence than is here ascribed to it. That which is
really the effect of the moral sanction, or of the legal sanction, or of
both, is continually ascribed to the influence of the religious
sanction. From causes which it would be easy, but foreign to the present
purpose, to explain, religious persons are apt to suppose, that an act,
if virtuous, is more virtuous, if vicious, more excusable, when the
motive which prompted it belonged to the religious class, than when it
belonged to any other: and even in some cases, that an act which, if
produced by any other motive, would be vicious, becomes virtuous by
having a motive of this class for its cause. Thus it becomes the
interest of every one, to whom the reputation of virtue is an object of
desire, to persuade others, and even himself, that as many as possible
of his actions, be they good or bad, emanate from that class of motives.
(Vol. I, pp. 246-7.)

* * * * *

[Bentham’s list of securities for trustworthiness of testimony concludes
with “Investigation,” which he describes as] arrangements designed or
tending to promote the discovery of one article of evidence through the
medium of another: the discovery of a lot of testimonial evidence, for
example, of a sort fit to be lodged in the budget of ultimately
employable evidence; whether the article, by means of which it is
discovered, be, or be not, itself fit to be so disposed of, fit to be
attended to in that character: the finding out, for example, a person
who was an eye-witness of the transaction, by the examination of a
person who was not himself an eye-witness of it, but heard the other
speak of himself as having been so.

Arrangements competent to the process of investigation, as here
described, are in every case necessary, to preserve the aggregate mass
of evidence from being untrustworthy and deceptitious on the score of
incompleteness.

This last article in the list of securities, which, as the reader will
have seen, is a security, not for the correctness of any one article of
evidence, but for the completeness of the whole mass, belongs to the
head of Forthcomingness, which was reserved by the Author to form part
of a work on Procedure.24 (Vol. I, p. 281.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [22]
[Mill appended the following note to a discursive footnote by Bentham on
the absurdities of rules concerning cross-examination of witnesses.]

Mr. Phillipps’s Law of Evidence, Vol. I, p. 256, says, “If a witness
should appear to be in the interest of the opposite party, or unwilling
to give evidence, the court will in its discretion allow the
examination-in-chief to assume something of the form of a
cross-examination.” It appears therefore that this rule of judge-made
law has to a great degree been set aside by other judge-made law,
subsequently enacted. (Vol. II, pp. 48-9.)

* * * * *

[Bentham considers the benefit and “vexation” of confining a witness,
when] What is manifest is, that the price thus considered as capable of
being paid for an additional security against the liberation of a guilty
defendant by mendacious testimony, is not a small one. . . .

Whatsoever be the species of delinquency, of the vexation in question
the magnitude will be the same. The proportion between the two
mischiefs, between the two benefits, or between the benefit on one hand
and the price paid for it in the shape of mischief (viz. vexation) on
the other hand, will depend in every case upon the magnitude, that is,
upon the mischievousness, of the offence.

It seems, however, that there can be scarcely any cases in which an
extraneous witness, not suspected of being in any way implicated in the
offence of which the defendant stands accused, can with propriety be
subjected to confinement: particularly to such close confinement as is
here in question. Not that, if there were no better means of warding off
the danger of deception from his testimony, there might not be cases of
so much importance that even this remedy, expensive as it is, would be
fit to be employed. But I see no reason why the same arrangement which
is proposed by Mr. Bentham to be adopted in the case of a defendant,
(viz. vivâ voce interrogation as soon as possible after his person can
be secured),25 should not, when necessary, be adopted likewise in the
case of an extraneous witness; or why, if sufficient in the one case, it
should not be sufficient in the other. I admit that it would be absurd,
in the view of obviating the danger of mendacity-serving suggestion, to
receive in every cause the evidence of every witness in the first
instance, and thus try the cause from beginning to end, in order to
facilitate the trying of it again at a subsequent period: but if (as Mr.
Bentham maintains) a strong suspicion that the witness means to give
false evidence, renders even confinement Edition: current; Page: [23] of
his person, if necessary to the prevention of deception from that cause,
a justifiable measure, that same degree, or even a less degree, of
suspicion, would surely justify the subjecting him to a preliminary
examination; which, though it would not prevent him from subsequently
receiving mendacity-serving information, would at any rate render such
information of little use to him for his mischievous purpose. Observe
also, that this arrangement would obviate, not only the danger of
suggestion ab extrà, but that of premeditation: confinement of his
person, were it ever so close, could be a security only against the
former. (Vol. II, p. 236.)

* * * * *

[Bentham’s list of the advantages of “preappointed evidence” in cases
involving contracts includes prevention of (1) “non-notoriety and
oblivion,” (2) “uncertainty” as to “import,” (3) “spurious contracts,”
(4) “unfairly obtained” contracts, and (5) “injury to third persons”; it
concludes with (6) “Production of revenue to government,” concerning
which he says:] In this, the last upon the list of purposes, we see an
advantage altogether void of all natural connection with the five
preceding ones, and with the general object and use of evidence. But,
when the connection is once formed, it contributes a material assistance
to those other original and direct purposes: inasmuch as the advantage
derived from the institution in this point of view is carried to
account, and serves to set in the scale against whatever articles are
chargeable upon it on the side of disadvantage.

This last might perhaps without impropriety be struck out of the list of
uses: since a tax on contracts, in whatever manner laid on, is either a
law-tax, that is, a tax upon justice, which is perhaps the worst of all
taxes, or a tax upon the transfer of property, which is one of the
worst, or both together. (Vol. II, p. 456.)

* * * * *

[Bentham proposes to deal with types of “evidentiary facts” as bearing
on the probability of “principal facts,” that is, “facts on the belief
of which judicial decision depends.” The fourth of these principal facts
“considered as probabilized” is “Unauthenticity” of] any instrument
being, or purporting to be, of ancient date. For the circumstances
capable of serving in the character of evidentiary facts to probabilize
this principal fact, unauthenticity,—or (which is the same thing in
Edition: current; Page: [24] other words), to disprobabilize the
authenticity of the instrument,—see a table of evidentiary facts of this
description, taken principally from Le Clerc’s Ars Critica.

No such table is to be found in the MS.26 (Vol. III, p. 24.)

* * * * *

[The fifth of these principal facts is] Posteriora priorum: any supposed
antecedent acts in a number of supposed successive acts (whether
forbidden by law or not), considered as following one another in a
supposed naturally connected series: for example, as being, or being
supposed to be, conducive to one and the same end; such as, in a
law-suit, success, viz. on either side of the suit.

Correspondent evidentiary facts,—any acts proved to have been performed,
and considered as having been performed in consequence of such supposed
antecedent acts; for example, in pursuit of the same end.

See a table of evidentiary facts of this description taken from Comyns’s
Digest of English Law.

This table, as well as that which is subsequently mentioned, is also
wanting.27 (Vol. III, p. 24.)

* * * * *

[The following note is appended to the title, “Of Improbability and
Impossibility,” of Chap. xvi of Book V.]

In putting together the scattered papers from which this work was
compiled, considerable difficulty was felt in assigning its proper place
to what Mr. Bentham had written on the subject of improbability and
impossibility.

Edition: current; Page: [25]
Had it been in the power of the editor to select that arrangement which
appeared to him best suited to the nature of the subject, he would have
placed so much of the present chapter as is merely explanatory of the
nature of improbability and impossibility, in the first book, entitled
Theoretic Grounds; and so much of it as relates to the probative force
of improbability and impossibility, considered as articles of
circumstantial evidence, in the present book. It appeared to him,
however, on perusing the manucript, that the mode in which Mr. Bentham
had treated the subject did not admit of any such separation of it into
two parts, as he had at first contemplated. The only question,
therefore, which remained, was, whether to place the chapter under the
head of Theoretic Grounds, or under that of Circumstantial Evidence?
and, on consideration, he has thought it better to postpone the more
general and explanatory matter to the present book, than to separate
this one species of circumstantial evidence from the rest. (Vol. III, p.
258.)

* * * * *

[To begin his discussion of “Impossible facts distinguished from verbal
contradictions,” Bentham says:] It having been shewn that improbability
and impossibility, applied to a matter of fact, are merely terms
expressing a certain strength of persuasion of the non-existence of that
fact; what remains is to shew, what are the grounds, on which such a
persuasion is liable to be entertained: to shew, in other words, in what
consists the improbability or impossibility of any alleged fact.

Previously, however, to entering upon this inquiry, it will be necessary
to discard out of the list of impossible facts, articles that might be
in danger of being considered as included in it. These are:

1. Contradictions in terms: or, as they might be termed, verbal
impossibilities. Examples: Two and two are not so many as four:—Two and
two are more than four:—The same thing is, and is not, at the same time.

The truth is, that in these cases no matter of fact at all is asserted;
consequently none of which it can be said that it is impossible.

This may be illustrated by the following passage from Locke:

All propositions, wherein two abstract terms are affirmed one of
another, are barely about the signification of sounds. For since no
abstract idea can be the same with any other but itself, when its
abstract name is affirmed of any other term, it can signify no more but
this, that it may or ought to be called by that name; or that these two
names signify the same idea. Thus, should any one say, that parsimony is
frugality, that gratitude is justice; that this or that action is, or is
not, temperate; however specious these and the like propositions may at
Edition: current; Page: [26] first sight seem, yet when we come to press
them, and examine nicely what they contain, we shall find that it all
amounts to nothing, but the signification of those terms.*

(Vol. III, p. 268.)

* * * * *

[The second category, after contradictions in terms, discussed in the
preceding note, is “Inconceivable facts,” concerning which Bentham
says:] Sometimes to this class, sometimes to the former, belong the
opposites of a variety of propositions of a mathematical nature: e.g.
that two and two should be either more or less than equal to four: that
two right lines should of themselves enclose a space.

These propositions, even such an one as the last, viz. that two right
lines cannot enclose a space, are but verbal contradictions. The terms
straight line, and space, and enclose, are all general terms, and to
affirm them one of another, is merely to say that they are of this or
that meaning. It is merely to say that the meaning we ascribe to the
term space, or rather to the term enclosure of space, is inconsistent
with the meaning we ascribe to the term two straight lines. When we pass
from names to things, and take two straight rods in our hands, we have
the evidence of our senses, that they cannot enclose a space. If they
touch at any one part, they diverge from one another at every other
part. If they touch at more than one part, they coincide, and then are
equivalent to one straight line. What we mean by an enclosure, is such a
line, or continuance of lines, that a body departing from any one point
can pass on without turning back till it come to that point again,
without having met in its progress any place where the line was
interrupted, any place where there was not a portion of line. An
enclosure is a line or conjunction of lines, which beginning at one
point is continued till it comes to that point again. Two straight lines
are lines which departing from one point never meet, but continually
diverge. What is affirmed, then, is, that lines which do meet, in the
manner thus described, and lines which in that manner do not meet, are
not the same lines. The question, then, either is about the physical
fact, the rods, to which the evidence of sense and experience is
applicable; or it is about the meaning of general terms. (Vol. III, pp.
268-9.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [27]
[Bentham asserts that supposed “disconformity” between matters of fact
and what someone believes to be “the established course of nature” may
be of three kinds: facts “disconformable in toto,” such as a body being
at the same time in two places; facts “disconformable in degree,” such
as a man being sixty feet tall; and facts “disconformable in specie,”
such as a unicorn. He continues:] It is manifest, that, in the two last
of these classes, the incredibility of the fact rises only to a greater
or less degree of improbability, not to that of impossibility. The
supposed facts are not repugnant to the established course of nature;
they are only not conformable to it: they are facts which are not yet
known to exist, but which, for aught we know, may exist; though, if
true, they would belong to the class of extraordinary facts, and
therefore require a greater degree of evidence to establish their truth
than is necessary in the case of a fact exactly resembling the events
which occur every day.

It will be attempted to be shewn in a subsequent note,28 that even what
Mr. Bentham calls impossibilities in toto, are in reality nothing more
than facts in a high degree improbable. (Vol. III, p. 284.)

* * * * *

[Bentham gives (Vol. III, pp. 285-6) the “primum mobiles, or causes of
motion and rest,” that modify the law of gravitation, as:]

1. The centrifugal force.

2. The force of cohesion,—the attraction observed to take place amongst
the homogeneous parts of the same whole.

3. The force of chemical attraction: to which, perhaps, may be to be
added repulsion. . . .

4. The force of repulsion or elasticity, given to the particles of other
matter by caloric, when, being united with them, it forms a gas.

5. The force of expansion and contraction (repulsion and re-attraction)
produced by the addition and subtraction of caloric to and from other
bodies in the states of solidity and liquidity.

6. The force of electrical and galvanic attraction and repulsion.

7. The force of magnetic attraction and repulsion.

8. The force of muscular motion put in action by the will.

9. The force of muscular motion put in action by the vital power, in the
case of the involuntary motions that take place in living animals.

10. The force of muscular motion put in action in the way of animal
galvanism.

11. The force of vegetation.

Edition: current; Page: [28]
[He concludes the discussion by considering whether new primum mobiles
may not be found:] as to the discovery of new causes of motion, causes
apparently distinct from, and not referable to, any of those above
enumerated, I am not disposed to regard it as in any degree improbable.
Yet, as to any causes adequate to the production of any such effect as
the effect in question; in the discoveries just spoken of there is not
any thing that would prevent me from regarding it as being, in the sense
above determined, practically impossible. Why? Because it appears to me
practically impossible, that, after so long a course of physical
experience and experiment, any primum mobile, of a force adequate to the
production of an effect of such magnitude, can have remained undetected.
As to the power of steam, the application of it to any useful purpose is
not so old as a century and a half; but the existence of it as a source
of motion, could never have been altogether a secret to any one who ever
boiled a pot with a cover to it.

It may, perhaps, be doubted, whether, until our knowledge shall have
attained a perfection far beyond what it has attained, or is ever likely
to attain, such an attribute as impossibility in toto, can, in the sense
in which Mr. Bentham uses the words, be predicated of any conceivable
phenomenon whatever.

Mr. Bentham has given a list (whether complete or incomplete is of no
consequence for the present purpose) of the various forces by which
gravitation is known to be, under certain circumstances, counteracted:
and assuming this list to be complete, he proceeds to infer [p. 287],
that “any motion which, being in a direction opposite to that of the
attraction of gravitation, should not be referable to any one of those
particular causes of motion, may be pronounced impossible:” and for
practical purposes, no doubt it may; but if metaphysical accuracy be
sought for, I doubt whether even in this case the impossibility in
question be any thing more than a very high degree of improbability.
For,

1st. Suppose the catalogue of all the known forces which may operate to
the production of motion, (or, as Mr. Bentham calls them, the primum
mobiles,) to be at present complete: does it follow that it will always
remain so? Is it possible to set limits to the discoveries which mankind
are capable of making in the physical sciences? Are we justified in
affirming that we are acquainted with all the moving forces which exist
in nature? Before the discovery (for instance) of galvanism, it will be
allowed, we should not have been justified in making any such
assertion.29 In what respect are circumstances changed since that time?
except that we are now acquainted with one force more than we were
before. By what infallible mark are Edition: current; Page: [29] we to
determine, when we have come to the knowledge of all the properties of
matter?

Mr. Bentham himself acknowledges [p. 289] that the discovery of new
moving forces is not impossible; but the discovery of new forces,
adequate to the production of such an effect as that of raising a heavy
body from the floor to the ceiling of a room without any perceptible
cause, he does consider impossible; because (says he) had any force,
adequate to the production of such an effect, been in existence, it must
have been observed long ago.* No doubt, the improbability of the
existence of any such force, increases in proportion to the magnitude of
the effect; but it may be permitted to doubt, whether it ever becomes an
impossibility. Had our grandfathers been told, that there existed a
force in nature, which was capable of setting gold, silver, and almost
all the other metals on fire, and causing them to burn with a bright
blue, green, or purple flame,—of converting the earths into bright
metallic substances by the extrication of a particular kind of air; etc.
etc.,—they surely might have said, with fully as much justice as we can
at present, that if any cause had existed in nature, adequate to the
production of such remarkable effects, they could not have failed to
have been aware of it before.

2ndly. Suppose it certain that all the great moving forces, to one or
more of which all the phenomena of the universe must be referable, were
known to us; we should not, to any practical purpose, be farther
advanced than before. We might indeed, in a general way, be assured of
the impossibility of every phenomenon not referable to some one or more
of these forces as its cause: but that any given alleged phenomenon is
in this predicament, is more than we could possibly be assured of; until
we knew not only all the moving forces which exist, but all the possible
varieties of the operation of all those forces, and all the forms and
shapes under which it is possible for them to manifest themselves;
until, in short, we knew all which it is possible to know of the
universe. How can I be sure that a given phenomenon which has no
perceptible cause, is not the effect of electricity, unless I knew what
all the effects of electricity are? And so of all the other laws of
nature. As, however, it is very improbable that we ever shall know all
the laws of nature in all their different combinations and
manifestations, and as, moreover, it is difficult to see how, even if we
did know them all, we could ever be certain that we did so; it seems
that we never can pronounce, with perfect certainty, of any conceivable
event, that it is impossible. See even Mr. Bentham himself, infra, Sect.
10, ad finem [Vol. III, pp. 371-2].

Although, however, it could not be pronounced, of the story told by Mr.
Bentham, that the event which it relates is impossible, thus much may
with safety Edition: current; Page: [30] be pronounced, that, if it did
happen, it was not produced by witchcraft.30 I can conceive the
existence of sufficient evidence to convince me of the occurrence of the
event, improbable though it be. I cannot conceive the existence of any
evidence, which could convince me that witchcraft was the cause of it.
The reason is this: suppose the fact proved, the question remains,—Is it
referable to witchcraft, or to some natural cause?—Of extraordinary
events, produced by natural causes, many have come within my experience:
of events produced by witchcraft, none whatever. That extraordinary
events from natural causes have frequently occurred, there is abundant
evidence: while there cannot, in the nature of things, be any evidence,
that any event has ever been occasioned by witchcraft. There may be
evidence that a particular event has uniformly followed the will of a
particular person supposed to be a witch; but that the supposed witch
brought about the given effect, not by availing herself of the laws of
nature, but through the agency of an evil spirit, counteracting those
laws,—this can never be more than an inference: it is not in the nature
of things that any person should have personal knowledge to that effect;
unless he has that perfect acquaintance with all the laws of nature,
which alone can enable him to affirm with certainty that the given
effect did not arise from any of those laws, What alleged witch, or
magician, was ever suspected of producing more extraordinary effects
than are daily produced by natural means, in our own times, by jugglers?
Omniscience alone, if witchcraft were possible, could enable any one not
in the secret, to distinguish it from jugglery. It is no wonder, then,
that no evidence can prove witchcraft; since there never can be any
evidence of it, good or bad, trustworthy or the reverse. All the
evidence that has ever been adduced of witchcraft is,—testimony, in the
first place, to an extraordinary event, and, in the next place, to
somebody’s opinion that this event was supernatural; but to nothing else
whatever. (Vol. III, pp. 289-92.)

* * * * *

[The following note, headed “Further Remarks by the Editor,” completes
Bk. V, Chap. xvi, Sect. 5, “On the Three Modes of Disconformity to the
Course of Nature.”]

After an attentive consideration of the characters by which Mr. Bentham
endeavours to distinguish his three classes from one another,31 the
reader will probably join with me in reducing these three classes to
two; viz. 1. facts repugnant to the course of nature so far as known to
us, and 2. facts merely Edition: current; Page: [31] deviating from it:
or (to express the same meaning in more precise language) 1. facts
contrary to experience; 2. facts not conformable to experience.

The discovery of a new species of animal, presents a specimen of a fact
not conformable to experience. The discovery (were such a thing
possible) of an animal belonging to any of the already known species,
but unsusceptible of death, or decay, would be a fact contrary to
experience.

This distinction was pointed out by Hume;* but, having pointed it out,
he knew not how to apply it: and the misapplication which it seemed to
me that he had made of it, led me for a long time to imagine that there
was no foundation for the distinction itself. Having, however, by
further reflection, satisfied myself of its reality, I will attempt, if
possible, to make my conception of it intelligible to the reader.

All that our senses tell us of the universe, consists of certain
phenomena, with their sequences. These sequences, that is to say, the
different orders in which different phenomena succeed one another, have
been discovered to be invariable. If they were not so; if, for example,
that food, the reception of which into the stomach was yesterday
followed by health, cheerfulness, and strength, were, if taken to-day,
succeeded by weakness, disease, and death; the human race, it is
evident, would have long ago become extinct. Those sequences, then,
which are observed to recur constantly, compose what is termed the order
of nature: and any one such sequence is, by rather an inappropriate
metaphor, stiled a law of nature.

When a new discovery is made in the natural world, it may be either by
the disruption of an old sequence, or by the discovery of a new one. It
may be discovered, that the phenomenon A, which was imagined to be in
all cases followed by the phenomenon B, is, in certain cases, not
followed by it; or it may be discovered that the phenomenon C is
followed by a phenomenon D, which, till now, was not known to follow it.

In the former case, the newly discovered fact is contrary to experience;
in the latter case, it is merely not conformable to it. In the first
case it is repugnant to what had been imagined to be the order of
nature; in the second case, it merely deviates from it.

The first time that the sensitive plant was discovered, its
characteristic property was a fact not conformable to experience. A new
sequence was discovered; but no sequence was broken asunder; the plant
had not been known to possess this property, but neither had it been
known not to possess it, not having been known at all.

But if a stone projected into the air were, without any perceptible
cause, to remain suspended, instead of falling to the ground; here would
be not merely a new Edition: current; Page: [32] sequence, but the
disruption of an old one: a phenomenon (projection of a stone into the
air) which, from past experience, had been supposed to be universally
followed by another phenomenon (the fall of the stone), is found, in the
case in question, not to be so followed. Here then is a fact contrary to
experience.

The error, then, (as it appears to me) of Hume, did not consist in
making the distinction between facts contrary, and facts not
conformable, to experience; it consisted in imagining, that, although
events not conformable to experience may properly be believed, events
contrary to experience cannot. That an event is not fit to be credited
which supposes the non-universality of a sequence previously considered
to be universal, is so far, in my conception, from being true, that the
most important of all discoveries in physics have been those whereby
what were before imagined to be universal laws of nature, have been
proved to be subject to exception. Take Mr. Bentham’s own list (pp.
285-6)32 of the exceptions to the law of gravitation: suppose all these
unknown, the law might have been supposed universal, and the exceptions,
when discovered, would have been so many violations of it: but do not
these exceptions, with the exceptions again to them, and so on, compose
by far the most valuable part of physical science? (Vol. III, pp.
304-7.)

* * * * *

[Bentham discusses cases in which facts that could properly have been
objected to on rational grounds as improbable have been proved true. The
first of these is water turning to ice, a fact that was incredible to
the King of Siam, according to an anecdote reported by Locke.]33

This being one of the chapters which was written twice over by Mr.
Bentham, the last time without reference to the first; the story of the
King of Siam is told twice over at full length. As, however, it is
brought to view for two very different purposes, viz. the first time, to
illustrate the principle that the credibility of a fact relative to a
particular individual depends upon his acquaintance with the course of
nature, and the second time, to exemplify the effect of improbability as
an article of circumstantial evidence; and as, moreover, the
illustrations which accompany the story, in the two places in which it
is introduced, are different; it has not been thought advisable to
strike it out in either place. (Vol. III, p. 333.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [33]
[Concerning such nonsense as that an old woman can move “through the air
at pleasure on a broomstick,” or a man can introduce “his body into a
quart bottle,” we have as full proof of their falsity] as, for the
governance of human conduct, a man needs to have; it is only by a
mixture of ignorance and rash confidence, that either of them could be
pronounced, in the strict sense of the word impossibility, impossible:
since, to the production of either of these effects, there needs but the
existence of some power in nature with which we are not as yet
acquainted.

Compare this with page 289, and the note at the bottom of that page.34
(Vol. III, p. 372.)

* * * * *

[Attempting in Sect. xi of Chap. xvi to assert, in connection with
“alibi evidence,” a distinction between “facts impossible per se, and
facts impossible si alia,” Bentham says:] There are two occasions on
which the evidence, or argument, indicated by the words impossibility
and incredibility, are capable of presenting themselves.

1. On the one side (say that of the demandant), a fact is deposed to by
a witness: on the other side (viz. that of the defendant), no testimony
is adduced, but it is averred that the supposed fact, as thus deposed
to, is in its own nature incredible; or, what comes to the same thing,
improbable to such a degree as to be incredible. Say, for example, a
fact pretended to have taken place in the way of witchcraft: a man
lifted up slowly, without any exertion of will on his part, or connexion
with any other, from the ground into the air; or an old woman, by an
exertion of volition on her part, riding in the air at pleasure on a
broomstick.

2. On the one side (say again that of the demandant), a fact is deposed
to by a witness, as before: on the other hand, it is averred to be
impossible,—impossible not in its own nature, as before, but for this
reason, viz. that the existence of it is incompatible with the existence
of another fact, which in this view is deposed to by other evidence: say
the testimony of a superior number of witnesses. The defendant cannot,
at the time alleged, have been committing the offence in London; for at
that same time he was at York, a place above two hundred miles distant.
The instance here given is that which is commonly known by the name of
alibi. It supposes the incompatibility of a man’s existing in one place
at any given point of time, with the existence of the same man in any
other place at the same point of time: or, in other words, of a man’s
existing in two places at once.

“For the purpose of the present inquiry, these two kinds of
impossibility are exactly alike. The nature of the impossibility is in
both cases the same; in both Edition: current; Page: [34] cases it
consists in disconformity to the established course of nature. The
difference is, that, in the first of the two cases, there is but one
event mentioned, and that event is one which, taken by itself, cannot be
true;—in the second case there are two events mentioned, either of
which, taken by itself, may be true, but both together cannot.

“In the first case, therefore, the impossibility being supposed, we
immediately set it down that the testimony of the affirming witnesses is
false:—in the second place, we have to choose which of the two
testimonies we shall disbelieve; that of the witnesses who affirm the
one fact, or that of the witnesses who affirm the other fact.

“If I am told that, on such a day, at such an hour, John Brown leaped
over the moon, I at once reject the assertion as being incredible: this
is impossibility of the first kind. If A tells me, that, on such a day,
at such an hour, John Brown was in London; and B tells me, that, on the
same day, and at the same hour, the same individual was at York; I
pronounce with equal readiness that both stories cannot be true, but it
remains a question for subsequent consideration, which of them it is
that is false: and this is impossibility of the second kind.”* (Vol.
III, pp. 372-4.)

* * * * *

[The following note is appended to the title, “Of ex parte preappointed
written evidence,” of Sect. 2 of Bk. VI, Chap. ii (“Of Extrajudicially
Written Evidence”). The next section is entitled “Of adscititious
evidence; i.e. evidence borrowed from another cause.” Mill completed the
chapter; see the next entry.]

This and the following section were left by the author in the state of
mere fragments. Several memoranda, far too incoherent to be inserted,
prove it to have been his intention to enter more fully both into the
subject of ex parte preappointed evidence, and into that of adscititious
evidence. It does not appear, however, that he carried this intention
into effect. (Vol. III, p. 422.)

* * * * *

[The following note appears at the end of Bentham’s discussion, in Bk.
VI, Chap. ii, Sect. 2, of “evidence alio in foro.” Mill’s contribution
follows immediately in the text.]

Edition: current; Page: [35]
Here ends all that Mr. Bentham had written on the subject of
adscititious evidence, with the exception of some loose memoranda. What
follows was chiefly made up from these memoranda by the editor.

The course proper to be taken, in respect to adscititious evidence, will
be found to vary, according as the document in question is a previous
decision, or the whole or some part of the minutes of the evidence
delivered in a previous cause.

In respect of the propriety of admission, both these species of
adscititious evidence stand nearly on the same ground. Neither of them
ought to be admitted, when better evidence from the same source is,
without preponderant inconvenience, to be had; neither of them ought to
be rejected, when it is not.

There is not, probably, that system of judicial procedure in existence,
(how bad soever the mode of taking evidence that it employs), which does
not afford a greater probability of right decision than of wrong; and in
general the presumption of right decision is a very strong one. True it
is that no decision of a court of justice, certifying the existence of a
fact, affords ground for believing it, any farther than as such decision
renders probable the existence, at the time when it was pronounced, of
evidence sufficient to support it: and if the original evidence, on
which the decision in the former cause was grounded, were forthcoming in
the present, that evidence would be preferable, as a foundation for
decision, to the mere opinion formerly pronounced on the ground of that
same evidence by a judge. But it scarcely ever happens that evidence
which has once been presented, admits of being again presented in as
perfect a form as before. All that important species of evidence which
is constituted by the deportment of the witness in the presence of the
judge, is, in most cases, irrecoverably lost: such evidence as can be
obtained now, might not be sufficient to warrant the former decision,
and yet the decision, when pronounced, may have been perfectly borne out
by the evidence on that occasion adduced. On the other hand, it is true
that, in very many cases, by recurring to the original sources,
sufficient evidence of the fact might even now be obtained, not,
however, without more or less of delay, vexation, and expense: for the
avoidance of which, it is often proper that the previous decision,
though an inferior kind of evidence, should be received as a substitute,
in the place of a superior kind.

As to the minutes of the evidence delivered in the former cause; it is
sufficiently manifest that they ought not to be admitted, if recurrence
to the original sources of evidence be practicable, without preponderant
inconvenience; if the witnesses in the former cause be capable of being
examined, or such written or real evidence as it may have afforded be
capable of being exhibited, in the present: unless when there may be a
use in comparing two testimonies delivered by the same witness on two
different occasions. But if (no matter from what cause) recurrence to
the original sources be either physically or prudentially impracticable,
the minutes of the former evidence should be admitted, and taken for
what they are worth. If the Edition: current; Page: [36] evidence in
question be oral testimony, being generally upon oath, subject to
punishment in case of intentional falsehood, and to
counter-interrogation, it is at any rate better than hearsay evidence,
which, at its origin, had none of these securities: if it be real
evidence, the official minutes of it are the very best kind of reported
real evidence, of which hereafter.

A question of greater nicety is, whether in any, and, if in any, in what
cases, adscititious evidence shall be taken for conclusive?

In the case of minutes of evidence, the short answer is, never. The
testimony of a witness, or of any number of witnesses, even if delivered
in the cause in hand, and under all the securities which can be taken in
the cause in hand for its correctness and completeness, ought not to be,
nor, under any existing system of law that I know of, would be, taken
for conclusive: much less a mere note of the testimony which they
delivered on a former occasion, subject perhaps, indeed, to the same set
of securities, but perhaps to a set in any degree inferior to those
which there may, in the cause in hand, be the means of subjecting them
to.

The case of a decision is more complicated. For the purpose of a prior
cause, a decision has been given which supposes proof made of a certain
fact; and the question is, whether, on the ground of such decision, such
fact shall be taken for true,—shall be considered as being sufficiently
and conclusively proved,—for the purpose of the decision to be given in
a posterior cause?

It must of course be assumed, that the prior decision necessarily
supposes evidence of the fact in question to have been presented to the
judge, sufficient to create in his mind a persuasion of its existence:
for there would be manifest impropriety in making the decision
conclusive evidence of any fact not absolutely necessary to its
legality; with whatever degree of probability the existence of such fact
might be inferred from it.

1. Let the parties be the same; and the tribunal either the same
tribunal, or one in which the same or equally efficient securities are
taken for rectitude of decision. In this case, unless where a new trial
of the former cause would be proper, the decision in the former cause
ought to be taken as conclusive evidence (for the purpose of the
posterior cause) of every fact, proof of which it necessarily implies. A
lawyer would say, Quia interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium.35 Not
choosing to content myself with vague and oracular generalities, which
are as susceptible of being employed in defence of bad arrangements of
procedure as of good ones, I place the propriety of the rule upon the
following more definite ground: that, as every person who would have an
opportunity of applying the security of counter-interrogation in the
second cause, has had such an opportunity in the first; and as the rules
of evidence which were observed in the former trial, were, by
supposition, as well calculated for the extraction of the truth, as
those which would be to be acted upon in the present; the judge on the
second occasion would have no Edition: current; Page: [37] advantage, in
seeking after the truth, over the judge on the first, to counterbalance
the disadvantage necessarily consequent upon lapse of time: and the
decision of the first judge (though strictly speaking it be only
evidence of evidence) is more likely to be correct, than that which the
second judge might pronounce on the occasion of the posterior cause.

The case is different if fresh evidence happen to have been brought to
light subsequently to the first trial, or if there be any reason for
suspecting error or mala fides on the part of the first judge. But, in
either of these cases, a new trial of the former cause would be proper.
If the fact be sufficiently established for the purpose of the first
cause, it is sufficiently established for the purpose of any subsequent
cause between the same parties. It is only when there appears reason to
think that it was improperly considered as established in the first
cause, that there can be any use in going through the trouble of
establishing it again in the second.

The above remarks apply also to the case in which the parties to the
second cause are not the actual parties to the first, but persons who
claim in their right, their executors, for example, or heirs-at-law; or
even persons claiming under the same deed, or, in any other way, upon
the same title; all those, in short, who in English law language are
quaintly called privies in blood, in estate, and in law: for though
these have not had an opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses in
the former cause, other persons representing the same interest have.

2. Suppose the parties different, that is, with different interests, and
the same reasons do not apply. The deficiency in respect of securities
for trustworthiness, which constitutes the inferiority of adscititious
evidence, may now have place to an indefinite extent, and is always
likely to have place to some extent. It will very often happen that
there was some part of the facts, known to the witnesses in the former
cause, which would have made in favour of one or other party to the
present cause; but which did not come to light, because, there being no
one among the parties to the former cause in whose favour it would have
made, it found no one to draw it out by interrogation. The former
decision, therefore, although conclusive against the parties to the
former cause, and all who claim under them, ought not to be conclusive
against a third party. If it were, an opportunity would be given for a
particular modification of the characteristic fraud: a feigned suit
instituted by one conspirator against another, and judgment suffered by
the latter to go against him, with the view of establishing a false
fact, to be afterwards made use of in a suit against some other person.

The above observations constitute what foundation there is for the rule
of English law, that res inter alios acta is not evidence:36 of which
hereafter. Note, en passant, the character of jurisprudential logic: a
decision inter alios is not conclusive evidence, therefore not
admissible.

Edition: current; Page: [38]
3. Lastly, suppose the tribunals different, and governed by different
rules: and let the rules of the tribunal which tried the first cause be
less calculated to insure rectitude of decision than those of the
tribunal which tries the second. In this case, with or without the
deficiency in point of security, arising from the difference of the
parties, there is at any rate the deficiency which arises from the
imperfection of the rules: the impropriety, therefore, of making the
decision conclusive, is manifest. Its probative force will evidently
vary, in proportion to the imperfection of the rules which govern the
practice of the court by which it was pronounced; always considered with
reference to the main end, rectitude of decision.

The probative force will be greater, caeteris paribus, when the court
from which the evidence is borrowed is in the same, than when it is in a
different, country; on account of the greater difficulty, in the latter
case, of obtaining proof of the existence of the characteristic fraud.
But this presumption is much less strong than that which arises from a
difference in the mode of extraction.

We shall see hereafter to how great an extent nearly all the above rules
are violated in English law. (Vol. III, pp. 426-33.)

* * * * *

[The following note is appended to Bentham’s list of the means (of
varying reliability) of making transcripts: writing with pen and ink,
printing with moveable types and stereotypes, engraving, sculpture, and
painting.]

Add to the lithography, which, when this work was written, had scarcely
been applied to the multiplication of copies of a written document.37
(Vol. III, p. 472.)

* * * * *

[The first paragraph of the following passage appears in the text in
square brackets and italics at the end of Bentham’s discussion in Bk.
VI, Chap. xii (“Aberrations of English Law in Regard to Makeshift
Evidence”). Mill’s contribution follows immediately in normal roman
type.]

The papers from which the above remarks on the aberrations of English
law have been compiled, were written by Mr. Bentham at different times,
and left by him in a very incomplete and fragmentitious state. It
appears that he had intended to give some account of what is done by
English law in regard to all the different kinds of makeshift evidence,
but never completed his design. The remainder of this Edition: current;
Page: [39] chapter, (with the exception of a fragment, which for
distinction’s sake has been printed in inverted commas,) is the result
of a partial attempt to fill up the void which had thus been left in the
body of the work.

5. Few questions have been more agitated in English law than those which
relate to the admissibility of, and the effect, to be given to,
different articles of adscititious evidence.* The subject occupies sixty
closely printed nominal octavo, real quarto pages, in Phillipps’s
exposition of the law of evidence.38 Of a subject thus extensive, more
than a very general view cannot be expected to be given in the present
work: nor is it necessary for our purpose to go beyond the more
prominent features.

One remarkable circumstance is, that the whole body of the rules of law
relating to this subject, are, with a very small number of exceptions,
exclusionary. Either the decision given in a former cause is said not to
be evidence; and then it is that decision which is excluded; or it is
said to be conclusive evidence: and then an exclusion is put upon the
whole mass of evidence, howsoever constituted, which might have been
capable of being presented on the other side.

In saying this, enough has already been said to satisfy any one, who has
assented to what was said in a former chapter concerning adscititious
evidence,39 that nearly the whole of the established rules on this
subject, except to the extent of the single and very limited case in
which it was there seen that exclusion is proper, are bad. Accordingly,
the rule that a judgment directly upon the point is conclusive in any
future cause between the same parties, is a good rule: it is almost the
only one that is.

Even this rule is cut into by one exception: that verdicts in criminal
proceedings are not only not conclusive, but are not even admissible
evidence, in civil cases.† For this exception, two reasons are given:
the one, founded on a mere technicality; the other on a view, though a
narrow and partial one, of the justice of the case. The first is, that
it is res inter alios acta: the parties in the civil cause cannot, it is
said, have been also the parties in the previous criminal one, the
plaintiff in a criminal proceeding being the king. It is obvious,
however, that the king’s being plaintiff is in this case a mere fiction.
Although the party in whose favour the previous verdict is offered in
evidence, was not called the plaintiff in the former proceeding, there
is nothing whatever to hinder him from having been the prosecutor, who
is substantially the plaintiff. Now if he was the prosecutor, and his
adversary the defendant, it is evident that the cause is between the
same parties; that it is not, in reality, res inter alios acta; and that
if it be treated as such, justice is sacrificed, as it so often is, to a
fiction of law.

Edition: current; Page: [40]
The other reason is, “that the party in the civil suit, in whose behalf
the evidence is supposed to be offered, might have been a witness on the
prosecution.”* This is true. He might have been a witness; and the
previous verdict might have been obtained by his evidence. But it might
be, that the contrary was the case. Whether he was a witness, or not, is
capable of being ascertained. If he was not a witness, why adhere to a
rule, which cannot have the shadow of a ground but upon the supposition
that he was? But suppose even that he was a witness, and that the
verdict which he now seeks to make use of, was obtained from the jury by
means of his own testimony. This will often be a very good reason for
distrust; but it never can be sufficient reason for exclusion. Under a
system of law, indeed, which does not suffer a party to give evidence
directly in his own behalf, it is consistent enough to prevent him from
doing the same thing in a roundabout way. A proposition, however, which
will be maintained in the sequel of this work, is, that in no case ought
the plaintiff to be excluded from testifying in what lawyers indeed
would call his own behalf, but which, by the aid of
counter-interrogation, is really, if his cause is bad, much more his
adversary’s behalf than his own.40 Should this opinion be found to rest
on sufficient grounds, the reason just referred to for not admitting the
former verdict as evidence, will appear to be, on the contrary, a strong
reason for admitting it.

Thus much may suffice, as to the first rule relating to this subject in
English law: a rule which has been seen to be as reasonable, as the
above-mentioned exception to it is unreasonable. We shall find few
instances, in the succeeding rules, of an approach even thus near to the
confines of common sense.

For, first, a judgment is not evidence, even between the same parties,
“of any matter which came collaterally in question, nor of any matter
incidentally cognizable, nor of any matter to be inferred by argument
from the judgment.”† By the words not evidence, lawyers sometimes mean
one thing, sometimes another: here, however, not admissible in evidence,
is what is meant. That it ought not to be conclusive as to any fact but
such as the judgment, if conformable to law, necessarily supposes to
have been proved, is no more than we have seen in a former chapter:
that, however, because it ought not to be made conclusive, it ought not
to be admissible, is an inference which none but a lawyer would ever
think of drawing. A common man’s actions are received every day as
circumstantial evidence of the motive by which he was actuated; why not
those of a judge?

Edition: current; Page: [41]
The next rule is, that a verdict or judgment on a former occasion, is
not evidence against any one who was a stranger to the former
proceeding: that is, who was not a party, nor stood in any such relation
to a party, as will induce lawyers to say that he was privy to the
verdict. The reason why a judgment under these circumstances is not
evidence, is, that it is res inter alios acta. But we have seen already*
that its being res inter alios acta, though a sufficient reason for
receiving it with suspicion, is no reason for excluding it.

The more special reason, by which, in the case now under consideration,
this general one is corroborated, is, that the party “had no opportunity
to examine witnesses, or to defend himself, or to appeal against the
judgment.”† This being undeniable, it would be very improper, no doubt,
to take the judgment for conclusive. On this ground, what is the dictate
of unsophisticated common sense? A very obvious one. As the party has
not had an opportunity to examine witnesses, to defend himself, or to
appeal against the judgment, at a former period, let him have an
opportunity of doing all these things now: let him have leave to impeach
the validity of the grounds on which the former judgment was given, and
to shew, by comments on the evidence, or by adducing fresh evidence,
that it was an improper one: but do not shut out perhaps the only
evidence which is now to be had against him, merely because it would be
unjust, on the ground of that evidence, to condemn him without a
hearing. In the nature of a judgment is there any thing which renders a
jury less capable of appreciating that kind of evidence, than any other
kind, at its just value? But it is useless to argue against one
particular case of the barbarous policy which excludes all evidence that
seems in any degree exposed to be untrustworthy. The proofs which will
be hereafter‡ adduced of the absurdity of the principle, are proofs of
its absurdity in this case, as in every other.

Another curious rule is, that, as a judgment is not evidence against a
stranger, the contrary judgment shall not be evidence for him. If the
rule itself is a curious one, the reason given for it is still more so:
“nobody can take benefit by a verdict, who had not been prejudiced by
it, had it gone contrary:”41 a maxim which one would suppose to have
found its way from the gaming-table to the bench. If a party be
benefited by one throw of the dice, he will, if the rules of fair play
are observed, be prejudiced by another: but that the consequence should
hold when applied to justice, is not equally clear. This rule of
mutuality is destitute of even that semblance of reason, which there is
for the rule concerning res inter alios acta. There is reason for saying
that a man shall not lose his cause in consequence of the verdict given
in a former proceeding to which he was not a party; but there is no
reason whatever for saying that he shall not lose his cause in
consequence of the verdict in a proceeding to which he was a party,
merely because his adversary was Edition: current; Page: [42] not. It is
right enough that a verdict obtained by A against B should not bar the
claim of a third party C; but that it should not be evidence in favour
of C against B, seems the very height of absurdity. The only fragment of
a reason which we can find in the books, having the least pretension to
rationality, is this, that C, the party who gives the verdict in
evidence, may have been one of the witnesses by means of whose testimony
it was obtained. The inconclusiveness of this reason we have already
seen.

The rule, that a judgment inter alios is not evidence, which, like all
other rules of law, is the perfection of reason,42 is in a variety of
instances set aside by as many nominal exceptions, but real violations,
all of which are also the perfection of reason. To the praise of common
sense, at least, they might justly lay claim, if they did no more, in
each instance, than abrogate the exclusionary rule. But if the rule be
bad in one way, the exceptions, as usual, are bad in the contrary way.

One of the exceptions relates to an order of removal, executed, and
either not appealed against, or, if appealed against, confirmed by the
quarter sessions. This, as between third parishes, who were not parties
to the order, is admissible evidence, and therefore (such is
jurisprudential logic) conclusive: the officers, therefore, of a third
parish, in which the pauper may have obtained a settlement, have it in
their power, by merely keeping the only witnesses who could prove the
settlement out of the way till after the next quarter sessions, or at
farthest for three months, to rid their parish for ever of the
incumbrance. The reason of this is, “that there may be some end to
litigation:”* a reason which is a great favourite with lawyers, and very
justly. Litigation, understand in those who cannot pay for it, is a bad
thing: let no such person presume to apply for justice. One is tempted,
however, to ask, whether justice be a thing worth having, or no? and if
it be, at what time it is desirable that litigation should be at an end?
after justice is done, or before? It would be ridiculous to ask, for
what reason it is of so much greater importance that litigation between
parishes should have an end, than litigation between individuals; since
a question of this sort would imply (what can by no means be assumed)
that reason had something to do with the matter.

What is called a judgment in rem in the exchequer, is, as to all the
world, admissible, and conclusive. The sentence of a court of admiralty,
is, in like manner, as against all persons, admissible, and conclusive.
So is even that of a foreign court of admiralty. The sentence of
ecclesiastical courts, in some particular instances; this, like the
others, is admissible, and, like the others, conclusive. It is useless
to swell the list. Equally useless would it be to enter into a detailed
exposition of the badness of these several rules. The reader by whom the
spirit of Edition: current; Page: [43] the foregoing remarks has been
imbibed, will make the application to all these cases for himself.

The law recognizes no difference in effect, between the decision of a
court abroad, and that of a court at home. The sentence of any foreign
court, of competent jurisdiction, directly deciding a question, is
conclusive, if the same question arise incidentally between the same
parties in this country; in all other cases, it is inadmissible. The
case of debt, in which it is admissible, but not conclusive, is
partially, and but partially, an exception: for even in this case the
foreign judgment is, as to some points, conclusive.*

To make no allowance for the different chance which different courts
afford for rectitude of decision, would be consistent enough as between
one court and another in the same country; in England at least, the
rules of the several courts, howsoever different among themselves, being
each of them within its own sphere the perfection of reason, any such
allowance as is here spoken of would be obviously absurd: that must be
equally good every where, which is every where the best possible. Of
foreign judicatories, however, taken in the lump, similar excellence has
not, we may venture to affirm, been ever predicated by any English
lawyer; nor is likely to be by any Englishman; for Englishmen, how blind
soever to the defects of their own institutions, have usually a keen
enough perception of the demerits, whether of institutions or of any
thing else, if presented to them without the bounds of their own
country. Were a consistent regard paid to the dictates of justice, what
could appear more absurd than to give the effect of conclusive evidence
to the decisions of courts in which nearly all the vices of English
procedure prevail, unaccompanied by those cardinal securities, publicity
and cross-examination, which go so far to make amends for all those
vices, and which alone render English judicature endurable? Yet the rule
which, in so many cases, excludes those decisions altogether, errs
nearly as much on the contrary side; for, the difficulty of bringing
witnesses and other evidence from another country being generally
greater than that of bringing them from another and perhaps not a
distant part of the same country, there is the greater probability that
the decision in question may be the only evidence obtainable.43

After what has been observed concerning the admissibility of prior
decisions in English law, little need be said on that of prior
depositions. Wherever the decision itself is said to be res inter alios
acta, the depositions on which it was grounded are so too; and are
consequently excluded. In other cases they are generally admissible:
though to this there are some exceptions. Happily nobody ever thought of
making them conclusive.†

“Among the causes which have contributed to heap vexation upon suitors
on the Edition: current; Page: [44] ground of evidence, one has been the
scramble for jurisdiction, i.e. for fees, between the common law courts,
and the courts called courts of equity. Such was the hostility, the
common law courts refused to give credit to whatever was done under
authority of their rivals. Depositions in equity were not admissible
evidence at common law. When the work of iniquity is wrought by judicial
hands, there must always be a pretence; but no pretence has been too
thin to serve the purpose. It consists always in some word or phrase:
and any one word that comes uppermost is sufficient.

“The pretence on this occasion was,—a court of equity is not a court of
record. A better one would have been, to have said, it is not a tennis
court. The consequence would have been equally legitimate; and the
defects of the common law courts, and the effrontery of the conductors
of the business, would not have been placed in so striking a point of
view.

“With much better reason (if reason had any thing to do in the business)
might the equity courts have refused the application of courts of record
to the common law courts. In every cause, the evidence, and that alone,
is the essence of the cause; in it is contained whatever constitutes the
individual character of the cause, and distinguishes it from all other
causes of the same species: to a cause, the evidence is what the kernel
is to the nut. In a court of equity, this principal part of the cause,
though not made up in the best manner, is at any rate put upon record,
or, in plain English, committed to writing, and preserved. In a court of
law this is never done. The evidence, like the leaves of the Sibyl, is
committed to the winds.44 What goes by the name of the record is a
compound of sense and nonsense, with excess of nonsense: the sense
composed of a minute quantity of useful truth, drowned and rendered
scarce distinguishable by a flood of lies, which would be more
mischievous if they were less notorious.

“In the court of exchequer, the same judges constitute one day a court
of equity, another day a court of law. What if the occasion for the
rejection of the evidence had presented itself in this court? In the
hands of an English judge, the jus mentiendi is the sword of
Alexander.45 On the declared ground of iniquity, stopping every day
their own proceedings, why scruple to refuse credit to their own acts?”

It is now, however, fully settled, that the answer of the defendant, as
well as the depositions of witnesses, in chancery, are evidence in a
court of law; and that “a Edition: current; Page: [45] decree of the
court of chancery may be given in evidence, on the same footing, and
under the same limitations, as the verdict or judgment of a court of
common law.”*

The exemplifications which we undertook to give of the defects of
English law in relation to makeshift evidence, may here end. To what
purpose weary the reader with the dull detail of the cases in which
casually-written or ex-parte preappointed evidence are excluded, with
the equally long, and equally dull, list of the cases in which, though
exclusion would be just as reasonable (if it were reasonable at all),
admission, and not exclusion, is the rule? To know that the established
systems are every where radically wrong, wrong in the fundamental
principles upon which they rest, and wrong just so far as those
principles are consistently applied; this, to the person who regards the
happiness of mankind as worth pursuing, and good laws as essential to
happiness, is in a pre-eminent degree important and interesting. But,
for one who, by a comprehensive survey of the grand features, has
satisfied himself that the system is rotten to the core; for such a
person to know that it is somewhat more tolerable in one part than in
another part; that principles which are mischievous in all their
applications, are a little more or a little less mischievous in one
application than in another; that, in this or that portion of the field
of law, vicious theories are consistently carried out, and yield their
appropriate fruit in equally vicious practice, while in this or that odd
corner they are departed from; would in general be a sort of knowledge
as destitute of instruction, as it always and necessarily must be of
amusement. (Vol. III, pp. 573-86.)

* * * * *

[Examining the “delay, vexation, and expense” of the “corruptive”
“fee-gathering principle,” Bentham begins with “Sham writs of
error—King’s Bench an open delay-shop.”]

The reader will remember that this was written previously to Mr. Peel’s
recent law reforms. By one of these, a partial, and but a partial,
remedy, was applied to the abuse here in question;46 which, however,
will equally serve the purpose of history, and of illustration. (Vol.
IV, p. 64.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [46]
[Under “natural procedure,” Bentham argues, the genuine claim would be
obvious, and there would be no surprises. As it is,] where information
is by either party really wanted, generally speaking, he has this
alternative: either he applies for it by motion, (a cause within a
cause), getting it, or not getting it; or he does without it as well as
he can.

So utterly unfit is the initial document called the declaration, in the
opinion of judges themselves, for any such purpose as that of informing
the defendant what claim it is that is made upon him,—that a practice
has grown up of compelling the plaintiff to give in, together with the
declaration, another document, called a bill of particulars, which shall
really specify, what the declaration pretends to specify, the nature of
the demand. According to the judges, then, who have introduced this
practice, the declaration is waste paper: utterly useless with reference
to the purpose for what it is pretended to be meant; productive only of
a mass of expense to the defendant. The bill of particulars really
giving the information, all the information that is wanted; the
question, why the declaration is not abolished, is a question for those
who are capable of penetrating the mysteries of the judicial conscience.
(Vol. IV, p. 285.)

* * * * *

[The following comment, headed “Note by the Editor,” appears in the
midst of Bentham’s account in Bk. VIII, Chap. xxviii, of remedies for
the flaws in technical procedure. Bentham comments:] As far as concerns
the organization of the existing courts of natural procedure, they are
susceptible of great improvements: but in respect of the mode of
procedure, two single features, (viz. appearance of the parties before
the judge, and vivâ voce examination of the parties, but especially the
former) are enough to render them as much superior to the best of the
regular courts, as the military tactics of European are to those of
Asiatic powers. They afford no work for lawyers: the wonder is not great
that they should not be to the taste of lawyers.

It is proper to observe here, that the praise bestowed by Mr. Bentham
upon the existing courts of natural procedure, is confined, in the
strictest sense, to the procedure of these courts, and by no means
extends to the constitution of the courts themselves. In many of these
courts, it is well known that justice is very badly administered. What,
however, we may be very certain of, is, that the cause of this bad
administration of justice is not the absence of the technical rules; and
that if, over and above all other sources of badness, the practice of
these courts were afflicted, in addition, with the rules of technical
procedure, they would be not only no better, but beyond comparison
worse, than they are.

Edition: current; Page: [47]
The real and only cause of the badness of the courts of natural
procedure, (in so far as they are bad), is that which is the cause of
the mal-administration of so many other departments of the great field
of government; defect of responsibility on the part of those persons, to
whom the administration of them is entrusted.

Causes of such defect of responsibility:

1. Defect of publicity. In the case of a justice of peace, administering
judicature, alone, or in conjunction with a brother justice, at his own
house, or on his bowling green, or wherever he happens to be, publicity
does not exist in any degree. In the case of courts of conscience,47
there is (I believe) nominal, but there can scarcely be said to be
effectual, publicity; since the apparent unimportance of the cause
prevents the proceedings in it from being reported in the newspapers,
and would prevent it, even if reported, from attracting in general any
portion, sufficient to operate as a security, of public attention.

2. Number of judges. In many of the courts of conscience, the tribunal
is composed of a considerable number of officers; though any greater
number than one, or at most two, (one to officiate when the other is
sick, or, from any other cause, unavoidably absent), can serve no
purpose but that of dividing, and in that manner virtually destroying,
responsibility.

3. Defect of appeal. In a great variety of cases, no appeal lies from
the decision of individual justices of peace, except to the Quarter
Sessions, that is to say, from the justices individually to the justices
collectively. How fruitless an appeal of this sort must in general be
(not to speak of its expense) is evident enough. What little value it
has, is mainly owing to the greater effectual publicity attendant on the
proceedings of a court of general sessions, which are generally reported
in the local papers, and always excite more or less of interest in the
neighbourhood.

4. The judges exempt from punishment, or even loss of office, in the
event of misconduct.

If the party injured by the decision of a justice of peace is able and
willing to go to the expense of a motion for a criminal information in
the King’s Bench, or an indictment at Nisi Prius, or an action against
the justice for damages; and if, having done so, he can prove, to the
satisfaction of the judges, the existence of what is called malice* on
the part of the magistrate, by whose unjust decision he has been
injured; all these things being supposed, he may then have some chance
of seeing some punishment inflicted upon his oppressor; though even then
probably a very Edition: current; Page: [48] inadequate one; the
prevailing doctrine being, that the proceedings of an unpaid magistrate
ought to be construed liberally and indulgently, as otherwise no
gentleman will consent to take upon himself the office.48

But, without the above preliminaries, who ever heard of an English
justice of peace who was so much as suspended from the commission, on
the ground of any misconduct, however gross? And a country justice must
either have very bad luck, or play his cards extremely ill, if, out of
every thousand cases of misdecision, there be so much as one or two in
which all these conditions meet. (Vol. IV, pp. 443-6.)

* * * * *

[The following note is appended to the heading of a section dealing with
another “remedy,” “Abolition of fees.”]

This, as the reader will observe, was written before the recent act,
which, in the instance of the twelve judges, commuted fees for
salaries.49 The evil, however, still subsists, in regard to a vast
variety of judicial offices. (Vol. IV, p. 450.)

* * * * *

[Bentham says:] On the score of vexation to the public at large, by the
disclosure of facts comprizable under the denomination of secrets of
state, no decision appears to have been ever pronounced. Why? Because no
known case ever presented itself, in which a decision to that effect was
called for on that ground. In this instance, as in every other, it
depends upon chance to open the mouth of jurisprudence. [To that comment
he appends a note on the habit courts of judicature have of
declaring—that is, making—law, which concludes:] More law, law covering
a greater extent in the field of legislation, is thus made by a single
judge, in a quarter of a minute, and at the expense of a couple of
words, than the legislature would make in a century, by statutes upon
statutes, after committees upon committees. [Mill’s note, in square
brackets, continues Bentham’s note, though it refers rather to Bentham’s
text.]

Edition: current; Page: [49]
Mr. Bentham seems to have overlooked one remarkable case, in which a
witness was forbidden to disclose something which the judge thought
proper to consider, or to pretend to consider, as a state secret. I
allude to the case of Plunkett v. Cobbett, in which Lord Ellenborough
refused to suffer a witness, who was a member of parliament, to be
examined concerning words spoken in parliament: and this by reason of
his duty, and in particular of his oath, by which he was bound not to
reveal the counsels of the nation.*

To support this inference, the two following falsehoods must have been
taken for true: 1. That words spoken in parliament were state secrets;
2. That in no case ought state secrets to be revealed. (Vol. IV, pp.
541-2.)

* * * * *

[Continuing his onslaught on the needless expense of the law, Bentham
remarks:] Be the delinquency of the defendant ever so enormous, the
expense of prosecution ever so great, reimbursement is not to be thought
of. Why not? Because, to receive money under the name of costs is
“beneath the royal dignity.”

The iniquity of this rule has forced the judges to take upon themselves
the responsibility of allowing to the prosecutor a sum of money under
the name of expenses: this however they do or leave undone as they
please: consequently the most frivolous reasons frequently suffice for
leaving it undone. It is asserted in the eighty-fourth number of the
Edinburgh Review, p. 403, that, in a recent case, a judge refused to
allow the prosecutor his expenses, because one of the witnesses for the
prosecution offended him by his demeanour.50 (Vol. IV, p. 547.)

* * * * *

[On “Abolition of taxes upon justice,” Bentham says:] In speaking of
this or any other expedient for obtaining pecuniary supplies for the
relief of this species of distress, it is impossible to avoid thinking
of the factitious loads by which it has Edition: current; Page: [50]
everywhere been aggravated. I speak not here of what has been done by
the judge for his own profit; but of what has been done by the finance
minister for his own use. The subject has elsewhere been treated pretty
much at large. See Protest against Law Taxes.51

The reader will observe, that this work was written before the late
repeal of the stamp duties on law proceedings,52 which has been justly
deemed one of the most meritorious acts of the present enlightened
administration. The arguments in the text, however, are general, and
apply equally to all nations. (Vol. IV, p. 624.)

* * * * *

[In Bk. IX, Pt. III, Chap. ii, Sect. 2, Bentham attacks judges,
concerned with precedent and their own interest, for exclusionary
principles.]

It seems much more probable, that the exclusion of evidence originated
in the ignorance of an uncivilized age, than in the sinister interest of
the judge. In a rude state of society, where the art of extracting truth
from the lips of a witness is not understood, and where testimonies are
counted, not weighed,53 it seems to have been the universal practice to
strike out of the account the testimony of all witnesses who were
considered to be under the influence of any mendacity-promoting cause.
Exclusionary rules of evidence have nowhere been carried so far as under
the systems of procedure which have been the least fettered with
technicalities. Take, for instance, the Hindoo law of evidence. See
Mill’s History of British India, Bk. II, Chap. iv.54 (Vol. V, p. 27.)

* * * * *

[Continuing his onslaught on foolish exclusions of evidence, Bentham
says:] One decision I meet with, that would be amusing enough, if to a
lover of mankind there could be any thing amusing in injustice. A man is
turned out of court for a Edition: current; Page: [51] liar,—not for any
interest that he has, but for one which he supposed himself to have, the
case being otherwise. Instead of turning the man out of court, might not
the judge have contented himself with setting him right? . . . The
pleasant part of the story is, that the fact on which the exclusion was
grounded could not have been true. For, before the witness could be
turned out of court for supposing himself to have an interest, he must
have been informed of his having none: consequently, at the time when he
was turned out, he must have ceased to suppose that he had any.

Another offence for which I find a man pronounced a liar, seems to make
no bad match with the foregoing: it was for being a man of honour. “Oh
ho! you are a man of honour, are you? Out with you, then; you have no
business here.” Being asked whether he did not look upon himself as
bound in honour to pay costs for the party who called him, supposing him
to lose the cause, and whether such was not his intention; his answer
was in the affirmative, and he was rejected. It was taken for granted
that he would be a liar. Why? Because he had shewn he would not be one.
If instead of saying yes he had said no, who could have refused to
believe him? and what would have become of the pretence?

By the supposition, the witness is a man of super-ordinary probity:
moral obligation, naked moral obligation, has on him the force of law.
What is the conclusion of the exclusionist? That this man of uncommonly
nice honour will be sure to perjure himself, to save himself from
incurring a loss which he cannot be compelled to take upon himself.

Both these extravagancies have been set aside by later decisions. A
witness cannot now, according to Phillipps, be excluded on account of
his believing himself to be interested, nor on account of his
considering himself bound in honour to pay the costs.* The former point,
however, seems to be still doubtful.†

Another of the absurdities of English law, in respect to the exclusion
grounded on pecuniary interest, is very well exposed in the following
passage, extracted from a review of the Traités des Preuves Judiciaires,
in the 79th Number of the Edinburgh Review:

Take as an example the case of forgery. Unless the crime has been
committed in the presence of witnesses, it can only be proved (in the
proper sense of the word) by the individual whose name is said to have
been forged. Yet that person is the only one whom the law of England
prohibits from proving the fact; a strange prohibition, for which some
very strong reason will naturally be sought. The reason to be found in
the books is this, that the party has an interest in pronouncing that
paper forged, for the enforcement of which he may be sued if it is
genuine:55 and this would be true, if the event of the criminal inquiry
were admitted to affect his interest, when the holder proceeds in a
civil suit to enforce the supposed obligation. But it is also an
indisputable rule, that the issue of the trial for forgery, whether
condemnation or discharge, is not permitted to have the least effect
upon this Edition: current; Page: [52] liability: the criminal may be
convicted, and yet the party whose name appears to the instrument, may
be fixed with the debt in a civil proceeding; or he may be acquitted,
and yet the genuineness of the handwriting may hereafter be questioned,
and its falsehood established. How, then, can the anomaly of this
exclusion be explained? It seems that legal antiquarians have preserved
the tradition of a practice which is said to have prevailed in former
times,—when a person was convicted of forgery, the forged instrument was
damned; i.e. delivered up to be destroyed in open court. The practice,
if it ever existed, now lives but in the memory of the learned; the
disabling consequences, however, survive it to this hour. The trial
proceeds in the presence of the person whose name is said to have been
forged, who alone knows the fact, and has no motive for misrepresenting
it. His statement would at once convict the pursuer [qu. prisoner?] if
guilty, or, if innocent, relieve him from the charge. But the law
declares him incompetent; and he is condemned to sit by, a silent
spectator, hearing the case imperfectly pieced out by the opinions and
surmises of other persons, on the speculative question, whether or not
the handwriting is his. And this speculation, incapable under any
circumstances of satisfying a reasonable mind, decides upon the life of
a fellow-citizen, in a system which habitually boasts of requiring
always the very best evidence that the nature of the case can admit!56

(Vol. V, pp. 57-9.)

* * * * *

[Bentham considers exceptions to the general rule that evidence of
witnesses is excluded when they have pecuniary interest in the outcome.
The first exception is discussed under the heading, “Interest against
interest.”] Unless the rule, out of which the exception is taken, be
supposed to be bad in toto, the reason of the exception (if it has any)
supposes all other circumstances equal, and the quantity of money
creative of the interest the same on both sides. Against the truth of
this supposition, there is exactly infinity to one. The number of
possible ratios is infinite: of these the ratio of equality is one. Of
the proportion between interest and interest, the exception takes no
cognizance: no mention of it is made.

It must be acknowledged, that, in many of the cases in which this
exception has been allowed, it has been, from the nature of the case,
unquestionably certain that the interest, at least the pecuniary
interest, was equal on both sides; thus, the accepter of a bill of
exchange is an admissible witness in an action by indorser against
drawer, to prove that he had no effects of the drawer’s in his hands;
because, whichever way the suit may be decided, he is equally liable. On
the other hand, there are many cases in which the interest is not
really, but only nominally the same on both sides. Thus, a pauper is a
good witness for either parish, in a settlement case: why? because (we
are told) it is the same thing to him whether he has a settlement in one
parish or in another;57 true, it may be the same thing; but it Edition:
current; Page: [53] may also be a very different thing, since different
parishes give very different allowances to their poor. (Vol. V, p. 63.)

* * * * *

[In discussing (Bk. IX, Pt. III, Chap. iv, Sect. 1) perjury as one of
the improper grounds for exclusion because of improbity, Bentham says,
in a footnote which Mill’s comment (in square brackets) concludes:]
Where a witness, who at the time of the transaction was an uninterested
one, has since given himself an interest in the cause, as, for instance,
by a wager, English lawyers have decided—and with indisputable
justice—that, by this act of the witness, the party shall not be
deprived of the benefit of his testimony. The damage which a man is not
allowed to do by an act otherwise so innocent as that of a wager, shall
he be allowed to do it by so criminal an act as perjury?

It is rather curious, that, while the attesting witness, if he has
happened to perjure himself since he signed his name, would not, I
suppose, be admitted to prove his own signature, he is admitted to
disprove it: “a person who has set his name as a subscribing witness to
a deed or will, is admissible to impeach the execution of the
instrument;”* although by so doing he confesses himself to have been
guilty of a crime which differs from the worst kind of perjury only in
the absence of oath, from forgery only in name. (Vol. V, pp. 86-7.)

* * * * *

[Looking to experience for support of his views on exclusion based on
improbity, Bentham says:] Inquiring among professional friends the
degree of observance given to the rules excluding witnesses on the
ground of improbity, I learn that judges may, in this point of view, be
divided into three classes. Some, treating the objection as an objection
to credit, not to competency, admit the witness, suffer his evidence to
go to the jury, presenting the objection at the same time, warning the
jury of the force of it, and when thus warned, leaving them to
themselves. If, after this warning, the jury convict a man of whose
guilt the judge from whom they have thus received the warning, is not
satisfied; from thence follows, as a matter of course, a recommendation
to mercy, from whence follows, as a matter also of course, a pardon.
Another class suffer the testimony to be given, but if they do not
Edition: current; Page: [54] find it corroborated by other testimony,
direct the jury to acquit, paying no regard to it. A third class, again,
if they understand that no other evidence is to follow, refuse, in spite
of all authorities, so much as to suffer the jury to hear the evidence.

The reader should be informed that these pages were written somewhere
about the year 1803. Whether any greater degree of unanimity exists on
the bench, in regard to these matters, at the present day, perhaps
nobody knows: it is hardly worth knowing. (Vol. V, p. 95.)

* * * * *

[In condemning exclusions based on religious opinions, Bentham says:]
Speculation, quoth somebody. No; cases of evidence excluded on account
of atheism have every now and then presented themselves in practice. [To
this he appends the following note, which Mill’s comment (in square
brackets) concludes:] The books exhibit several cases of this sort; and
from private information it has happened to me to hear of several not
mentioned in any book.

Such a case occurred only a few months ago. One of Carlile’s shopmen had
been robbed.58 His evidence was refused, and justice denied to him, on
the ground of what lawyers affectedly call defect of religious
principle.59 (Vol. V, pp. 132-3.)

* * * * *

[Bentham asserts that the question “Are you an atheist?” not only
offends “against the dictates of reason and justice,” but is] repugnant
to the known rules of actually existing law. In virtue of a statute
still in force, [Mill’s note is here appended] a declaration to any such
effect subjects the individual to penalties of high severity: and the
rule, that no man shall, in return to any question, give an answer that
can have the effect of subjecting him to any sort of penalty, is the
firmly-established fruit of that mischievous superstition, the war upon
which will form the business of the ensuing Part.

Since this was written (July 1806) the statute against blasphemy has
been Edition: current; Page: [55] repealed:60 but the Lord Chancellor,
(by virtue of that power of superseding the will of the legislature,
which judges never hesitate to assume to themselves whenever they need
it), has taken upon himself to declare, that to deny the Trinity is
still an offence at common law.61 (Vol. V, p. 133.)

* * * * *

[Concerning the exclusion of evidence from “persons excommunicated,”
Bentham says:] You omit paying your attorney’s bill: if the bill is a
just one, and you able to pay it, this is wrong of you; but if unable,
your lot (of which immediately) will be just the same. If the business
done, was done in a court called a common law court, your attorney is
called an attorney, and the case belongs not to this purpose. If in a
court called an ecclesiastical court, the attorney is called a proctor:
you are imprisoned, and so forth; but first you must be excommunicated.
For this crime, or for any other, no sooner are you excommunicated, than
a discovery is made, that, being “excluded out of the church,” you are
“not under the influence of any religion:” you are a sort of atheist. To
your own weak reason it appears to you that you believe; but the law,
which is the perfection of reason, knows that you do not. Being
omniscient, and infallible, and so forth, she knows that, were you to be
heard, it would be impossible you should speak true: therefore, you too
are posted off upon the excluded list, along with atheists, catholics,
and quakers.

Forbidden by his religion, a quaker will not pay tithes: sued in the
spiritual court, he is excommunicated. As a witness, he is now
incompetent twice over: once by being a quaker, and again by being
excommunicate. Why by being excommunicate? Answer, per Mr. Justice
Buller,—“because he is not under the influence of any religion.”62

Since these two paragraphs were written (July 1806), the incompetency of
excommunicated persons to give evidence has been removed by the statute
53 George III, c. 127 (Phillips, Vol. I, p. 26). (Vol. V, p. 140.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [56]
[With heavy irony, echoed by Mill in his note, Bentham discusses the
legal means by which “competency” is restored to a witness. The first of
these is the “Burning Iron” applied to the hands of those guilty of
“clergyable felonies.” He comments, in part:] Other punishments may run
their course; other punishments, whatever may be their duration, may
have run their course, and the incredibility remain unextinguished. It
is not time, but heat, that works the cure. Neither does whipping
possess any such virtue as that of a restorative to veracity: for
whipping is not fire. A conviction of an offence, for which whipping is
the sentence; expels the veracity; but the execution of the sentence
does not in this case bring it back again. To a plain understanding, the
incredibility might as well be whipped out as burnt out, or the new
credibility whipped in as burnt in: but this, it seems, is not law.
There is no purifier like fire.

There are cases indeed, in which whipping, or fine, or transportation,
or any other kinds of punishment, have all the virtue of burning: but
this is only when they have been substituted for it by act of
parliament:63 in all other cases, nothing but burning will serve. The
benefit of clergy has of itself no virtue; burning, or a statutory
substitute is indispensable. “In Lord Warwick’s case,” says Phillipps
(Vol. I, p. 32) “one who had been convicted of manslaughter, and allowed
his clergy, but not burnt in the hand, was called as a witness for the
prisoner; and on an objection to his competency, the lords referred it
to the judges present, who thought he was not a competent witness, as
the statue had made the burning in the hand a condition precedent to the
discharge.”64 (Vol. V, p. 172.)

* * * * *

[The second means of restoring competency (see the previous entry) is “A
Great Seal,” on which Bentham says:] The sort of great seal to be
employed on this occasion, is that which is employed for granting
pardons. Supposing (what has sometimes happened) the ground of the
pardon to have been the persuasion of the convict’s innocence, the
restoration of the admissibility would, under the rule of consistency,
be a necessary consequence: in every other case, whatever propriety
there might be, consistency is out of the question. An experiment was
once made by Edition: current; Page: [57] another sort of seal, called a
privy seal: the experiment failed: the seal was not found to be big
enough. [To this passage Bentham appends the following note, which
Mill’s comment (in square brackets) concludes:] The English of this is,
that it belongs to the Chancellor, not to the Lord Privy Seal (or at
least not to the Lord Privy Seal alone) to grant pardons. Understand, in
a direct way: for in an indirect way, as above shewn [See Bk. VIII,
“Technical Procedure,” Chap. xiv, “Nullification.”], it belongs to any
body.

A statute of the last session but one, (6 Geo. IV, c. 25) enacts, that a
pardon under the sign manual, and countersigned by a Secretary of State,
shall have the same effect as a pardon under the great seal. (Vol. V, p.
173.)

* * * * *

[Bentham asserts sadly that to expect relief from law taxes is
hopeless,] unless the moment (perhaps an ideal one) should ever arrive,
that should produce a financier to whom the most important interests of
the people should be dearer than his own momentary ease.

That time is happily come.65 (Vol. V, p. 222.)

* * * * *

[The following lengthy passage, headed “Farther Remarks by the Editor,”
concludes Sect. 2, “Lawyer and Client,” of Bk. IX, Chap. v, “Examination
of the Cases in Which English Law Exempts One Person from Giving
Evidence against Another.”]

In the notice of the Traité des Preuves Judiciaires, in the Edinburgh
Review,* the rule which excludes the testimony of the professional
assistant, is with much earnestness defended.66 The grounds of the
defence, in so far as they are intelligible to me, reduce themselves to
those which follow:

1. The first argument consists of two steps, whereof the former is
expressed, the latter understood; and either of them, if admitted,
destroys the other. The proposition which is asserted is, that the aid
which is afforded to an accused person by his advocate, is of
exceedingly great importance to justice. The proposition Edition:
current; Page: [58] which is insinuated is, that of this aid he would be
deprived, if his advocate were rendered subject to examination.—If the
only purpose, for which an advocate can be of use, be to assist a
criminal in the concealment of his guilt, the last proposition is true:
but what becomes of the former? If, on the other hand (as is
sufficiently evident) an advocate be needful on other accounts than
this,—if he be of use to the innocent, as well as to the guilty, to the
man who has nothing to conceal, as well as to the man who has; what is
to hinder an innocent, or even a guilty defendant, from availing himself
of his advocate’s assistance for all purposes, except that of
frustrating the law?

2. The second argument consists but of one proposition: it is, that Lord
Russell’s attorney would have been a welcome visitor, with his notes in
his pocket, to the office of the solicitor of the Treasury. To the
exalted personages, whose desire it was to destroy Lord Russell, any
person would, it is probable, have been a welcome visitor, who came with
information in his pocket tending to criminate the prisoner.67 From
this, what does the reviewer infer? That no information tending to
criminate the prisoner should be received? That the truth should not, on
a judicial occasion, be ascertained? Not exactly: only that one means, a
most efficient means, of ascertaining it, should be rejected. Are we to
suppose, then, that on every judicial occasion the thing which is
desirable is, that the laws should not be executed? then, indeed, the
reviewer’s conclusion would be liable to no other objection than that of
not going nearly far enough; since all other kinds of evidence might,
and indeed ought, on such a supposition, to be excluded likewise.

So long as the law treats any act as a crime which is not a crime, so
long it will, without doubt, be desirable that some acts which are
legally crimes should escape detection: and by conducing to that end,
this or any other exclusionary rule may palliate, in a slight degree,
the mischiefs of a bad law. To make the conclusion hold universally,
what would it be necessary to suppose? Only that the whole body of the
law is a nuisance, and its frustration, not its execution, the end to be
desired.

Laws are made to be executed, not to be set aside. For the sake of
weakening this or that bad law, would you weaken all the laws? How
monstrous must that law be, which is not better than such a remedy!
Instead of making bad laws, and then, by exclusionary rules, undoing
with one hand a part of the mischief which you have been doing with the
other, would it not be wiser to make no laws but such as are fit to be
executed, and then to take care that they be executed on all occasions?

3. The third argument is of that ingenious and sometimes very puzzling
sort, called a dilemma. If the rule were abolished, two courses only,
according to the reviewer, the lawyer would have: he must enter into
communication with the Edition: current; Page: [59] opposite party from
the beginning, to which course there would be objections; or he must
wait till he had satisfied himself that his client was in the wrong, and
must enter into communication with the opposite party then; to which
course there would be other objections. What the force of these
objections may be, it is not necessary, nor would it be pertinent, to
inquire: since neither justice nor Mr. Bentham demand that he should
enter into communication with the opposite party at all. What is
required is only, that if, upon the day of trial, the opposite party
should choose to call for his evidence, it may not be in his power, any
more than in that of any other witness, to withhold it.

One would not have been surprised at these arguments, or even worse,
from an indiscriminate eulogizer of “things as they are;”68 this,
however, is by no means the character of the writer of this article: it
is the more surprising, therefore, that he should have been able to
satisfy himself with reasons such as the three which we have examined.
Not that these are all the reasons he has to give: the following
paragraph seems to be considered by him as containing additional reasons
to the same effect:

Even in the very few instances where the accused has intrusted his
defender with a full confession of his crime, we hold it to be clear
that he may still be lawfully defended. The guilt of which he may be
conscious, and which he may have so disclosed, he has still a right to
see distinctly proved upon him by legal evidence. To suborn wretches to
the commission of perjury, or procure the absence of witnesses by
bribes, is to commit a separate and execrable crime; to tamper with the
purity of the judges is still more odious: but there is no reason why
any party should not, by fair and animated arguments, demonstrate the
insufficiency of that testimony, on which alone a righteous judgment can
be pronounced to his destruction. Human beings are never to be run down
like beasts of prey, without respect to the laws of the chase. If
society must make a sacrifice of any one of its members, let it proceed
according to general rules, upon known principles, and with clear proof
of necessity: “let us carve him as a feast fit for the gods, not hew him
as a carcass for the hounds.”69 Reversing the paradox above cited from
Paley,70 we should not despair of finding strong arguments in support of
another, and maintain that it is desirable that guilty men should
sometimes escape, by the operation of those general rules which form the
only security for innocence.71

In reading the above declamation, one is at a loss to discover what it
is which the writer is aiming at. Does he really think that, all other
things being the same, a system of procedure is the better, for
affording to criminals a chance of escape? If this be his serious
opinion, there is no more to be said; since it must be freely admitted
that, reasoning upon this principle, there is no fault to be found with
the rule. If it be your object not to find the prisoner guilty, there
cannot be a better way Edition: current; Page: [60] than refusing to
hear the person who is most likely to know of his guilt, if it exist.
The rule is perfectly well adapted to its end: but is that end the true
end of procedure? This question surely requires no answer.

But if the safety of the innocent, and not that of the guilty, be the
object of the reviewer’s solicitude; had he shewn how an innocent man
could be endangered by his lawyer’s telling all he has to tell, he would
have delivered something more to the purpose than any illustration which
the subject of carcasses and hounds could yield. If he can be content
for one moment to view the question with other than fox-hunting eyes,
even he must perceive that, to the man who, having no guilt to disclose,
has disclosed none to his lawyer, nothing could be of greater advantage
than that this should appear; as it naturally would if the lawyer were
subjected to examination.

“There is no reason why any party should not, by fair and animated
arguments, demonstrate the insufficiency of that testimony, on which
alone a righteous judgment can be pronounced to his destruction.” This,
if I rightly understand it, means, that incomplete evidence ought not,
for want of comments, to be taken for complete: we were in no great
danger of supposing that it ought. But the real question is,—should you,
because your evidence is incomplete, shut out other evidence which would
complete it? After the lawyer has been examined, is the evidence
incomplete notwithstanding? then is the time for your “fair and animated
arguments.” Is it complete? then what more could you desire?

The denunciation which follows, against hunting down human beings
without respect for the laws of the chase, is one of those proofs which
meet us every day, how little, as yet, even instructed Englishmen are
accustomed to look upon judicature as a means to an end, and that end
the execution of the law. They speak and act, every now and then, as if
they regarded a criminal trial as a sort of game, partly of chance,
partly of skill, in which the proper end to be aimed at is, not that the
truth may be discovered, but that both parties may have fair play: in a
word, that whether a guilty person shall be acquitted or punished, may
be, as nearly as possible, an even chance.

I had almost omitted the most formidable argument of all, which was
brought forward by M. Dumont, not as decisive, but as deserving of
consideration, and which the reviewer, who adopts it, terms “a
conclusive reductio ad absurdum.”72 This consists in a skilful
application of the words spy and informer (espion, délateur), two words
forming part of a pretty extensive assortment of vaguely vituperative
expressions, which possess the privilege of serving as conclusive
objections against any person or thing which it is resolved to condemn,
and against which, it is supposed, no other objections can be found.

Spies and informers are bad people; a lawyer who discloses his client’s
guilt is a spy and an informer; he is therefore a bad man, and such
disclosure is a bad Edition: current; Page: [61] practice, and the rule
by which it is prohibited is a good rule. Such, when analysed into its
steps, is the argument which we are now called upon to consider.

But to form a ground for condemning any practice, it is not enough to
apply to the person who practises it an opprobrious name: it is
necessary, moreover, to point out some pernicious tendency in the
practice; to shew that it produces more evil than good. It cannot be
pretended that the act of him, who, when a crime comes to his knowledge,
(be it from the malefactor’s own lips, or from any other source), being
called upon judicially to declare the truth, declares it accordingly, is
a pernicious act. On the contrary, it is evident that it is a highly
useful act: the evil occasioned by it being, at the very worst, no more
than the punishment of the guilty person; an evil which, in the opinion
of the legislature, is outweighed by the consequent security to the
public. Call this man, therefore, an informer or not, as you please; but
if you call him an informer, remember to add, that the act which
constitutes him one, is a meritorious act.

M. Dumont expresses an apprehension that no honourable man would take
upon him the functions of an advocate, if compelled to put on what he is
pleased to call the character of an informer. Further reflection would,
I think, have convinced him that this apprehension is chimerical. There
is scarcely any thing in common between the two characters of an
informer and of a witness. The antipathy which exists against the former
extends not to the latter. A witness, as such, does not take money for
giving evidence, as an informer frequently does for giving information.
The act of an informer is spontaneous: he is a man who goes about of his
own accord doing mischief to others: so at least it appears to the eyes
of unreflecting prejudice. The evidence of the witness may be more fatal
to the accused than the indications given by the informer; but it has
the appearance of not being equally spontaneous: he tells what he knows,
because the law compels him to say something, and because being obliged
to speak, he will speak nothing but the truth: but for any thing that
appears, if he had not been forced, he would have held his tongue and
staid away. An honourable man, acting in the capacity of an advocate,
would, by giving true evidence, incur the approbation of all lovers of
justice, and would not incur the disapprobation of any one: what,
therefore, is there to deter him? unless it be a hatred of justice.

The reviewer adds, that M. Dumont’s argument “might be assisted with a
multiplicity of reasonings:” these, as he has not stated them, Mr.
Bentham, probably, may be pardoned for being ignorant of. The reviewer
is modest enough to content himself with the “single and very obvious
remark, that the author evidently presumes the guilt from the
accusation:”73 a remark which could have had its source in nothing but
the thickest confusion of ideas. Had Mr. Bentham recommended
condemnation without evidence, or any other practice which would be
indiscriminately injurious to all accused persons, innocent or guilty;
it might Edition: current; Page: [62] then have been said of him, with
some colour of justice, that he presumed the guilt from the accusation.
But when, of the practice which he recommends, it is a characteristic
property to be a security to the innocent, a source of danger to the
guilty alone,—under what possible pretence can he be charged with
presuming the existence of guilt?—though he may be charged, sure enough,
with desiring that where there is guilt, it may be followed by
punishment; a wish probably blameable in the eyes of the reviewer, who
thinks it “desirable that guilty men should sometimes escape.”

Thus weak are all the arguments which could be produced against this
practice, by men who would have been capable of finding better
arguments, had any better been to be found. It may appear, and perhaps
ought to appear, surprising, that men generally unprejudiced, and
accustomed to think, should be misled by sophistry of so flimsy a
texture as this has appeared to be. Unhappily, however, there is not any
argument so palpably untenable and absurd, which is not daily received,
even by instructed men, as conclusive, if it makes in favour of a
doctrine which they are predetermined to uphold. In the logic of the
schools, the premises prove the conclusion. In the logic of the
affections, some cause, hidden or apparent, having produced a
prepossession, this prepossession proves the conclusion, and the
conclusion proves the premises. You may then scatter the premises to the
winds of heaven, and the conclusion will not stand the less firm:—the
affections being still enlisted in its favour, and the shew, not the
substance, of a reason being that which is sought for,—if the former
premises are no longer defensible, others of similar quality are easily
found. The only mode of attack which has any chance of being successful,
is to look out for the cause of the prepossession, and do what may be
possible to be done towards its removal: when once the feeling, the real
support of the opinion, is gone, the weakness of the ostensible
supports, the so called reasons, becomes manifest, and the opinion falls
to the ground.

What is plainly at the bottom of the prepossession in the present case,
is a vague apprehension of danger to innocence. There is nothing which,
if listened to, is so sure to mislead as vague fears.74 Point out any
specific cause of alarm, any thing upon which it is possible to lay your
hand, and say, from this source evil of this or that particular kind is
liable to flow; and there may be some chance of our being able to judge
whether the apprehension is or is not a reasonable one. Confine yourself
to vague anticipations of undefined evils, and your fears merit not the
slightest regard: if you cannot tell what it is you are afraid of, how
can you expect any one to participate in your alarm? One thing is
certain: that, if there be any reason for fear, that reason must be
capable of being pointed out: and that a danger which does not admit of
being distinctly stated, is no danger at all. Let any one, Edition:
current; Page: [63] therefore, ask himself,—supposing the law good, and
the accused innocent,—what possible harm can be done him by making his
professional assistant tell all that he knows?

He may have told to his lawyer, and his lawyer, if examined, may
disclose, circumstances which, though they afford no inference against
him, it would have been more agreeable to him to conceal. True; but to
guard him against any such unnecessary vexation, he will have the
considerate attention of the judge: and this inconvenience, after all,
is no more than what he may be subjected to by the deposition of any
other witness, and particularly by that of his son, or his servant, or
any other person who lives in his house, much more probably than by that
of his lawyer.

Whence all this dread of the truth? Whence comes it that any one loves
darkness better than light, except it be that his deeds are evil?75
Whence but from a confirmed habit of viewing the law as the enemy of
innocence,—as scattering its punishments with so ill-directed and so
unsparing a hand, that the most virtuous of mankind, were all his
actions known, could no more hope to escape from them than the most
abandoned of malefactors? Whether the law be really in this state, I
will not take upon myself to say: sure I am, that if it be, it is high
time it should be amended. But if it be not, where is the cause of
alarm? In men’s consciousness of their own improbity. Children and
servants hate tell-tales; thieves hate informers, and peaching
accomplices; and, in general, he who feels a desire to do wrong, hates
all things, and rules of evidence among the rest, which may, and he
fears will, lead to his detection.

Thus much in vindication of the proposed rule. As for its advantages,
they are to be sought for not so much in its direct, as in its indirect,
operation. The party himself having been, as he ought to be, previously
subjected to interrogation; his lawyer’s evidence, which, though good of
its kind, is no better than hearsay evidence, would not often add any
new facts to those which had already been extracted from the lips of the
client. The benefit which would arise from the abolition of the
exclusionary rule, would consist rather in the higher tone of morality
which would be introduced into the profession itself. A rule of law
which, in the case of the lawyer, gives an express license to that
wilful concealment of the criminal’s guilt, which would have constituted
any other person an accessary in the crime, plainly declares that the
practice of knowingly engaging one’s self as the hired advocate of an
unjust cause, is, in the eye of the law, or (to speak intelligibly) in
that of the law-makers, an innocent, if not a virtuous practice. But for
this implied declaration, the man who in this way hires himself out to
do injustice or frustrate justice with his tongue, would be viewed in
exactly the same light as he who frustrates justice or does injustice
with any other instrument. We should not then hear an advocate boasting
of the artifices by which he had trepanned a deluded Edition: current;
Page: [64] jury into a verdict in direct opposition to the strongest
evidence; or of the effrontery with which he had, by repeated insults,
thrown the faculties of a bonâ fide witness into a state of confusion,
which had caused him to be taken for a perjurer, and as such
disbelieved. Nor would an Old Bailey counsel any longer plume himself
upon the number of pickpockets whom, in the course of a long career, he
had succeeded in rescuing from the arm of the law. The professional
lawyer would be a minister of justice, not an abettor of crime; a
guardian of truth, not a suborner of mendacity: and not at his hands
only, in another sphere, whether as a private man or as a legislator,
somewhat more regard for truth and justice might be expected than now,
when resistance to both is his daily business, and, if successful, his
greatest glory; but, through his medium, the same salutary influence
would speedily extend itself to the people at large. Can the paramount
obligation of these cardinal virtues ever be felt by them as it ought,
while they imagine that, on such easy terms as those of putting on a wig
and gown, a man obtains, and on the most important of all occasions, an
exemption from both? (Vol. V, pp. 313-25.)

* * * * *

[Having commented that a wife’s evidence is admissible against her
husband when he is accused of inflicting personal injury on her, Bentham
adds a note on the exclusion of a first wife’s evidence in cases of
bigamy, on the grounds that she is the only lawful wife. Mill’s comment
(in square brackets) completes the footnote.]

Technical law is never consistent, even in its badness. On a prosecution
for bigamy, the first husband or wife is not admissible to prove the
fact of the former marriage. But, after a long period of uncertainty, it
has been settled as late as the year 1817, that in any collateral suit
or proceeding between third persons, the rule is quite different:76 a
person may therefore be incidentally charged with bigamy by the
testimony of the first wife or husband, and with the effect of
punishment, viz. in the shape of loss of character; a punishment not the
less real, for being inflicted by other hands than those of the
executioners of the law. (Vol. V, pp. 336-7.)

* * * * *

[Bk. IX, Pt. IV, Chap. v, on exclusion of evidence by husbands and
wives, is concluded by Mill’s comments, headed “Further remarks by the
Editor.”]

The exclusion of the testimony of husband and wife, for or against each
other, is in Edition: current; Page: [65] the number of the exclusions
which, in an article already alluded to, are defended by the Edinburgh
Review:

yet not entirely, [says the reviewer,] on account of that dread
entertained by the English law, of conjugal feuds, though these are
frequently of the most deadly character. But the reason just given, in
the case of the priest, applies; [this refers to the opinion of Mr.
Bentham, that the disclosure, by a catholic priest, of the secrets
confided to him by a confessing penitent, should not be required or
permitted]77 for the confidence between married persons makes their
whole conversation an unreserved confession; and they also could never
be contradicted but by the accused: while external circumstances might
be fabricated with the utmost facility, to give apparent confirmation to
false charges. But our stronger reason is, that the passions must be too
much alive, where the husband and wife contend in a court of justice, to
give any chance of fair play to the truth. It must be expected, as an
unavoidable consequence of the connexion by which they are bound, that
their feelings, either of affection or hatred, must be strong enough to
bear down the abstract regard for veracity, even in judicial
depositions.78

Want of space might form some excuse to this writer for not having said
more; but it is no apology for the vagueness and inconclusiveness of
what he has said.

The confidence, say you, between married persons makes their whole
conversation an unreserved confession? So much the better: their
testimony will be the more valuable. It is a strange reason for
rejecting an article of evidence, that it is distinguished from other
articles by its fulness and explicitness.

The reviewer must have read Mr. Bentham very carelessly, to suppose that
his reason for excluding the testimony of the priest is, because the
discourse of the penitent is an “unreserved confession:” this would be a
reason for admitting, not for rejecting, the evidence. The true reason
for the exclusion in the case of the confessor, is, that punishment
attaching itself upon the discharge of a religious duty would in effect
be punishment for religious opinions. Add to which, that the confidence
reposed by the criminal in his confessor has not for its object the
furtherance, nor the impunity, of offences; but for its effect, as far
as it goes, the prevention of them. To seal the lips of the wife gives a
facility to crime: to seal those of the confessor gives none; but, on
the contrary, induces a criminal to confide the secret of his guilt to
one whose only aim will in general be to awaken him to a sense of it.
Lastly, it is to be remembered that, by compelling the disclosure in the
case of the confessor, no information would ultimately be gained: the
only effect being, that, on the part of the criminal, no such
revelations would be made. Not so in the case of the wife, who may have
come to a knowledge of the crime independently of any voluntary
confession by her criminal husband.

That the testimony of the wife could not be contradicted but by the
accused person, her husband, and vice versâ,—which, if true, would be a
good reason for distrusting, but no reason for rejecting their
evidence,—is, in the majority of Edition: current; Page: [66] cases, not
true. What the husband and wife have told one another in secret, no one
but they two can know; and, consequently, what either of them says on
the subject of it, nobody but the other has it in his power to
contradict. But is not this likewise the case between the criminal and
his accomplice, or between the criminal and any other person, with
respect to any fact which occurred when they two were the only persons
present? while, with respect to all other facts, the testimony of
husband or wife would, if false, be just as capable of being refuted by
counter-evidence as the testimony of any other witness.

The aphorism on which the reviewer founds what he calls his “stronger
reason,” one would not have wondered at meeting with in a German
tragedy; but it is certainly what one would never have looked for in a
discourse upon the law of evidence. Strange as it may sound in
sentimental ears, I am firmly persuaded that many, nay most, married
persons pass through life without either loving or hating one another to
any such uncontrollable excess. Suppose them however to do so, and their
“feelings,” whether of affection or of hatred, to be “strong enough to
bear down the abstract regard for veracity:” will they, in addition to
this “abstract regard,”—a curious sort of a regard,—be strong enough to
bear down the fear of punishment and of shame? Will they render the
witness proof against the vigilance and acuteness of a sagacious and
experienced cross-examiner? Or rather, are not the witnesses who are
under the influence of a strong passion, precisely those who, when
skilfully dealt with, are least capable of maintaining the appearance of
credibility, even when speaking the truth; and, à fortiori, least likely
to obtain credit for a lie?

But I waste time, and fill up valuable space, in arguing seriously
against such solemn trifling. (Vol. V, pp. 345-9.)

* * * * *

[The following note occurs in the midst of Bentham’s argument that
justice is deprived of valuable evidence by the exclusion of evidence by
“a party to the cause, for or against himself” (Bk. IX, Pt. V, Chap.
i).]

The Edinburgh Review, in an article which has been several times
referred to, makes a long attack upon “the French method of
interrogating persons under a charge” with a view to the extraction of
their self-criminative testimony.79 It is not necessary to enter
particularly into the objections advanced by the reviewer against this
practice. They may all be summed up in two propositions, neither of
which seems very likely to be disputed: 1. that an innocent man may very
possibly be unable to furnish, all at once, those explanations which are
necessary to make his Edition: current; Page: [67] innocence appear; and
2. that, such inability on the part of a prisoner not being conclusive
evidence of his guilt, it would be very wrong to treat it as if it were
so.

The reviewer does not state whether his objection extends to the
examination of the prisoner on the occasion of the definitive trial: but
we may presume that it does not, since his arguments do not apply to
that case. By that time, the prisoner may reasonably be supposed to be
prepared with all such explanations as the circumstances will admit of;
and if he is not, I fear it will go hard with him, whether the
insufficient explanations which he does give, are given through his
advocate only, or partly from the lips of his advocate and partly from
his own.

But, even against the preliminary interrogation of the prisoner as soon
as possible after his apprehension, the objections, it is evident, are
altogether inconclusive. That non-responsion and evasive responsion are
strong articles of circumstantial evidence against a prisoner, is what
will hardly be denied:—that, by an inconsiderate judge, more than the
due weight may be attached to them, is a casualty to which they are
liable, in common with all other sorts of circumstantial evidence, but
not more liable than other sorts. Were the possibility of deception a
sufficient ground for putting an exclusion upon evidence, can it be
necessary to say, that no evidence would be admitted at all? But the
exclusionists never seem to consider, that if deception may arise from
evidence, it is still more likely to arise from the want of evidence.

After all, the reviewer, when he comes to his practical conclusion,
explains away the whole effect of his previous arguments, and ends by
prescribing

a middle course, which leaves the party to judge and act for himself. If
he is blessed with self-command, and is in possession of the means of at
once refuting his pursuers, why should his vindication be delayed? but
as he may be incompetent to do so, or unprovided with the necessary
proofs, let him be calmly told by the magistrate, that no unfair
inference will be drawn from his reserving his defence for a more
convenient season.80

That something of this sort should be told him, is obviously proper; to
which I will add, that no promise could be more safely given than a
promise not to draw any unfair inferences; though it may be doubted how
far such an assurance would quiet the alarms of an innocent prisoner,
until he should be informed what inferences the magistrate would
consider unfair. The proper thing to tell him would be, that if, from
the unexpectedness of the accusation, he felt his faculties to be in too
bewildered a state to qualify him for making a clear statement of the
truth (and of this the magistrate would be in some measure able to
judge), or if any sufficient reason rendered him unable or averse to
give the necessary explanations without delay, he would be at liberty to
say as little or as much as he pleased; but that if, when the trial
should come on, and he should come to be finally examined, the
explanations afforded by him should appear to be such as might with
equal facility and propriety have been given on the spot; his having
refrained from giving Edition: current; Page: [68] them at that time,
would be considered as strong evidence (though even then, not conclusive
evidence) of his guilt. (Vol. V, pp. 352-4.)

* * * * *

[Bentham examines, in Bk. IX, Pt. V, Chap. iii, the inconsistencies of
English law concerning the admissibility of defendant’s evidence. He
treats first criminal cases, and then turns to civil ones, on which he
says, in part:] Speak indeed he [the defendant] may; if mere speaking
will content him, without speaking to any purpose. For, in cases of this
class, defendant and plaintiff standing on even ground, and without any
nook for compassion (real or hypocritical) to plant itself upon, and
cry, Hear him! hear him! whatever he may (if he have courage) insist
upon saying, will be watched by men with sieves in their hands; and
whatever testimony he may take upon him to throw in along with his
matter of argument and observations, will be carefully separated, and
forbidden to be lodged in the budget of evidence.

There is one case, according to Phillipps, in which the evidence of the
defendant is allowed to be given in his own behalf, on the occasion of
an action in the common law courts. The case I allude to, is that of an
action for a malicious prosecution, “where it seems,” says Phillipps,
“to have been understood, that the evidence which the defendant himself
gave on the trial of the indictment, may, under certain circumstances,
be received in his favour on the trial of the action.” (Phillipps, Vol.
I, p. 66.)

Observe that in this, as in so many other cases, evidence which might
without any trouble be obtained in a good shape, is carefully put into a
bad one. What the defendant said on the first occasion, may be received
in his favour on the second; though by what evidence, except hearsay
evidence, he can be proved to have said it (unless the judge’s notes
happen to have been preserved) is not clear: while the defendant
himself, who is there in court, ready to be examined, and without the
slightest inconvenience in the shape of delay, vexation, or expense,
stands peremptorily debarred from opening his mouth.

Whether he is allowed in this case to give evidence for himself, or
no,—certain however it is, that in this one case his wife is allowed to
give evidence for him, which, in the opinion of Phillipps, seems to be
the same thing. The reason given by Lord Holt for admitting in evidence
the oath of the defendant’s wife, to prove the felony committed, is as
follows: “For otherwise, one that should be robbed would be under an
intolerable mischief: if he prosecuted for such robbery, and the party
should be acquitted, the prosecutor would be liable to an action for a
malicious Edition: current; Page: [69] prosecution, without the
possibility of making a good defence, though the cause of prosecution
were ever so pregnant.”81 The reason is a good one; but admit its
goodness, and what becomes of the exclusionary rule? (Vol. V, pp.
388-9.)

* * * * *

[Arguing against the requirement of a second witness in cases of
perjury, Bentham points to the error in] supposing that any rational
conclusion can be drawn from the mere circumstance of number, as between
accusers and defendants, without taking into the account the particular
circumstances of each case.

It is on the same ridiculous plea, that the testimony of a single
witness has been determined in English law to be insufficient to ground
a conviction for perjury: “because,” we are told, “there would only be
one oath against another.”82 Irrefragable logic this, if all oaths be
exactly of equal value, no matter what may be the character of the
swearer, and to the action of what interests he may be exposed. It is on
the same ground, that no decree can be made, in equity, on the oath of
one witness, against the defendant’s answer on oath. (See the following
section.) (Vol. V, p. 469.)

* * * * *

[After pointing out that in English law, two witnesses are required to
support a conviction of treason, Bentham has high sport with the notion
that the king is less protected from assassination than any subject.
Mill’s note is appended to this comment:] Picking a pocket of a
handkerchief, value one shilling, is capital felony; its being the
king’s pocket does not make it treason: for picking the king’s pocket of
his handkerchief, a man might be hanged on the testimony of a single
witness: shooting the king being treason, a man may shoot the king in
the presence of any body he pleases, and not a hair of the murderer’s
head can be touched for it. Blessed laws! under which it is as safe
again, to shoot the king as to pick his pocket!

This singular rule of evidence is now no longer in force as regards any
direct Edition: current; Page: [70] attempt against the person of the
king, but it still subsists as regards any other kind of treason.83
(Vol. V, p. 487.)

* * * * *

[Mill’s self-explanatory note, the first paragraph below (in italics and
square brackets), appears at the end of Bentham’s part of Bk. IX, Pt.
VI, Chap. iv, “Exclusion by Rendering a Particular Species of Evidence
Conclusive.” Mill’s part of the chapter follows immediately in normal
type.]

This chapter having been left unfinished by the Author, what follows has
been added to it by the Editor. A few paragraphs, which for distinction
have been put in inverted commas, consist of fragments, written at
different times by Mr. Bentham: for the remainder the Editor is alone
responsible.

This is not the only sort of case in which the sworn, but
uncrossexamined and self-serving testimony of a party to the suit, is
received as conclusive, that is, to the exclusion of counter-evidence.
“The practice in chancery,” we are informed by Phillipps,* “invariably
is, that a party is entitled only to extracts of letters, if the other
party will swear that the passages extracted are the only parts relating
to the subject matter.”

There is another rule, by which a man’s own testimony is rendered
conclusive evidence in his favour, and that too on such a subject as
that of his own character. The witness indeed in this case is not a
party in the suit; but for any thing that appears, he may be the vilest
of malefactors; and he is, at any rate, under the influence of an
interest, which is one of the strongest of all interests in the bulk of
mankind, while even in the vilest it cannot be a weak one. A witness, as
we have seen,† is not compellable to answer any question, the answer to
which, if true, might tend to degrade his character: if, however, he
chooses to answer, the party Edition: current; Page: [71] who asks the
question is bound by his answer, and is not allowed to falsify it by
counter-evidence.*

The above seem to be the only instances worth mentioning, in which an
article of orally delivered testimonial evidence has in English law been
made conclusive. The instances in which similar effect has been given to
an article of circumstantial evidence are innumerable; and many of them
have been already brought to view.

1. As often as a decision has been given against either of the parties
in a suit, on no other ground than that of his having failed, at a
particular stage of the suit, to perform any operation which has been
rendered necessary at that stage by technical rules, to the obtainment
of justice; so often has the non-performance of that operation been
taken as evidence, and conclusive evidence, of what is called in the
language of lawyers want of merits, that is, of the badness of his
cause.

“Of the justice of the demand, whatsoever it be, that happens to be made
upon the defendant, provided the suit does not happen to be called a
criminal one, non-resistance on his part is regarded and acted upon as
sufficient evidence; and to the plaintiff possession is given of the
object of his demand, just as if the justness of it had been proved.
Even a lawyer will not pretend that on any ground of reason the
inference is a conclusive one. Pecuniary inability, especially under the
load of factitious expense imposed every where by the technical system,
is another cause equally adequate to the production of the effect. In
every part of the empire of the technical system, and more particularly
in England, this inability will have place in the case of a vast
majority of the body of the people.

“If a presumption thus slight were not received in proof of the justice
of the plaintiff’s claim, and in the character of conclusive
evidence,—if such direct proof of it as were to be had, were in every
instance to be required,—a number of malâ fide suits, with the produce
of which, the coffers of the man of law are at present swelled, would
have no existence.

“Thus it is, that under the technical system, every court calling itself
a court of justice is in effect an open shop, in which, for the benefit
of the shopkeeper and his associates, licenses are sold at a fixed, or
at least at a limited, price,—empowering the purchaser to oppress and
ruin at his choice any and every individual, obnoxious to him or not, on
whom indigence or terror impose the inability of opposing effectual
resistance.

Edition: current; Page: [72]
“The real condition in which the great majority of the people, in the
capacity of suitors, have been placed by the factitious expenses
manufactured by the man of law, is an object too reproachful to him to
be suffered to remain undisguised. In this, as in every other part of
the system, extortion and oppression find in mendacity an ever-ready
instrument. The real condition in which the suitor has been involved,
the misfortune of defencelessness through indigence, is put out of
sight: a crime is imputed to him in its stead: and for that crime, not
only without proof, but under the universally notorious consciousness of
his innocence, he is punished. Contempt is the word constantly employed
to designate this imaginary crime. The real, the universally notorious,
causes of his inaction, are fear and impotence. But a man cannot be
punished avowedly for fear: he cannot be punished for impotence: mankind
would not submit themselves to tyranny so completely without a mask.
Adding calumny to mendacity, they pretend to regard his inaction as
originating in contempt; and it is on this mendacious accusation of
their own forging, that they ground the ruin they inflict on him under
the name of punishment.”

In equity, the defendant, who, from his own poverty or ignorance, or the
carelessness of his lawyer, is so unfortunate as not to put in an answer
to the plaintiff’s bill, stands a great chance (if a poor man) of being
a prisoner for life. He is committed to gaol for the contempt: and as he
is not released without payment of fees,—unless he has money to pay
these fees, or can find some one else who will pay them for him, he must
remain there all his life. Instances of this sort have not unfrequently,
through the medium of the newspapers, been presented to the public eye.

2. As often as a contract, or any other legally operative instrument, is
pronounced null and void, on account of the non-observance of any
formality; so often, the sort of exclusion of which we are here
treating, has place. A man claims a landed estate, under the will of the
last proprietor. The will is produced in court: it is found to have the
signatures of two witnesses only, instead of three;84 or one of the
three is proved to have put his name to the will in the absence of the
testator: the will is rejected, and the party loses his estate. The
rejection of the will may, perhaps, be considered as a penalty, for
non-compliance with that injunction of the law which requires that
certain formalities should be observed. Considered in this point of
view, it has been shewn in a previous Book* to be unnecessary and
objectionable. But it may also be regarded as grounded on the
presumption that the will was spurious, or unfairly obtained. Here then
is this one circumstance, viz. non-observance of legally prescribed
formalities, received as conclusive evidence of spuriousness or
unfairness. The fallacy of this supposition has also been made Edition:
current; Page: [73] sufficiently manifest in the Book already referred
to. This article of circumstantial evidence, which is conclusive in law,
is so far from being conclusive in reason, that it scarcely amounts even
to the slightest presumption, until two things be ascertained: first,
that the party knew that these formalities were prescribed; and
secondly, that compliance with them was in his power. That spurious or
unfair instruments have not frequently been prevented by the peremptory
requisition of these formalities, is more than I would undertake to say:
but an assertion which one may venture upon without much danger of
mistake, is, that there is scarcely an instance of any instrument’s
having been actually set aside for the want of them, in which there was
not a considerable, if not a preponderant, probability of its being
genuine.

3. Almost all estoppels are exclusions of the sort now under
consideration. You are estopped, say the lawyers, from proving so and
so: the meaning of which is, that they will not permit you to prove it.
For this they have sometimes one pretext, sometimes another: something
which you yourself have said or done; or something which has been said
or done by somebody else.

There is a great variety of instances in which they tell you that you
are estopped by a previous decision, either of the same court, or of
some other court of justice: these have been already noticed under the
head of adscititious evidence.* At other times you are estopped by what
they term an admission. You are said to make an admission, if you say or
do any thing, or if any other person says or does any thing for you,
which a judge construes as an acknowledgment on your part, that a
certain event has happened; that is, any thing from which he chooses to
infer its happening: after which, though every body, who knows any thing
about the matter, knows that it has not happened, and would say so if
asked, the judge, to save the trouble of asking, chooses to act exactly
as if it had.

Admissions are of two kinds, express or presumed; and the former are
either admissions upon record, or admissions not upon record. It is a
rule with lawyers, that no evidence can be received to dispute
admissions upon record,† that is, admissions in the pleadings. If this
rule went no farther than to confine the evidence to such points as are
actually in dispute between the parties, it would be a good rule. In a
law book, a man may reckon himself fortunate if he hits upon a rule
which has a reason: if he expect, that where the reason stops, the rule
will stop too, it is very rarely that he will not be disappointed. One
example will serve as well as a thousand. When a man, against whom an
action is brought for a sum of money, denies that the plaintiff is
entitled to the whole sum which he claims, but admits that he has a just
claim upon him for a smaller sum,—the practice is, for the defendant to
pay into court the amount of the sum which he acknowledges to be
Edition: current; Page: [74] due, that it may remain in deposit until
the cause is decided. This payment, lawyers choose to call an
“acknowledgment upon record;” and now mark the consequence: “the party
cannot recover it back, although he has paid it wrongfully, or by
mistake.”*

As for extrajudicial admissions, it is not always that they are even
receivable; when they are, they are generally taken for conclusive: for
it may be observed, in regard to this part of the law of evidence, as in
regard to so many other parts of it, that neither the lawyers by whom it
was made, nor the lawyers by whom it has been expounded, ever seem to
know that there is any middle course between taking an article of
evidence for conclusive, and rejecting it altogether. Accordingly, in
reading the dicta of judges, or the compilations of institutional
writers from those dicta, one is continually at a loss to know what they
mean. In speaking of this or that evidentiary circumstance, what they
tell you concerning it, is, that it is evidence: now and then
superadding, as it were for the sake of variety, the epithet good to the
general appellative, evidence. Would you know whether they mean that it
is conclusive, or only that it is admissible? Observe their actions: see
whether they send it to a jury: for any thing that you can collect from
their words, they are as likely to mean the one as the other.

The following will serve as an example, as well of the ambiguity of
which I have been speaking, as of the sort of logic which passes for
irrefragable, under the dominion of technical rules. When a party,
interested in the cause, makes an admission against his interest, if he
has not made it by mistake, it is nearly the best evidence against him
that you can have: ergo, it ought to be taken for conclusive against
him, when he has made it by mistake; ergo, the admission of a person who
is merely a nominal plaintiff, and who is not interested in the cause,
ought to be conclusive against the person who is. So, at least, it was
decided in the case of Bauerman v. Radenius,† in which the admission of
the plaintiffs on the record, though not the parties really interested,
was received as conclusive, and the plaintiffs were nonsuited. I say,
received as conclusive; because, when a plaintiff is nonsuited, that is
to say, when his claim is dismissed by the judge without going to a
jury, it is because, if he had gone to a jury, the jury must have found
a verdict against him; which would have been a bar to any future
prosecution of the same claim: whereas a nonsuit leaves it still in his
power to bring a fresh action, after remedying the defect which would
have compelled the jury to find against him. The court of King’s Bench
afterwards affirmed, that is, confirmed, the nonsuit: on which occasion
Mr. Justice Lawrence said, “The present plaintiffs either have or have
not an interest: but it must be considered that they have an interest,
in order to support the action; and if they have, an admission made by
them that they have no cause of action, is admissible evidence.”85 This
judge, here, with much naïveté, Edition: current; Page: [75] displays
the manner in which, under the influence of technical rules, what is
known to be false is taken for true, in order that what is evidently
unjust may be done. He knew as well as the nominal plaintiffs knew, that
they had not an interest in the cause: but what of that? The law knew
that they had.

There is an overflow of legal learning, on the question, what effect to
your prejudice shall be given to the admission of your agent: and here
again recurs the usual alternative: it is either not received, or it is
received as conclusive: it either excludes all other evidence, or it is
itself excluded. Thus, in one case,* “a letter from the defendant’s
clerk, informing the plaintiff that a policy had been effected, was held
to be good evidence [meaning here conclusive evidence] of the existence
of the policy; and the defendant was not allowed to prove that the
letter had been written by mistake, and that the policy had not been
made:” while, in another case,† “where the fact sought to be
established, was, that a bond had been executed by the defendant to the
plaintiff, which the defendant had got possession of, the Master of the
Rolls refused to admit, as evidence of this fact, the declaration of the
defendant’s agent, who had been employed to keep the bond for the
plaintiff’s benefit, and who, on its being demanded by the plaintiff,
informed him that it had been delivered to the defendant.” It might seem
to a cursory reader, on comparing these two decisions, either that the
predilection of judges for bad evidence was such, that, rejecting an
admission in other cases, they were willing to receive it upon the
single condition of its being made by mistake; or that, in laying down
rules of evidence, blind caprice was the only guide. In this apparent
inconsistency, however, there is a principle, though no one would have
thought it: it is this: that the admissions of an agent are not to be
received, unless “made by him, either at the time of his making an
agreement about which he is employed, or in acting within the scope of
his authority.”86 It is not, that what he says on these occasions is
more likely to be true than what he says on other occasions: it is, that
“it is impossible to say a man is precluded from questioning or
contradicting any thing that any person may have asserted, as to his
conduct or agreement, merely because that person has been an agent:”87
and as it would be unjust to preclude him from contradicting it, it is
not permitted so much as to be heard.

Besides these express admissions, there is an extensive assortment of
presumed ones; when a man “precludes himself from disputing a fact, by
the tenour of his conduct and demeanour:”‡ the meaning of which is, that
the court will presume an Edition: current; Page: [76] admission from
any thing that a man does, which they think he would not have done if
the fact had not been true. This is the principle: but as to the extent
of its application, there is no criterion of it except the Index to the
Reports. It has usually been applied only to cases in which the
presumption afforded by the act is really strong, and might reasonably
be held conclusive in the absence of counter-evidence, though certainly
not to the exclusion of counter-evidence, since there is not so much as
one of the cases in which the presumption is not liable to fail. Without
touching upon the grounds of failure which are peculiar to this or that
case, there is one obvious ground which is common to them all. A man’s
actions can never prove the truth of a fact, except in so far as his
belief of it is evidence of its truth: and to hinder a man from proving
that a thing did not happen, because at some former period he believed
that it did, even if you were sure that he believed it (which in general
you are not, it being only inferred from his actions), would be unjust
in any case, but is more especially absurd, when the fact in question is
one of those complicated, and frequently recondite, facts, which are
constitutive of title.

Take a few instances.

“By accounting with a person as farmer of the tolls of a turnpike, a
party is estopped from disputing the validity of his title, when sued by
account stated for those tolls.

“By paying tithes to the plaintiff on former occasions, a defendant
admits the right of the plaintiff to an action for not setting out
tithes.

“Where a party rented glebe lands of a rector, and had paid him rent, he
was not permitted, in an action for use and occupation, to dispute his
lessor’s title, by proving that his presentation was simoniacal.

“In actions of use and occupation, when the tenant has occupied by the
permission of the plaintiff, he cannot dispute the plaintiff’s title,
although he may shew that it is at an end.

“In an action of ejectment, by a landlord against his tenant, the tenant
cannot question the title of his landlord, although he is at liberty to
shew that it has expired.”*

In all these instances, the presumption upon which, if upon any thing,
the decision must have been grounded, is, that if the plaintiff had not
really had a good title, the defendant would not have paid rent, tithe,
etc. to him, as the case may be. To justify the rendering this
presumption conclusive, it would be necessary, among a crowd of other
suppositions, to suppose that a tenant never paid rent to the de facto
landlord, without first demanding his title deeds, and going over them
with a lawyer, for the purpose of assuring himself that they did not
contain any flaw.

4. A whole host of exclusions lurk in the admired rule, that the best
evidence which the nature of the case admits of, is to be required: a
rule which seems to Edition: current; Page: [77] please every body, and
with the more reason, as, having no distinct meaning of its own, it is
capable of receiving any which any one thinks proper to attach to it.
There is a charm, too, in the sound of the words best evidence, which no
lawyer, and scarcely any non-lawyer, is able to resist. The following
seems to be nearly the train of thought (in so far as any thing like
thought can be said to have place) which passes through the mind of the
submissive and admiring student, when he hears this maxim delivered ex
cathedrâ, as something which, like Holy Writ, is to be believed and
adored. Good evidence, it naturally occurs to him, is a good thing: à
fortiori therefore (it is unnecessary to say), the best evidence cannot
but be a good thing: what, however, can be more proper, than always to
require, and insist upon having, the best of every thing? How admirable,
therefore, the rule which requires the best evidence (whether it is to
be had or no); and how admirable the system of law, which is in a great
measure made up of such rules!

As a preliminary to praising this rule, a desirable thing would be, to
understand it: for this, however, you have no chance but by looking at
the practice: the attempt to find a meaning for the words would be lost
labour. The meaning attached to it by lawyers has been different,
according to the different purposes which they have had to serve by it.
One use which they have made of it, is, to serve as a reason for
excluding an inferior and less trustworthy sort of evidence, when a more
trustworthy sort, from the same source, is to be had: as, for example, a
transcript, when the original is in existence and forthcoming. Applied
to this purpose, the rule, if it were not so vague, would be justly
entitled to the appellation of a good rule: the purpose, at any rate,
(with the limitations which have been seen in the Book on Makeshift
Evidence), must be allowed to be a good purpose. Another use which has
been made by lawyers, at times, of this rule, is, to enable a judge, at
no greater expense than that of calling a particular sort of evidence
the best evidence, to treat it as conclusive in favour of the party who
produces it; or the non-production of it as conclusive against the party
who, it is supposed, ought to have produced it; in both cases putting an
exclusion upon all other evidence: and it is in this application of the
rule, that it presents a demand for consideration in this place.

“Take a sample of their best evidence,—of that best evidence which, by
such its bestness, puts an exclusion upon all other evidence.

“Speculative Position or Antecedent;—Written evidence is better than
parol evidence. Practical Inference or Conclusion;—Therefore, in case of
a contract, when there exists written evidence of it, with certain
formalities for its accompaniments, oral evidence is, or is not, to be
admitted, in relation to the purport of such contract. Is, or is not;
whichever is most agreeable and convenient to the judge. Such is the
plain and true account of the matter: for distinctions are spun out of
distinctions; and, the light of reason, by which they would be all
consumed, being effectually shut out, on and on the thread might
continue to be spun without end.

Edition: current; Page: [78]
“Observe the inconsistency.

“In English law, circumstantial evidence of the weakest kind, comparison
of hands, by persons acquainted, or not acquainted, with the hand of the
person in question,—or even the bare tenour of the instrument, i.e. the
circumstance of its purporting upon the face of it to have been executed
(i.e. recognized) by the person or persons therein mentioned,—this
circumstance, if coupled with the evidentiary circumstance ex custodiâ,
is (if the assumed date of the instrument be as much as thirty years
anterior to the day of production) held sufficient, and, in default of
counter-evidence, conclusive.

“A dozen or a score of alleged percipient witnesses, all ready to concur
in deposing that, to the provisions in the instrument mentioned, this or
that other had been agreed to be added or substituted,—shall they be
received, and heard to say as much? Oh, no; that must not be; it is
against our rule about best evidence.”

The general rule on this subject, is, that oral evidence is not
admissible “to contradict, or vary, or add to, the terms of a written
agreement.”* Cut down as this rule is, by almost innumerable exceptions,
there is still enough of it left to do much mischief. The exceptions, if
their practical effect be looked to, are reasonable, as narrowing pro
tanto the extent of a bad rule: in principle, however, there is scarce
one of them which is tenable, unless it be first granted that the rule
is absurd. It would be difficult, for example, to discover how, in
respect of the propriety of admitting oral evidence to shew the
abandonment of a written agreement, it should make any difference
whether the agreement was or was not under seal; or why, in equity, on a
bill for the specific performance of a written agreement, evidence to
prove that, by reason of accident or mistake, the written instrument
does not correctly express the agreement, should, if tendered by the
defendant, be in certain cases admitted; if tendered by the plaintiff,
refused. The origin of the exceptions to this rule, as well as to so
many other technical rules, is visible enough. They were established by
the same sort of authority which established the rules, viz. that of
judges, deciding pro hâc vice,88 under the guidance of no principle, but
in accordance with the interest or whim of the moment, or frequently
with the laudable view of doing justice, notwithstanding technical
rules. A judge sees plainly, that, in this or that particular case, if
he adhere to the rule, he will do injustice; and without daring to set
it aside, or even allowing himself to suppose that a rule which had
descended from wise ancestors could be other than a good one, he has
honesty enough to wish to do justice in the cause in hand, and
accordingly cuts into the rule with a new exception for every new
instance which presents itself to him of its mischievous operation,
taking care never to carry the exception one jot farther than is
strictly necessary for his immediate purpose: another judge follows, and
takes another nibble at the rule, Edition: current; Page: [79] always
upon the same diminutive scale; and so on. Hence it comes, that, at
length, after the lapse of a few centuries, the body of the law,
considered as a whole, has become a little more just, and a great deal
more unintelligible:—while the law books have degenerated from the
primitive simplicity of the old textbooks, where every thing was
comprehended under a few simple principles, (in which, whatever
trespasses you might find against justice or common sense, you will find
none against consistency,—and which would be perfect, if conduciveness
to human happiness were a quality that could, without inconvenience, be
dispensed with in law); and have swelled into an incoherent mass of
mutually conflicting decisions, none of them covering more than a minute
spot in the field of law, and which the most practised memory would
vainly strive to retain, or the most consummate logic to reduce to a
common principle.

Oral evidence, it seems, is receivable to explain, in many cases in
which it would not be receivable to vary, the terms of an agreement. The
general rule is, that, in case of a latent ambiguity,—that is to say, an
ambiguity which does not appear on the face of the instrument, but is
raised by extrinsic evidence,—extrinsic evidence will be received to
explain it: thus, if a testator bequeaths to John Stiles his estate of
Blackacre, and it appears that he has two estates known by that name,
oral evidence will be received to shew which of the two he meant.
Provided always, that there be no possibility of giving effect to the
instrument in terminis,89 without the aid of other evidence:* for if it
have a definite meaning, though a different one from that of the
testator, it does not signify. When they cannot by any means contrive to
give execution to the ipsissima verba of the will, then, it seems, they
will condescend to inquire what the testator intended.

Not so when the ambiguity is patent, that is, apparent on the face of
the instrument. In this case, the door is inexorably shut upon all
extrinsic evidence; and if the intention of the party cannot be inferred
from the context, “the clause will be void, on account of its
uncertainty.”90 You are unskilled in composition: after making mention
in your will of two persons, your brother and your younger son, you
bequeath to him an estate: in this case it may possibly admit of
dispute, to which of the two you meant to bequeath it; what, however,
can admit of no dispute, is, that you meant to bequeath it to one or
other of them: as, therefore, it is doubtful whether you intended that A
should have it, or B, the judge will not give it to either of them, but
gives it to C, the heir-at-law, whom it is certain you intended not to
have it. Or, if he gives it to either of the two persons who, and who
alone, can Edition: current; Page: [80] possibly have been meant, he
gives it upon the slightest imaginable presumption from the context.
There were twenty persons standing by when you executed the will, all of
whom knew perfectly well, from your declarations at the time, which of
the two parties in question you meant, but none of whom he will suffer
to be heard. And this is what lawyers call requiring the best evidence.

For this rule two reasons have been given: one a technical, that is,
avowedly an irrational one; the other, one which pretends to be
rational. The technical reason is the production of Lord Bacon: it is
this: “the law will not couple and mingle matter of specialty, which is
of the higher account, with matter of averment, which is of inferior
account in law.”91 For those to whose conceptions the incongruity of so
irregular a mixture might fail to present itself in colours sufficiently
glaring, a subsequent lord chancellor brought forth the following less
recondite reason; that the admission of oral evidence in explanation of
patent ambiguities, “would tend to put it in the power of witnesses to
make wills for testators:”92 an objection which would be very strong
against any one mode of proof, if it did not unhappily apply to every
other.

All hearing of evidence lets in some danger of falsehood. What, however,
was probably meant, is, that the admissibility of oral evidence to
explain a will, would frustrate the intention of the law in requiring
preappointed evidence, a better sort of evidence than oral, and less
likely to be false. If this be the meaning, it is enunciated far too
generally. It is true that preappointed evidence, considered as a genus,
is better than oral. But it is not true that every particular article of
the former is better than the best conceivable article of the latter. It
is not true that the signature of three witnesses is better, caeteris
paribus, than the oral depositions of twenty. Yet this rule excludes the
latter evidence, on the plea of its inferiority to the former.*

Edition: current; Page: [81]
Another consequence of the technical maxim, that written evidence is
better than parol, (a maxim which, like almost all other general maxims
of technical law, is not true in more than half the cases which it
extends to), is the exclusion, in a great number of cases, of oral
evidence to prove that there exists a written document evidentiary of a
particular fact. The judges, on the occasion of a reference made to them
in the course of the late queen’s trial, declared that “the contents of
every written paper are, according to the ordinary and well-established
rules of evidence, to be proved by the paper itself, and by that alone,
if the paper be in existence.”* Good: provided always it be a necessary
consequence, that a paper is forthcoming, because it is in existence.
Upon the strength of this rule, the judges decided, that the supposed
writer of a letter could not be questioned concerning the contents of
the letter, unless the letter itself were first produced, and the
witness asked whether he wrote it. Thus, the only evidence, perhaps,
which you have got, and that too of so good a kind as the testimony of a
writer concerning what he himself has written, is excluded, because
another sort of evidence is not produced, which would be better if you
could get it, but which, in all probability, you cannot get. The
superior evidence, though not forthcoming to any practical purpose,
cannot be shewn not to exist; and it is therefore said to be
forthcoming, to the purpose of excluding all inferior evidence.

A volume might be filled with specimens of the injustice and absurdity
which are the fruit of the rule requiring the best evidence. Take this
example among others. A written instrument, with certain formalities,
being the best evidence; if, in the written instrument, any one of these
formalities be omitted, neither the agreement, nor any other evidence of
the transaction, will be received. Thus,

a written instrument which requires a stamp, cannot be admitted in
evidence, unless it be duly stamped; and no parol evidence will be
received of its contents. If, therefore, the instrument produced is the
only legal proof of the transaction, and that cannot be admitted
Edition: current; Page: [82] for want of a proper stamp, the transaction
cannot be proved at all; as, in an action for use and occupation, if it
appear that the defendant held under a written agreement, which for want
of a stamp cannot be received, the plaintiff will not be allowed to go
into general evidence; for the agreement is the best evidence of the
nature of the occupation.*

An agreement on unstamped paper not being itself receivable, it follows
naturally enough, that if it be lost, parol evidence will not be
received of its contents; nor even if it be wrongfully destroyed by the
other party: notwithstanding another technical rule, that no one is
allowed to take advantage of his own wrong.93 But you can never guess
from the terms of a rule, to what cases it will be applied.

Take the following still more barefaced piece of absurdity, as a final
specimen of the operation of this vaunted rule.

The acts of state of a foreign government can only be proved by copies
of such acts, properly authenticated. Thus, in the case of Richardson v.
Anderson, where the counsel on the part of the defendant proposed to
give in evidence a book purporting to be a collection of treaties
concluded by America, and to be published by the authority of the
American government; and it was proposed, further, to prove, by the
American minister resident at this court, that the book produced was the
rule of his conduct; this evidence was offered as equivalent to a
regular copy of the archives in Washington: but Lord Ellenborough
rejected the evidence, and held, that it was necessary to have a copy
examined with the archives.†

We may expect in time to see a judge arise, who, more tenacious of
consistency than his predecessors, will refuse to take notice of the
existence of the city of London, unless an examined copy of the charter
of the corporation be given in evidence to prove it.

Can any exposure make this piece of technicality more ridiculous than it
is made by merely stating it?

5. I shall notice only one more instance of the species of disguised
exclusion which forms the subject of the present chapter. The sort of
evidence which, in this instance, is taken for conclusive, is the
species of official document called a record.

Records, [says Phillipps,] are the memorials of the proceedings of the
legislature, and of the king’s courts of justice, preserved in rolls of
parchment; and they are considered of such authority, that no evidence
is allowed to contradict them. Thus, if a verdict, finding several
issues, were to be produced in evidence, the opposite party would not be
allowed to shew, that no evidence was offered on one of the issues, and
that the finding of the jury was indorsed on the postea by mistake.‡

On this piece of absurdity, after what has already been said, it can
scarcely be necessary to enlarge. Somehow or other, however, lawyers
seem to have found Edition: current; Page: [83] out, that, like every
thing else which is human, so even a record,—however high its
“authority,” and however indisputable its title to the appellation
bestowed upon it by Lord Chief Baron Gilbert, “a diagram” (whatever be
meant by a diagram) “for the demonstration of right” (whatever be meant
by the demonstration of right),—is still, notwithstanding it be written
upon parchment, liable to error:94 for they have found it necessary to
determine that a record shall be conclusive proof only “that the
decision or judgment of the court was as is there stated,” and not “as
to the truth of allegations which were not material nor traversable.”95
This is fortunate: the fact of the judgment being one of the very few
matters, contained in what is called a record, which, unless by mistake,
are generally true. But, however fallible in respect of other facts, in
respect of this one fact they hold it to be infallible; and its
infallibility, itself needing no proof, supersedes all proof of the
contrary; which, therefore, as it cannot prove any thing, it would be
loss of time to hear: accordingly it is not heard, but inexorably
excluded.* (Vol. V, pp. 570-96.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [84]


OF THE RULE, THAT EVIDENCE IS TO BE CONFINED TO THE POINTS IN ISSUE.*

this rule, though good in principle, is frequently, as it is
administered, an instrument of mischief; partly from being combined with
a bad system of pleading, partly from the perverse application which has
been made of it to purposes for which it was never intended. Being an
exclusionary rule, it demands consideration in this place: and the
occasion seems a suitable one for taking notice, not of the bad effects
in the way of exclusion only, but of the bad effects of other
descriptions, which are the fruit of it.

Nothing can be more proper than to exclude all evidence irrelevant to
the points in dispute: and if the points in issue on the pleadings were
always the points, and all the points, in dispute, nothing could be more
proper than to exclude all evidence irrelevant to the points in issue.
Unhappily, however, to determine what are the points in dispute, though
the professed object of all systems of pleading, is very imperfectly
attained even under the best; and the points really at issue are often
very different from the points in issue, as they appear on the
pleadings.

In so far as the representation given in the pleadings of the state of
the question between the parties, fails to accord with the real state;
in so far, at least, as any point (that is, of course, any material
point) which is really in dispute, is omitted or mis-stated in the
pleadings; in so far, the rule, which requires that the evidence be
confined to the points in issue, those points not being the points in
dispute, operates to the exclusion of all evidence which bears only upon
the real points in dispute. This includes all cases of quashing,
grounded on what is called a flaw in the pleadings: as, for instance,
the case of a misnomer. If you indict a man under the name of John
Josiah Smith, and it turns out that his real name is John Joseph Smith,
though nobody has the least doubt of his being the person meant, and
though he himself would not have the effrontery to declare upon oath a
belief that he was not, it is no matter, the indictment is quashed:
because, the only question at issue, as indicated by the indictment,
relating to the supposed guilt of Josiah, proof, however convincing, of
the criminality of Joseph, is foreign to the issue. On the same ground,
in an action for non-residence, the designation of the parish by the
name of St. Ethelburgh, instead of Saint Ethelburgha, was held to be (as
lawyers term it) a fatal variance. On another occasion, the ground of
the quashing was, that a party to a bill of exchange had been called
Couch, instead of Crouch: on another, that the prisoner was charged with
having personated M’Cann, while the evidence went to shew, that the man
whom he had personated was M’Carn. It was not that, in any of these
instances, any real doubt existed as to the purport of the charge; nor
was it that, in the guilt of defrauding two persons with names so
different as M’Cann and M’Carn are, there was deemed to be any such
difference Edition: current; Page: [85] in point of enormity as could
justify so great a diversity of treatment: it was, that the unbending
spirit of technical rules requires that you should prove, verbatim et
literatim, the very thing which you have asserted, and, whatever may be
the real issue, ties you down to the nominal one. That the substitution
of an r for an n could in any other way be effected than by dropping the
proceeding and beginning de novo, is what you will never get any Common
Lawyer to understand.

It is the same when any other circumstance, legally material, is
misdescribed in the pleadings; as when the declaration stated an
absolute promise, and a conditional one was proved; and when a
declaration for assaulting a constable in the execution of his office,
alleged that he was constable of a particular parish, and the proof was
that he was sworn in for a liberty, of which the parish was part: a
notable reason for depriving the plaintiff of justice, or putting him to
the expense of another suit to obtain it!*

The root of the evil here lies in the system of pleading. To eradicate
it entirely, that whole system must be abolished: the mode in which what
is called pleading is now conducted, namely, by a sort of written
correspondence between two attorneys, must give place to oral pleading,
by the parties themselves, in the presence of the judge; when either no
such mistakes as the above would be made, or, if made, they would be
instantly rectified. Even under the present vicious system, however, the
quashing of the suit might be avoided much oftener than it is. There are
mistakes that are of consequence, there are others which are of none:
there are mistakes by which the opposite party may have been misled,
there are others by which he cannot. It is just, certainly, that after a
party has intimated to his adversary his intention of proving a certain
case, he should be allowed to prove that case, and no other: since, if
there were no such rule, the other party might be taken by surprise: he
might come prepared with evidence to rebut what he imagined was the
claim against him, and might find, on going to trial, that the one
really brought was quite different. This being the reason, what then is
the practical rule? Let the remedy be confined to the single case, in
which alone there is any evil to be remedied. If the opposite party has
really been misled, or put to any inconvenience by the error, he cannot,
one would think, have any reasonable objection to saying so: nor to
delivering the assertion under all those securities which are taken for
the truth of testimony in any other case. Unless, therefore, he is
willing, under these securities, to declare that, in consequence of the
error, he has been either prevented from bringing the necessary
evidence, or induced to bring evidence which was not necessary, let the
error be rectified, and the cause go on as it would have done if there
had been no error. If he be willing to make such a declaration, and if
his adversary admit, or fail to disprove its truth, let the necessary
delay (when any delay is necessary) be granted: and let the party by
whose fault the error was Edition: current; Page: [86] occasioned, be
subjected to the obligation of indemnifying the other for all bonâ fide
expenses which he can prove to have been occasioned him by it.

If the rule, in the cases above examined, is attended with bad effects,
it is not that it is a bad rule, but (as has been already intimated)
that it is accompanied by a bad system of pleading. There is, however,
another set of cases, in which the rule is applied in a sense in which
it is altogether absurd: facts being shut out, under pretence of their
not being the facts at issue, which, though unquestionably not the facts
at issue, are of the highest importance as evidentiary of those which
are.

Thus, the custom of one manor is not to be given in evidence to explain
the custom of another manor; unless it be first proved, that both manors
were formerly one, or were held under one lord; or unless the custom is
laid as a general custom of the country, or of that particular district.
Why? Because customs are “different in different manors, and in their
nature distinct.”96 But although the customs of different manors are
different, they may nevertheless be analogous; and though the custom of
one manor cannot of itself prove that of another, it may assist in
clearing up apparent inconsistencies in it, or in obviating an argument
grounded on its supposed improbability. There is also another reason, of
still greater weight, which we owe to the ingenuity of Lord Chief
Justice Raymond: “for,” says he, “if this kind of evidence were to be
allowed, the consequence seems to be, that it would let in the custom of
one manor into another, and in time bring the customs of all manors to
be the same.”* In the contemplation of so overwhelming a calamity, it is
no wonder that Lord Raymond should have lost sight of whatever
inconvenience might happen to be sustained by the party in the right,
from losing his cause for want of such explanations as a reference to
the custom of a neighbouring manor might have afforded; especially if
advertence be had to the appalling fact, that the customs of all manors
would come to be the same, if suffered to be shewn for what they are.
The reader will not, of course, indulge in any such vain fancy, as that
the custom which is good for one manor, can be good, or even endurable,
for the manor adjoining; or that the inhabitants of one village could
even exist, under rules and regulations which bind the inhabitants of
another village as well as themselves.

Again; “in a question between landlord and tenant, whether rent was
payable quarterly or half-yearly, evidence of the mode in which other
tenants of the same landlord paid their rent, is not admissible.”† Yet
what can be more strictly relevant? the determining motive in such cases
usually being the landlord’s convenience, which may reasonably be
presumed to be the same in the case of one farmer as of another.

Mr. Harrison gives an abstract of eight cases decided under the rule
that Edition: current; Page: [87] evidence is to be confined to the
points in issue; seven of which include this same sort of absurdity.

It cannot be pretended, that the evidence thus shut out is irrelevant:
and to maintain, as a general maxim, that evidence of relevant facts is
to be excluded, because those facts are not expressly averred in the
pleadings, would be too great a stretch of technicality, even for a
lawyer. For the above decisions, however, no better reason can be given;
unless that of Lord Chief Justice Raymond, which Mr. Phillipps styles an
“argument of inconvenience,”97 be so considered.

With as good reason might any other article of circumstantial evidence
be excluded. A murder, suppose, has been committed: the prisoner was
near the spot; he was known to be a personal enemy of the deceased, and
at a former interview he had threatened to kill him: stains of blood
were found upon his linen when he was apprehended, and he had a bloody
knife in his pocket. What then? None of these facts are in issue: it is
not said in the indictment, that he was an enemy of the deceased, nor
yet that he had used threatening language towards him; he is not charged
with soiling his linen; and though, indeed, it is alleged in the
indictment, that he killed and slew the deceased with a knife, value
sixpence, it is nowhere imputed to him that he stained the knife. At
this rate, the plaintiff would need to include in the declaration every
fact which, in the character of an evidentiary fact, he might have
occasion to bring to the notice of the judge.

We have now considered the rule in both its applications: its abusive
application, which can never be other than mischievous; and its
legitimate application, which, to be purely beneficial, wants only to be
combined with a rational mode of pleading. Suppose the system of
pleading reformed; this rule, to be a good one, would only need to be
always employed in its legitimate, and never in its abusive, sense. When
thus restricted, however, what does it really mean? Only, that evidence
is not to be admitted of any facts, except either those on which the
decision immediately turns, or other facts which are evidentiary of
them.

General as this rule is, greater particularity will not, in this
instance, be found to be attainable; since the question, on what facts
the decision turns, is a question, not of evidence, but of the
substantive branch of the law: it respects the probandum, not the
probans: it does not belong to the inquiry, by what sort of evidence the
facts of the case may be proved; it belongs to the inquiry, what are the
facts of which the law has determined that proof shall be required, in
order to establish the plaintiff’s claim.

This circumstance, obvious as it is, might easily be overlooked by one
who had studied the subject only in the compilations of the English
institutional writers; who, not content with directing that the evidence
be confined to the points in issue, have farther proceeded, under the
guise of laying down rules of evidence, to declare, on each occasion,
what the points in issue are.

Edition: current; Page: [88]
One whole volume98 out of two which compose Mr. Phillipps’s treatise on
the Law of Evidence,—with a corresponding portion of the other treatises
extant concerning that branch of the law,—is occupied in laying down
rules concerning the sort of evidence which should be required in
different sorts of actions or suits at law. But why should different
forms of action require different sorts of evidence? The securities by
which the trustworthiness of evidence is provided for, and the rules by
which its probative force is estimated, if for every sort of cause they
are what they ought to be, must be the same for one sort of cause as for
another. The difference is not in the nature of the proof; it is in the
nature of the facts required to be proved. There is no difference as
between different forms of action, in reason, or even in English law, in
respect of the rules relating to the competency of witnesses; nor, in
general, to the admissibility or the proof of written documents; nor in
respect of any other of the general rules of evidence. What Mr.
Phillipps (I mention him only as a representative of the rest)
professes, under each of the different forms of action, to tell you, is,
what facts, in order to support an action in that form, it is necessary
that you should prove.

Now what are these facts? In every cause, either some right is claimed,
or redress demanded for some wrong. By a wrong, is of course meant a
violation of a right. Some one or more of those facts, therefore, by
which rights are conferred, or taken away, or violated, must at any rate
be proved: and if proof of any other fact be necessary, it can only be
as evidentiary of these. If, therefore, a man professes to tell you all
the facts, some one or more or all of which you must prove, in order to
get a decision in your favour; he must furnish you, among other things,
with a complete list of all the facts which confer or take away, and all
the acts which violate, all the rights, which have been constituted and
sanctioned by law. This, accordingly, is what Mr. Phillipps and others
of his brethren attempt to do. But, to enumerate the facts which confer
or take away rights, is the main business of what is called the civil
branch of the law: to enumerate the acts by which rights are violated,
in other words to define offences, is the main business of the penal
branch. What, therefore, the lawyers give us, under the appellation law
of evidence, is really, in a great part of it, civil and penal law.

Another part of it consists of rules, which are called rules of
evidence, but which are really rules of pleading. These are laid down
under the guise of instructions for adapting the evidence to the
pleadings. It is not often, however, that a man has it in his power to
mould the evidence as he pleases: but he always has the power,—that is
to say, his lawyers have it for him,—of moulding the pleadings (those on
his own side at least) as he pleases. These rules, therefore, for
adapting the evidence to the pleadings, are, in fact, rules for adapting
the pleadings to the evidence.

Two examples will illustrate the intermixture of the substantive law
with the law of evidence; and one of them will also afford a specimen of
the intermixture of rules of evidence with rules of pleading.

Edition: current; Page: [89]
Under the title Burglary, Mr. Starkie begins by saying, that on an
indictment for burglary, it is essential to prove, 1st, a felonious
breaking and entering; 2ndly, of the dwelling-house; 3rdly, in the
night-time; 4thly, with intent to commit a felony.99 He then proceeds to
inform us, that there must be evidence of an actual or constructive
breaking: for if the entry was obtained through an open door or window,
it is no burglary. That the lifting up a latch, taking out a pane of
glass, lifting up folding-doors, breaking a wall or gates which protect
the house, the descent down a chimney, the turning a key where the door
is locked on the inside,—constitute a sufficient breaking. That where
the glass of the window was broken, but the shutter within was not
broken, it was doubted whether the breaking was sufficient, and no
judgment was given; and so on in the same strain. Who does not see that
all this is an attempt,—a lame one, it must be confessed, (which is not
the fault of the compiler), but still an attempt,—to supply that
definition of the offence of burglary, which the substantive law has
failed to afford?

The title “burglary” consists of twelve octavo pages, not one line of
which is law of evidence.100 It is all, like the part above extracted,
penal law; except three pages, which are occupied in stating how the
ownership of the dwelling-house, in which the offence was committed,
must be laid in the indictment; and which therefore belong to pleading.

To take our next example from the non-penal branch of the law: when Mr.
Phillipps, in treating of the sort of evidence required to support an
action of trover, informs us, that the plaintiff in this action must
prove that he had either the absolute property in the goods, or at least
a special property, such as a carrier has, or a consignee or factor, who
are responsible over to their principal; and further, that he must shew
either his actual possession of the goods, or his right to immediate
possession; and that he must prove a wrongful conversion of the goods by
the defendant, and that the denial of goods to him who has a right to
demand them, is a wrongful conversion; and that the defendant may shew
that the property belonged to him, or to another person under whom he
claims, or that the plaintiff had before recovered damages against a
third person for a conversion of the same goods, or that he was joint
tenant of the property with the plaintiff, or tenant in common, or
parcener, or had a lien on the goods, or a hundred other things which it
would be of no use to enumerate;101 what can be more plain, than that he
is here telling us, not by what evidence an action of trover is to be
sustained, but in what cases such an action will lie: that he is telling
us, in fact, what we are to prove, not by what evidence we are to prove
it; that he is enumerating the investitive facts, which will give to the
plaintiff a right to the service which he claims to be rendered to him
at the charge of the defendant; and the divestitive facts, by which that
right will be taken away from him.

Edition: current; Page: [90]
Yet, of this sort of matter the whole of the chapter, a few sentences
excepted, is composed; and this it is that composes the greatest part of
almost all the other chapters in the volume; which yet does not include
any sorts of causes except those which, in form at least, are non-penal.

I do not mention this as matter of blame to the institutional writers
from whose compilations the above examples are drawn. There are some
things really belonging to the subject of evidence, which it is
necessary to state in treating separately of each particular kind of
action; viz. the nature of the corresponding preappointed evidence, (if
the law has rendered any such evidence necessary to support the claim
that is the subject of the action); and also the nature and amount of
the evidence which the law renders sufficient to establish a primâ facie
case, and throw the onus probandi upon the other side. With this matter
really belonging to Evidence, it may be convenient to mix up such
matters belonging to civil and penal law, as ought to be adverted to by
the professional agent of the party who brings the action. The
arrangement which is best for the practitioner, or the student of the
law, differs as much from that which is best for the philosopher, as the
alphabetical arrangement of words in a dictionary differs from the
methodical classification of them in a philosophical grammar. (Vol. V,
pp. 597-610.)

* * * * *

[Bentham argues that “the greater the affliction” of the sufferer in a
suit appears to a witness, the less likely is “mendacious testimony,”
one reason being that, “at least in a civilized state of society,” the
“love of justice . . . may be considered as having more or less hold on
every human heart.”]

This love of justice, commonplace moralists, and even a certain class of
philosophers, would be likely to call an original principle of human
nature. Experience proves the contrary: by any attentive observer of the
progress of the human mind in early youth, the gradual growth of it may
be traced.

Among the almost innumerable associations by which this love of justice
is nourished and fostered, that one to which it probably owes the
greatest part of its strength, arises from a conviction which cannot
fail to impress itself upon the mind of every human being possessed of
an ordinary share of intellect,—the conviction, that if other persons in
general were habitually and universally to disregard the rules of
justice in their conduct towards him, his destruction would be the
speedy consequence: and that by every single instance of disregard to
those rules on the part of any one, (himself included), the probability
of future violations of the same nature is more or less increased. (Vol.
V, p. 638.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [91]
[In discussing the effect on testimony of “interest derived from sexual
connections,” Bentham considers the possibility that a wife’s adultery
will affect her probity in a case involving her husband. He appends the
following note, which Mill’s comment (in square brackets) concludes:]
Among the Lacedaemonians and Romans, though adultery was no more
dispunishable than horse-stealing, a man would lend his wife to a friend
as he would his horse. To whatsoever degree illaudable, the custom does
not the less prove the rashness of any opinion that should regard
adultery on the part of the wife as a proof of the extinction of that
partiality, by which, in a cause in which the husband is party, her
testimony will naturally be drawn towards the husband’s side.

In France, before the revolution, the effect even of notorious adultery
in diminishing that partiality was as nothing. (Vol. V, p. 671.)

* * * * *

[The following note concludes the Rationale.]


NOTE ON THE BELGIC CODE102

the code recently promulgated for the kingdom of the Netherlands, forms
in many respects, so far as regards the law of evidence, an advantageous
contrast with most European systems of jurisprudence.

Its superiority is most decided in the department of preappointed
evidence, particularly under the head of contracts: formalities being,
as it is fit they should be, prescribed, but not peremptorily so. A
contract, although informally drawn up, may yet, if signed by the
parties, be received in evidence. There is also a system of registration
for written contracts. It is an article of this code, that oral evidence
is not admissible to prove the existence, or to disprove or add to or
alter the contents, of a written contract in form; but to this
exclusionary rule there are two curious exceptions, one in favour of the
poor, the other in favour of the mercantile classes: if the property
dependant on the contract do not exceed the value of one hundred
florins, or if the transaction which gave rise to the contract be a
commercial transaction, oral evidence may be heard. These exceptions
render the code more wise and just, but much less consistent.

In the department of testimonial evidence, the only absolute exclusions
are those of the husband or wife of a party to the cause, and all
relatives of a party in the direct line: but the relatives and
connexions of a party in any collateral line (as well Edition: current;
Page: [92] as those of the husband or wife of a party) to the fourth
degree, are said to be reproché (in the Dutch version of the code,
gewraakt); as are also the presumptive heir, or servant of a party, all
persons directly or indirectly interested (pecuniarily) in the cause,
and all persons who have been convicted of robbery, theft, or swindling,
or who have suffered any afflictive or infamizing punishment.

It is probable, though not clearly apparent on the face of the code,
that the words reproché and gewraakt refer to the old rule of the Roman
law, by which the evidence of two witnesses is conclusive evidence
(plena probatio) in certain cases:103 and the meaning of these phrases
probably is, that a witness belonging to any of the classes above
enumerated, shall not be considered a witness to that purpose, viz. the
purpose of forming a plena probatio, in conjunction with one other
witness. If this be the meaning of the apparently exclusionary rule, it
tends, pro tanto, to diminish the mischievousness of the monstrous
principle of law to which it constitutes an exception.

It seems that the parties themselves cannot be heard in evidence under
this code; with this exception, however, that a party may be required to
admit or deny his own signature; and several other exceptions closely
resembling the juramentum expurgatorium and the juramentum suppletorium
of the Roman law, which have already been explained.104

Among the bad rules of Roman law which are adopted in this code, is that
which constitutes the evidence of a single witness insufficient to form
the ground of a decision. The place of a second witness may, however, in
many instances, be supplied by a written document, which is in such
cases termed a commencement de preuve par écrit.

A rule deserving of imitation in this code, is that which permits
children under fifteen years of age to give their testimony without
oath. Their title to credence evidently does not depend upon their
capacity to understand the nature of a religious ceremony, but upon
their power of giving a clear, consistent, and probable narrative of
what they have seen or heard.

On the whole, this new code, so far at least as regards the department
of evidence, may be pronounced, though still far from perfect,
considerably better than either the English system, or the other
continental modifications of the Roman law. (Vol. V, pp. 745-7.)


James Mill’s Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind


PREFACE TO THE PRESENT EDITION

in the study of Nature, either mental or physical, the aim of the
scientific enquirer is to diminish as much as possible the catalogue of
ultimate truths. When, without doing violence to facts, he is able to
bring one phenomenon within the laws of another; when he can shew that a
fact or agency, which seemed to be original and distinct, could have
been produced by other known facts and agencies, acting according to
their own laws; the enquirer who has arrived at this result, considers
himself to have made an important advance in the knowledge of nature,
and to have brought science, in that department, a step nearer to
perfection. Other accessions to science, however important practically,
are, in a scientific point of view, mere additions to the materials:
this is something done towards perfecting the structure itself.

The manner in which this scientific improvement takes place is by the
resolution of phenomena which are special and complex into others more
general and simple. Two cases of this sort may be roughly distinguished,
though the distinction between them will not be found on accurate
examination to be fundamental. In one case it is the order of the
phenomena that is analysed and simplified; in the other it is the
phenomena themselves. When the observed facts relating to the weight of
terrestrial objects, and those relating to the motion of the heavenly
bodies, were found to conform to one and the same law, that of the
gravitation of every particle of matter to every other particle with a
force varying as the inverse square of the distance, this was an example
of the first kind.1 The order of the phenomena was resolved into a more
general law. A great number of the successions which take place in the
material world were shewn to be particular cases of a law of causation
pervading all Nature. The other class of investigations are those which
deal, not with the successions of phenomena, but with the complex
phenomena themselves, and disclose to us that the very fact which we are
studying is made up of simpler Edition: current; Page: [96] facts: as
when the substance Water was found to be an actual compound of two other
bodies, hydrogen and oxygen; substances very unlike itself, but both
actually present in every one of its particles.2 By processes like those
employed in this case, all the variety of substances which meet our
senses and compose the planet on which we live, have been shewn to be
constituted by the intimate union, in a certain number of fixed
proportions, of some two or more of sixty or seventy bodies, called
Elements or Simple Substances, by which is only meant that they have not
hitherto been found capable of further decomposition.3 This last process
is known by the name of chemical analysis: but the first mentioned, of
which the Newtonian generalization is the most perfect type, is no less
analytical. The difference is, that the one analyses substances into
simpler substances; the other, laws into simpler laws. The one is partly
a physical operation; the other is wholly intellectual.

Both these processes are as largely applicable, and as much required, in
the investigation of mental phenomena as of material. And in the one
case as in the other, the advance of scientific knowledge may be
measured by the progress made in resolving complex facts into simpler
ones.

The phenomena of the Mind include multitudes of facts, of an
extraordinary degree of complexity. By observing them one at a time with
sufficient care, it is possible in the mental, as it is in the material
world, to obtain empirical generalizations of limited compass, but of
great value for practice. When, however, we find it possible to connect
many of these detached generalizations together, by discovering the more
general laws of which they are cases, and to the operation of which in
some particular sets of circumstances they are due, we gain not only a
scientific, but a practical advantage; for we then first learn how far
we can rely on the more limited generalizations; within what conditions
their truth is confined; by what changes of circumstances they would be
defeated or modified.

Not only is the order in which the more complex mental phenomena follow
or accompany one another, reducible, by an analysis similar in kind to
the Newtonian, to a comparatively small number of laws of succession
among simpler facts, connected as cause and effect; but the phenomena
themselves can mostly be shown, by an analysis resembling those of
chemistry, to be made up of simpler phenomena. “In the mind of man,”
says Dr. Thomas Brown, in one of his Introductory Lectures,

all is in a state of constant and ever-varying complexity, and a single
sentiment may be the slow result of innumerable feelings. There is not a
single pleasure, or pain, or thought, or emotion, that may not, by the
influence of that associating principle which is afterwards to Edition:
current; Page: [97] come under our consideration, be so connected with
other pleasures, or pains, or thoughts, or emotions, as to form with
them, for ever after, an union the most intimate. The complex, or
seemingly complex, phenomena of thought, which result from the constant
operation of this principle of the mind, it is the labour of the
intellectual inquirer to analyse, as it is the labour of the chemist to
reduce the compound bodies on which he operates, however close and
intimate their combination may be, to their constituent elements. . . .
From the very instant of its first existence, the mind is constantly
exhibiting phenomena more and more complex: sensations, thoughts,
emotions, all mingling together, and almost every feeling modifying, in
some greater or less degree, the feelings that succeed it; and as, in
chemistry, it often happens that the qualities of the separate
ingredients of a compound body are not recognizable by us in the
apparently different qualities of the compound itself,—so in this
spontaneous chemistry of the mind, the compound sentiment that results
from the association of former feelings has, in many cases, on first
consideration, so little resemblance to these constituents of it, as
formerly existing in their elementary state, that it requires the most
attentive reflection to separate, and evolve distinctly to others, the
assemblages which even a few years may have produced.4

It is, therefore, “scarcely possible to advance even a single step, in
intellectual physics, without the necessity of performing some sort of
analysis, by which we reduce to simpler elements some complex feeling
that seems to us virtually to involve them.”5

These explanations define and characterize the task which was proposed
to himself by the author of the present treatise, and which he concisely
expressed by naming his work an Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human
Mind. It is an attempt to reach the simplest elements which by their
combination generate the manifold complexity of our mental states, and
to assign the laws of those elements, and the elementary laws of their
combination, from which laws, the subordinate ones which govern the
compound states are consequences and corollaries.

The conception of the problem did not, of course, originate with the
author; he merely applied to mental science the idea of scientific
inquiry which had been matured by the successful pursuit, for many
generations, of the knowledge of external nature. Even in the particular
path by which he endeavoured to reach the end, he had eminent
precursors. The analytic study of the facts of the human mind began with
Aristotle; it was first carried to a considerable height by Hobbes and
Locke, who are the real founders of that view of the Mind which regards
the greater part of its intellectual structure as having been built up
by Experience. These three philosophers have all left their names
identified with the great fundamental law of Association of Ideas;6 yet
none of them saw far enough to perceive that it is through this law that
Experience operates in moulding our thoughts and forming Edition:
current; Page: [98] our thinking powers. Dr. Hartley was the man of
genius who first clearly discerned that this is the key to the
explanation of the more complex mental phenomena, though he, too, was
indebted for the original conjecture to an otherwise forgotten thinker,
Mr. Gay.7 Dr. Hartley’s treatise (Observations on Man) goes over the
whole field of the mental phenomena, both intellectual and emotional,
and points out the way in which, as he thinks, sensations, ideas of
sensation, and association, generate and account for the principal
complications of our mental nature. If this doctrine is destined to be
accepted as, in the main, the true theory of the Mind, to Hartley will
always belong the glory of having originated it. But his book made
scarcely any impression upon the thought of his age. He incumbered his
theory of Association with a premature hypothesis respecting the
physical mechanism of sensation and thought;8 and even had he not done
so, his mode of exposition was little calculated to make any converts
but such as were capable of working out the system for themselves from a
few hints. His book is made up of hints rather than of proofs. It is
like the production of a thinker who has carried his doctrines so long
in his mind without communicating them, that he has become accustomed to
leap over many of the intermediate links necessary for enabling other
persons to reach his conclusions, and who, when at last he sits down to
write, is unable to recover them. It was another great disadvantage to
Hartley’s theory, that its publication so nearly coincided with the
commencement of the reaction against the Experience psychology, provoked
by the hardy scepticism of Hume. From these various causes, though the
philosophy of Hartley never died out, having been kept alive by
Priestley, the elder Darwin,9 and their pupils, it was generally
neglected, until at length the author of the present work gave it an
importance that it can never again lose. One distinguished thinker, Dr.
Thomas Brown, regarded some of the mental phenomena from a point of view
similar to Hartley’s, and all that he did for psychology was in this
direction; but he had read Hartley’s work either very superficially, or
not at all: he seems to have derived nothing from it, and though he
Edition: current; Page: [99] made some successful analyses of mental
phenomena by means of the laws of association, he rejected, or ignored,
the more searching applications of those laws; resting content, when he
arrived at the more difficult problems, with mere verbal
generalizations, such as his futile explanations by what he termed
“relative suggestion.”10 Brown’s psychology was no outcome of Hartley’s;
it must be classed as an original but feebler effort in a somewhat
similar direction.

It is to the author of the present volumes that the honour belongs of
being the reviver and second founder of the Association psychology.
Great as is this merit, it was but one among many services which he
rendered to his generation and to mankind. When the literary and
philosophical history of this century comes to be written as it deserves
to be, very few are the names figuring in it to whom as high a place
will be awarded as to James Mill. In the vigour and penetration of his
intellect he has had few superiors in the history of thought: in the
wide compass of the human interests which he cared for and served, he
was almost equally remarkable: and the energy and determination of his
character, giving effect to as single-minded an ardour for the
improvement of mankind and of human life as I believe has ever existed,
make his life a memorable example. All his work as a thinker was devoted
to the service of mankind, either by the direct improvement of their
beliefs and sentiments, or by warring against the various influences
which he regarded as obstacles to their progress: and while he put as
much conscientious thought and labour into everything he did, as if he
had never done anything else, the subjects on which he wrote took as
wide a range as if he had written without any labour at all. That the
same man should have been the author of the History of India and of the
present treatise, is of itself sufficiently significant. The former of
those works, which by most men would have been thought a sufficient
achievement for a whole literary life, may be said without exaggeration
to have been the commencement of rational thinking on the subject of
India: and by that, and his subsequent labours as an administrator of
Indian interests under the East India Company, he effected a great
amount of good, and laid the foundation of much more, to the many
millions of Asiatics for whose bad or good government his country is
responsible. The same great work is full of far-reaching ideas on the
practical interests of the world; and while forming an important chapter
in the history and philosophy of civilization (a subject which had not
then been so scientifically studied as it has been since) it is one of
the most valuable contributions yet made even to the English history of
the period it embraces. If, in addition to the History and to the
present treatise, all the author’s minor writings were collected; the
outline treatises on nearly all the great branches of moral and
political science which he drew up for the Supplement to the
Encyclopaedia Edition: current; Page: [100] Britannica, and his
countless contributions to many periodical works;11 although advanced
thinkers have outgrown some of his opinions, and include, on many
subjects, in their speculations, a wider range of considerations than
his, every one would be astonished at the variety of his topics, and the
abundance of the knowledge he exhibited respecting them all. One of his
minor services was, that he was the first to put together in a compact
and systematic form, and in a manner adapted to learners, the principles
of Political Economy12 as renovated by the genius of Ricardo: whose
great work,13 it may be mentioned by the way, would probably never have
seen the light, if his intimate and attached friend Mr. Mill had not
encouraged and urged him, first to commit to paper his profound
thoughts, and afterwards to send them forth to the world. Many other
cases might be mentioned in which Mr. Mill’s private and personal
influence was a means of doing good, hardly inferior to his public
exertions. Though, like all who value their time for higher purposes, he
went little into what is called society, he helped, encouraged, and not
seldom prompted, many of the men who were most useful in their
generation: from his obscure privacy he was during many years of his
life the soul of what is now called the advanced Liberal party; and such
was the effect of his conversation, and of the tone of his character, on
those who were within reach of its influence, that many, then young, who
have since made themselves honoured in the world by a valuable career,
look back to their intercourse with him as having had a considerable
share in deciding their course through life. The most distinguished of
them all, Mr. Grote, has put on record, in a recent publication, his
sense of these obligations, in terms equally honourable to both.14 As a
converser, Mr. Mill has had few equals; as an argumentative converser,
in modern times probably none. All his mental resources seemed to be at
his command at any moment, and were then freely employed in removing
difficulties which in his writings for the public he often did not think
it worth while to notice. To a logical acumen which has always been
acknowledged, he united a clear appreciation of the practical side of
things, for which he did not always receive credit from those Edition:
current; Page: [101] who had no personal knowledge of him, but which
made a deep impression on those who were acquainted with the official
correspondence of the East India Company conducted by him. The moral
qualities which shone in his conversation were, if possible, more
valuable to those who had the privilege of sharing it, than even the
intellectual. They were precisely such as young men of cultivated
intellect, with good aspirations but a character not yet thoroughly
formed, are likely to derive most benefit from. A deeply rooted trust in
the general progress of the human race, joined with a good sense which
made him never build unreasonable or exaggerated hopes on any one event
or contingency; an habitual estimate of men according to their real
worth as sources of good to their fellow-creatures, and an unaffected
contempt for the weaknesses or temptations that divert them from that
object,—making those with whom he conversed feel how painful it would be
to them to be counted by him among such backsliders; a sustained
earnestness, in which neither vanity nor personal ambition had any part,
and which spread from him by a sympathetic contagion to those who had
sufficient moral preparation to value and seek the opportunity; this was
the mixture of qualities which made his conversation almost unrivalled
in its salutary moral effect. He has been accused of asperity, and there
was asperity in some few of his writings; but no party spirit, personal
rivalry, or wounded amour-propre ever stirred it up.15 Even when he had
received direct personal offence, he was the most placable of men. The
bitterest and ablest attack ever publicly made on him was that which was
the immediate cause of the introduction of Mr. Macaulay into public
life.16 He felt it keenly at the time, but with a quite impersonal
feeling, as he would have felt anything that he thought unjustly said
against any opinion or cause which was dear to him; and within a very
few years afterwards he was on terms of personal friendship with its
author, as Lord Macaulay himself, in a very creditable passage of the
preface to his collected Essays, has, in feeling terms, commemorated.17

At an early period of Mr. Mill’s philosophical life, Hartley’s work had
taken a strong hold of his mind; and in the maturity of his powers he
formed and executed the purpose of following up Hartley’s leading
thought, and completing what that thinker had begun. The result was the
present work, which is not only an immense advance on Hartley’s in the
qualities which facilitate the access of recondite Edition: current;
Page: [102] thoughts to minds to which they are new, but attains an
elevation far beyond Hartley’s in the thoughts themselves. Compared with
it, Hartley’s is little more than a sketch, though an eminently
suggestive one: often rather showing where to seek for the explanation
of the more complex mental phenomena, than actually explaining them. The
present treatise makes clear, much that Hartley left obscure: it
possesses the great secret for clearness, though a secret commonly
neglected—it bestows an extra amount of explanation and exemplification
on the most elementary parts. It analyses many important mental
phenomena which Hartley passed over, and analyses more completely and
satisfactorily most of those of which he commenced the analysis. In
particular, the author was the first who fully understood and expounded
(though the germs of this as of all the rest of the theory are in
Hartley) the remarkable case of Inseparable Association: and inasmuch as
many of the more difficult analyses of the mental phenomena can only be
performed by the aid of that doctrine, much had been left for him to
analyse.

I am far from thinking that the more recondite specimens of analysis in
this work are always successful, or that the author has not left
something to be corrected as well as much to be completed by his
successors. The completion has been especially the work of two
distinguished thinkers in the present generation, Professor Bain and Mr.
Herbert Spencer; in the writings of both of whom, the Association
Psychology has reached a still higher development.18 The former of these
has favoured me with his invaluable collaboration in annotating the
present work. In the annotations it has been our object not only to
illustrate and enforce, but to criticise, where criticism seemed called
for. What there is in the work that seems to need correction, arises
chiefly from two causes. First, the imperfection of physiological
science at the time at which it was written, and the much greater
knowledge since acquired of the functions of our nervous organism and
their relations with the mental operations. Secondly, an opening was
made for some mistakes, and occasional insufficiency of analysis, by a
mental quality which the author exhibits not unfrequently in his
speculations, though as a practical thinker both on public and on
private matters it was quite otherwise; a certain impatience of detail.
The bent of his mind was towards that, in which also his greatest
strength lay; in seizing the larger features of a subject—the commanding
laws which govern and connect many phenomena. Having reached these, he
sometimes gives himself up to the current of thoughts which those
comprehensive laws suggest, not stopping to guard himself carefully in
the minutiae of their application, nor devoting much of his thoughts to
anticipating all the objections that could be made, Edition: current;
Page: [103] though the necessity of replying to some of them might have
led him to detect imperfections in his analyses. From this cause (as it
appears to me), he has occasionally gone further in the pursuit of
simplification, and in the reduction of the more recondite mental
phenomena to the more elementary, than I am able to follow him; and has
left some of his opinions open to objections, which he has not afforded
the means of answering. When this appeared to Mr. Bain or myself to be
the case, we have made such attempts as we were able to place the matter
in a clearer light; and one or other, or both, have supplied what our
own investigations or those of others have provided, towards correcting
any shortcomings in the theory.

Mr. Findlater, of Edinburgh, Editor of Chambers’ Cyclopaedia, has kindly
communicated, from the rich stores of his philological knowledge, the
corrections required by the somewhat obsolete philology which the author
had borrowed from Horne Tooke.19 For the rectification of an erroneous
statement respecting the relation of the Aristotelian doctrine of
General Ideas to the Platonic, and for some other contributions in which
historical is combined with philosophical interest, I am indebted to the
illustrious historian of Greece and of the Greek philosophy.20 Mr.
Grote’s, Mr. Bain’s and Mr. Findlater’s notes are distinguished by their
initials; my own, as those of the Editor.

The question presented itself, whether the annotations would be most
useful, collected at the end of the work, or appended to the chapters or
passages to which they more particularly relate. Either plan has its
recommendations, but those of the course which I have adopted seemed to
me on the whole to preponderate. The reader can, if he thinks fit, (and,
if he is a real student, I venture to recommend that he should do so)
combine the advantages of both modes, by giving a first careful Edition:
current; Page: [104] reading to the book itself, or at all events to
every successive chapter of the book, without paying any attention to
the annotations. No other mode of proceeding will give perfectly fair
play to the author, whose thoughts will in this manner have as full an
opportunity of impressing themselves on the mind, without having their
consecutiveness broken in upon by any other person’s thoughts, as they
would have had if simply republished without comment. When the student
has done all he can with the author’s own exposition—has possessed
himself of the ideas, and felt, perhaps, some of the difficulties, he
will be in a better position for profiting by any aid that the notes may
afford, and will be in less danger of accepting, without due
examination, the opinion of the last comer as the best.

* * * * *

[James Mill, dealing with smell as a sensation, remarks:] The word
smell, beside denoting the sensation and the object, denotes also the
organ, in such phrases as the following: “Sight and Hearing are two of
the inlets of my knowledge, and Smell is a third;” “The faculty by which
I become sensible of odour is my Smell.”

It may be questioned whether, in the phrases here cited, the word Smell
stands for the olfactory organ. It would perhaps be most correct to say,
that in these cases it denotes the abstract capacity of smelling, rather
than the concrete physical instrument. Even when smell is said to be one
of the five senses, it may fairly be doubted whether a part of the
meaning intended is, that it is one of the five organs of sensation.
Nothing more seems to be meant, than that it is one of five
distinguishable modes of having sensations, whatever the intrinsic
difference between those modes may be.

In the author’s footnote he recognises that the abstract power of
smelling enters into this particular application of the word Smell; and
refers to a subsequent part of the treatise for the meaning of Power.21
But he thinks that along with the power, or as part of the conception of
Power, the material organ is also signified. It seems to Edition:
current; Page: [105] me that the organ does not enter in either of these
modes, into the signification of the word. We can imagine ourselves
ignorant that we possess physical organs; or aware that we possess them,
but not aware that our sensations of smell are connected with them. Yet
on either of these suppositions the “power of smelling” would be
perfectly intelligible, and would have the same meaning to us which it
has now. (Vol. I, p. 14.)

* * * * *

[The final sentence of the section on hearing reads:] “Sense of hearing”
is thus seen to be the name of a very complex idea, including five
distinguishable ingredients, the idea of the organ of hearing, the idea
of the sensation, the idea of the object of hearing, the idea of a
synchronous order, and the idea of a successive order.

In the case of hearing, as of smell, one of the ambiguities brought to
notice by the author is of questionable reality. It is doubtful if
hearing is ever used as a name of the organ. To the question supposed in
the text, “by which of my organs do I have the knowledge of sound” the
correct answer would surely be, not “my hearing”22—an expression which,
so applied, could only be accepted as elliptical,—but “my organ of
hearing,” or (still better) “my ear.” Again, the phrase “I have the
sense of hearing” signifies that I have a capacity of hearing, and that
this capacity is classed as one of sense, or in other words, that the
feelings to which it has reference belong to the class Sensations: but
the organ, though a necessary condition of my having the sensations,
does not seem to be implied in the name. (Vol. I, pp. 19-20.)

* * * * *

[Having averred that sight is used as “a name of the object,” James Mill
goes on to say that it also “is sometimes employed as a name of the
organ.” He then says:] An old man informs us, that his sight is failing,
meaning that his eyes are failing.

The example given does not seem to me to prove that sight is ever
employed as a name of the organ. When an old man says that his sight is
failing, he means only that he is less capable of seeing. His eyes might
be failing in some other respect, when he would not say that his sight
was failing. The term “sense of sight,” like Edition: current; Page:
[106] sense of hearing or of smell, stands, as it seems to me, for the
capability, without reference to the organ. (Vol. I, p. 23.)

* * * * *

[To illustrate his belief that vision denotes the object as well as the
feeling, James Mill says:] What vision was that? would be a very
intelligible question, on the sudden appearance and disappearance of
something which attracted the eye.

Vision, I believe, is used to denote the object of sight, only when it
is supposed that this object is something unreal, i.e., that it has not
any extended and resisting substance behind it: or rhetorically, to
signify that the object looks more like a phantom than a reality; as
when Burke calls Marie Antoinette, as once seen by him, a delightful
vision.23 (Vol. I, p. 24.)

* * * * *

[James Mill observes that the “feelings” of taste are very often united
with those of smell,] the two organs being often affected by the same
thing, at the same time. In that case, though we have two sensations,
they are so intimately blended as to seem but one; and the flavour of
the apple, the flavour of the wine, appears to be a simple sensation,
though compounded of taste and smell.

Some physiologists have been of opinion that a large proportion of what
are classed as tastes, including all flavours, as distinguished from the
generic tastes of sweet, sour, bitter, etc., are really affections of
the nerves of smell, and are mistaken for tastes only because they are
experienced along with tastes, as a consequence of taking food into the
mouth.24 (Vol. I, p. 25.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [107]
[Concerning taste, James Mill says there is the same complexity of
meaning as in the other terms of sensation, including reference to the
organ.]

The statement that “taste” is sometimes employed as a name of the organ,
seems to me, like the similar statements respecting the names of our
other senses, disputable. (Vol. I, p. 27.)

* * * * *

[Once more James Mill says that a term, touch, refers to the object.] If
I were to call a piece of fine and brilliant velvet a fine sight,
another person might say, it is a fine touch as well as fine sight.

It is more true of the word touch, than of the names of our other
senses, that it is occasionally employed to denote the organ of touch;
because that organ, being the whole surface of the body, has not, like
the organs of the special senses, a compact distinctive name. But it may
be doubted if the word touch ever stands for the object of touch. If a
person made use of the phrase in the text, “it is a fine touch as well
as a fine sight,” he would probably be regarded as purchasing an
epigrammatic turn of expression at the expense of some violence to
language. (Vol. I, p. 32.)

* * * * *

[James Mill explains his use of the word connotes in the following
footnote, to which J.S. Mill’s note is appended.] The use, which I shall
make, of the term connotation, needs to be explained. There is a large
class of words, which denote two things, both together; but the one
perfectly distinguishable from the other. Of these two things, also, it
is observable, that such words express the one, primarily, as it were;
the other, in a way which may be called secondary. Thus, white, in the
phrase white horse, denotes two things, the colour, and the horse; but
it denotes the colour primarily, the horse secondarily. We shall find it
very convenient, to say, therefore, that it notes the primary, connotes
the secondary, signification.

Reasons will be assigned further on, why the words to connote and
connotation had better be employed, not as here indicated, but in a
different and more special sense.25 (Vol. I, p. 34.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [108]
[With reference to sensations of “disorganization,” caused by
lacerations, cuts, bruises, burnings, poisonings, inflammation, etc.,
James Mill comments:] Most of those sensations are of the painful kind;
though some are otherwise. Some slight, or locally minute inflammations,
produce a sensation called itching, which is far from disagreeable, as
appears from the desire to scratch, which excites it.

The author, in this passage, uses the word itching out of its ordinary
sense; making it denote the pleasant sensation accompanying the relief
by scratching, instead of the slightly painful, and sometimes highly
irritating, sensation which the scratching relieves. (Vol. I, pp. 37-8.)

* * * * *

[James Mill points out that] there are some muscles of the body in
constant and vehement action, as the heart, of the feelings attendant
upon the action of which we seem to have no cognisance at all. That this
is no argument against the existence of those feelings, will be made
apparent, by the subsequent explanation of other phenomena, in which the
existence of certain feelings, and an acquired incapacity of attending
to them, are out of dispute.

The paradox, of feelings which we have no cognisance of—feelings which
are not felt—will be discussed at large in a future note.26 (Vol. I, p.
42.)

* * * * *

[James Mill, having asserted that just as each sense has “its separate
class of sensations, so each has its separate class of ideas” (Vol. I,
p. 54), argues that in the case of muscular action, the will is involved
as antecedent.] Thus the idea of resistance is the thought, or idea, of
the feelings we have, when we will to contract certain muscles, and feel
the contraction impeded.

Rather, when we will to contract certain muscles, and the contraction
takes place, but is not followed by the accustomed movement of the limb;
what follows, instead, being a sensation of pressure, proportioned to
the degree of the contraction. It is not the muscular contraction itself
which is impeded by the resisting object: that contraction takes place:
but the outward effect which it was Edition: current; Page: [109] the
tendency, and perhaps the purpose, of the muscular contraction to
produce, fails to be produced. (Vol. I, p. 58.)

* * * * *

Hunger, and thirst, are also names of ideas, which chiefly refer to
sensations in the same part of our system.27

I venture to think that it is not a philosophically correct mode of
expression, to speak of indigestion, or of hunger and thirst, as names
of ideas. Hunger and thirst are names of definite sensations; and
indigestion is a name of a large group of sensations, held together by
very complicated laws of causation. If it be objected, that the word
indigestion, and even the words hunger and thirst, comprehend in their
meaning other elements than the immediate sensations; that the meaning,
for instance, of hunger, includes a deficiency of food, the meaning of
indigestion a derangement of the functions of the digestive organs; it
still remains true that these additional portions of meaning are
physical phenomena, and are not our thoughts or ideas of physical
phenomena; and must, therefore, in the general partition of human
consciousness between sensations and ideas, take their place with the
former, and not with the latter. (Vol. I, p. 60.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s footnote is appended to the end of Chap. ii, “Ideas”
(following a long note by Bain).]

A question which, as far as I know, has been passed over by
psychologists, but which ought not to be left unanswered, is this: Can
we have ideas of ideas? We have sensations, and we have copies of these
sensations, called ideas of them: can we also have copies of these
copies, constituting a second order of ideas, two removes instead of one
from sensation?

Every one will admit that we can think of a thought. We remember
ourselves remembering, or imagine ourselves remembering, an object or an
event, just as we remember or imagine ourselves seeing one. But in the
case of a simple idea of sensation, i.e. the idea or remembrance of a
single undivided sensation, there seems nothing to distinguish the idea
of the idea, from the idea of the sensation itself. When I imagine
myself thinking of the colour of snow, I am not aware of any Edition:
current; Page: [110] difference, even in degree of intensity, between
the image then present to my mind of the white colour, and the image
present when I imagine myself to be seeing the colour.

The case, however, is somewhat different with those combinations of
simple ideas which have never been presented to my mind otherwise than
as ideas. I have an idea of Pericles;28 but it is derived only from the
testimony of history: the real Pericles never was present to my senses.
I have an idea of Hamlet, and of Falstaff;29 combinations which, though
made up of ideas of sensation, never existed at all in the world of
sense; they never were anything more than ideas in any mind. Yet, having
had these combinations of ideas presented to me through the words of
Shakespeare, I have formed what is properly an idea not of an outward
object, but of an idea in Shakespeare’s mind; and I may communicate my
idea to others, whose idea will then be an idea of an idea in my mind.
My idea of Pericles, or my idea of any person now alive whom I have
never seen, differs from these in the circumstance that I am persuaded
that a real object corresponding to the idea does now, or did once,
exist in the world of sensation: but as I did not derive my idea from
the object, but from some other person’s words, my idea is not a copy of
the original, but a copy (more or less imperfect) of some other person’s
copy: it is an idea of an idea.

Although, however, the complex idea I have of an object which never was
presented to my senses, is rightly described as an idea of an idea; my
remembrance of a complex idea which I have had before, does not seem to
me to differ from the remembered idea as an idea differs from a
sensation. There is a distinction between my visual idea of Mont Blanc
and the actual sight of the mountain, which I do not find between my
remembrance of Falstaff and the original impression from which it was
derived. My present thought of Falstaff seems to me not a copy but a
repetition of the original idea; a repetition which may be dimmed by
distance, or which may, on the contrary, be heightened by intermediate
processes of thought; may have lost some of its features by lapse of
time, and may have acquired others by reference to the original sources;
but which resembles the first impression not as the thought of an object
resembles the sight of it, but as a second or third sight of an object
resembles the first. This question will meet us again in the
psychological examination of Memory, the theory of which is in no small
degree dependent upon it. (Vol. I, pp. 68-9.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [111]
[James Mill avers that] we have three cases of vividness, of which we
can speak with some precision: the case of sensations, as compared with
ideas; the case of pleasurable and painful sensations, and their ideas,
as compared with those which are not pleasurable or painful; and the
case of the more recent, compared with the more remote.

If it be admitted that in the three cases here specified the word
vividness, as applied to our impressions, has a definite meaning, it
seems to follow that this meaning may be extended in the way of analogy,
to other cases than these. There are, for example, sensations which
differ from some other sensations like fainter feelings of the same
kind, in much the same manner as the idea of a sensation differs from
the sensation itself: and we may, be extension, call these sensations
less vivid. Again, one idea may differ from another idea in the same
sort of way in which the idea of a sensation had long ago differs from
that of a similar sensation received recently: that is, it is a more
faded copy—its colours and its outlines are more effaced: this idea may
fairly be said to be less vivid than the other.

The author himself, a few pages farther on, speaks of some complex ideas
as being more “obscure” than others, merely on account of their greater
complexity.30 Obscurity, indeed, in this case, means a different quality
from the absence of vividness, but a quality fully as indefinite.

Mr. Bain, whose view of the subject will be found further on,31 draws a
fundamental distinction (already indicated in a former note)32 between
the attributes which belong to a sensation regarded in an intellectual
point of view, as a portion of our knowledge, and those which belong to
the element of Feeling contained in it; Feeling being here taken in the
narrower acceptation of the word, that in which Feeling is opposed to
Intellect or Thought. To sensations in their intellectual aspect Mr.
Bain considers the term vividness to be inapplicable: they can only be
distinct or indistinct. He reserves the word vividness to express the
degree of intensity of the sensation, considered in what may be called
its emotional aspect, whether of pleasure, of pain, or of mere
excitement.

Whether we accept this restriction or not, it is in any case certain,
that the property of producing a strong and durable association without
the aid of repetition, belongs principally to our pleasures and pains.
The more intense the pain or pleasure, the more promptly and powerfully
does it associate itself with its accompanying circumstances, even with
those which are only accidentally present. In the cases mentioned in the
text, a single occurrence of the painful sensation is sufficient to
produce an association, which neither time can wear out nor
counter-associations dissolve, between the idea of the pain and the
ideas of the Edition: current; Page: [112] sensations which casually
accompanied it in that one instance, however intrinsically indifferent
these may be. (Vol. I, pp. 85-6.)

* * * * *

[James Mill asserts that there are some ideas we cannot “combine,”
because] a strong association excludes whatever is opposite to it. I
cannot associate the two ideas of assafoetida, and the taste of sugar.
Why? Because the idea of assafoetida is so strongly associated with the
idea of another taste, that the idea of that other taste rises in
combination with the idea of assafoetida, and of course the idea of
sugar does not rise. I have one idea associated with the word pain. Why
can I not associate pleasure with the word pain? Because another
indissoluble association springs up, and excludes it. This is,
therefore, only a case of indissoluble association; but one of much
importance, as we shall find when we come to the exposition of some of
the more complicated of our mental phenomena.

Some further elucidation seems needful of what is here said, in so
summary a manner, respecting ideas which it is not in our power to
combine: an inability which it is essential to the analysis of some of
the more complex phenomena of mind that we should understand the meaning
of. The explanation is indicated, but hardly more than indicated, in the
text.

It seems to follow from the universal law of association, that any idea
could be associated with any other idea, if the corresponding
sensations, or even the ideas themselves, were presented in
juxtaposition with sufficient frequency. If, therefore, there are ideas
which cannot be associated with each other, it must be because there is
something that prevents this juxtaposition. Two conditions hence appear
to be required, to render ideas incapable of combination. First, the
sensations must be incapable of being had together. If we cannot
associate the taste of assafoetida with the taste of sugar, it is
implied, that we cannot have the taste of assafoetida along with the
taste of sugar. If we could, a sufficient experience would enable us to
associate the ideas. Here, therefore, is one necessary condition of the
impossibility of associating certain ideas with one another. But this
condition, though necessary, is not sufficient. We are but too capable
of associating ideas together though the corresponding external facts
are really incompatible. In the case of many errors, prejudices, and
superstitions, two ideas are so closely and obstinately associated, that
the man cannot, at least for the time, help believing that the
association represents a real coexistence or sequence between outward
facts, though such coexistence or sequence may contradict a positive law
of the physical world. There is therefore a further condition required
to render two ideas unassociable, and this is, that one of them shall be
already associated with some idea which excludes the other. Thus far the
analysis is carried Edition: current; Page: [113] in the author’s text.
But the question remains, what ideas exclude one another? On careful
consideration I can only find one case of such exclusion: when one of
the ideas either contains, or raises up by association, the idea of the
absence of the other. I am aware of no case of absolute incompatibility
of thought or of imagination, except between the presence of something
and its absence; between an affirmative and the corresponding negative.
If an idea irresistibly raises up the idea of the absence of a certain
sensation, it cannot become associated with the idea of that sensation;
for it is impossible to combine together in the same mental
representation, the presence of a sensation and its absence.

We are not yet, however, at the end of the difficulty; for it may be
objected, that the idea of the absence of anything is the idea of a
negation, of a nullity; and the idea of nothing must itself be
nothing—no idea at all. This objection has imposed upon more than one
metaphysician; but the solution of the paradox is very simple. The idea
of the presence of a sensation is the idea of the sensation itself along
with certain accompanying circumstances: the idea of the absence of the
sensation is the idea of the same accompanying circumstances without the
sensation. For example: my idea of a body is the idea of a feeling of
resistance, accompanying a certain muscular action of my own, say of my
hand; my idea of no body, in other words, of empty space, is the idea of
the same or a similar muscular action of my own, not attended by any
feeling of resistance. Neither of these is an idea of a mere negation;
both are positive mental representations: but inasmuch as one of them
includes the negation of something positive which is an actual part of
the other, they are mutually incompatible: and any idea which is so
associated with one of them as to recall it instantly and irresistibly,
is incapable of being associated with the other.

The instance cited by the author from Dr. Brown, is a good illustration
of the law.33 We can associate the ideas of a plane and of a convex
surface as two surfaces side by side; but we cannot fuse the two mental
images into one, and represent to ourselves the very same series of
points giving us the sensations we receive from a plane surface and
those we receive from a convex surface both at once. That this cannot
but be so, is a corollary from the elementary law of association. Not
only has no instance ever occurred in our experience of a surface which
gave us at the same moment both these sets of sensations; but whenever
in our experience a surface originally plane, came to give us the
sensations we receive from a convex surface (as for instance when we
bend a flat sheet of paper), it, at the very same moment, ceased to be,
or to appear, a plane. The commencement of the one set of sensations has
always been simultaneous with the cessation of the other set, and this
experience, not being affected by any change of circumstances, has the
constancy and invariability of a law of nature. It forms a Edition:
current; Page: [114] correspondingly strong association; and we become
unable to have an idea of either set of sensations, those of planeness
or those of convexity, without having the idea of the disappearance of
the other set, if they existed previously. I believe it will be found
that all the mental incompatibilities, the impossibilities of thought,
of which so much is made by a certain class of metaphysicians, can be
accounted for in a similar manner. (Vol. I, pp. 97-100.)

* * * * *

[The opening paragraphs of Sect. 10 of Chap. iii (“The Association of
Ideas”) read:] It not unfrequently happens in our associated feelings,
that the antecedent is of no importance farther than as it introduces
the consequent. In these cases, the consequent absorbs all the
attention, and the antecedent is instantly forgotten. Of this a very
intelligible illustration is afforded by what happens in ordinary
discourse. A friend arrives from a distant country, and brings me the
first intelligence of the last illness, the last words, the last acts,
and death of my son. The sound of the voice, the articulation of every
word, makes its sensation in my ear; but it is to the ideas that my
attention flies. It is my son that is before me, suffering, acting,
speaking, dying. The words which have introduced the ideas, and kindled
the affections, have been as little heeded, as the respiration which has
been accelerated, while the ideas were received.

It is important in respect to this case of association to remark, that
there are large classes of our sensations, such as many of those in the
alimentary duct, and many in the nervous and vascular systems, which
serve, as antecedents, to introduce ideas, as consequents; but as the
consequents are far more interesting than themselves, and immediately
absorb the attention, the antecedents are habitually overlooked; and
though they exercise, by the trains which they introduce, a great
influence on our happiness or misery, they themselves are generally
wholly unknown.

That there are connections between our ideas and certain states of the
internal organs, is proved by many familiar instances. Thus, anxiety, in
most people, disorders the digestion. It is no wonder, then, that the
internal feelings which accompany indigestion, should excite the ideas
which prevail in a state of anxiety. Fear, in most people, accelerates,
in a remarkable manner, the vermicular motion of the intestines. There
is an association, therefore, between certain states of the intestines,
and terrible ideas; and this is sufficiently confirmed by the horrible
dreams to which men are subject from indigestion; and the hypochondria,
more or less afflicting, which almost always accompanies certain morbid
states of the digestive organs. The grateful food which excites
pleasurable sensations in the mouth, continues them in the stomach; and,
as pleasures excite ideas of their Edition: current; Page: [115] causes,
and these of similar causes, and causes excite ideas of their effects,
and so on, trains of pleasurable ideas take their origin from
pleasurable sensations in the stomach. Uneasy sensations in the stomach,
produce analogous effects. Disagreeable sensations are associated with
disagreeable circumstances; a train is introduced, in which, one painful
idea following another, combinations, to the last degree afflictive, are
sometimes introduced, and the sufferer is altogether overwhelmed by
dismal associations.

The law of association laid down in this section ranks among the
principal of what may be termed the laws of Obliviscence. It is one of
the widest in its action, and most important in its consequences of all
the laws of the mind; and the merit of the author, in the large use he
makes of it, is very great, as, though it is the key that unlocks many
of the more mysterious phenomena of the mind, it is among the least
familiar of the mental laws, and is not only overlooked by the great
majority of psychologists, but some, otherwise of merit, seem unable to
see and understand the law after any quantity of explanation.

The first, however, of the examples by which the author illustrates this
law, is not marked by his usual felicity. Its shortcomings are pointed
out by Mr. Bain in the preceding note.34 The internal feelings (says the
author) which accompany indigestion, introduce trains of ideas (as in
the case of horrible dreams, and of hypochondria) which are acutely
painful, and may embitter the whole existence, while the sensations
themselves, being comparatively of little interest, are unheeded and
forgotten. It is true that the sensations in the alimentary canal,
directly produced by indigestion, though (as every one knows) in some
cases intense, are in others so slight as not to fix the attention, and
yet may be followed by melancholy trains of thought, the connection of
which with the state of the digestion may be entirely unobserved: but by
far the most probable supposition appears to be, that these painful
trains are not excited by the sensations, but that they and the
sensations are joint or successive effects of a common organic cause. It
is difficult to comprehend how these obscure sensations can excite the
distressing trains of ideas by the laws of association; for what
opportunity have these sensations usually had of becoming associated,
either synchronously or successively, with those ideas? The explanation,
in the text, of this difficulty, seems surprisingly insufficient.
Anxiety, in most people, disorders the digestion; and consequently,
according to the author, the sensations of indigestion excite the ideas
which prevail in a state of anxiety. If that were the true explanation,
the only persons with whom indigestion would depress the spirits, would
be those who had suffered previous depression of spirits, sufficient in
duration and intensity to disorder the digestion, and to keep it
disordered long enough to effect a close and inseparable cohesion
between even very slight sensations of indigestion and painful ideas
excited by other causes. Surely this is not the fact. The theory has a
Edition: current; Page: [116] true application in the case of the
confirmed hypochondriac. When the sensations have been repeatedly
experienced along with the melancholy trains of thought, a direct
association is likely to grow up between the two; and when this has been
effected, the first touch of the sensations may bring back in full
measure the miserable mental state which had coexisted with them, thus
increasing not only the frequency of its recurrence, but, by the
conjunction of two exciting causes, the intensity of the misery. But the
origin of the state must be looked for elsewhere, and is probably to be
sought in physiology.

The other example in the text seems still less relevant. Fear tends to
accelerate the peristaltic motion, therefore there is a connection
between certain states of the intestines and terrible ideas. To make
this available for the author’s purpose, the consequence of the
connection ought to be, that acceleration of the peristaltic motion
excites ideas of terror. But does it? The state of indigestion
characteristic of hypochondria is not looseness of the bowels, but is
commonly attended with the exact opposite. The author’s usual acuteness
of discernment seems to have been, in these cases, blunted by an
unwillingness to admit the possibility that ideas as well as sensations
may be directly affected by material conditions. But if, as he admits,
ideas have a direct action on our bodily organs, a prima facie case is
made out for the localization of our ideas, equally with our sensations,
in some part of our bodily system; and there is at least no antecedent
presumption against the supposition that the action may be
reciprocal—that as ideas sometimes derange the organic functions, so
derangements of organic functions may sometimes modify the trains of our
ideas by their own physical action on the brain and nerves, and not
through the associations connected with the sensations they excite.
(Vol. I, pp. 102-5.)

* * * * *

[The concluding paragraph of Chap. iii, Sect. 10 reads:] In illustration
of the fact, that sensations and ideas, which are essential to some of
the most important operations of our minds, serve only as antecedents to
more important consequents, and are themselves so habitually overlooked,
that their existence is unknown, we may recur to the remarkable case
which we have just explained, of the ideas introduced by the sensations
of sight. The minute gradations of colour, whch accompany varieties of
extension, figure, and distance, are insignificant. The figure, the
size, the distance, themselves, on the other hand, are matters of the
greatest importance. The first having introduced the last, their work is
done. The consequents remain the sole objects of attention, the
antecedents are forgotten; in the present instance, not completely; in
other instances, so completely, that they cannot be recognised.35
Edition: current; Page: [117] The reader, it may be hoped, is now
familiar with the important psychological fact, so powerfully grasped
and so discerningly employed by Hartley and the author of the
Analysis,—that when, through the frequent repetition of a series of
sensations, the corresponding train of ideas rushes through the mind
with extreme rapidity, some of the links are apt to disappear from
consciousness as completely as if they had never formed part of the
series. It has been a subject of dispute among philosophers which of
three things takes place in this case. Do the lost ideas pass through
the mind without consciousness? Do they pass consciously through the
mind and are they then instantly forgotten? Or do they never come into
the mind at all, being, as it were, overleaped and pressed out by the
rush of the subsequent ideas?

It would seem, at first sight, that the first and third suppositions
involve impossibilities, and that the second, therefore, is the only one
which we are at liberty to adopt. As regards the first, it may be
said—How can we have a feeling without feeling it, in other words,
without being conscious of it? With regard to the third, how, it may be
asked, can any link of the chain have been altogether absent, through
the pressure of the subsequent links? The subsequent ideas are only
there because called up by it, and would not have arisen at all unless
it had arisen first, however short a time it may have lasted. These
arguments seem strong, but are not so strong as they seem.

In favour of the first supposition, that feelings may be unconsciously
present, various facts and arguments are adduced by Sir William Hamilton
in his Lectures; but I think I have shewn in another work, that the
arguments are inconclusive, and the facts equally reconcilable with the
second of the three hypotheses.36 That a feeling should not be felt
appears to me a contradiction both in words and in nature. But, though a
feeling cannot exist without being felt, the organic state which is the
antecedent of it may exist, and the feeling itself not follow. This
happens, either if the organic state is not of sufficient duration, or
if an organic state stronger than itself, and conflicting with it, is
affecting us at the same moment. I hope to be excused for quoting what I
have said elsewhere on this subject (Examination of Sir William
Hamilton’s Philosophy, Chap. xv).

In the case, for instance, of a soldier who receives a wound in battle,
but in the excitement of the moment is not aware of the fact, it is
difficult not to believe that if the wound had been accompanied by the
usual sensation, so vivid a feeling would have forced itself to be
attended to and remembered. The supposition which seems most probable
is, that the nerves of the particular part were affected as they would
have been by the same cause in any other circumstances, but that, the
nervous centres being intensely occupied with other impressions, the
affection of the local nerves did not reach them, and no sensation was
Edition: current; Page: [118] excited. In like manner, if we admit (what
physiology is rendering more and more probable) that our mental
feelings, as well as our sensations, have for their physical antecedents
particular states of the nerves; it may well be believed that the
apparently suppressed links in a chain of association, those which Sir
William Hamilton considers as latent, really are so; that they are not,
even momentarily, felt; the chain of causation being continued only
physically, by one organic state of the nerves succeeding another so
rapidly that the state of mental conciousness appropriate to each is not
produced. We have only to suppose, either that a nervous modification of
too short duration does not produce any sensation or mental feeling at
all, or that the rapid succession of different nervous modifications
makes the feelings produced by them interfere with each other, and
become confounded in one mass. The former of these suppositions is
extremely probable, while of the truth of the latter we have positive
proof. An example of it is the experiment which Sir W. Hamilton quoted
from Mr. Mill, and which had been noticed before either of them by
Hartley.37 It is known that the seven prismatic colours, combined in
certain proportions, produce the white light of the solar ray. Now, if
the seven colours are painted on spaces bearing the same proportion to
one another as in the solar spectrum, and the coloured surface so
produced is passed rapidly before the eyes, as by the turning of a
wheel, the whole is seen as white. The physiological explanation of this
phenomenon may be deduced from another common experiment. If a lighted
torch, or a bar heated to luminousness, is waved rapidly before the eye,
the appearance produced is that of a ribbon of light; which is
universally understood to prove that the visual sensation persists for a
certain short time after its cause has ceased. Now, if this happens with
a single colour, it will happen with a series of colours: and if the
wheel on which the prismatic colours have been painted, is turned with
the same rapidity with which the torch was waved, each of the seven
sensations of colour will last long enough to be contemporaneous with
all the others, and they will naturally produce by their combination the
same colour as if they had, from the beginning, been excited
simultaneously. If anything similar to this obtains in our consciousness
generally (and that it obtains in many cases of consciousness there can
be no doubt) it will follow that whenever the organic modifications of
our nervous fibres succeed one another at an interval shorter than the
duration of the sensations or other feelings corresponding to them,
those sensations or feelings will, so to speak, overlap one another, and
becoming simultaneous instead of successive, will blend into a state of
feeling, probably as unlike the elements out of which it is engendered,
as the colour white is unlike the prismatic colours. And this may be the
source of many of those states of internal or mental feeling which we
cannot distinctly refer to a prototype in experience, our experience
only supplying the elements from which, by this kind of mental
chemistry, they are composed. The elementary feelings may then be said
to be latently present, or to be present but not in consciousness. The
truth, however, is that the feelings themselves are not present,
consciously or latently, but that the nervous modifications which are
their usual antecedents have been present, while the consequents have
been frustrated, and another consequent has been produced instead.

In this modified form, therefore, the first of the three hypotheses may
possibly be true. Let us now consider the third, that of the entire
elision of some of the ideas which form the associated train. This
supposition seemed to be inadmissible, because the loss of any link
would, it was supposed, cause the chain itself to break off at that
point. To make the hypothesis possible, it is only, however, necessary
to Edition: current; Page: [119] suppose, that, while the association is
acquiring the promptitude and rapidity which it ultimately attains, each
of the successive ideas abides for a brief interval in our consciousness
after it has already called up the idea which is to succeed it. Each
idea in the series, though introduced, not by synchronous, but by
successive association, is thus, during a part of its continuance,
synchronous with the idea which introduced it: and as the rapidity of
the suggestions increases by still further repetition, an idea may
become synchronous with another which was originally not even contiguous
to it, but separated from it by an intervening link; or may come into
immediate instead of mediate sequence with such an idea. When either of
these states of things has continued for some time, a direct association
of the synchronous or of the successive kind will be generated between
two ideas which are not proximate links in the chain; A will acquire a
direct power of exciting C, independently of the intervening idea B. If,
then, B is much less interesting than C, and especially if B is of no
importance at all in itself, but only by exciting C, and has therefore
nothing to make the mind dwell on it after C has been reached, the
association of A with C is likely to become stronger than that of A with
B: C will be habitually excited directly by A; as the mind runs off to
the further ideas suggested by C, B will cease to be excited at all; and
the train of association, like a stream which breaking through its bank
cuts off a bend in its course, will thenceforth flow in the direct line
AC, omitting B. This supposition accounts more plausibly than either of
the others for the truly wonderful rapidity of thought, since it does
not make so large a demand as the other theories on our ability to
believe that a prodigious number of different ideas can successively
rush through the mind in an instant too short for measurement.

The result is, that all the three theories of this mental process seem
to be quite possible; and it is not unlikely that each of them may be
the real process in some cases, either in different persons, or in the
same persons under different circumstances. I can only remit the
question to future psychologists, who may be able to contrive crucial
experiments for deciding among these various possibilities. (Vol. I, pp.
106-10.)

* * * * *

[In considering whether resemblance, “an alleged principle of
association,” can be included under other laws, James Mill says:] I
believe it will be found that we are accustomed to see like things
together. When we see a tree, we generally see more trees than one; when
we see an ox, we generally see more oxen than one; a sheep, more sheep
than one; a man, more men than one. From this observation, I think, we
may refer resemblance to the law of frequency, of which it seems to form
only a particular case.

Edition: current; Page: [120]
The reason assigned by the author for considering association by
resemblance as a case of association by contiguity, is perhaps the least
successful attempt at a generalisation and simplification of the laws of
mental phenomena, to be found in the work. It ought to be remembered
that the author, as the text shews, attached little importance to it.
And perhaps, not thinking it important, he passed it over with a less
amount of patient thought than he usually bestowed on his analyses.

Objects, he thinks, remind us of other objects resembling them, because
we are accustomed to see like things together. But we are also
accustomed to see like things separate. When two combinations
incompatible with one another are both realised in familiar experience,
it requires a very great preponderance of experience on one side to
determine the association specially to either. We are also much
accustomed to see unlike things together; I do not mean things
contrasted, but simply unlike. Unlikeness, therefore, not amounting to
contrast, ought to be as much a cause of association as likeness.
Besides, the fact that when we see (for instance) a sheep, we usually
see more sheep than one, may cause us, when we think of a sheep, to
think of an entire flock; but it does not explain why, when we see a
sheep with a black mark on its forehead, we are reminded of a sheep with
a similar mark, formerly seen, though we never saw two such sheep
together. It does not explain why a portrait makes us think of the
original, or why a stranger whom we see for the first time reminds us of
a person of similar appearance whom we saw many years ago. The law by
which an object reminds us of similar objects which we have been used to
see along with it, must be a different law from that by which it reminds
us of similar objects which we have not been used to see along with it.
But it is the same law by which it reminds us of dissimilar objects
which we have been used to see along with it. The sight of a sheep, if
it reminds us of a flock of sheep, probably by the same law of
contiguity, reminds us of a meadow; but it must be by some other law
that it reminds us of a single sheep previously seen, and of the
occasion on which we saw that single sheep.

The attempt to resolve association by resemblance into association by
contiguity must perforce be unsuccessful, inasmuch as there never could
have been association by contiguity without a previous association by
resemblance. Why does a sensation received this instant remind me of
sensations which I formerly had (as we commonly say), along with it? I
never had them along with this very sensation. I never had this
sensation until now, and can never have it again. I had the former
sensations in conjunction not with it, but with a sensation exactly like
it. And my present sensation could not remind me of those former
sensations unlike itself, unless by first reminding me of the sensation
like itself, which really did coexist with them. There is thus a law of
association anterior to, and presupposed by, the law of contiguity:
namely, that a sensation tends to recall what is called the idea of
itself, that is, the remembrance of a sensation like itself, if such has
previously been experienced. This is implied in what we call recognising
a sensation, as one which has been felt before; more correctly, as
undistinguishably Edition: current; Page: [121] resembling one which has
been felt before. The law in question was scientifically enunciated, and
included, I believe for the first time, in the list of Laws of
Association, by Sir William Hamilton, in one of the Dissertations
appended to his edition of Reid:38 but the fact itself is recognised by
the author of the Analysis, in various passages of his work; more
especially in the second section of the fourteenth chapter.39 There is,
therefore, a suggestion by resemblance—a calling up of the idea of a
past sensation by a present sensation like it—which not only does not
depend on association by contiguity, but is itself the foundation which
association by contiguity requires for its support.

When it is admitted that simple sensations remind us of one another by
direct resemblance, many of the complex cases of suggestion by
resemblance may be analysed into this elementary case of association by
resemblance, combined with an association by contiguity. A flower, for
instance, may remind us of a former flower resembling it, because the
present flower exhibits to us certain qualities, that is, excites in us
certain sensations, resembling and recalling to our remembrance those we
had from the former flower, and these recall the entire image of the
flower by the law of association by contiguity. But this explanation,
though it serves for many cases of complex phenomena suggesting one
another by resemblance, does not suffice for all. For, the resemblance
of complex facts often consists, not solely, or principally, in likeness
between the simple sensations, but far more in likeness of the manner of
their combination, and it is often by this, rather than by the single
features, that they recall one another. After we had seen, and well
observed, a single triangle, when we afterwards saw a second there can
be little doubt that it would at once remind us of the first by mere
resemblance. But the suggestion would not depend on the sides or on the
angles, any or all of them; for we might have seen such sides and such
angles uncombined, or combined into some other figure. The resemblance
by which one triangle recalls the idea of another is not resemblance in
the parts, but principally and emphatically in the manner in which the
parts are put together. I am unable to see any mode in which this case
of suggestion can be accounted for by contiguity; any mode, at least,
which would fit all cases of the kind. (Vol. I, pp. 111-14.)

* * * * *

[The] union of two complex ideas into one, Dr. Hartley has called a
duplex idea.

I have been unable to trace in Hartley the expression here ascribed to
him. In every Edition: current; Page: [122] passage that I can discover,
the name he gives to a combination of two or more complex ideas is that
of a decomplex idea.40 (Vol. I, p. 115.)

* * * * *

[A comprehensive note by Bain, appended to the end of Chap. iii, “The
Association of Ideas,” is followed by J.S. Mill’s footnote.]

The author and Mr. Bain agree in rejecting Contrast as an independent
principle of association.41 I think they might have gone further, and
denied it even as a derivative one. All the cases considered as examples
of it seem to me to depend on something else. I greatly doubt if the
sight or thought of a dwarf has intrinsically any tendency to recall the
idea of a giant. Things certainly do remind us of their own absence,
because (as pointed out by Mr. Bain) we are only conscious of their
presence by comparison with their absence; and for a further reason,
arising out of the former, viz. that, in our practical judgments, we are
led to think of the case of their presence and the case of their absence
by one and the same act of thought, having commonly to choose between
the two. But it does not seem to me that things have any special
tendency to remind us of their positive opposites. Black does not remind
us of white more than of red or green. If light reminds us of darkness,
it is because darkness is the mere negation, or absence, of light. The
case of heat and cold is more complex. The sensation of heat recalls to
us the absence of that sensation: if the sensation amounts to pain, it
calls up the idea of relief from it; that is, of its absence, associated
by contiguity with the pleasant feeling which accompanies the change.
But cold is not the mere absence of heat; it is itself a positive
sensation. If heat suggests to us the idea of the sensation of cold, it
is not because of the contrast, but because the close connection which
exists between the outward conditions of both, and the consequent
identity of the means we employ for regulating them, cause the thought
of cold and that of heat to be frequently presented to us in
continguity. (Vol. I, pp. 125-6.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of Chap. iv, “Naming.”]

This exposition of Naming in its most general aspect, needs neither
explanation nor comment. It is one of those specimens of clear and
vigorous statement, going Edition: current; Page: [123] straight to the
heart of the matter, and dwelling on it just long enough and no longer
than necessary, in which the Analysis abounds. (Vol. I, p. 133.)

* * * * *

Names, to be useful, cannot exceed a certain number. They could not
otherwise be remembered. It is, therefore, of the greatest importance
that each name should accomplish as much as possible. To this end, the
greater number of names stand, not for individuals only, but classes.
[For example, red, sweet, hot, loud, rose, stone, iron, ox.]

Economy in the use of names is a very small part of the motive leading
to the creation of names of classes. If we had a name for every
individual object which exists in the universe, and could remember all
those names, we should still require names for what those objects or
some of them have in common; in other words, we should require
classification, and class-names. This will be obvious if it is
considered that had we no names but names of individuals, we should not
have the means of making any affirmation respecting any object; we could
not predicate of it any qualities. But of this more largely in a future
note.42 (Vol. I, p. 137.)

* * * * *

[James Mill comments that when wishing to name simple ideas, for
instance those of sight, one has available only red, blue, violet, etc.,
all of which are the names of the sensations. Awkward expressions
result, such as “my sensation of red, my idea of red.” Similarly, “sound
of a trumpet,” “flight of a bird,” “light,” “pain,” and “heat” are the
names “of the sensation as well as the idea.”]

In strict propriety of language all these are names only of sensations,
or clusters of sensations; not of ideas. A person studious of precision
would not, I think, say heat, meaning the idea of heat, or a tree, when
he meant the idea of a tree. He would use heat as the name only of the
sensation of heat, and tree as the name of the outward object, or
cluster of sensations; and if he had occasion to speak of the idea, he
would say, my idea (or the idea) of heat; my idea (or the idea) of a
tree. (Vol. I, p. 140.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [124]
[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of “Nouns Substantive,” Sect. 1 of
Chap. iv, “Naming,” in which James Mill refers to “complex ideas which,
though derived . . . from the senses, are put together in a great degree
at our discretion, as the ideas of a centaur, a mountain of gold, of
comfort, of meanness; all that class of ideas . . . which Mr. Locke has
called mixed modes”43 (Vol. I, pp. 137-8). He then mentions their
arbitrary and individual formation, using other instances cited by J.S.
Mill (ibid., pp. 140-1).]

There is some need for additional elucidation of the class of complex
ideas distinguished (under the name of Mixed Modes) by Locke, and
recognised by the author of the Analysis, as “put together in a great
degree at our discretion;” as “those which the mind forms arbitrarily,”
so that “the ideas of which they are composed are more or less numerous
according to pleasure, and each man of necessity forms his own
combination.” From these and similar phrases, interpreted literally, it
might be supposed that in the instances given, a centaur, a mountain of
gold, comfort, meanness, fear, courage, temperance, ignorance, republic,
aristocracy, monarchy, piety, good manners, prudence—the elements which
constitute these several complex ideas are put together premeditatedly,
by an act of will, which each individual performs for himself, and of
which he is conscious. This, however, happens only in cases of
invention, or of what is called creative imagination. A centaur and a
mountain of gold are inventions: combinations intentionally made, at
least on the part of the first inventor; and are not copies or
likenesses of any combination of impressions received by the senses, nor
are supposed to have any such outward phenomena corresponding to them.
But the other ideas mentioned in the text, those of courage, temperance,
aristocracy, monarchy, etc., are supposed to have real originals outside
our thoughts. These ideas, just as much as those of a horse and a tree,
are products of generalization and abstraction: they are believed to be
ideas of certain points or features in which a number of the clusters of
sensations which we call real objects agree: and instead of being formed
by intentionally putting together simple ideas, they are formed by
stripping off, or rather, by not attending to, such of the simple
sensations or ideas entering into the clusters as are peculiar to any of
them, and establishing an extremely close association among those which
are common to them all. These complex ideas, therefore, are not, in
reality, like the creations of mere imagination, put together at
discretion, any more than the complex ideas, compounded of the obvious
sensible qualities of objects, which we call our ideas of the objects.
They are formed in the same manner as these, only not so rapidly or so
easily, since the particulars of which they are composed do not obtrude
themselves upon the senses, but suppose a perception of qualities and
sequences not immediately obvious. From this circumstance results the
consequence noticed by the author, that this class of complex ideas are
often of different composition in Edition: current; Page: [125]
different persons. For, in the first place, different persons abstract
their ideas of this sort from different individual instances; and
secondly, some persons abstract much better than others; that is, take
more accurate notice of the obscurer features of instances, and discern
more correctly what are those in which all the instances agree. This
important subject will be more fully entered into when we reach that
part of the present work which treats of the ideas connected with
General Terms.44 (Vol. I, pp. 142-3.)

* * * * *

[“Nouns Adjective,” Sect. 2 of Chap. iv, concludes:] Beside the use of
adjectives, in dividing great classes into smaller ones, without
multiplication of names; they sometimes answer another purpose. It often
happens that, in the cluster of sensations or ideas which have one name;
we have occasion to call attention particularly to some one ingredient
of the cluster. Adjectives render this service, as well as that of
marking a class. This rose, I say, is red; that rose is yellow: this
stone is hot, that stone is cold. The term, red rose, or yellow rose, is
the name of a class. But when I say, this rose is red, where an
individual is named, I mark emphatically the specific difference;
namely, red, or yellow; which constitutes that subdivision of the genus
rose, to which the individual belongs.

In the concluding paragraph we find the first recognition by the author
that class names serve any purpose, or are introduced for any reason,
except to save multiplication of names. Adjectives, it is here said,
answer also the purpose of calling attention to some one ingredient of
the cluster of sensations combined under one name. That is to say, they
enable us to affirm that the cluster contains that ingredient: for they
do not merely call attention to the ingredient, or remind the hearer of
it: the hearer, very often, did not know that the cluster contained the
ingredient, until he was apprised by the proposition.

But surely it is not only adjectives which fulfil either office, whether
of giving information of an ingredient, or merely fixing the attention
upon it. All general names do so, when used as predicates. When I say
that a distant object which I am pointing at is a tree, or a building, I
just as much call attention to certain ingredients in the cluster of
sensations constituting the object, as I do when I say, This rose is
red. So far is it from being true that adjectives are distinguished from
substantives by having this function in addition to that of economizing
names, that it is, on the contrary, much more nearly true of adjectives
than of the class-names which are nouns substantive, that the
economizing of names is the principal motive for their institution. For
though general names of some sort are indispensable to Edition: current;
Page: [126] predication, adjectives are not. As is well shewn in the
text, the peculiarity, which really distinguishes adjectives from other
general names, is that they mark cross divisions. All nature having
first been marked out into classes by means of nouns substantive, we
might go on by the same means subdividing each class. We might call the
large individuals of a class by one noun substantive and the small ones
by another, and these substantives would serve all purposes of
predication; but to do this we should need just twice as many additional
nouns substantive as there are classes of objects. Since, however, the
distinction of large and small applies to all classes alike, one pair of
names will suffice to designate it. Instead therefore of dividing every
class into sub-classes, each with its own name, we draw a line across
all the classes, dividing all nature into large things and small, and by
using these two words as adjectives, that is, by adding one or other of
them as the occasion requires to every noun substantive which is the
name of a class, we are able to mark universally the distinction of
large and small by two names only, instead of many millions. (Vol. I,
pp. 149-50.)

* * * * *

[In “Verbs,” Sect. 3 of Chap. iv, James Mill says:] When the name of an
act is applied to an agent, the agent is either the person speaking, the
person spoken to, or some other person. The word denoting the action is,
by what are called the Persons of the verb, made to connote these
diversities. Thus amo notes the act, and connotes the person speaking as
the actor; amas notes the act, and connotes the person spoken to, as the
actor; amat notes the act, and connotes some person, as the actor, who
is neither the person speaking, nor the person spoken to.

There is here a fresh instance of the oversight already pointed out,
that of not including in the function for which general names are
required, their employment in Predication. Amo, amas, and amamus,
cannot, I conceive, with any propriety be called names of actions, or
names at all. They are entire predications. It is one of the properties
of the kind of general names called verbs, that they cannot be used
except in a Proposition or Predication, and indeed only as the predicate
of it: (for the infinitive is not a verb, but the abstract of a verb).
What else there is to distinguish verbs from other general names will be
more particularly considered further on.45 (Vol. I, p. 154.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [127]
[James Mill discusses “the contrivances” used to make verbs,] the marks
or names of action, by their connotative powers, a more and more
effectual instrument of notation. Accurately speaking, they are
adjectives; so fashioned as to connote, a threefold distinction of
agents, with a twofold distinction of their number, a threefold
distinction of the manner of the action, and a threefold distinction of
its time; and, along with all this, another important particular, . . .
the copula in predication.

The imperfection of this theory of Verbs is sufficiently apparent. They
are, says the author, a particular kind of Adjectives. Adjectives,
according to the preceding Section, are words employed to enable us,
without inconvenient multiplication of names, to subdivide great classes
into smaller ones. Can it be said, or would it have been said by the
author, that the only, or the principal reason for having Verbs, is to
enable us to subdivide classes of objects with the greatest economy of
names?

Neither is it strictly accurate to say that Verbs are always marks of
motion, or of action, even including, as the author does, by an
extension of the meaning of those terms, every process which is attended
with a feeling of effort. Many verbs, of the kind which grammarians call
neuter or intransitive verbs, express rest, or inaction: as sit, lie,
and in some cases, stand. It is true however that the verbs first
invented, as far as we know anything of them, expressed forms of motion,
and the principal function of verbs still is to affirm or deny action.
Or, to speak yet more generally, it is by means of verbs that we
predicate events. Events, or changes, are the most important facts, to
us, in the surrounding world. Verbs are the resource which language
affords for predicating events. They are not the names of events; all
names of events are substantives, as sunrise, disaster, or infinitives,
as to rise, and infinitives are logically substantives. But it is by
means of verbs that we assert, or give information of, events; as, The
sun rises, or, Disaster has occurred. There is, however, a class of
neuter verbs already referred to, which do not predicate events, but
states of an unchanging object, as lie, sit, remain, exist. It would be
incorrect, therefore, to give a definition of Verbs which should limit
them to the expression of events. I am inclined to think that the
distinction between nouns and verbs is not logical, but merely
grammatical, and that every word, whatever be its meaning, must be
reputed a verb, which is so constructed grammatically that it can only
be used as the predicate of a proposition. Any meaning whatever is, in
strictness, capable of being thrown into this form: but it is only
certain meanings, chiefly actions or events, which there is, in general,
any motive for putting into this particular shape. (Vol. I, pp. 155-6.)

* * * * *

[In “Predication,” Sect. 4 of Chap. iv, James Mill refers to predication
as] the Edition: current; Page: [128] grand expedient, by which language
is enabled to mark not only sensations and ideas, but also the order of
them.

The theory of Predication here set forth, stands in need of further
elucidation, and perhaps of some correction and addition.

The account which the author gives of a Predication, or Proposition, is,
first, that it is a mode of so putting together the marks of sensations
and ideas, as to mark the order of them. Secondly, that it consists in
substituting one name for another, so as to signify that a certain name
(called the predicate), is a mark of the same idea which another name
(called the subject) is a mark of.46

It must be allowed that a predication, or proposition, is intended to
mark some portion of the order either of our sensations or of our ideas,
i.e., some part of the coexistences or sequences which take place either
in our minds, or in what we term the external world. But what sort of
order is it that a predication marks? An order supposed to be believed
in. When John, or man, are said to be marks of an individual object, all
there is in the matter is that these words, being associated with the
idea of the object, are intended to raise that idea in the mind of the
person who hears or reads them. But when we say, John is a man, or, John
is an old man, we intend to do more than call up in the hearer’s mind
the images of John, of a man, and of an old man. We intend to do more
than inform him that we have thought of, or even seen, John and a man,
or John and an old man, together. We inform him of a fact respecting
John, namely, that he is an old man, or at all events, of our belief
that this is a fact. The characteristic difference between a predication
and any other form of speech, is, that it does not merely bring to mind
a certain object (which is the only function of a mark, merely as such);
it asserts something respecting it. Now it may be true, and I think it
is true, that every assertion, every object of Belief,—everything that
can be true or false—that can be an object of assent or dissent—is some
order of sensations or of ideas: some coexistence or succession of
sensations or ideas actually experienced, or supposed capable of being
experienced. And thus it may appear in the end that in expressing a
belief, we are after all only declaring the order of a group or series
of sensations or ideas. But the order which we declare is not an
imaginary order; it is an order believed to be real. Whatever view we
adopt of the psychological nature of Belief, it is necessary to
distinguish between the mere suggestion to the mind of a certain order
among sensations or ideas—such as takes place when we think of the
alphabet, or the numeration table—and the indication that this order is
an actual fact, which is occurring, or which has occurred once or
oftener, or which, in certain definite circumstances, always occurs;
which are the things indicated as true by an affirmative predication,
and as false by a negative one.

That a predication differs from a name in doing more than merely calling
up an idea, is admitted in what I have noted as the second half of the
author’s theory of Edition: current; Page: [129] Predication. That
second half points out that every predication is a communication,
intended to act, not on the mere ideas of the listener, but on his
persuasion or belief: and what he is intended to believe, according to
the author, is, that of the two names which are conjoined in the
predication, one is a mark of the same idea (or let me add, of the same
sensation or cluster of sensations) of which the other is a mark. This
is a doctrine of Hobbes, the one which caused him to be termed by
Leibnitz, in words which have been often quoted, “plus quam
nominalis.”47 It is quite true that when we predicate B of A—when we
assert of A that it is a B—B must, if the assertion is true, be a name
of A, i.e., a name applicable to A; one of the innumerable names which,
in virtue of their signification, can be used as descriptive of A: but
is this the information which we want to convey to the hearer? It is so
when we are speaking only of names and their meaning, as when we
enunciate a definition. In every other case, what we want to convey is a
matter of fact, of which this relation between the names is but an
incidental consequence. When we say, John walked out this morning, it is
not a correct expression of the communication we desire to make, that
“having walked out this morning” or “a person who has walked out this
morning” are two of the innumerable names of John. They are only
accidentally and momentarily names of John by reason of a certain event,
and the information we mean to give is, that this event has happened.
The event is not resolvable into an identity of meaning between names,
but into an actual series of sensations that occurred to John, and a
belief that any one who had been present and using his eyes would have
had another series of sensations, which we call seeing John in the act
of walking out. Again, when we say, Negroes are woolly-haired, we mean
to make known to the hearer, not that woolly-haired is a name of every
negro, but that wherever the cluster of sensations signified by the word
negro, are experienced, the sensations signified by the word
woolly-haired will be found either among them or conjoined with them.
This is an order of sensations: and it is only in consequence of it that
the name woolly-haired comes to be applicable to every individual of
whom the term negro is a name.

There is nothing positively opposed to all this in the author’s text:
indeed he must be considered to have meant this, when he said, that by
means of substituting one name for another, a predication marks the
order of our sensations and ideas. The omission consists in not
remarking that what is distinctively signified by a predication, as
such, is Belief in a certain order of sensations or ideas. And when this
has been said, the Hobbian addition, that it does so by declaring the
predicate to be a name of everything of which the subject is a name, may
be omitted as surplusage, and as diverting the mind from the essential
features of the case. Edition: current; Page: [130] Predication may thus
be defined, a form of speech which expresses a belief that a certain
coexistence or sequence of sensations or ideas, did, does, or, under
certain conditions, would take place: and the reverse of this when the
predication is negative. (Vol. I, pp. 161-4.)

* * * * *

[Continuing his discussion of predication, James Mill says:] We have
already seen, perhaps at sufficient length, the manner in which, and the
end for which, the Genus, and the Species are predicated of any subject.
It is, that the more comprehensive name, may be substituted for the less
comprehensive; so that each of our marks may answer the purpose of
marking, to as great an extent as possible. In this manner we substitute
the word man, for example, for the word Thomas, when we predicate the
Species of the individual, in the proposition, “Thomas is a man;” the
word animal, for the word man, when we predicate the Genus of the
Species, in the proposition, “man, is an animal.”

If what has been said in the preceding note is correct, it is a very
inadequate view of the purpose for which a generic or specific name is
predicated of any subject, to say that it is in order that “the more
comprehensive name may be substituted for the less comprehensive, so
that each of our marks may answer the purpose of marking to as great an
extent as possible.” The more comprehensive and the less comprehensive
name have each their uses, and the function of each not only could not
be discharged with equal convenience by the other, but could not be
discharged by it at all. The purpose, in predicating of anything the
name of a class to which it belongs, is not to obtain a better or more
commodious name for it, but to make known the fact of its possessing the
attributes which constitute the class, and which are therefore signified
by the class-name. It is evident that the name of one class cannot
possibly perform this office vicariously for the name of another. (Vol.
I, p. 165.)

* * * * *

[Having dealt with Genus and Species, James Mill turns to the other
three Classical predicables, Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens.]

The author says, that no very distinct boundaries are marked by the
three terms, Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens, nor do they effect a
scientific division.48 As Edition: current; Page: [131] used, however,
by the more accurate of the school logicians, they do mark out distinct
boundaries, and do effect a scientific division.

Of the attributes common to a class, some have been taken into
consideration in forming the class, and are included in the
signification of its name. Such, in the case of man, are rationality,
and the outward form which we call the human. These attributes are its
Differentiae; the fundamental differences which distinguish that class
from the others most nearly allied to it. The school logicians were
contented with one Differentia, whenever one was sufficient completely
to circumscribe the class. But this was an error, because one attribute
may be sufficient for distinction, and yet may not exhaust the
signification of the class-name. All attributes, then, which are part of
that signification, are set apart as Differentiae. Other attributes,
though not included among those which constitute the class, and which
are directly signified by its name, are consequences of some of those
which constitute the class, and always found along with them. These
attributes of the class are its Propria. Thus, to be bounded by three
straight lines is the Differentia of a triangle: to have the sum of its
three angles equal to two right angles, being a consequence of its
Differentia, is a Proprium of it. Rationality is a Differentia of the
class Man: to be able to build cities is a Proprium, being a consequence
of rationality, but not, as that is, included in the meaning of the word
Man. All other attributes of the class, which are neither included in
the meaning of the name, nor are consequences of any which are included,
are Accidents, however universally and constantly they may be true of
the class; as blackness, of crows.

The author’s remark, that these three classes of Attributives differ
from one another only in the accident of their application,49 is most
just. There are not some attributes which are always Differentiae, and
others which are always Propria, or always Accidents. The same attribute
which is a Differentia of one genus or species, may be, and often is, a
Proprium or an Accidens of others, and so on. (Vol. I, pp. 168-9.)

* * * * *

[James Mill argues that] all Predication, is Predication of Genus or
Species, since the Attributives classed under the titles of Differentia,
Proprium, Accidens, cannot be used but as part of the name of a Species.
But we have seen, above, that Predication by Genus and Species is merely
the substitution of one name for another, the more general for the less
general; the fact of the substitution being marked by the Copula. It
follows, if all Predication is by Genus and Species, that all
Predication is the substitution of one name for another, the more for
the less general.

Edition: current; Page: [132]
It will be easy for the learner to make this material fact familiar to
himself, by attending to a few instances. Thus, when it is said that man
is rational, the term rational is evidently elliptical, and the word
animal is understood. The word rational, according to grammatical
language, is an adjective, and is significant only in conjunction with a
substantive. According to logical language, it is a connotative term,
and is without a meaning when disjoined from the object, the property or
properties of which it connotes.

I am unable to feel the force of this remark. Every predication ascribes
an attribute to a subject. Differentiae, Propria, and Accidents, agree
with generic and specific names in expressing attributes, and the
attributes they express are the whole of their meaning. I therefore
cannot see why there should not be Predication of any of these, as well
as of Genus and Species. These three Predicables, the author says,
cannot be used but as part of the name of a genus or species: they are
adjectives, and cannot be employed without a substantive understood.
Allowing this to be logically, as it is grammatically, true, still the
comprehensive and almost insignificant substantive, “thing” or “being,”
fully answers the purpose; and the entire meaning of the predication is
contained in the adjective. These adjectives, as the author remarks, are
connotative terms; but so, on his own shewing elsewhere, are all
concrete substantives, except proper names. Why, when it is said that
man is rational, must “the word animal” be “understood?” Nothing is
understood but that the being, Man, has the attribute of reason. If we
say, God is rational, is animal understood? It was only the Greeks who
classed their gods as Ζω̑α ἀθἀνατα.50

The exclusion of the three latter Predicables from predication probably
recommended itself to the author as a support to his doctrine that all
Predication is the substitution of one name for another, which he
considered himself to have already demonstrated so far as regards Genus
and Species. But proofs have just been given that in the predication of
Genus and Species no more than in that of Differentia, Proprium, or
Accidens, is anything which turns upon names the main consideration.
Except in the case of definitions, and other merely verbal propositions,
every proposition is intended to communicate a matter of fact: This
subject has that attribute—This cluster of sensations is always
accompanied by that sensation.

Let me remark by the way, that the word connote is here used by the
author in what I consider its legitimate sense—that in which a name is
said to connote a property or properties belonging to the object it is
predicated of. He afterwards Edition: current; Page: [133] casts off
this use of the term, and introduces one the exact reverse: but of this
hereafter.51 (Vol. I, pp. 169-71.)

* * * * *

[Immediately following the text quoted in the previous entry, James Mill
remarks:] With respect, however, to such examples as this last, namely,
all those in which the predicate consists of the genus and differentia,
the proposition is a mere definition; and the predicate, and the
subject, are precisely equivalent. Thus, “rational animal” is precisely
the same class as “man;” and they are only two names for the same thing;
the one a simple, or single-worded name; the other a complex, or
doubled-worded, name. Such propositions therefore are, properly
speaking, not Predications at all. When they are used for any other
purpose than to make known, or to fix, the meaning of a term, they are
useless, and are denominated identical propositions.

In this passage the author virtually gives up the part of his theory of
Predication which is borrowed from Hobbes.52 According to his doctrine
in this place, whenever the predicate and the subject are exactly
equivalent, and “are only two names for the same thing,” the predication
serves only “to make known, or to fix, the meaning of a term,” and “such
propositions are, properly speaking, not Predications at all.” (Vol. I,
p. 171.)

* * * * *

[James Mill argues in detail (Vol. I, pp. 174-8) the pernicious effects
of the copula verb’s being used also to denote existence, citing the
verb to be in English. To this passage is appended a note by Findlater
(pp. 178-82) in which he shows how this confusion is avoided in
non-Indo-European languages. J.S. Mill’s note follows immediately on
Findlater’s.]

The interesting and important philological facts adduced by Mr.
Findlater, confirm and illustrate in a very striking manner the doctrine
in the text, of the radical distinction between the functions of the
copula in predication, and those of the substantive verb; by shewing
that many languages have no substantive verb, no verb expressive of mere
existence, and yet signify their predications by other means; and that
probably all languages began without a substantive verb, though they
must always have had predications.

Edition: current; Page: [134]
The confusion between these two different functions in the European
languages, and the ambiguity of the verb To Be, which fulfils them both,
are among the most important of the minor philosophical truths to which
attention has been called by the author of the Analysis. As in the case
of many other luminous thoughts, an approach is found to have been made
to it by previous thinkers. Hobbes, though he did not reach it, came
very close to it, and it was still more distinctly anticipated by
Laromiguière, though without any sufficient perception of its value. It
occurs in a criticism on a passage of Pascal, and in the following
words.

Quand on dit, l’être est, etc. le mot est, ou le verbe, n’exprime pas la
même chose que le mot être, sujet de la définition. Si j’énonce la
proposition suivante: Dieu est existant, je ne voudrais pas dire
assurément, Dieu existe existant: cela ne ferait pas un sens; de même,
si je dis que Virgile est poëte, je ne veux pas donner à entendre que
Virgile existe. Le verbe est, dans la proposition, n’exprime donc pas
l’existence réelle; il n’exprime qu’un rapport spécial entre le sujet et
l’attribut, le rapport du contenant au contenu. . . .*

Having thus hit upon an unobvious truth in the course of an argument
directed to another purpose, he passes on and takes no further notice of
it.

It may seem strange that the verb which signifies existence should have
been employed in so many different languages as the sign of predication,
if there is no real connection between the two meanings. But languages
have been built up by the extension of an originally small number of
words, with or without alterations of form, to express new meanings, the
choice of the word being often determined by very distant analogies. In
the present case, the analogy is not distant. All our predications are
intended to declare the manner in which something affects, or would
affect, ourselves or others. Our idea of existence is simply the idea of
something which affects or would affect us somehow, without distinction
of mode. Everything, therefore, which we can have occasion to assert of
an existing thing, may be looked upon as a particular mode of its
existence. Since snow is white, and since snow exists, it may be said to
exist white; and if a sign was wanted by which to predicate white of
snow, the word exists would be very likely to present itself. But most
of our predications do relate to existing things: and this being so, it
is in the ordinary course of the human mind that the same sign should be
adhered to when we are predicating something of a merely imaginary thing
(an abstraction, for instance) and that, being so used, it should create
an association between the abstraction and the notion of real existence.
(Vol. I, pp. 182-4.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [135]
[To illustrate the sequences in trains of thought connected by cause and
effect, James Mill says:] let me suppose that I have a flint and steel
in my hand, which I am about to strike, one against the other, but at
that instant perceive a barrel of gunpowder open, close before me. I
withhold the stroke in consequence of the train of thought which
suggests to me the ultimate effect. If I have occasion to mark the
train, I can only do it by a series of Predications, each of which marks
a sequence in the train of causes and effects. “I strike the flint on
the steel,” first sequence. “The stroke produces a spark,” second
sequence. “The spark falls on gunpowder,” third sequence. “The spark
ignites the gunpowder,” fourth sequence. “The gunpowder ignited makes an
explosion,” fifth sequence. The ideas contained in these propositions
must all have passed through my mind, and this is the only mode in which
language enables me to mark them in their order.

It is necessary again to notice the consistent omission, throughout the
author’s theory of Predication, of the element Belief. In the case
supposed, the ideas contained in all the propositions might have passed
through the mind, without our being led to assert the propositions. I
might have thought of every step in the series of phenomena mentioned,
might have pictured all of them in my imagination, and have come to the
conclusion that they would not happen. I therefore should not have made,
either in words or in thought, the predication, This gunpowder will
explode if I strike the flint against the steel. Yet the same ideas
would have passed through my mind in the same order, in which they stand
in the text. The only deficient link would have been the final one, the
Belief. (Vol. I, p. 187.)

* * * * *

[To illustrate sequences connected by being “included under the same
name” (Vol. I, p. 186), James Mill refers (p. 188) to syllogism as the
leading example.] Let us consider the following very familiar instance.
“Every tree is a vegetable: every oak is a tree: therefore, every oak is
a vegetable.” This is evidently a process of naming. The primary idea is
that of the object called an oak; from the name oak, I proceed to the
name tree, finding that the name oak, is included in the name tree; and
from the name tree, I proceed to the name vegetable, finding that the
name tree is included in the name vegetable, and by consequence the name
oak. This is the series of thoughts, which is marked in order, by the
three propositions or predications of the syllogism.

For the present I shall only remark on this theory of the syllogism,
that it must stand or fall with the theory of Predication of which it is
the sequel. If, as I have maintained, the propositions which are the
premises of the syllogism are not correctly described as mere processes
of naming, neither is the formula by which a Edition: current; Page:
[136] third proposition is elicited from these two a process of mere
naming. What it is, will be considered hereafter.53 (Vol. I, p. 188.)

* * * * *

[Discussing the predications in geometry, James Mill comments:] The
amount of the three angles of a triangle, is twice a right angle. I
arrive at this conclusion, as it is called, by a process of reasoning:
that is to say, I find out a name “twice a right angle,” which much more
distinctly points out to me a certain quantity, than my first name,
“amount of the three angles of a triangle;” and the process by which I
arrive at this name is a successive change of names, and nothing more;
as any one may prove to himself by merely observing the steps of the
demonstration.

I cannot see any propriety in the expression that when we infer the sum
of the three angles of a triangle to be twice a right angle, the
operation consists in finding a second name which more distinctly points
out the quantity than the first name. When we assent to the proof of
this theorem, we do much more than obtain a new and more expressive name
for a known fact; we learn a fact previously unknown. It is true that
one result of our knowledge of this theorem is to give us a name for the
sum of the three angles, “the marking power of which is perfectly known
to us:”54 but it was not for want of knowing the marking power of the
phrase “sum of the three angles of a triangle” that we did not know what
that sum amounted to. We knew perfectly what the expression “sum of the
three angles” was appointed to mark. What we have obtained, that we did
not previously possess, is not a better mark for the same thing, but an
additional fact to mark—the fact which is marked by predicating of that
sum, the phrase “twice a right angle.” (Vol. I, p. 191.)

* * * * *

[Treating a matter to which he later returns, the class of words which
are names of names, James Mill says:] Word is a generical name for all
Names. It is not the name of a Thing, as chair is the name of a thing,
or watch, or picture. But word is a name for these several names; chair
is a word, watch is a word, picture is a word, and so of all other
names. Thus grammatical and logical terms are names of names. The word
noun, is the name of one class of words, verb of another, preposition of
another, and so on. The word sentence, is the name of a series of words
put together for a certain purpose; the word paragraph, the same; and so
Edition: current; Page: [137] oration, discourse, essay, treatise, etc.
The words genus and species, are not names of things, but of names.
Genus is not the name of any thing called animal or any thing called
body; it is a name of the names animal, body, and so on; the name animal
is a genus, the name body is a genus; and in like manner is the name man
a species, the name horse, the name crow, and so on. The name
proposition, the name syllogism, are names of a series of words put
together for a particular purpose; and so is the term definition; and
the term argument. It will be easily seen that these words enter into
Predication precisely on the same principles as other words. Either the
more distinct is predicated of the less distinct, its equivalent; or the
more comprehensive of the less comprehensive. Thus we say, that nouns
and verbs are declinables; preposition and adverb indeclinables; where
the more comprehensive terms are predicated of the less. Thus we say,
that adjectives and verbs are attributes; where the more distinct is
predicated of the less.

This exposition of the class of words which are properly names of names,
belongs originally to Hobbes,55 and is highly important. They are a kind
of names, the signification of which is very often misunderstood, and
has given occasion to much hazy speculation. It should however be
remarked that the words genus and species are not solely names of names;
they are ambiguous. A genus never indeed means (as many of the schoolmen
supposed) an abstract entity, distinct from all the individuals
composing the class; but it often means the sum of those individuals
taken collectively; the class as a whole, distinguished on the one hand
from the single objects comprising it, and on the other hand from the
class name. (Vol. I, pp. 192-3.)

* * * * *

[In “Adverbs,” Sect. vi of Chap. iv, to illustrate his assertion that
adverbs are always employed to modify the subject or predicate of a
proposition, James Mill comments (Vol. I, p. 199):] “Anciently,” is an
adverb of time. It is of the same import as the expression, “In distant
past time.” It is applied to modify the subject, or predicate, of a
proposition, as in the following example: “A number of men anciently in
England had wives in common.” “Had wives in common,” is the predicate of
the above proposition, and it is modified, or limited, in respect to
time, by the word “anciently.” [He goes on to deal with adverbs of
place, quality, and relation; J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of the
section.]

In many cases, and even in some of the examples given, the adverb does
not modify either the subject or the predicate, but the application of
the one to the Edition: current; Page: [138] other. “Anciently,” in the
proposition cited, is intended to limit and qualify not men, nor
community of wives, but the practice by men of community of wives: it is
a circumstance affecting not the subject or the predicate, but the
predication. The qualification of past and distant time attaches to the
fact asserted, and to the copula, which is the mark of assertion. The
reason of its seeming to attach to the predicate is because, as the
author remarked in a previous section, the predicate, when a verb,
includes the copula. (Vol. I, p. 200.)

* * * * *

[At the end of Chap. v, “Consciousness,” a long note by Bain, commenting
generally on the term, is appended (Vol. I, pp. 226-9); J.S. Mill’s note
follows it.]

Those psychologists who think that being conscious of a feeling is
something different from merely having the feeling, generally give the
name Consciousness to the mental act by which we refer the feeling to
ourself; or, in other words, regard it in its relation to the series of
many feelings, which constitutes our sentient life. Many philosophers
have thought that this reference is necessarily involved in the fact of
sensation: we cannot, they think, have a feeling, without having the
knowledge awakened in us at the same moment, of a Self who feels it. But
of this as a primordial fact of our nature, it is impossible to have
direct evidence; and a supposition may be made which renders its truth
at least questionable. Suppose a being, gifted with sensation but devoid
of memory; whose sensations follow one after another, but leave no trace
of their existence when they cease. Could this being have any knowledge
or notion of a Self? Would he ever say to himself, I feel; this
sensation is mine? I think not. The notion of a Self is, I apprehend, a
consequence of Memory. There is no meaning in the word Ego or I, unless
the I of to-day is also the I of yesterday; a permanent element which
abides through a succession of feelings, and connects the feeling of
each moment with the remembrance of previous feelings. We have, no
doubt, a considerable difficulty in believing that a sentient being can
exist without the consciousness of Itself. But this difficulty arises
from the irresistible association which we, who possess Memory, form in
our early infancy between every one of our feelings and our remembrance
of the entire series of feelings of which it forms a part, and
consequently between every one of our feelings and our Self. A slight
correction, therefore, seems requisite to the doctrine of the author
laid down in the present chapter.56 There is a mental process, over and
above the mere having a feeling, to which the word Consciousness is
sometimes, and it can hardly be said improperly, applied, viz. the
reference of the feeling to our Self. But this process, though Edition:
current; Page: [139] separable in thought from the actual feeling, and
in all probability not accompanying it in the beginning, is, from a very
early period of our existence, inseparably attendant on it, though, like
many other mental processes, it often takes place too rapidly to be
remembered at the next instant.

Other thinkers, or perhaps the same thinkers on other occasions, employ
the word Consciousness as almost a synonyme of Attention. We all know
that we have a power, partly voluntary, though often acting
independently of our will, of attending (as it is called) to a
particular sensation or thought. The essence of Attention is that the
sensation or thought is, as it were, magnified, or strengthened: it
becomes more intense as a whole, and at the same time more distinct and
definite in its various parts, like a visible object when a stronger
light is thrown upon it: while all other sensations or thoughts which do
or which might present themselves at the same moment are blunted and
dimmed, or altogether excluded. This heightening of the feeling we may
call, if we please, heightening the consciousness of the feeling; and it
may be said that we are made more conscious of the feeling than we were
before: but the expression is scarcely correct, for we are not more
conscious of the feeling, but are conscious of more feeling.

In some cases we are even said to be, by an act of attention, made
conscious of a feeling of which we should otherwise have been
unconscious: and there is much difference of opinion as to what it is
which really occurs in this case. The point has received some
consideration in a former Note,57 but there may be advantage in again
recalling it to remembrance. It frequently happens (examples of it are
abundant in the Analysis) that certain of our sensations, or certain
parts of the series of our thoughts, not being sufficiently pleasurable
or painful to compel attention, and there being no motive for attending
to them voluntarily, pass off without having been attended to; and, not
having received that artificial intensification, they are too slight and
too fugitive to be remembered. We often have evidence that these
sensations or ideas have been in the mind; because, during their short
passage, they have called up other ideas by association. A good example
is the case of reading from a book, when we must have perceived and
recognized the visible letters and syllables, yet we retain a
remembrance only of the sense which they conveyed. In such cases many
psychologists think that the impressions have passed through the mind
without our being conscious of them.58 But to have feelings
unconsciously, to have had them without being aware, is something like a
contradiction. All we really know is that we do not remember having had
them; whence we reasonably conclude that if we had them, we did not
attend to them; and this inattention to our feelings is what seems to be
here meant Edition: current; Page: [140] by being unconscious of them.
Either we had the sensations or other feelings without attending to
them, and therefore immediately forgot them, or we never, in reality,
had them. This last has been the opinion of some of the profoundest
psychologists. Even in cases in which it is certain that we once had
these feelings, and had them with a lively consciousness (as of the
letters and syllables when we were only learning to read) yet when
through numberless repetitions the process has become so rapid that we
no longer remember having those visual sensations, these philosophers
think that they are elided,—that we cease to have them at all. The usual
impressions are made on our organs by the written characters, and are
transmitted to the brain, but these organic states, they think, pass
away without having had time to excite the sensations corresponding to
them, the chain of association being kept up by the organic states
without need of the sensations. This was apparently the opinion of
Hartley; and is distinctly that of Mr. Herbert Spencer. The conflicting
suppositions are both consistent with the known facts of our mental
nature. Which of them is the true, our present knowledge does not, I
think, enable us to decide.

The author of the Analysis often insists on the important doctrine that
we have many feelings, both of the physical and of the mental class,
which, either because they are permanent and unchangeable, or for the
contrary reason, that they are extremely fugitive and evanescent, and
are at the same time uninteresting to us except for the mental processes
they originate, we form the habit of not attending to; and this habit,
after a time, grows into an incapacity; we become unable to attend to
them, even if we wish. In such cases we are usually not aware that we
have had the feelings; yet the author seems to be of opinion that we
really have them. He says, for example, in the section on Muscular
Sensations: “We know that the air is continually pressing upon our
bodies. But the sensation being continual, without any call to attend to
it, we lose from habit, the power of doing so. The sensation is as if it
did not exist.”59 Is it not the most reasonable supposition that the
sensation does not exist; that the necessary condition of sensation is
change; that an unchanging sensation, instead of becoming latent,
dwindles in intensity, until it dies away, and ceases to be a sensation?
Mr. Bain expresses this mental law by saying, that a necessary condition
of Consciousness is change; that we are conscious only of changes of
state.60 I apprehend that change is necessary to consciousness of
feeling, only because it is necessary to feeling: when there is no
change, there is, not a permanent feeling of which we are unconscious,
but no feeling at all.

In the concluding chapter of Mr. Bain’s great work, there is an
enumeration of Edition: current; Page: [141] the various senses in which
the word Consciousness is used.61 He finds them no fewer than thirteen.
(Vol. I, pp. 229-32.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of Chap. vi, “Conception.”]

The doctrine of this chapter is as just as it is admirably stated. A
conception is nothing whatever but a complex idea, and to conceive is to
have a complex idea. But as there must always have been some cause why a
second name is used when there is already a first, there is generally
some difference in the occasions of their employment: and a recognition
of this difference is necessary to the completeness of the exposition.
It seems to me that conception and to conceive are phrases appropriated
to the case in which the thing conceived is supposed to be something
external to my own mind. I am not said to conceive my own thoughts;
unless it be in the case of an invention, or mental creation; and even
then, to conceive it, means to imagine it realized, so that it may be
presented to myself or others as an external object. To conceive
something is to understand what it is; to adapt my complex idea to
something presented to me objectively. I am asked to conceive an
iceberg: it is not enough that I form to myself some complex idea; it
must be a complex idea which shall really resemble an iceberg, i.e. what
is called an iceberg by other people. My complex idea must be made up of
the elements in my mind which correspond to the elements making up the
idea of an iceberg in theirs.

This is connected with one of the most powerful and misleading of the
illusions of general language. The purposes of general names would not
be answered, unless the complex idea connected with a general name in
one person’s mind were composed of essentially the same elements as the
idea connected with it in the mind of another. There hence arises a
natural illusion, making us feel as if, instead of ideas as numerous as
minds, and merely resembling one another, there were one idea,
independent of individual minds, and to which it is the business of each
to learn to make his private idea correspond. This is the Platonic
doctrine of Ideas in all its purity:62 and as half the speculative world
are Platonists without knowing it, hence it also is that in the writings
of so many psychologists we read of the conception or the concept of so
and so; as if there was a concept of a thing or of a class of things,
other than the ideas in individual minds—a concept belonging to
everybody, the common inheritance of the human race, but independent of
any of Edition: current; Page: [142] the particular minds which conceive
it. In reality, however, this common concept is but the sum of the
elements which it is requisite for the purposes of discourse that people
should agree with one another in including in the complex idea which
they associate with a class name. As we shall presently see, these are
only a part, and often but a small part, of each person’s complex idea,
but they are the part which it is necessary should be the same in all.
(Vol. I, pp. 236-7.)

* * * * *

[In Chap. viii, “Classification,” developing further a position
mentioned earlier, James Mill says:] Man first becomes acquainted with
individuals. He first names individuals. But individuals are
innumerable, and he cannot have innumerable names. He must make one name
serve for many individuals. It is thus obvious, and certain, that men
were led to class solely for the purpose of economizing in the use of
names. Could the processes of naming and discourse have been as
conveniently managed by a name for every individual, the names of
classes, and the idea of classification, would never have existed. But
as the limits of the human memory did not enable men to retain beyond a
very limited number of names; and even if it had, as it would have
required a most inconvenient portion of time, to run over in discourse,
as many names of individuals, and of individual qualities, as there is
occasion to refer to in discourse, it was necessary to have contrivances
of abridgement; that is, to employ names which marked equally a number
of individuals, with all their separate properties; and enabled us to
speak of multitudes at once.

The doctrine that “men were led to class solely for the purpose of
economizing in the use of names,” is here reasserted in the most
unqualified terms. The author plainly says that if our memory had been
sufficiently vast to contain a name for every individual, the names of
classes and the idea of classification would never have existed. Yet how
(I am obliged to ask) could we have done without them? We could not have
dispensed with names to mark the points in which different individuals
resemble one another: and these are class-names. The fact that we
require names for the purpose of making affirmations—of predicating
qualities—is in some measure recognised by the author, when he says “it
would have required a most inconvenient portion of time to run over in
discourse as many names of individuals and of individual qualities as
there is occasion to refer to in discourse.” But what is meant by an
individual quality? It is not individual qualities that we ever have
occasion to predicate. It is true that the qualities of an object are
only the various ways in which we or other minds are affected by it, and
these affections are not the same in different objects, except in the
sense in which the word same stands for exact similarity. But we never
have occasion to predicate of an object the Edition: current; Page:
[143] individual and instantaneous impressions which it produces in us.
The only meaning of predicating a quality at all, is to affirm a
resemblance. When we ascribe a quality to an object, we intend to assert
that the object affects us in a manner similar to that in which we are
affected by a known class of objects. A quality, indeed, in the custom
of language, does not admit of individuality: it is supposed to be one
thing common to many; which, being explained, means that it is the name
of a resemblance among our sensations, and not a name of the individual
sensations which resemble. Qualities, therefore, cannot be predicated
without general names; nor, consequently, without classification.
Wherever there is a general name there is a class: classification, and
general names, are things exactly coextensive. It thus appears that,
without classification, language would not fulfil its most important
function. Had we no names but those of individuals, the names might
serve as marks to bring those individuals to mind, but would not enable
us to make a single assertion respecting them, except that one
individual is not another. Not a particle of the knowledge we have of
them could be expressed in words. (Vol. I, pp. 260-2.)

* * * * *

[At the conclusion of Chap. viii, George Grote supplies a long note
(Vol. I, pp. 271-87) on the Socratic philosophers’ notions of
classification and abstraction; J.S. Mill’s note follows immediately.]

Rejecting the notion that classes and classification would not have
existed but for the necessity of economizing names, we may say that
objects are formed into classes on account of their resemblance. It is
natural to think of like objects together; which is, indeed, one of the
two fundamental laws of association. But the resembling objects which
are spontaneously thought of together, are those which resemble each
other obviously, in their superficial aspect. These are the only classes
which we should form unpremeditatedly, and without the use of
expedients. But there are other resemblances which are not superficially
obvious; and many are not brought to light except by long experience, or
observation carefully directed to the purpose; being mostly resemblances
in the manner in which the objects act on, or are acted on by, other
things. These more recondite resemblances are often those which are of
greatest importance to our interests. It is important to us that we
should think of those things together, which agree in any particular
that materially concerns us. For this purpose, besides the classes which
form themselves in our minds spontaneously by the general law of
association, we form other classes artificially, that is, we take pains
to associate mentally together things which we wish to think of
together, but which are not sufficiently associated by the spontaneous
action of association by resemblance. The grand instrument we Edition:
current; Page: [144] employ in forming these artificial associations, is
general names. We give a common name to all the objects, we associate
each of the objects with the name, and by their common association with
the name they are knit together in close association with one another.

But in what manner does the name effect this purpose, of uniting into
one complex class-idea all the objects which agree with one another in
certain definite particulars? We effect this by associating the name in
a peculiarly strong and close manner with those particulars. It is, of
course, associated with the objects also; and the name seldom or never
calls up the ideas of the class-characteristics unaccompanied by any
other qualities of the objects. All our ideas are of individuals, or of
numbers of individuals, and are clothed with more or fewer of the
attributes which are peculiar to the individuals thought of. Still, a
class-name stands in a very different relation to the definite
resemblances which it is intended to mark, from that in which it stands
to the various accessory circumstances which may form part of the image
it calls up. There are certain attributes common to the entire class,
which the class-name was either deliberately selected as a mark of, or,
at all events, which guide us in the application of it. These attributes
are the real meaning of the class-name—are what we intend to ascribe to
an object when we call it by that name. With these the association of
the name is close and strong: and the employment of the same name by
different persons, provided they employ it with a precise adherence to
the meaning, ensures that they shall all include these attributes in the
complex idea which they associate with the name. This is not the case
with any of the other qualities of the individual objects, even if they
happen to be common to all the objects, still less if they belong only
to some of them. The class-name calls up, in every mind that hears or
uses it, the idea of one or more individual objects, clothed more or
less copiously with other qualities than those marked by the name; but
these other qualities may, consistently with the purposes for which the
class is formed and the name given, be different with different persons,
and with the same person at different times. What images of individual
horses the word horse shall call up, depends on such accidents as the
person’s taste in horses, the particular horses he may happen to
possess, the descriptions he last read, or the casual pecularities of
the horses he recently saw. In general, therefore, no very strong or
permanent association, and especially no association common to all who
use the language, will be formed between the word horse and any of the
qualities of horses but those expressly or tacitly recognised as the
foundations of the class. The complex ideas thus formed consisting of an
inner nucleus of definite elements always the same, imbedded in a
generally much greater number of elements indefinitely variable, are our
ideas of classes; the ideas connected with general names; what are
called General Notions: which are neither real objective entities, as
the Realists held, nor mere names, as supposed to be maintained by the
Nominalists, nor abstract ideas excluding all properties not common to
the class, such as Locke’s famous Idea of a triangle that is neither
equilateral nor isosceles Edition: current; Page: [145] nor scalene.63
We cannot represent to ourselves a triangle with no properties but those
common to all triangles: but we may represent it to ourselves sometimes
in one of those three forms, sometimes in another, being aware all the
while that all of them are equally consistent with its being a triangle.

One important consequence of these considerations is, that the meaning
of a class-name is not the same thing with the complex idea associated
with it. The complex idea associated with the name man, includes, in the
mind of every one, innumerable simple ideas besides those which the name
is intended to mark, and in the absence of which it would not be
predicated. But this multitude of simple ideas which help to swell the
complex idea are infinitely variable, and never exactly the same in any
two persons, depending in each upon the amount of his knowledge, and the
nature, variety, and recent date of his experience. They are therefore
no part of the meaning of the name. They are not the association common
to all, which it was intended to form, and which enables the name to be
used by all in the same manner, to be understood in a common sense by
all, and to serve, therefore, as a vehicle for the communication,
between one and another, of the same thoughts. What does this, is the
nucleus of more closely associated ideas, which is the constant element
in the complex idea of the class, both in the same mind at different
times, and in different minds.

It is proper to add, that the class-name is not solely a mark of the
distinguishing class-attributes, it is a mark also of the objects. The
name man does not merely signify the qualities of animal life,
rationality, and the human form, it signifies all individual men. It
even signifies these in a more direct way than it signifies the
attributes, for it is predicated of the men, but not predicated of the
attributes; just as the proper name of an individual man is predicated
of him. We say, This is a man, just as we say, This is John Thompson:
and if John Thompson is the name of one man, Man is, in the same manner,
a name of all men. A class name, being thus a name of the various
objects composing the class, signifies two distinct things, in two
different modes of signification. It signifies the individual objects
which are the class, and it signifies the common attributes which
constitute the class. It is predicated only of the objects; but when
predicated, it conveys the information that these objects possess those
attributes. Every concrete class-name is thus a connotative name. It
marks both the objects and their common attributes, or rather, that
portion of their common attributes in virtue of which they have been
made into a class. It denotes the objects, and, in a mode of speech
lately revived from the old logicians, it connotes the attributes. The
author of the Analysis employs the word connote in a different manner;
we shall presently examine which of the two is best.64

We are now ready to consider whether the author’s account of the ideas
Edition: current; Page: [146] connected with General Names is a true and
sufficient one. It is best expressed in his own words.

The word Man, we shall say, is first applied to an individual; it is
first associated with the idea of that individual, and acquires the
power of calling up the idea of him; it is next applied to another
individual, and acquires the power of calling up the idea of him; so of
another, and another, till it has become associated with an indefinite
number, and has acquired the power of calling up an indefinite number of
those ideas indifferently. What happens? It does call up an indefinite
number of the ideas of individuals, as often as it occurs, and calling
them up in close connexion, it forms them into a species of complex
idea. . . . When the word man calls up the ideas of an indefinite number
of individuals, not only of all those to whom I have individually given
the name, but of all those to whom I have in imagination given it, or
imagine it will ever be given, and forms all those ideas into one,—it is
evidently a very complex idea, and therefore indistinct; and this
indistinctness has doubtless been the main cause of the mystery which
has appeared to belong to it. That this however is the process, is an
inevitable result of the laws of association.65

In brief, my idea of a Man is a complex idea compounded of the ideas of
all the men I have ever known and of all those I have ever imagined,
knit together into a kind of unit by a close association.

The author’s description of the manner in which the class-association
begins to be formed, is true and instructive; but does any one’s idea of
a man actually include all that the author finds in it? By an inevitable
result of the laws of association, it is impossible to form an idea of a
man in the abstract; the class-attributes are always represented in the
mind as part of an image of an individual, either remembered or
imagined; this individual may vary from time to time, and several images
of individuals may present themselves either alternatively or in
succession: but is it necessary that the name should recal images of all
the men I ever knew or imagined, or even all of whom I retain a
remembrance? In no person who has seen or known many men, can this be
the case. Apart from the ideas of the common attributes, the other ideas
whether of attributes or of individual men, which enter into the complex
idea, are indefinitely variable not only in kind but in quantity. Some
people’s complex idea of the class is extremely meagre, that of others
very ample. Sometimes we know a class only from its definition, i.e.
from an enumeration of its class-attributes, as in the case of an object
which we have only read of in scientific books: in such a case the idea
raised by the class-name will not be limited to the class-attributes,
for we are unable to conceive any object otherwise than clothed with
miscellaneous attributes: but these, not being derived from experience
of the objects, may be such as the objects never had, nor could have;
while nevertheless the class, and the class-name, answer their proper
purpose; they cause us to group together all the things possessing the
class-attributes, and they inform us that we may expect those attributes
in anything of which that name is predicated.

Edition: current; Page: [147]
The defect, as it seems to me, of the view taken of General Names in the
text, is that it ignores this distinction between the meaning of a
general name, and the remainder of the idea which the general name calls
up. That remainder is uncertain, variable, scanty in some cases, copious
in others, and connected with the name by a very slight tie of
association, continually overcome by counter-associations. The only part
of the complex idea that is permanent in the same mind, or common to
several minds, consists of the distinctive attributes marked by the
class-name. Nothing else is universally present, though something else
is always present: but whatever else be present, it is through these
only that the class-name does its work, and effects the end of its
existence. We need not therefore be surprised that these attributes,
being all that is of importance in the complex idea, should for a long
time have been supposed to be all that is contained in it. The truest
doctrine which can be laid down on the subject seems to be this—that the
idea corresponding to a class-name is the idea of a certain constant
combination of class-attributes, accompanied by a miscellaneous and
indefinitely variable collection of ideas of individual objects
belonging to the class. (Vol. I, pp. 287-93.)

* * * * *

[In treating of “Abstraction” (Chap. ix), James Mill turns to the
generalizing of adjectives that serve to differentiate.] Let us take the
word “black” for an example; and let us suppose that we apply this
adjective first to the word man. We say “black man.” But we speedily see
that for the same reason for which we say black man we may say black
horse, black cow, black coat, and so on. The word black is thus
associated with innumerable modifications of the sensation black. By
frequent repetition, and the gradual strengthening of the association,
these modifications are at last called up in such rapid succession that
they appear commingled, and no longer many ideas, but one. Black is
therefore no longer an individual but a general name. It marks not the
particular black of a particular individual; but the black of every
individual, and of all individuals.

The example which the author has here selected of a general name, sets
in a strong light the imperfection of the theory of general names, laid
down by him in the preceding chapter. A name like “black,” which marks a
simple sensation, is an extreme case of the inapplicability of the
theory. Can it be maintained that the idea called up in our minds by the
word black, is an idea compounded of ideas of black men, black horses,
black cows, black coats, and the like? If I can trust my own
consciousness, the word need not, and generally does not, call up any
idea but that of a single black surface. It is still not an abstract
idea, but the idea of an individual object. It is not a mere idea of
colour; it is that, combined with ideas of extension Edition: current;
Page: [148] and figure, always present but extremely vague, because
varying, even from one moment to the next. These vague ideas of an
uncertain extension and figure, combined with the perfectly definite
idea of a single sensation of colour, are, to my consciousness, the sole
components of the complex idea associated with the word black. I am
unable to find in that complex idea the ideas of black men, horses, or
other definite things, though such ideas may of course be recalled by
it.

In such a case as this, the idea of a black colour fills by itself the
place of the inner nucleus of ideas knit together by a closer
association, which I have described as forming the permanent part of our
ideas of classes of objects, and the meaning of the class-names. (Vol.
I, p. 297.)

* * * * *

[James Mill returns to the term connotative, saying:] I shall find much
convenience in using the term notation to point out the sensation or
sensations which are peculiarly marked by such words, the term
connotation to point out the clusters which they mark along with this
their principal meaning.

Thus the word, black, notes that of which black is more peculiarly the
name, a particular colour; it connotes the clusters with the names of
which it is joined: in the expression, black man, it connotes man; black
horse, it connotes horse; and so of all other cases. The ancient
Logicians used these terms, in the inverse order; very absurdly, in my
opinion.

The word Connote, with its substantive Connotation, was used by the old
logicians in two senses; a wider, and a narrower sense. The wider is
that in which, up to this place, the author of the Analysis has almost
invariably used it; and is the sense in which he defined it, in a note
to section 5 of his first chapter.

There is a large class of words which denote two things both together;
but the one perfectly distinguishable from the other. Of these two
things, also, it is observable, that such words express the one
primarily as it were; the other in a way which may be called secondary.
Thus white, in the phrase white horse, denotes two things, the colour
and the horse; but it denotes the colour primarily, the horse
secondarily. We shall find it very convenient to say, therefore, that it
notes the primary, connotes the secondary signification.66

This use of terms is attended with the difficulty, that it may often be
disputed which of the significations is primary and which secondary. In
the example given, most people would agree with the author that the
colour is the primary signification; the word being associated with the
objects, only through its previous association with the colour. But take
the other of the two words, horse. That too is connotative, and in the
same manner. It signifies any and every individual horse, Edition:
current; Page: [149] and it also signifies those attributes common to
horses, which led to their being classed together and receiving that
common name. Which, in this case, is the primary, and which the second
signification? The author would probably say, that in this case, unlike
the other, horse is the primary signification, the attributes the
secondary. Yet in this equally with the former case, the attributes are
the foundation of the meaning: a thing is called a horse to express its
resemblance to other horses; and the resemblance consists of the common
attributes. The question might be discussed, pro and con, by many
arguments, without any conclusive result. The difference between primary
and secondary acceptations is too uncertain, and at best too
superficial, to be adopted as the logical foundation of the distinction
between the two modes of signification.

The author, however, has, throughout the preceding chapters, regarded
words as connoting any number of things which though included in their
signification, are not, in his judgment, what they primarily signify. He
said, for example, that a verb notes an action, and connotes the agent
(as either me, thee, or some third person), the number of agents (as one
or more), the time (as past, present, or future), and three modes, “that
in which there is no reference to anything preceding, that in which
there is a reference to something preceding, and that in which reference
is made to the will of one of the Persons.”67 I cite this complicated
case, to shew by a striking example the great latitude with which the
author uses the word Connote.

But in the present chapter he follows the example of some of the old
logicians in adopting a second and more restricted meaning, expressive
of the peculiar connotation which belongs to all concrete general names;
viz. that twofold manner of signification, by which every name of a
class signifies, on the one hand, all and each of the individual things
composing the class, and on the other hand the common attributes, in
consideration of which the class is formed and the name given, and which
we intend to affirm of every object to which we apply the name. It is
difficult to overrate the importance of keeping in view this
distinction, or the danger of overlooking it when not made prominent by
an appropriate phrase. The word Connote, which had been employed for
this purpose, had fallen into disuse. But, though agreeing with the old
logicians in using the word Connote to express this distinction, the
author exactly reverses their employment of it. In their phraseology,
the class-name connotes the attributes: in his, it notes the attributes,
and connotes the objects. And he declares that in his opinion, their
mode of employing the term is very absurd.68

We have now to consider which of these two modes of employing it is
really the most appropriate.

A concrete general name may be correctly said to be a mark, in a certain
way, Edition: current; Page: [150] both for the objects and for their
common attributes. But which of the two is it conformable to usage to
say that it is the name of? Assuredly, the objects. It is they that are
called by the name. I am asked, what is this object called? and I
answer, a horse. I should not make this answer if I were asked what are
these attributes called. Again, I am asked, what is it that is called a
horse? and I answer, the object which you see; not the qualities which
you see. Let us now suppose that I am asked, what is it that is called
black; I answer, all things that have this particular colour. Black is a
name of all black things. The name of the colour is not black, but
blackness. The name of a thing must be the name which is predicated of
the thing, as a proper name is predicated of the person or place it
belongs to. It is scarcely possible to speak with precision, and adhere
consistently to the same mode of speech, if we call a word the name of
anything but that which it is predicated of. Accordingly the old
logicians, who had not yet departed widely from the custom of common
speech, considered all concrete names as the names of objects, and
called nothing the name of an attribute but abstract names.

Now there is considerable incongruity in saying that a word connotes,
that is, signifies secondarily, the very thing which it is a name of. To
connote, is to mark something along with, or in addition to, something
else. A name can hardly be said to mark the thing which it is a name of
in addition to some other thing. If it marks any other thing, it marks
it in addition to the thing of which it is itself the name. In the
present case, what is marked in addition, is that which is the cause of
giving the name; the attributes, the possession of which by a thing
entitles it to that name. It therefore seems more conformable to the
original acceptation of the word Connote, that we should say of names
like man or black that they connote humanity or blackness, and denote,
or are names of, men and black objects; rather than, with the author of
the Analysis, that they note the attributes, and connote the things
which possess the attributes.

If this mode of using the terms is more consonant to propriety of
language, so also is it more scientifically convenient. It is of extreme
importance to have a technical expression exclusively consecrated to
signify the peculiar mode in which the name of a class marks the
attributes in virtue of which it is a class, and is called by the name.
The verb “to note,” employed by the author of the Analysis as the
correlative of “to connote,” is far too general to be confined to so
specific a use, nor does the author intend so to confine it. “To
connote,” on the contrary, is a phrase which has been handed down to us
in this restricted acceptation, and is perfectly fitted to be used as a
technical term. There is no more important use of a term than that of
fixing attention upon something which is in danger of not being
sufficiently taken notice of. This is emphatically the case with the
attribute-signification of the names of objects. That signification has
not been seen clearly, and what has been seen of it confusedly has
bewildered or misled some of the most distinguished philosophers. From
Hobbes to Hamilton, those who have attempted to penetrate the secret of
the higher logical operations of the intellect have Edition: current;
Page: [151] continually missed the mark for want of the light which a
clear conception of the connotation of general names spreads over the
subject. There is no fact in psychology which more requires a technical
name; and it seems eminently desirable that the words Connote and
Connotative should be exclusively employed for this purpose; and it is
for this purpose that I have myself invariably employed them.

In studying the Analysis, it is of course necessary to bear in mind that
the author does not use the words in this sense, but sometimes in a
sense much more vague and indefinite, and, when definite, in a sense the
reverse of this. It may seem an almost desperate undertaking, in the
case of an unfamiliar term, to attempt to rectify the usage introduced
by the actual reviver of the word: and nothing could have induced me to
attempt it, but a deliberate conviction that such a technical expression
is indispensable to philosophy, and that the author’s mode of employing
these words unfits them for the purpose for which they are needed, and
for which they are well adapted. I fear, however, that I have rarely
succeeded in associating the words with their precise meaning, anywhere
but in my own writings.69 The word Connote, not unfrequently meets us of
late in philosophical speculations, but almost always in a sense more
lax than the laxest in which it is employed in the Analysis, meaning no
more than to imply. To such an extent is this the case, that able
thinkers and writers do not always even confine the expression to names,
but actually speak of Things as connoting whatever, in their opinion,
the existence of the Things implies or presupposes. (Vol. I, pp.
299-304.)

* * * * *

[James Mill asserts that he has shown] the real nature of abstract
terms; a subject which has in general presented such an appearance of
mystery. They are simply the concrete terms, with the connotation
dropped. And this has in it, surely, no mystery at all.

After having said that a concrete general name notes an attribute, that
is, one of the sensations in a cluster, and connotes the objects which
have the attribute, i.e. the clusters of which that sensation forms a
part;70 the author proceeds to say that an abstract name is the concrete
name with the connotation dropped.

This seems a very indirect and circuitous mode of making us understand
what an abstract name signifies. Instead of aiming directly at the mark,
it goes round it. It tells us that one name signifies a part of what
another name signifies, leaving us to Edition: current; Page: [152]
infer what part. A connotative name with the connotation dropped, is a
phrase requiring to be completed by specifying what is the portion of
signification left. The concrete name with its connotation signifies an
attribute, and also the objects which have the attribute. We are now
instructed to drop the latter half of the signification, the objects.
What then remains? The attribute. Why not then say at once that the
abstract name is the name of the attribute? Why tell us that x is a plus
b with b dropped, when it was as easy to tell us that x is a?

The noticeable thing however is that if a stands merely for the
sensation, x really is a little more than a: the connotation (in the
author’s sense of the term) of the concrete name is not wholly dropped
in the abstract name. The term blackness, and every other abstract term,
includes in its signification the existence of a black object, though
without declaring what it is. That is indeed the distinction between the
name of an attribute, and the name of a kind or type of sensation. Name
of sensations by themselves are not abstract but concrete names. They
mark the type of the sensation, but they do not mark it as emanating
from any object. “The sensation of black” is a concrete name, which
expresses the sensation apart from all reference to an object.
“Blackness” expresses the same sensation with reference to an object, by
which the sensation is supposed to be excited. Abstract names thus still
retain a limited amount of connotation in both the author’s senses of
the term—the vaguer and the more specific sense. It is only in the sense
to which I am anxious to restrict the term, that any abstract name is
without connotation.

An abstract name, then, may be defined as the name of an attribute; and,
in the ultimate analysis, as the name of one or more of the sensations
of a cluster; not by themselves, but considered as part of any or all of
the various clusters, into which that type of sensations enters as a
component part. (Vol. I, pp. 304-5.)

* * * * *

[James Mill says that the “infinitive mood” is an “abstract term,”] with
this peculiarity, that, though it leaves out the connotation of the
actor, it retains the connotation of time.

The infinitive mood does not always express time. At least, it often
expresses it aoristically, without distinction of tense. “To love” is as
abstract a name as “love,” “to fear,” as “fear”: they are applied
equally to past, present, and future. The infinitives of the past and
future, as amavisse, amaturus esse, do, however, include in their
signification a particular time. (Vol. I, p. 306.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [153]
[James Mill suggests that in Latin the formation of abstract terms from
verbs (by the addition of tio) is the cause of their having both active
and passive signification, and laments that the defect has been handed
on to English.] This ambiguity the Greek language happily avoided: thus
it had πρα̑χις and πρα̑γμα, the first for the active signification of
actio, the latter the passive.

I apprehend that πραγμα is not an abstract but a concrete term, and does
not express the attribute of being done, but the thing done—the effect
which results from the completed action. (Vol. I, p. 308.)

* * * * *

[To James Mill’s discussion in Chap. x, “Memory,” of the act of trying
to remember, Bain adds the following note, to which J.S. Mill’s note, in
square brackets, is appended:] This process seems best expressed by
laying down a law of Compound or Composite Association; under which a
plurality of feeble links of connexion may be a substitute for one
powerful and self-sufficing link.

The laws of compound association are the subject of one of the most
original and profound chapters of Mr. Bain’s treatise.* (Vol. I, p.
323.)

* * * * *

That words alone, without ideas, suggest one another in a train, is
proved by our power of repeating a number of words of an unknown
language.

There is here a lapse, of mere expression. The meaning is not that words
suggest one another without ideas; words do not suggest words, but the
ideas of words. The author intended to say that words, or the ideas of
them, often suggest the ideas of other words (forming a series) without
suggesting along with them any ideas of the things which those words
signify. (Vol. I, p. 327.)

* * * * *

[James Mill asserts that, in memory,] there is not only the idea of the
thing remembered; there is also the idea of my having seen it. Now these
two, 1, the idea Edition: current; Page: [154] of the thing, 2, the idea
of my having seen it, combined, make up, it will not be doubted, the
whole of that state of consciousness which we call memory.

The doctrine which the author thinks “will not be doubted” is more than
doubted by most people, and in my judgment rightly. To complete the
memory of seeing the thing, I must have not only the idea of the thing,
and the idea of my having seen it, but the belief of my having seen it;
and even this is not always enough; for I may believe on the authority
of others that I have seen a thing which I have no remembrance of
seeing. (Vol. I, p. 329.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to the end of Chap. x, “Memory.”]

The only difficulty about Memory, when once the laws of Association are
understood, is the difference between it and Imagination; but this is a
difference which will probably long continue to perplex philosophers.
The author finds in Memory, besides the idea of the fact remembered, two
other ideas: “the idea of my present self, the remembering self, and the
idea of my past self, the remembered or witnessing self:”71 and a
supposed rapid repetition in thought, of the whole of the impressions
which I received between the time remembered and the time of
remembering. But (apart from the question whether we really do repeat in
thought, however summarily, all this series) explaining memory by Self
seems very like explaining a thing by the thing. For what notion of Self
can we have, apart from Memory? The fact of remembering, i.e. of having
an idea combined with the belief that the corresponding sensation was
actually felt by me, seems to be the very elementary fact of Self, the
origin and foundation of the idea; presupposed in our having the very
complex notion of a Self, which is here introduced to explain it. As,
however, the author admits that the phenomenon of Belief, and the
notions of Time and of Personal Identity, must be taken into account in
order to give a complete explanation of Memory, any further remarks had
better be deferred until these subjects have been regularly brought
under our consideration.72 (Vol. I, pp. 339-40.)

* * * * *

I take memory first, and judgment last, from no other principle of
arrangement, Edition: current; Page: [155] than facility of exposition;
and I have in this way found it convenient to treat of judgment as a
case of belief.

How is it possible to treat of Belief without including in it Memory and
Judgment? Memory is a case of belief. In what does Memory differ from
Imagination, except in the belief that what it represents did really
take place? Judgment, in its popular acceptation, is Belief resulting
from deliberate examination, in other words, Belief grounded on
evidence: while in its philosophical sense it is coextensive, if not
synonymous, with Belief itself. I do not know how it is possible to
distinguish a judgment from any other process of the mind, except by its
being an act of belief. (Vol. I, p. 342.)

* * * * *

[James Mill argues that] to have a sensation, and to believe that we
have it, are not distinguishable things. When I say “I have a
sensation,” and say, “I believe that I have it,” I do not express two
states of consciousness, but one and the same state. A sensation is a
feeling; but a feeling, and the belief of it are the same thing. The
observation applies equally to ideas. When I say I have the idea of the
sun, I express the same thing, exactly, as when I say, that I believe I
have it. The feeling is one, the names, only, are two. [A note to this
passage by Bain, which is followed by J.S. Mill’s note, reads:] In the
case of a present reality, belief has no place; it can be introduced
only by a fiction or a figure. The believing state comes into operation
when something thought of is still remote, and attainable by an
intermediate exertion. The fact “I see the sun” is full fruition: the
fact that I can see the sun by going out of doors affords scope for
belief or disbelief.

The difference between Mr. Bain and the author is but in language and
classification. It is necessary for the reader of the Analysis to
remember, that the author uses the word Belief as the most general term
for every species of conviction or assurance; the assurance of what is
before our eyes, as well as of that which we only remember or expect; of
what we know by direct perception, as well as of what we accept on the
evidence of testimony or of reasoning: all this we are convinced or
persuaded of; all this, in the author’s language, we believe. Mr. Bain,
on the other hand, like Sir William Hamilton and many others, restricts
the term to those cases of conviction which are short of direct
intuition.73 (Vol. I, p. 343.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [156]
Besides the sensation of colour, I have . . . the belief of a certain
distance, at which I see the rose; and that of a certain figure,
consisting of leaves disposed in a certain form. I believe that I see
this distance and form; in other words, perceive it by the eye, as
immediately as I perceive the colour. Now this last part of the process
has been explained by various philosophers. There is no dispute, or
uncertainty, about the matter. All men admit, that this, one of the most
remarkable of all cases of belief, is wholly resolvable into
association.

“All men admit.” Certainly not all men; though, at the time when the
author wrote, it might be said, with some plausibility, all
psychologists. Unfortunately this can no longer be said: Mr. Samuel
Bailey has demanded a rehearing of the question, and has pronounced a
strong and reasoned opinion on the contrary side; and his example has
been followed by several other writers: but without, in my opinion, at
all weakening the position which since the publication of Berkeley’s
Essay on Vision, had been almost unanimously maintained by
philosophers.74 (Vol. I, p. 345.)

* * * * *

That a cause means, and can mean nothing to the human mind, but constant
antecedent, is no longer a point in dispute.

Here again the author takes too sanguine a view of the amount of
agreement hitherto attained among metaphysical philosophers. “That a
cause means, and can mean, nothing to the human mind but constant
antecedent” is so far from being “no longer a point in dispute” that it
is denied with vehemence by a large numerical majority of philosophers;
and its denial is perhaps the principal badge of one of the Edition:
current; Page: [157] two schools which at this, as at most other times,
bisect the philosophical world—the intuitional school and the
experiential. (Vol. I, p. 352.)

* * * * *

[James Mill asserts that the name given to the “supposed cause of
supposed causes” is the “Substratum,” and comments that in a regressive
search there is no reason to stop there.] The Barbarian, in accounting
for the support of the earth, placed it on the back of a great elephant,
and the great elephant on the back of a great tortoise; but neither
himself, nor those whom he instructed, were carried by their habits of
association any farther.

It is a question worth considering, why that demand for a cause of
everything, which has led to the invention of so many fabulous or
fictitious causes, so generally stops short at the first step, without
going on to imagine a cause of the cause. But this is quite in the
ordinary course of human proceedings. It is no more than we should
expect, that these frivolous speculations should be subject to the same
limitations as reasonable ones. Even in the region of positive facts—in
the explaining of phenomena by real, not imaginary, causes—the first
semblance of an explanation generally suffices to satisfy the curiosity
which prompts the inquiry. The things men first care to inquire about
are those which meet their senses, and among which they live; of these
they feel curious as to the origin, and look out for a cause, even if it
be but an abstraction. But the cause once found, or imagined, and the
familiar fact no longer perplexing them with the feeling of an unsolved
enigma, they do not, unless unusually possessed by the speculative
spirit, occupy their minds with the unfamiliar antecedent sufficiently
to be troubled respecting it with any of the corresponding perplexity.
(Vol. I, p. 354.)

* * * * *

[James Mill says:] There are certain things which I consider as marks or
signs of sensations in other creatures. The Belief follows the signs,
and with a force, not exceeded in any other instance. But the
interpretation of signs is wholly a case of association, as the
extraordinary phenomena of language abundantly testify. [Bain comments,
in a note to which J.S. Mill’s comment is appended (in square
brackets):] This is true in by far the greater number of instances.
Nevertheless, there are some of the signs of feeling that have an
intrinsic efficacy, on very manifest grounds. While the meanings of the
smile and the frown could have been reversed, if the association had
been the other way, there is an obvious suitability Edition: current;
Page: [158] in the harsh stunning tones of the voice to signify anger
and to inspire dread, and a like suitability in the gentle tones to
convey affection and kindly feeling. We might have contracted the
opposing associations, had the facts been so arranged, just as in times
of peace, we associate joy with deafening salvos of artillery; and as
loud, sharp-pealing laughter serves in the expression of agreeable
feeling. But there is a gain of effect when the signs employed are such
as to chime in, by intrinsic efficacy, with the associated meanings. On
this coincidence depend the refinements of elocution, oratory, and stage
display.

The fact here brought to notice by Mr. Bain is, that certain of the
natural expressions of emotion have a kind of analogy to the emotions
they express, which makes an opening for an instinctive interpretation
of them, independently of experience. But if this be so (and there can
be little doubt that it is so) the suggestion takes place by
resemblance, and therefore still by association. (Vol. I, p. 356.)

* * * * *

[James Mill says (Vol. I, p. 362):] The fundamental law of association
is, that when two things have been frequently found together, we never
perceive or think of the one without thinking of the other. [He goes on
to elucidate, ending the passage with the remark:] I can no more have
the idea of a stone let go in the air, and not have the idea of its
dropping to the ground, than I can have the idea of the stone, and not
have it, at the same time.

The theory maintained so powerfully and with such high intellectual
resources by the author, that Belief is but an inseparable association,
will be examined at length in a note at the end of the chapter.75
Meanwhile let it be remarked, that the case of supposed inseparable
association given in this passage, requires to be qualified in the
statement. We cannot, indeed, think of a stone let go in the air,
without having the idea of its falling; but this association is not so
strictly inseparable as to disable us from having the contrary idea.
There are analogies in our experience which enable us without difficulty
to form the imagination of a stone suspended in the air. The case
appears to be one in which we can conceive both opposites, falling and
not falling; the incompatible images not, of course, combining, but
alternating in the mind. Which of the two carries belief with it,
depends on what is termed Evidence. (Vol. I, p. 364.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [159]
[In a footnote, James Mill comments:] Locke, at a period subsequent to
the publication of his Essay, seems to have become more sensible of the
importance of association. These are his words:—“I think I shall make
some other additions to be put into your Latin translation, and
particularly concerning the connexion of ideas, which has not, that I
know, been hitherto considered, and has, I guess, a greater influence
upon our minds, than is usually taken notice of.”* [J.S. Mill’s note is
appended, in square brackets.]

aWhen Locke wrote the letter here quoted, he had not yet written the
chapter of his Essay which treats of the Association of Ideas. That
chapter did not appear in the original edition, but was first inserted
in the fourth, published in 1690.76 The intention, therefore, which he
expressed to Molineux, has received its fulfilment; and the passage
quoted further on in the text, is part of the “addition” which he
contemplated.a (Vol. I, p. 377.)

* * * * *

[To the end of Chap. xi, “Belief,” a note by Bain is appended, followed
by J.S. Mill’s.]

The analysis of Belief presented in this chapter, brings out the
conclusion that all cases of Belief are simply cases of indissoluble
association: that there is no generic distinction, but only a difference
in the strength of the association, between a case of belief and a case
of mere imagination: that to believe a succession or coexistence between
two facts is only to have the ideas of the two facts so strongly and
closely associated, that we cannot help having the one idea when we have
the other.

If this can be proved, it is the greatest of all the triumphs of the
Association Psychology. To first appearance, no two things can be more
distinct than thinking of two things together, and believing that they
are joined together in the outward world. Nevertheless, that the latter
state of mind is only an extreme case of the former, is, as we see, the
deliberate doctrine of the author of the Analysis; and it has also in
its favour the high psychological authority of Mr. Herbert Spencer.77
Edition: current; Page: [160] Mr. Bain, in the preceding note, as well
as in his systematic work, looks at the phenomenon from another side,
and pronounces that what constitutes Belief is the power which an idea
has obtained over the Will.78 It is well known and understood that a
mere idea may take such possession of the mind as to exercise an
irresistible control over the active faculties, even independently of
Volition, and sometimes in opposition to it. This, which Mr. Bain calls
the power of a Fixed Idea, is exemplified in the cases of what is called
fascination: the impulse which a person looking from a precipice
sometimes feels to throw himself down it; and the cases of crimes said
to have been committed by persons who abhor them, because that very
horror has filled their minds with an intense and irrepressible idea of
the act. Since an idea is sometimes able to overpower volition, it is no
wonder that an idea should determine volition; as it does whenever we,
under the influence of the idea of a pleasure or of a pain, will that
which obtains for us the pleasure or averts the pain. In this voluntary
action, our conduct is grounded upon a relation between means and an
end; (that is, upon a constant conjunction of facts in the way of
causation, ultimately resolvable into a case of resemblance and
contiguity): in common and unanalytical language, upon certain laws of
nature on which we rely. Our reliance is the consequence of an
association formed in our minds between the supposed cause and its
effect, resulting either from personal experience of their conjunction,
from the teachings of other people, or from accidental appearances. Now,
according to Mr. Bain, when this association between the means and the
end, the end calling up the idea of the means, arrives at the point of
giving to the idea thus called up a command over the Will, it
constitutes Belief. We believe a thing, when we are ready to act on the
faith of it; to face the practical consequences of taking it for
granted: and therein lies the distinction between believing two facts to
be conjoined, and merely thinking of them together.79 Thus far Mr. Bain:
and with this I fully agree. But something is still wanting to the
completeness of the analysis. The theory as stated, distinguishes two
antecedents, by a difference not between themselves, but between their
consequents. But when the consequents differ, the antecedents cannot be
the same. An association of ideas is or is not a Belief, according as it
has or has not the power of leading us to voluntary action: this is
undeniable: but when there is a difference in the effects there must be
a difference in the cause: the association which leads to action must
be, in some respect or other, different from that which stops at
thought. The question, therefore, raised, and, as they think, resolved,
by the author of the Analysis and by Mr. Spencer, still demands an
answer. Does the difference between the two cases consist in this, that
in the one case the association is dissoluble, in the other it is so
much more closely riveted, by repetition, or by the intensity of the
associated feelings, as to be no longer dissoluble? This is the question
we are compelled to face.

Edition: current; Page: [161]


I

In the first place, then, it may be said—If Belief consisted in an
indissoluble association, Belief itself would be indissoluble. An
opinion once formed could never afterwards be destroyed or changed. This
objection is good against the word indissoluble. But those who maintain
the theory do not mean by an indissoluble association, one which nothing
that can be conceived to happen could possibly dissolve. All our
associations of ideas would probably be dissoluble, if experience
presented to us the associated facts separate from one another. If we
have any associations which are, in practice, indissoluble, it can only
be because the conditions of our existence deny to us the experiences
which would be capable of dissolving them. What the author of the
Analysis means by indissoluble associations, are those which we cannot,
by any mental effort, at present overcome. If two ideas are, at the
present time, so closely associated in our minds, that neither any
effort of our own, nor anything else which can happen, can enable us now
to have the one without its instantly raising up the other, the
association is, in the author’s sense of the term, indissoluble. There
would be less risk of misunderstanding if we were to discard the word
indissoluble, and confine ourselves to the expression which the author
employs as its equivalent, inseparable. This I will henceforth do, and
we will now enquire whether Belief is nothing but an inseparable
association.

In favour of this supposition there is the striking fact, that an
inseparable association very often suffices to command belief. There are
innumerable cases of Belief for which no cause can be assigned, except
that something has created so strong an association between two ideas
that the person cannot separate them in thought. The author has given a
large assortment of such cases, and has made them tell with great force
in support of his theory. Locke, as the author mentions, had already
seen, that this is one of the commonest and most fertile sources of
erroneous thought;80 deserving to be placed high in any enumeration of
Fallacies. When two things have long been habitually thought of
together, and never apart, until the association between the ideas has
become so strong that we have great difficulty, or cannot succeed at
all, in separating them, there is a strong tendency to believe that the
facts are conjoined in reality; and when the association is closer
still, that their conjunction is what is called Necessary. Most of the
schools of philosophy, both past and present, are so much under the
influence of this tendency, as not only to justify it in principle, but
to erect it into a Law of Things. The majority of metaphysicians have
maintained, and even now maintain, that there are things which, by the
laws of intelligence, cannot be separated in thought, and that these
things are not only always united in fact, but united by necessity: and,
again, other things, which cannot be united in thought—which cannot be
thought of together, and that these not only never do, but it is
impossible they ever Edition: current; Page: [162] should, coexist in
fact. These supposed necessities are the very foundation of the
Transcendental schools of metaphysics, of the Common Sense school, and
many others which have not received distinctive names. These are facts
in human nature and human history very favourable to the supposition
that Belief is but an inseparable association, or at all events that an
inseparable association sufficies to create Belief.

On the contrary side of the question it may be urged, that the
inseparable associations which are so often found to generate Beliefs,
do not generate them in everybody. Analytical and philosophical minds
often escape from them, and resist the tendency to believe in an
objective conjunction between facts merely because they are unable to
separate the ideas. The author’s typical example of an inseparable
association, (and there can be none more suited to the purpose,) is the
association between sensations of colour and the tangible magnitudes,
figures, and distances, of which they are signs, and which are so
completely merged with them into one single impression, that we believe
we see distance, extension, and figure, though all we really see is the
optical effects which accompany them, all the rest being a rapid
interpretation of natural signs.81 The generality of mankind, no doubt,
and all men before they have studied the subject, believe what the
author says they do; but a great majority of those who have studied the
subject believe otherwise: they believe that a large portion of the
facts which we seem to see, we do not really see, but instantaneously
infer. Yet the association remains inseparable in these scientific
thinkers as in others: the retinal picture suggests to them the real
magnitude, in the same irresistible manner as it does to other people.
To take another of the author’s examples: when we look at a distant
terrestrial object through a telescope, it appears nearer; if we reverse
the telescope it appears further off.82 The signs by which we judge of
distance from us, here mislead, because those signs are found in
conjunction with real distances widely different from those with which
they coexist in our ordinary experience. The association, however,
persists, and is irresistible, in one person as much as in another; for
every one recognises that the object, thus looked at, seems nearer, or
farther off, than we know it to be. But does this ever make any of us,
except perhaps an inexperienced child, believe that the object is at the
distance at which we seem to see it? The inseparable association, though
so persistent and powerful as to create in everybody an optical
illusion, creates no delusion, but leaves our belief as conformable to
the realities of fact as if no such illusive appearance had presented
itself. Cases similar to this are so frequent, that cautious and
thoughtful minds, enlightened by experience on the misleading character
of inseparable associations, learn to distrust them, and do not, even by
a first impulse, believe a connexion in fact because there is one in
thought, but wait for evidence.

Following up the same objection, it may be said that if belief is only
an Edition: current; Page: [163] inseparable association, belief is a
matter of habit and accident, and not of reason. Assuredly an
association, however close, between two ideas, is not a sufficient
ground of belief; is not evidence that the corresponding facts are
united in external nature. The theory seems to annihilate all
distinction between the belief of the wise, which is regulated by
evidence, and conforms to the real successions and coexistences of the
facts of the universe, and the belief of fools, which is mechanically
produced by any accidental association that suggests the idea of a
succession or coexistence to the mind: a belief aptly characterized by
the popular expression, believing a thing because they have taken it
into their heads.

Indeed, the author of the Analysis is compelled by his theory to affirm
that we actually believe in accordance with the misleading associations
which generate what are commonly called illusions of sense. He not only
says that we believe we see figure and distance—which the great majority
of psychologists since Berkeley do not believe;83 but he says, that in
the case of ventriloquy “we cannot help believing” that the sound
proceeds from the place, of which the ventriloquist imitates the effect;
that the sound of bells opposed by the wind, not only appears farther
off, but is believed to come from farther off, although we may know the
exact distance from which it comes; that “in passing on board ship,
another ship at sea, we believe that she has all the motion, we none:”
nay even, that when we have turned ourselves round with velocity several
times, “we believe that the world is turning round.”84 Surely it is more
true to say, as people generally do say, “the world seems to us to turn
round.” To me these cases appear so many experimental proofs, that the
tendency of an inseparable association to generate belief, even when
that tendency is fully effectual in creating the irresistible appearance
of a state of things that does not really exist, may yet be impotent
against reason, that is, against preponderant evidence.

In defence of these paradoxes, let us now consider what the author of
the Analysis might say. One thing he would certainly say: that the
belief he affirms to exist in these cases of illusion, is but a
momentary one; with which the belief entertained at all other times may
be at variance. In the case, for instance, of those who, from an early
association formed between darkness and ghosts, feel terror in the dark
though they have a confirmed disbelief in ghosts, the author’s opinion
is that there is a temporary belief, at the moment when the terror is
felt.85 This was also the opinion of Dugald Stewart:86 and the agreement
(by no means a solitary one) between two thinkers of such opposite
tendencies, reminds one of the saying “Quand un Français et un Anglais
sont d’accord, il faut bien qu’ils aient raison.”87 Edition: current;
Page: [164] Yet the author seems to adopt this notion not from
observation of the case, but from an antecedent opinion that “dread
implies belief, and an uncontrollable belief,” which, he says, “we need
not stay to prove.”88 It is to be wished, in this case, that he had
staid to prove it: for it is harder to prove than he thought. The
emotion of fear, the physical effect on the nervous system known by that
name, may be excited, and I believe often is excited, simply by terrific
imaginations. That these imaginations are, even for a moment, mistaken
for menacing realities, may be true, but ought not to be assumed without
proof. The circumstance most in its favour (one not forgotten by the
author) is that in dreams, to which may be added hallucinations,
frightful ideas are really mistaken for terrible facts. But dreams are
states in which all other sensible ideas are mistaken for outward facts.
Yet sensations and ideas are intrinsically different, and it is not the
normal state of the human mind to confound the one with the other.

Besides, this supposition of a momentary belief in ghosts breaking in
upon and interrupting an habitual and permanent belief that there are no
ghosts, jars considerably with the doctrine it is brought to support,
that belief is an inseparable association. According to that doctrine,
here are two inseparable associations, which yet are so far from
exclusively possessing the mind, that they alternate with one another,
each Inseparable implying the separation of the other Inseparable. The
association of darkness with the absence of ghosts must be anything but
inseparable, if there only needs the presence of darkness to revive the
contrary association. Yet an association so very much short of
inseparable, is accompanied, at least in the absence of darkness, by a
full belief. Darkness is in this case associated with two incompatible
ideas, the idea of ghosts and that of their absence, but with neither of
them inseparably, and in consequence the two associations alternately
prevail, as the surrounding circumstances favour the one or the other;
agreeably to the laws of Compound Association, laid down with great
perspicuity and reach of thought by Mr. Bain in his systematic
treatise.89

To the argument, that the inseparable associations which create optical
and other illusions, do not, when opposed by reason, generate the false
belief, the author’s answer would probably be some such as the
following. When the rational thinker succeeds in resisting the belief,
he does so by more or less completely overcoming the inseparableness of
the association. Associations may be conquered by the formation of
counter-associations. Mankind had formerly an inseparable association
between sunset and the motion of the sun, and this inseparable
association compelled them to believe that in the phenomenon of sunset
the sun moves and the earth is at rest. But Copernicus, Galileo,90 and
after Edition: current; Page: [165] them, all astronomers, found
evidence, that the earth moves and the sun is at rest: in other words,
certain experiences, and certain reasonings from those experiences, took
place in their minds, the tendency of which was to associate sunset with
the ideas of the earth in motion and the sun at rest. This was a
counter-association, which could not coexist, at least at the same
instant, with the previous association connecting sunset with the sun in
motion and the earth at rest. But for a long time the new associating
influences could not be powerful enough to get the better of the old
association, and change the belief which it implied. A belief which has
become habitual, is seldom overcome but by a slow process. However, the
experiences and mental processes that tended to form the new association
still went on; there was a conflict between the old association and the
causes which tended to produce a new one; until, by the long continuance
and frequent repetition of those causes, the old association, gradually
undermined, ceased to be inseparable, and it became possible to
associate the idea of sunset with that of the earth moving and the sun
at rest; whereby the previous idea of the sun moving and the earth at
rest was excluded for the time, and as the new association grew in
strength, was at last thrown out altogether. The argument should go on
to say that after a still further prolongation of the new experiences
and reasonings, the old association became impossible and the new one
inseparable; for, until it became inseparable, there could, according to
the theory, be no belief. And this, in truth, does sometimes happen.
There are instances in the history of science, even down to the present
day, in which something which was once believed to be impossible, and
its opposite to be necessary, was first seen to be possible, next to be
true, and finally came to be considered as necessarily true, and its
opposite (once deemed necessary) as impossible, and even inconceivable;
insomuch that it is thought by some that what was reputed an
impossibility, might have been known to be a necessity. In such cases,
the quality of inseparableness has passed, in those minds at least, from
the old association to the new one. But in much the greatest number of
cases the change does not proceed so far, and both associations remain
equally possible. The case which furnished our last instance is an
example. Astronomers, and all educated persons, now associate sunset
with motion confined to the earth, and firmly believe this to be what
really takes place; but they have not formed this association with such
exclusiveness and intensity as to have become unable to associate sunset
with motion of the sun. On the contrary, the visible appearance still
suggests motion of the sun, and many people, though aware of the truth,
find that they cannot by any effort make themselves see sunset any
otherwise than as the sinking of the sun below the earth. My own
experience is different: I find that I can represent the phenomenon to
myself in either light; I can, according to the manner in which I direct
my thoughts, see sunset either as the Edition: current; Page: [166]
earth tilting above the sun, or as the sun dipping below the earth: in
the same manner as when a railway train in motion passes another at
rest, we are able, if we prevent our eyes from resting on any third
object, to imagine the motion as being either in the one train or in the
other. How, then, can it be said that there is an inseparable
association of sunset with the one mode of representation, and a
consequent inability to associate it with the other? It is associated
with both, and the one of the two associations which is nearest to being
inseparable is that which belief does not accompany. The difference
between different people in the ability to represent to themselves the
phenomenon under either aspect, depends rather on the degree of exercise
which they have given to their imagination in trying to frame mental
pictures conformable to the two hypotheses, than upon those
considerations of reason and evidence which yet may determine their
belief.

The question still remains, what is there which exists in the hypothesis
believed, and does not exist in the hypothesis rejected, when we have
associations which enable our imagination to represent the facts
agreeably to either hypothesis? In other words, what is Belief?

I think it must be admitted, that when we can represent to ourselves in
imagination either of two conflicting suppositions, one of which we
believe, and disbelieve the other, neither of the associations can be
inseparable; and there must therefore be in the fact of Belief, which
exists in only one of the two cases, something for which inseparable
association does not account. We seem to have again come up, on a
different side, to the difficulty which we felt in the discussion of
Memory, in accounting for the distinction between a fact remembered, and
the same fact imagined. There is a close parallelism between the two
problems. In both, we have the difference between a fact and a
representation in imagination; between a sensation, or combination of
sensations, and an idea, or combination of ideas. This difference we all
accept as an ultimate fact. But the difficulty is this. Let me first
state it as it presents itself in the case of Memory. Having in our mind
a certain combination of ideas, in a group or a train, accompanying or
succeeding one another; what is it which, in one case, makes us
recognize this group or train as representing a group or train of the
corresponding sensations, remembered as having been actually felt by us,
while in another case we are aware that the sensations have never
occurred to us in a group or train corresponding to that in which we are
now having the ideas? This is the problem of Memory. Let me now state
the problem of Belief, when the belief is not a case of memory. Here
also we have ideas connected in a certain order in our own mind, which
makes us think of a corresponding order among the sensations, and we
believe that this similar combination of the sensations is a real fact:
i.e. whether we ever felt it or not, we confidently expect that we
should feel it under certain given conditions. In Memory, we believe
that the realities in Nature, the sensations and combinations of
sensations presented to us from without, have occurred to us in an order
which agrees with that in which we are representing them to ourselves in
thought: in those Edition: current; Page: [167] cases of Belief which
are not cases of Memory, we believe, not that they have occurred, but
that they would have occurred, or would occur, in that order.

What is it that takes place in us, when we recognize that there is this
agreement between the order of our ideas and the order in which we
either had or might have had the sensations which correspond to
them—that the order of the ideas represents a similar order either in
our actual sensations, or in those which, under some given
circumstances, we should have reason to expect? What, in short, is the
difference to our minds between thinking of a reality, and representing
to ourselves an imaginary picture? I confess that I can perceive no
escape from the opinion that the distinction is ultimate and primordial.
There is no more difficulty in holding it to be so, than in holding the
difference between a sensation and an idea to be primordial. It seems
almost another aspect of the same difference. The author himself says,
in the chapter on Memory, that, a sensation and an idea being different,
it is to be expected that the remembrance of having had a sensation
should be different from the remembrance of having had an idea, and that
this is a sufficient explanation of our distinguishing them.91 If this,
then, is an original distinction, why should not the distinction be
original between the remembrance of having had a sensation, and the
actually having an idea (which is the difference between Memory and
Imagination); and between the expectation of having a sensation, and the
actually having an idea (which is the difference between Belief and
Imagination)? Grant these differences, and there is nothing further to
explain in the phenomenon of Belief. For every belief is either the
memory of having had a sensation (or other feeling), or the expectation
that we should have the sensation or feeling in some given state of
circumstances, if that state of circumstances could come to be realized.


II

That all belief is either Memory or Expectation, will be clearly seen if
we run over all the different objects of Belief. The author has already
done so, in order to establish his theory; and it is now necessary that
we should do the same.

The objects of Belief are enumerated by the author in the following
terms:—1. Events, real existences. 2. Testimony. 3. The truth of
propositions.92 He intended this merely as a rough grouping, sufficient
for the purpose if it includes everything: for it is evident that the
divisions overlap one another, and it will be seen presently that the
last two are but cases of the first.

Belief in events he further divides into belief in present events, in
past events, and in future events. Belief in present events he
subdivides into belief in immediate existences present to my senses, and
belief in immediate existences not present to Edition: current; Page:
[168] my senses. We see by this that he recognises no difference, in a
metaphysical sense, between existences and events, because he regards,
with reason, objects as merely the supposed antecedents of events. The
distinction, however, requires to be kept up, being no other than the
fundamental difference between simultaneousness, and succession or
change.

Belief in immediate existences present to my senses, is either belief in
my sensations, or belief in external objects. Believing that I feel what
I am at this moment feeling, is, as the author says, only another name
for having the feeling;93 with the idea, however, of Myself, associated
with it; of which hereafter.

The author goes on to analyse Belief in external objects present to our
senses; and he resolves it into a present sensation, united by an
irresistible association with the numerous other sensations which we are
accustomed to receive in conjunction with it. The Object is thus to be
understood as a complex idea, compounded of the ideas of various
sensations which we have, and of a far greater number of sensations
which we should expect to have if certain contingencies were realized.
In other words, our idea of an object is an idea of a group of
possibilities of sensation, some of which we believe we can realize at
pleasure, while the remainder would be realized if certain conditions
took place, on which, by the laws of nature, they are dependent. As thus
explained, belief in the existence of a physical object, is belief in
the occurrence of certain sensations, contingently on certain previous
conditions. This is a state of mind closely allied to Expectation of
sensations. For—though we use the name Expectation only with reference
to the future, and even to the probable future—our state of mind in
respect to what may be future, and even to what might have been future,
is of the same general nature, and depends on the same principles, as
Expectation. I believe that a certain event will positively happen,
because the known conditions which always accompany it in experience
have already taken place. I believe that another event will certainly
happen if the known conditions which always accompany it take place, and
those conditions I can produce when I please. I believe that a third
event will happen if its conditions take place, but I must wait for
those conditions; I cannot realize them at pleasure, and may never
realize them at all. The first of these three cases is positive
expectation, the other two are conditional expectation. A fourth case is
my belief that the event would have happened at any former time if the
conditions had taken place at that time. It is not consonant to usage to
call this Expectation, but, considered as a case of belief, there is no
essential difference between it and the third case. My belief that I
should have heard Cicero had I been present in the Forum, and my belief
that I shall hear Mr. Gladstone if I am present in the House of
Commons,94 can nowise be regarded as essentially different phenomena.
The one Edition: current; Page: [169] we call Expectation, the other
not, but the mental principle operative in both these cases of belief is
the same.

The author goes on to say, that the belief that we should have the
sensations if certain conditions were realized, that is, if we had
certain other sensations, is merely an inseparable association of the
two sets of sensations with one another, and their inseparable union
with the idea of ourselves as having them.95 But I confess it seems to
me that all this may exist in a case of simple imagination. The author
would himself admit that the complex idea of the object, in all its
fulness, may be in the mind without belief. What remains is its
association with the idea of ourselves as percipients. But this also, I
cannot but think, we may have in the case of an imaginary scene, when we
by no means believe that any corresponding reality exists. Does the idea
of our own personality never enter into the pictures in our imagination?
Are we not ourselves present in the scenes which we conjure up in our
minds? I apprehend we are as constantly present in them, and as
conscious of our presence, as we are in contemplating a real prospect.
In either case the vivacity of the other impressions eclipses, for the
most part, the thought of ourselves as spectators, but not more so in
the imaginary, than in the real, spectacle.

It appears to me, then, that to account for belief in external objects,
we must postulate Expectation; and since all our expectations, whether
positive or contingent, are a consequence of our Memory of the past (as
distinguished from a representation in fancy), we must also postulate
Memory. The distinction between a mere combination of ideas in thought,
and one which recals to us a combination of sensations as actually
experienced, always returns on our hands as an ultimate postulate.

The author proceeds to shew how this idea of a mere group of sensations,
actual or contingent, becomes knit up with an idea of a permanent
Something, lying, as it were, under these sensations, and causing them;
this further enlargement of the complex idea taking place through the
intimate, or, as he calls it, inseparable association, generated by
experience, which makes us unable to imagine any phenomenon as beginning
to exist without something anterior to it which causes it.96 This
explanation seems to me quite correct as far as it goes; but, while it
accounts for the difficulty we have in not ascribing our sensations to
some cause or other, it does not explain why we accept, as in fact we
do, the group itself as the cause. I have endeavoured to clear up this
difficulty elsewhere (Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy),
and in preference to going over the ground a second time, I subjoin, at
the end of the volume, the chapter containing the explanation.97 That
chapter supplies all that appears to me to be further necessary Edition:
current; Page: [170] on the subject of belief in outward objects; which
is thus shewn to be a case of Conditional Expectation.

It is unnecessary to follow the author into the minute consideration of
Belief in the existence of objects not present, since the explanation
already given equally applies to them. My belief in the present
existence of St. Paul’s is correctly set forth by the author as
consisting of the following elements: I believe that I have seen St.
Paul’s: I believe that I shall see St. Paul’s, when I am again in St.
Paul’s Churchyard: I believe that I should see St. Paul’s, if I were in
St. Paul’s Churchyard at this instant.98 All this, as he justly remarks,
is Memory or Expectation. And this, or some part of this, is the whole
of what is in any case meant by belief in the real existence of an
external object. The author adds, I also believe that if any creature
whose senses are analogous to my own, is now in St. Paul’s Churchyard,
it has the present sensation of that edifice. But this belief is not
necessary to my belief in the continued existence of St. Paul’s. For
that, it suffices that I believe I should myself see it. My belief that
other creatures would do so, is part of my belief in the real existence
of other creatures like myself; which is no more mysterious, than our
belief in the real existence of any other objects some of whose
properties rest not on direct sensation, but on inference.

Belief in past existences, when those existences have been perceived by
ourselves, is Memory.99 When the past existences are inferred from
evidence, the belief of them is not Memory, but a fact of the same
nature as Expectation; being a belief that we should have had the
sensations if we had been cotemporary with the objects, and had been in
the local position necessary for receiving sensible impressions from
them.

We now come to the case of Belief in testimony.100 But testimony is not
itself an object of belief. The object of belief is what the testimony
asserts. And so in the last of the author’s three cases, that of assent
to a proposition.101 The object of belief, in both these cases, is an
assertion. But an assertion is something asserted, and what is asserted
must be a fact, similar to some of those of which we have already
treated. According to the author, belief in an assertion is belief that
two names are both of them names of the same thing: but this we have
felt ourselves obliged to discard, as an inadequate explanation of the
import of any assertions, except those which are classed as merely
verbal. Every assertion concerning Things, whether in concrete or in
abstract language, is an assertion that some fact, or group of facts,
has been, is, or may be expected to be, found, wherever a certain other
fact, or group of facts, is found. Belief in this, is therefore either
remembrance that we did have, or expectation that we shall have, or a
belief of the same nature with expectation that in some given
circumstances we should have, or Edition: current; Page: [171] should
have had, direct perception of a particular fact. Belief, therefore, is
always a case either of Memory or of Expectation; including under the
latter name conditional as well as positive expectation, and the state
of mind similar to expectation which affects us in regard to what would
have been a subject of expectation, if the conditions of its realization
had still been possible.

It may be objected, that we may believe in the real existence of things
which are not objects of sense at all. We may. But we cannot believe in
the real existence of anything which we do not conceive as capable of
acting in some way upon our own or some other being’s consciousness;
though the state of consciousness it produces may not be called a
sensation. The existence of a thing means, to us, merely its capacity of
producing an impression of some sort upon some mind, that is, of
producing some state of consciousness. The belief, therefore, in its
existence, is still a conditional expectation of something which we
should, under some supposed circumstances, be capable of feeling.

To resume: Belief, as I conceive, is more than an inseparable
association, for inseparable associations do not always generate belief,
nor does belief always require, as one of its conditions, an inseparable
association: we can believe that to be true which we are capable of
conceiving or representing to ourselves as false, and false what we are
capable of representing to ourselves as true. The difference between
belief and mere imagination, is the difference between recognising
something as a reality in nature, and regarding it as a mere thought of
our own. This is the difference which presents itself when Memory has to
be distinguished from Imagination; and again when Expectation, whether
positive or contingent (i.e. whether it be expectation that we shall, or
only persuasion that in certain definable circumstances we should, have
a certain experience) has to be distinguished from the mere mental
conception of that experience.


III

Let us examine, once more, whether the speculations in the text afford
us any means of further analysing this difference.

The difference presents itself in its most elementary form in the
distinction between a sensation and an idea. The author admits this
distinction to be ultimate and primordial. “A sensation is different
from an idea, only because it is felt to be different.”102 But, after
having admitted that these two states of consciousness are
distinguishable from each other in and by themselves, he adds, that they
are also distinguishable by their accompaniments. “The accompaniments of
a sensation are always generically different from those of an idea. . .
. The accompaniments of a sensation, are all the simultaneous objects of
sensation, together with all those which, to a certain extent, both
preceded and followed it. The accompaniments of Edition: current; Page:
[172] an idea are not the simultaneous objects of sensation, but other
ideas; namely, the neighbouring parts, antecedent and consequent, of the
mental train.”103 There can be no doubt that in those individual cases
in which ideas and sensations might be confounded, namely, when an idea
reaches or approaches the vivacity of a sensation, the indication here
pointed out helps to assure us that what we are conscious of is,
nevertheless, only an idea. When, for instance, we awake from a dream,
and open our eyes to the outward world, what makes us so promptly
recognise that this and not the other is the real world, is that we find
its phenomena connected in the accustomed order of our objects of
sensation. But though this circumstance enables us, in particular
instances, to refer our impression more instantaneously to one or the
other class, it cannot be by this that we distinguish ideas at first
from sensations; for the criterion supposes the distinction to be
already made. If we judge a sensation to be a sensation because its
accompaniments are other sensations, and an idea to be an idea because
its accompaniments are other ideas, we must already be able to
distinguish those other sensations from those other ideas.

A similar remark is applicable to a criterion between sensations and
ideas, incidentally laid down by Mr. Bain in the First Part of his
systematic treatise. “A mere picture or idea remains the same whatever
be our bodily position or bodily exertions; the sensation that we call
the actual is entirely at the mercy of our movements, shifting in every
possible way according to the varieties of action that we go through.”*
This test, like the author’s, may serve in cases of momentary doubt; but
sensations in general must have been already distinguished from ideas,
before we could have hit upon this criterion between them. If we had not
already known the difference between a sensation and an idea, we never
could have discovered that one of them is “at the mercy of our
movements,” and that the other is not.

It being granted that a sensation and an idea are ipso facto
distinguishable, the author thinks it no more than natural that “the
copy of the sensation should be distinguishable from the revival of the
idea, when they are both brought up by association.”104 But he adds,
that there is another distinction between the memory of a sensation, and
the memory of an idea, and it is this. In all Memory the idea of self
forms part of the complex idea; but in the memory of sensation, the self
which enters into the remembrance is “the sentient self, that is, seeing
and hearing:” in the memory of an idea, it is “not the sentient self,
but the conceptive self, self having an idea. But” (he adds) “myself
percipient, and myself imagining, or conceiving, are two very different
states of consciousness: of course the ideas of these states of
consciousness, or these states revived by association, are very
different ideas.”105

Edition: current; Page: [173]
Concerning the fact there is no dispute. Myself percipient, and myself
imagining or conceiving, are different states, because perceiving is a
different thing from imagining; and being different states, the
remembrance of them is, as might be expected, different. But the
question is, in what does the difference between the remembrances
consist? The author calls one of them the idea of myself perceiving, and
the other the idea of myself imagining, and thinks there is no other
difference. But how do the idea of myself having a sensation, and the
idea of myself having an idea of that sensation, differ from one
another? since in either case an idea of the sensation is all that I am
having now. The thought of myself perceiving a thing at a former time,
and the thought of myself imagining the thing at that former time, are
both at the present moment facts of imagination—are now merely ideas. In
each case I have an ideal representation of myself, as conscious in a
manner very similar in the two cases; though not exactly the same, since
in the one case I remember to have been conscious of a sensation, in the
other, to have been conscious only of an idea of that sensation: but, in
either case, that past consciousness enters only as an idea, into the
consciousness I now have by recollection. In what, then, as far as mere
ideas are concerned, do my present mental representations of the two
cases differ? Will it be said, that the idea of the sensation is one
thing, the idea of the idea of the sensation another thing? Or are they
both the same idea, namely, the idea of the sensation; and is the
element that is present in the one case, but absent in the other, not an
idea but something else? A difference there is admitted to be between
the remembrance of having had a sensation, and the remembrance of having
merely thought of the sensation, i.e. had the idea of it: is this
difference a difference in the ideas I have in the two cases, or is the
idea the same, but accompanied in the one case by something not an idea,
which does not exist in the other? for if so, this something is a
Belief.

I have touched upon this question in a former note,106 and expressed my
inability to recognise, in the idea of an idea, anything but the idea
itself; in the thought of a thought, anything but a repetition of the
thought. My thought of Falstaff, as far as I can perceive, is not a copy
but a repetition of the thought I had of him when I first read
Shakespeare: not indeed an exact repetition, because all complex ideas
undergo modification by time, some elements fading away, and new ones
being added by reverting to the original sources or by subsequent
associations; but my first mental image of Falstaff, and my present one,
do not differ as the thought of a rose differs from the sight of one; as
an idea of sensation differs from the sensation. On this point the
author was perhaps of the same opinion, since we found him contrasting
the “copy” of the sensation with the “revival” of the idea, as if the
latter was a case of simple repetition, the former not. It would have
been well if he had made this point a subject of express discussion; for
if his opinion upon it was what, from this passage, we may suppose it to
have been, it involves a serious difficulty. If (he says) a sensation
and an idea “are Edition: current; Page: [174] distinguishable in the
having, it is likely that the copy of the sensation should be
distinguishable from the revival of the idea.” But the copy of the
sensation is the idea; so that, on this shewing, the idea is
distinguishable from its own revival, that is, from the same idea when
it occurs again. The author’s theory would thus require him to maintain
that an idea revived is a specifically different idea, and not the same
idea repeated: since otherwise the two states of mind, so far as regards
the ideas contained in them, are undistinguishable, and it is necessary
to admit the presence in Memory of some other element.

Let us put another case. Instead of Falstaff, suppose a real person whom
I have seen: for example General Lafayette.107 My idea of Lafayette is
almost wholly, what my idea of Falstaff is entirely, a creation of
thought: only a very small portion of it is derived from my brief
experience of seeing and conversing with him. But I have a remembrance
of having seen Lafayette, and no remembrance of having seen Falstaff,
but only of having thought of him. Is it a sufficient explanation of
this difference to say, that I have an idea of myself seeing and hearing
Lafayette, and only an idea of myself thinking of Falstaff? But I can
form a vivid idea of myself seeing and hearing Falstaff. I can without
difficulty imagine myself in the field of Shrewsbury, listening to his
characteristic soliloquy over the body of Hotspur; or in the tavern in
the midst of his associates, hearing his story of his encounter with the
men in buckram.108 When I recal the scene, I can as little detach it
from the idea of myself as present, as I can in the case of most things
of which I was really an eye-witness. The spontaneous presence of the
idea of Myself in the conception, is always that of myself as
percipient. The idea of myself as in a state of mere imagination, only
substitutes itself for the other when something reminds me that the
scene is merely imaginary.

I cannot help thinking, therefore, that there is in the remembrance of a
real fact, as distinguished from that of a thought, an element which
does not consist, as the author supposes, in a difference between the
mere ideas which are present to the mind in the two cases. This element,
howsoever we define it, constitutes Belief, and is the difference
between Memory and Imagination. From whatever direction we approach,
this difference seems to close our path. When we arrive at it, we seem
to have reached, as it were, the central point of our intellectual
nature, presupposed and built upon in every attempt we make to explain
the more recondite phenomena of our mental being. (Vol. I, pp. 402-23.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [175]
[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to Chap. xii, “Ratiocination.”]

This chapter, which is of a very summary character, is a prolongation of
the portion of the chapter on Belief, which examines the case of belief
in the truth of a proposition; and must stand or fall with it. The
question considered is, how, from belief in the truth of the two
premises of a syllogism, we pass into belief in the conclusion. The
exposition proceeds on the untenable theory of the import of
propositions, on which I have so often had occasion to comment. That
theory, however, was not necessary to the author for shewing how two
ideas may become inseparably associated through the inseparable
association of each of them with a third idea: and inasmuch as an
inseparable association between the subject and predicate, in the
author’s opinion, constitutes belief, an explanation of ratiocination
conformable to that given of belief follows as a matter of course.

Although I am unable to admit that there is nothing in belief but an
inseparable association, and although I maintain that there may be
belief without an inseparable association, I can still accept this
explanation of the formation of an association between the subject and
predicate of the conclusion, which, when close and intense, has, as we
have seen, a strong tendency to generate belief. But to shew what it is
that gives the belief its validity, we must fall back on logical laws,
the laws of evidence. And independently of the question of validity, we
shall find in the reliance on those laws, so far as they are understood,
the source and origin of all beliefs, whether well or ill founded, which
are not the almost mechanical or automatic products of a strong
association—of the lively suggestion of an idea. We may therefore pass
at once to the nature of Evidence, which is the subject of the next
chapter.

I venture to refer, in passing, to those chapters in my System of Logic,
in which I have maintained, contrary to what is laid down in this
chapter, that Ratiocination does not consist of Syllogisms; that the
Syllogism is not the analysis of what the mind does in reasoning, but
merely a useful formula into which it can translate its reasonings,
gaining thereby a great increase in the security for their
correctness.109 (Vol. I, pp. 426-7.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to Chap. xiii, “Evidence.”]

This chapter on Evidence is supplementary to the chapter on Belief, and
is intended to analyse the process of weighing and balancing opposing
grounds for believing.

Edition: current; Page: [176]
Evidence is either of individual facts (not actually perceived by
oneself), or of general truths. The former is the only case to which
much attention is paid in the present chapter; which very happily
illustrates it, by the case of navigators having to decide on the
existence or non-existence of inhabitants in a newly discovered island.
The process of balancing the evidence for and against, is depicted in a
very lively manner. Let us see whether the mental facts set down in the
exposition, are precisely those which take place.

When the sailors have seen prints of a foot, resembling those of a man,
the idea is raised of a man making the print. When they afterwards see a
monkey, whose feet leave traces almost similar, the idea is also raised
of a monkey making the print, and the state of their minds, the author
says, is doubt. Of this state he gives the following analysis.

There is here a double association with the print of the foot. There is
the association of a man, and there is the association of a monkey.
First, the print raises the idea of a man, but the instant it does so,
it raises also the idea of a monkey. The idea of the monkey, displacing
that of the man, hinders the first association from the fixity which
makes it belief; and the idea of man, displacing that of monkey, hinders
the second association from that fixity which constitutes belief.110

This passage deserves to be studied; for without having carefully
weighed it, we cannot be certain that we are in complete possession of
the author’s theory of Belief.

There are two conflicting associations with the print of the foot. The
picture of a man making it, cannot co-exist with that of a monkey making
it. But the two may alternate with one another. Had the association with
a man been the only association, it would, or might (for on this point
the author is not explicit) have amounted to belief. But the idea of the
monkey and that of the man alternately displacing one another, hinder
either association from having the fixity which would make it belief.

This alternation, however, between the two ideas, of a monkey making the
footprint and of a man making it, may very well take place without
hindering one of the two from being accompanied by belief. Suppose the
sailors to obtain conclusive evidence, testimonial or circumstantial,
that the prints were made by a monkey. It may happen, nevertheless, that
the remarkable resemblance of the foot prints to those of a man, does
not cease to force itself upon their notice: in other words, they
continue to associate the idea of a man with the footsteps; they are
reminded of a man, and of a man making the footsteps, every time they
see or think of them. The double association, therefore, may subsist,
and the one which does not correspond with the fact may even be the most
obtrusive of the two, while yet the other conception may be the one with
which the men believe the real facts to have corresponded.

Edition: current; Page: [177]
All the rest of the exposition is open to the same criticism. The author
accounts very accurately for the presence of all the ideas which the
successive appearance of the various articles of evidence arouses in the
mind. But he does not shew that the belief, which is ultimately arrived
at, is constituted by the expulsion from the mind of one set of these
ideas, and the exclusive possession of it by the other set. It is quite
possible that neither of the associations may acquire the “fixity”
which, according to the apparent meaning of the author, would defeat the
other association altogether, and drive away the conception which it
suggests; and yet, one of the suppositions may be believed and the other
disbelieved, according to the balance of evidence, as estimated by the
investigator. Belief, then, which has been already shewn not to require
an inseparable association, appears not to require even “fixity”—such
fixity as to exclude the idea of the conflicting supposition, as it does
exclude the belief.

The problem of Evidence divides itself into two distinguishable
enquiries: what effect evidence ought to produce, and what determines
the effect that it does produce: how our belief ought to be regulated,
and how, in point of fact, it is regulated. The first enquiry—that into
the nature and probative force of evidence; the discussion of what
proves what, and of the precautions needed in admitting one thing as
proof of another—are the province of Logic, understood in its widest
sense: and for its treatment we must refer to treatises on Logic, either
inductive or ratiocinative.111 All that would be in place here, reduces
itself to a single principle: In all cases, except the case of what we
are directly conscious of (in which case, as the author justly observes,
the evidence and the belief are one and the same thing)—in all cases,
therefore, in which belief is really grounded on evidence, it is
grounded, in the ultimate result, on the constancy of the course of
nature. Whether the belief be of facts or of laws, and whether of past
facts or of those which are present or future, this is the basis on
which it rests. Whatever it is that we believe, the justification of the
belief must be, that unless it were true, the uniformity of the course
of nature would not be maintained. A cause would have occurred, not
followed by its invariable effect; an effect would have occurred, not
preceded by any of its invariable causes; witnesses would have lied, who
have always been known to speak the truth; signs would have proved
deceptive, which in human experience have always given true indication.
This is obvious, whatever case of belief on evidence we examine. Belief
in testimony is grounded on previous experience that testimony is
usually conformable to fact: testimony in general (for even this may
with truth be affirmed); or the testimony of the particular witness, or
the testimony of persons similar to him. Belief that the sun will rise
and set to-morrow, or that a stone thrown up into the air will fall
back, rests on experience that this has been invariably the case, and
reliance that what has hitherto occurred Edition: current; Page: [178]
will continue to occur hereafter. Belief in a fact vouched for by
circumstantial evidence, rests on experience that such circumstances as
are ascertained to exist in the case, never exist unaccompanied by the
given fact. What we call evidence, whether complete or incomplete,
always consists of facts or events tending to convince us that some
ascertained general truths or laws of nature must have proved false, if
the conclusion which the evidence points to is not true.

Belief on evidence is therefore always a case of the generalizing
process; of the assumption that what we have not directly experienced
resembles, or will resemble, our experience. And, properly understood,
this assumption is true; for the whole course of nature consists of a
concurrence of causes, producing their effects in a uniform manner; but
the uniformity which exists is often not that which our first
impressions lead us to expect. Mr. Bain has well pointed out, that the
generalizing propensity, in a mind not disciplined by thought, nor as
yet warned by its own failures, far outruns the evidence, or rather,
precedes any conscious consideration of evidence; and that what the
consideration of evidence has to do when it comes, is not so much to
make us generalize, as to limit our spontaneous impulse of
generalization, and restrain within just bounds our readiness to believe
that the unknown will resemble the known.112 When Mr. Bain occasionally
speaks of this propensity as if it were instinctive, I understand him to
mean, that by an original law of our nature, the mere suggestion of an
idea, so long as the idea keeps possession of the mind, suffices to give
it a command over our active energies. It is to this primitive mental
state that the author’s theory of Belief most nearly applies. In a mind
which is as yet untutored, either by the teachings of others or by its
own mistakes, an idea so strongly excited as for the time to keep out
all ideas by which it would itself be excluded, possesses that power
over the voluntary activities which is Mr. Bain’s criterion of
Belief;113 and any association that compels the person to have the idea
of a certain consequence as following his act, generates, or becomes, a
real expectation of that consequence. But these expectations often
turning out to have been ill grounded, the unduly prompt suggestion
comes to be associated, by repetition, with the shock of disappointed
expectation; and the idea of the desired consequent is now raised
together with the idea not of its realization, but of its frustration:
thus neutralizing the effect of the first association on the belief and
on the active impulses. It is in this stage that the mind learns the
habit of looking out for, and weighing, evidence. It presently discovers
that the expectations which are least often disappointed are those which
correspond to the greatest and most varied amount of antecedent
experience. It gradually comes to associate the feeling of disappointed
expectation with all those promptings to expect, which, being the result
of accidental associations, have no, or but little, previous experience
Edition: current; Page: [179] conformable to them: and by degrees the
expectation only arises when memory represents a considerable amount of
such previous experience; and is strong in proportion to the quantity of
the experience. At a still later period, as disappointment nevertheless
not unfrequently happens notwithstanding a considerable amount of past
experience on the side of the expectation, the mind is put upon making
distinctions in the kind of past experiences, and finding out what
qualities, besides mere frequency, experience must have, in order not to
be followed by disappointment. In other words, it considers the
conditions of right inference from experience; and by degrees arrives at
principles or rules, more or less accurate, for inductive reasoning.
This is substantially the doctrine of the author of the Analysis. It
must be conceded to him, that an association, sufficiently strong to
exclude all ideas that would exclude itself, produces a kind of
mechanical belief; and that the processes by which this belief is
corrected, or reduced to rational bounds, all consist in the growth of a
counter-association, tending to raise the idea of a disappointment of
the first expectation: and as the one or the other prevails in the
particular case, the belief, or expectation, exists or does not exist,
exactly as if the belief were the same thing with the association. It
must also be admitted that the process by which the belief is overcome,
takes effect by weakening the association; which can only be effected by
raising up another association that conflicts with it. There are two
ways in which this counter-association may be generated. One is, by
counter-evidence; by contrary experience in the specific case, which, by
associating the circumstances of the case with a contrary belief,
destroys their association with the original belief. But there is also
another mode of weakening, or altogether destroying, the belief, without
adducing contrary experience: namely, by merely recognising the
insufficiency of the existing experience; by reflecting on other
instances in which the same amount and kind of experience have existed,
but were not followed by the expected result. In the one mode as in the
other, the process of dissolving a belief is identical with that of
dissolving an association; and to this extent—and it is a very large
extent—the author’s theory of Belief must be received as true.

I cannot, however, go beyond this, and maintain with the author that
Belief is identical with a strong association; on account of the reason
already stated, viz. that in many cases—indeed in almost all cases in
which the evidence has been such as required to be investigated and
weighed—a final belief is arrived at without any such clinging together
of ideas as the author supposes to constitute it; and we remain able to
represent to ourselves in imagination, often with perfect facility, both
the conflicting suppositions, of which we nevertheless believe one and
reject the other. (Vol. I, pp. 433-9.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [180]
[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to the introductory paragraph of Chap.
xiv, “Some Names Which Require a Particular Explanation”:] We have now
seen that, in what we call the mental world, Consciousness, there are
three grand classes of phenomena, the most familiar of all the facts
with which we are acquainted,—sensations, ideas, and the train of ideas.
We have examined a number of the more complicated cases of
Consciousness; and have found, that they all resolve themselves into the
three simple elements, thus enumerated. We also found it necessary to
shew, for what ends, and in what manner, marks were contrived of
sensations and ideas, and by what combinations they were made to
represent, expeditiously, trains of those states of consciousness. Some
marks or names, however, could not be explained, till some of the more
complicated states of consciousness were unfolded; these also are names
so important, and so peculiar in their mode of signification, that a
very complete understanding of them is required. It is to the
consideration of these remarkable cases of Naming that we now proceed.

Under the modest title of an explanation of the meaning of several
names, this chapter presents us with a series of discussions of some of
the deepest and most intricate questions in all metaphysics. Like Plato,
the author introduces his analysis of the most obscure among the complex
general conceptions of the human mind, in the form of an enquiry into
the meaning of their names.114 The title of the chapter gives a very
inadequate notion of the difficulty and importance of the speculations
contained in it, and which make it, perhaps, the profoundest chapter of
the book. It is almost as if a treatise on chemistry were described as
an explanation of the names air, water, potass, sulphuric acid, etc.
(Vol. II, p. 2.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to Sect. 1, “Names of Names,” of Chap.
xiv.]

A right understanding of the words which are names of names, is of great
importance in philosophy. The tendency was always strong to believe that
whatever receives a name must be an entity or being, having an
independent existence of its own; and if no real entity answering to the
name could be found, Edition: current; Page: [181] men did not for that
reason suppose that none existed, but imagined that it was something
peculiarly abstruse and mysterious, too high to be an object of sense.
The meaning of all general, and especially of all abstract terms, became
in this way enveloped in a mystical haze; and none of these have been
more generally misunderstood, or have been a more copious source of
futile and bewildering speculation, than some of the words which are
names of names. Genus, Species, Universal, were long supposed to be
designations of sublime hyperphysical realities; Number, instead of a
general name of all numerals, was supposed to be the name, if not of a
concrete thing, at least of a single property or attribute.

This class of names was well understood and correctly characterized by
Hobbes, of whose philosophy the distinction between names of names and
of things was a cardinal point.115 (Vol. II, p. 5.)

* * * * *

[In Chap. xiv, Sect. 2, “Relative Terms,” James Mill says:] If it is
asked, why we give names in pairs? The general answer immediately
suggests itself; it is because the things named present themselves in
pairs; that is, are joined by association. But as many things are joined
in pairs by association, which do not receive relative names, the cause
may still be inquired of the classification. What is the reason that
some pairs do, while many more do not, receive relative names? The cause
is the same by which we are guided in imposing other names. As the
various combinations of ideas are far too numerous for naming, and we
are obliged to make a selection, we name those which we find it of most
importance to have named, omitting the rest. It is a question of
convenience, solved by experience. It will be seen more distinctly
hereafter, that relative names are one of the contrivances for
epitomising; and that they enable us to express ourselves with fewer
words than we should be able to do without them.

No part of the Analysis is more valuable than the simple explanation
here given of a subject which has seemed so mysterious to some of the
most enlightened and penetrating philosophers, down even to the present
time. The only difference between relative names and any others consists
in their being given in pairs; and the reason of their being given in
pairs is not the existence between two things, of a mystical bond called
a Relation, and supposed to have a kind of shadowy and abstract reality,
but a very simple peculiarity in the concrete fact which the two names
are intended to mark.

In order to make quite clear the nature of this peculiarity, it will be
desirable to advert once more to the double mode of signification of
concrete general names, Edition: current; Page: [182] viz. that while
they denote (or are names of) objects, they connote some fact relating
to those objects. The fact connoted by any name, relative or not, is
always of the same nature; it is some bodily or mental feeling, or some
set of bodily or mental feelings, accompanying or produced by the
object. But in the case of the ordinary names of objects, this fact
concerns one object only, or rather only that one object and the
sentient mind. The peculiarity in the case of relative names is, that
the fact connoted concerns two objects, and cannot be understood without
thinking of them both. It is a phenomenon in which two objects play a
part. There is no greater mystery in a phenomenon which concerns two
objects, than in a phenomenon which concerns only one. For example; the
fact connoted by the word cause, is a fact in which the thing which is
the cause, is implicated along with another thing which is the effect.
The facts connoted by the word parent, and also by the word son or
daughter, are a long series of phenomena of which both the parent and
the child are parts; and the series of phenomena would not be that which
the name parent expresses, unless the child formed a part of it, nor
would it be that which the name son or daughter expresses, unless the
parent formed a part of it. Now, when in a series of phenomena of any
interest to us two objects are implicated, we naturally give names
expressive of it to both the objects, and these are relative names. The
two correlative names denote two different objects, the cause and the
effect, or the parent and son; but though what they denote is different,
what they connote is in a certain sense the same: both names connote the
same set of facts, considered as giving one name to the one object,
another name to the other. This set of facts, which is connoted by both
the correlative names, was called by the old logicians the ground of the
relation, fundamentum relationis. The fundamentum of any relation is the
facts, fully set out, which are the reason of giving to two objects two
correlative names. In some cases both objects seem to receive the same
name; in the relation of likeness, both objects are said to be like; in
the relation of equality, both are said to be equal. But even here the
duality holds, on a stricter examination: for the first object (A) is
not said to be like, absolutely, but to be like the second object (B);
the second is not said to be like absolutely, but to be like the first.
Now though “like” is only one name, “like A” is not the same name as
“like B,” so that there is really, in this case also, a pair of names.

From these considerations we see that objects are said to be related,
when there is any fact, simple or complex, either apprehended by the
senses or otherwise, in which they both figure. Any objects, whether
physical or mental, are related, or are in a relation, to one another,
in virtue of any complex state of consciousness into which they both
enter; even if it be a no more complex state of consciousness than that
of merely thinking of them together. And they are related to each other
in as many different ways, or in other words, they stand in as many
distinct relations to one another, as there are specifically distinct
states of consciousness of which they both form parts. As these may be
innumerable, the possible relations not only Edition: current; Page:
[183] of any one thing with others, but of any one thing with the same
other, are infinitely numerous and various. But they may all be reduced
to a certain number of general heads of classification, constituting the
different kinds of Relation: each of which requires examination apart,
to ascertain what, in each case, the state of consciousness, the cluster
or train of sensations or thoughts, really is, in which the two objects
figure, and which is connoted by the correlative names. This examination
the author accordingly undertakes: and thus, under the guise of
explaining names, he analyses all the principal cases which the world
and the human mind present, of what are called Relations between things.
(Vol. II, pp. 7-10.)

* * * * *

[James Mill analyzes Relative Terms into groups (Vol. II, pp. 8-10):]

I. The only, or at least the principal, occasions, for naming simple
sensations, or simple ideas, in pairs, seem to be these:

1. When we take them into simultaneous view, as such and such;

2. When we take them into simultaneous view, as antecedent and
consequent.

II. The principal occasions on which we name the complex ideas, called
objects, in pairs, are these four:

1. When we speak of them as having an order in space;

2. When we speak of them as having an order in time;

3. When we speak of them as agreeing or disagreeing in quantity;

4. As agreeing or disagreeing in quality.

III. The occasions on which we name the complex ideas of our own
formation in pairs, are,

1. When we speak of them as composed of the same or different simple
ideas;

2. When we speak of them as antecedent and consequent.

[He then (Vol. II, p. 10) turns to the first:]

I. 1. We speak of two sensations, as Same or Different, Like or Unlike.

[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of the discussion of I, 1.]

The author commences his survey of Relations with the most universal of
them all, Likeness and Unlikeness; and he examines these as subsisting
between simple sensations or ideas; for whatever be the true theory of
likeness or unlikeness as between the simple elements, the same, in
essentials, will serve for the likenesses or unlikenesses of the wholes
compounded of them.

Examining, then, what constitutes likeness between two sensations
(meaning two exactly similar sensations experienced at different times);
he says, that to feel the two sensations to be alike, is one and the
same thing with having the two sensations. Their being alike is nothing
but their being felt to be alike; their being Edition: current; Page:
[184] unlike is nothing but their being felt to be unlike. The feeling
of unlikeness is merely that feeling of change, in passing from the one
to the other, which makes them two, and without which we should not be
conscious of them at all. The feeling of likeness, is the being reminded
of the former sensation by the present, that is, having the idea of the
former sensation called up by the present, and distinguishing them as
sensation and idea.

It does not seem to me that this mode of describing the matter explains
anything, or leaves the likenesses and unlikenesses of our simple
feelings less an ultimate fact than they were before. All it amounts to
is, that likeness and unlikeness are themselves only a matter of
feeling: and that when we have two feelings, the feeling of their
likeness or unlikeness is inextricably interwoven with the fact of
having the feelings. One of the conditions, under which we have
feelings, is that they are like and unlike: and in the case of simple
feelings, we cannot separate the likeness or unlikeness from the
feelings themselves. It is by no means certain, however, that when we
have two feelings in immediate succession, the feeling of their likeness
is not a third feeling which follows instead of being involved in the
two. This question is expressly left open by Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his
Principles of Psychology;116 and I am not aware that any philosopher has
conclusively resolved it. We do not get rid of any difficulty by calling
the feeling of likeness the same thing with the two feelings that are
alike: we have equally to postulate likeness and unlikeness as primitive
facts—as an inherent distinction among our sensations; and whichever
form of phraseology we employ makes no difference in the ulterior
developments of psychology. It is of no practical consequence whether we
say that a phenomenon is resolved into sensations and ideas, or into
sensations, ideas, and their resemblances, since under the one
expression as under the other the resemblance must be recognised as an
indispensable element in the compound.

When we pass from resemblance between simple sensations and ideas, to
resemblance between complex wholes, the process, though not essentially
different, is more complicated, for it involves a comparison of part
with part, element with element, and therefore a previous discrimination
of the elements. When we judge that an external object, compounded of a
number of attributes, is like another external object; since they are
not, usually, alike in all their attributes, we have to take the two
objects into simultaneous consideration in respect to each of their
various attributes one after another: their colour, to observe whether
that is similar; their size, whether that is similar; their figure,
their weight, and so on. It comes at last to a perception of likeness or
unlikeness between simple sensations: but we reduce it to this by
attending separately to one of the simple sensations forming the one
cluster, and to one of those forming the other cluster, and if possible
adjusting our organs of sense so as to have these two sensations in
immediate juxtaposition: as when we put two objects, of which we wish to
Edition: current; Page: [185] compare the colour, side by side, so that
our sense of sight may pass directly from one of the two sensations of
colour to the other. This act of attention directed successively to
single attributes, blunts our feeling of the other attributes of the
objects, and enables us to feel the likeness of the single sensations
almost as vividly as if we had nothing but these in our mind. Having
felt this likeness, we say that the sensations are like, and that the
two objects are like in respect of those sensations: and continuing the
process we pronounce them to be either like or unlike in each of the
other sensations which we receive from them. (Vol. II, pp. 17-20.)

* * * * *

[The next section, I, 2, begins (Vol. II, p. 18):] 2. The only other
relative terms applicable to simple sensations and ideas, are those
which denote them as Antecedent and Consequent. [Once more J.S. Mill’s
note appears at the end of the discussion.]

The next relation which the author examines is that of succession, or
Antecedent and Consequent. And here again we have one of the universal
conditions to which all our feelings or states of consciousness are
subject. Whenever we have more feelings than one, we must have them
either simultaneously or in succession; and when we are conscious of
having them in succession, we cannot in any way separate or isolate the
succession from the feelings themselves. The author attempts to carry
the analysis somewhat farther. He says that when we have two sensations
in the order of antecedent and consequent, the consequent calls up the
idea of the antecedent; and that this fact, that a sensation calls up
the idea of another sensation directly, and not through an intermediate
idea, constitutes that other sensation the antecedent of the sensation
which reminds us of it—is not a consequence of the one sensation’s
having preceded the other, but is literally all we mean by the one
sensation’s having preceded the other. There seem to be grave objections
to this doctrine. In the first place, there is no law of association by
which a consequent calls up the idea of its antecedent. The law of
successive association is that the antecedent calls up the idea of the
consequent, but not conversely; as is seen in the difficulty of
repeating backwards even a form of words with which we are very
familiar. We get round from the consequent to the antecedent by an
indirect process, through the medium of other ideas; or by going back,
at each step, to the beginning of the train, and repeating it downwards
until we reach that particular link. When a consequent directly recalls
its antecedent, it is by synchronous association, when the antecedent
happens to have been so prolonged as to coexist with, instead of merely
preceding, the consequent.

The next difficulty is, that although the direct recalling of the idea
of a past Edition: current; Page: [186] sensation by a present, without
any intermediate link, does not take place from consequent to
antecedent, it does take place from like to like: a sensation recalls
the idea of a past sensation resembling itself, without the intervention
of any other idea. The author, however, says, that “when two sensations
in a train are such that if one exists, it has the idea of the other
along with it by its immediate exciting power, and not through any
intermediate idea; the sensation, the idea of which is thus excited, is
called the antecedent, the sensation which thus excites that idea is
called the consequent.”117 If this therefore were correct, we should
give the names of antecedent and consequent not to the sensations which
really are so, but to those which recall one another by resemblance.

Thirdly and lastly, to explain antecedence, i.e. the succession between
two feelings, by saying that one of the two calls up the idea of the
other, that is to say, is followed by it, is to explain succession by
succession, and antecedence by antecedence. Every explanation of
anything by states of our consciousness, includes as part of the
explanation a succession between those states; and it is useless
attempting to analyse that which comes out as an element in every
analysis we are able to make. Antecedence and consequence, as well as
likeness and unlikeness, must be postulated as universal conditions of
Nature, inherent in all our feelings whether of external or of internal
consciousness. (Vol. II, pp. 22-4.)

* * * * *

[Abstract terms, James Mill argues,] derive their meaning wholly from
their concretes. . . . The same, in its abstract sense, is the case with
line, though we have not words by which we can convey the conception
with equal clearness. If we had an abstract term, separate from the
concrete, the troublesome association in question would have been less
indissoluble, and less deceptive. If we had such a word as Lineness, or
Linth, for example, we should have much more easily seen, that our idea
is the idea of the physical line; and that linth without a line, as
breadth without something broad, length without something long, are just
nothing at all.

This conception of a geometrical line, as the abstract, of which a
physical line is the corresponding concrete, is scarcely satisfactory.
An abstract name is the name of an attribute, or property, of the things
of which the concrete name is predicated. It is, no doubt, the name of
some part, some one or more, of the sensations composing the concrete
group, but not of those sensations simply and in themselves; it is the
name of those sensations regarded as belonging to some group. Whiteness,
the abstract name, is the name of the colour white, considered as the
colour of some physical object. Now I do not see that a geometrical line
is Edition: current; Page: [187] conceived as an attribute of a physical
object. The attribute of objects which comes nearest to the
signification of a geometrical line, is their length: but length does
not need any name but its own; and the author does not seem to mean that
a geometrical line is the same thing as length. He seems to have fallen
into the mistake of confounding an abstract with an ideal. The line
which is meant in all the theorems of geometry I take to be as truly
concrete as a physical line; it denotes an object, but one purely
imaginary; a suppositious object, agreeing in all else with a physical
line, but differing from it in having no breadth. The properties of this
imaginary line of course agree with those of a physical line, except so
far as these depend on, or are affected by, breadth. The lines,
surfaces, and figures contemplated by geometry are abstract, only in the
improper sense of the term, in which it is applied to whatever results
from the mental process called Abstraction. They ought to be called
ideal. They are physical lines, surfaces, and figures, idealized, that
is, supposed hypothetically to be perfectly what they are only
imperfectly, and not to be at all what they are in a very slight, and
for most purposes wholly unimportant, degree. (Vol. II, pp. 28-9.)

* * * * *

[In his discussion of relative terms that apply to the synchronous
order, that is, in space, James Mill comments:] We never perceive, what
we call an object, except in the synchronous order. Whatever other
sensations we receive, the sensations of the synchronous order, are
always received along with them. When we perceive a chair, a tree, a
man, a house, they are always situated so and so, with respect to other
objects. As the sensations of position are thus always received with the
other sensations of an object, the idea of Position is so closely
associated with the idea of the object, that it is wholly impossible for
us to have the one idea without the other. It is one of the most
remarkable cases of indissoluble association; and is that feeling which
men describe, when they say that the idea of space forces itself upon
their understandings, and is necessary.

Under the head, as before, of Relative Terms, we find here an analysis
of the important and intricate complex ideas of Extension and Position.
It will be convenient to defer any remarks on this analysis, until it
can be considered in conjunction with the author’s exposition of the
closely allied subjects of Motion and Space.118 (Vol. II, p. 36.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [188]
[Turning to relative terms in the successive order, that is, in time,
James Mill says:] Of successions, that is, the order of objects as
antecedent and consequent, some are constant, some not constant. Thus, a
stone dropped in the air always falls to the ground. This is a case of
constancy of sequence. Heavy clouds drop rain, but not always. This is a
case of casual sequence.

This is surely an improper use of the word Casual. Sequences cannot be
exhaustively divided into invariable and casual, or (as by the author a
few pages further on) into constant and fortuitous. Heavy clouds, though
they do not always drop rain, are not connected with it by mere
accident, as the passing of a waggon might be. They are connected with
it through causation: they are one of the conditions on which, when
united, rain is invariably consequent, though it is not invariably
consequent on that single condition. This distinction is essential to
any system of Inductive Logic, in which it recurs at every step. (Vol.
II, pp. 37-8.)

* * * * *

[Continuing his account of relative terms in the successive order, James
Mill says, after treating Doctor and Patient as properly “one name,
though made up of two parts,” that Father and Son are similarly] the two
extremities of a train of great length and intricacy, very imperfectly
understood. They also, both together, compose, as may easily be seen,
but one name. Father is a word which connotes Son, and whether Son is
expressed or not, the meaning of it is implied. In like manner Son
connotes Father; and, stripped of that connotation, is without a
meaning. Taken together, therefore, they are one name, the name of the
complex idea of that train of which father is the one extremity, son the
other.

It seems hardly a proper expression to say that Physician and Patient,
or that Father and Son, are one name made up of two parts. When one of
the parts is a name of one person and the other part is the name of
another, it is difficult to see how the two together can be but one
name. Father and Son are two names, denoting different persons: but what
the author had it in his mind to say, was that they connote the same
series of facts, which series, as the two persons are both indispensable
parts of it, gives names to them both, and is made the foundation or
fundamentum of an attribute ascribed to each.

With the exception of this questionable use of language, which the
author had recourse to because he had not left himself the precise word
Connote, to express what there is of real identity in the signification
of the two names; the analysis which follows of the various complicated
cases of relation seems philosophically unexceptionable. The complexity
of a relation consists in the complex composition of the series of facts
or phenomena which the names connote, and which is the fundamentum
relationis. The names signify that the person or thing, of which they
Edition: current; Page: [189] are predicated, forms part of a group or
succession of phenomena along with the other person or thing which is
its correlate: and the special nature of that group or series, which may
be of extreme complexity, constitutes the speciality of the relation
predicated. (Vol. II, pp. 39-40.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of James Mill’s third subsection on
relative terms, dealing with quantity.]

After analysing Position and Extension under the head of Relative Terms,
the author now, under the same head, gives the analysis of Quantity and
Quality. To what he says on the subject of Quantity it does not appear
necessary to add anything. He seems to have correctly analysed the
phenomenon down to a primitive element, beyond which we have no power to
investigate. As Likeness and Unlikeness appeared to be properties of our
simple feelings, which must be postulated as ultimate, and which are
inseparable from the feelings themselves, so may this also be said of
More and Less. As some of our feelings are like, some unlike, so there
is a mode of likeness or unlikeness which we call Degree: some feelings
otherwise like are unlike in degree, that is one is unlike another in
intensity, or one is unlike another in duration; in either case one is
distinguished as more, or greater, the other as less. And the fact of
being more or less only means that we feel them as more or less. The
author says in this case, as he had said in the other elementary cases
of relation, that the more and the less being different sensations, to
trace them and to distinguish their difference are not two things but
one and the same thing. It matters not, since there the difference still
is, unsusceptible of further analysis. The author’s apparent
simplification amounts only to this, that differences of quantity, like
all other differences of which we take cognizance, are differences
merely in our feelings; they exist only as they are felt. But (as we
have already said of resemblance, and of antecedence and consequence)
they must be postulated as elements. The distinction of more and less is
one of the ultimate conditions under which we have all our states of
consciousness. (Vol. II, pp. 53-4.)

* * * * *

[James Mill’s fourth subsection on relative terms, on quality, is
followed by J.S. Mill’s note:]

As in the case of Quantity, so in that of Quality, it is needless to add
anything to the Edition: current; Page: [190] author’s very sufficient
elucidation. I merely make the usual reserves with respect to the use of
the word Connotation. The concrete names which predicate qualities (for
of abstract relative names the author is not yet speaking) are said by
him to be the names of our sensations; green, for instance, and red. But
it is the abstract names alone which are this: the names greenness, and
redness. And even the abstract names signify something more than only
the sensations: they are names of the sensations considered as derived
from an object which produces them. The concrete name is a name not of
the sensation, but of the object, of which alone it is predicable: we
talk of green objects, but not of green sensations. It however connotes
the quality greenness, that is, it connotes that particular sensation as
produced by, or proceeding from, the object; as forming one of the group
of sensations which constitutes the object. This, however, is but a
difference, though a very important one, in terminology. It is strictly
true, that the real meaning of the word is the sensations; as, in all
cases, the meaning of a connotative word resides in the connotation (the
attributes signified by it), though it is the name of, or is predicable
of, only the objects which it denotes. (Vol. II, pp. 60-1.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to a clause, “In the case of objects, that
which is named, is, clusters of ideas,” in James Mill’s discussion of
“clusters, formed by arbitrary association,” that “receive names in
pairs,” when “they consist of the same or different simple ideas”:]

Say rather, in the case of objects, what is named is clusters of
sensations, supplemented by possibilities of sensation. If an object is
but a cluster of ideas, what is there to distinguish it from a mere
thought? (Vol. II, p. 62.)

* * * * *

[Continuing the discussion of arbitrarily associated simple ideas giving
rise to relative terms, James Mill deals (Vol. II, pp. 63-4) with equal
and unequal, greater and less. J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of the
discussion.]

In this passage the author has got as near as it is perhaps possible to
get, to an analysis of the ideas of More and Less. We say there is more
of something, when, to what there already was, there has been superadded
other matter of the same kind. And when there is no actual superadding,
but merely two independent masses of the same substance, we call that
one the greater which produces the same impression on our senses which
the other would produce if an addition were made Edition: current; Page:
[191] to it. So with differences of intensity. One sweet taste is called
sweeter than another because it resembles the taste which would be
produced by adding more sugar: and so forth. In all these cases there is
presupposed an original difference in the sensations produced in us by
the greater mass and by the smaller: but according to the explanation
now offered, the idea which guides the application of the terms is that
of physical juxtaposition. (Vol. II, pp. 64-5.)

* * * * *

[James Mill continues his discussion of relative terms by considering
(Vol. II, pp. 65-9) successive ideas, which call forth terms such as
antecedent and consequent, prior and posterior, first and second. In the
course of the argument, he asks (p. 67):] if thoughts are reciprocally
Cause and Effect, that is to say, if, in trains of thought, the same
antecedent is regularly followed by the same consequent, how happens it
that all trains of thought are not the same? [His answer is that the
sensations giving rise to the ideas, and contributing to the “trains,”
vary greatly. J.S. Mill’s note is appended to the end of this argument.]

The author may seem to be anticipating a difficulty which few will feel,
when he asks how it happens that all trains of thought are not the same.
But what he is enquiring into is not why this happens, but how its
happening is consistent with the doctrine he has just laid down. He is
guarding against a possible objection to his proposition, that “the
succession of two thoughts” has “that constancy to which we apply the
terms Cause and Effect.”119 If (he says) it is by direct causation that
an idea raises up another idea with which it is associated; and if it be
the nature and the very meaning of a cause, to be invariably followed by
its effect; how is it, he asks, that any two minds, which have once had
the same idea, do not coincide in their whole subsequent history? And
how is it that the same mind, when it gets back to an idea it has had
before, odes not go on revolving in an eternal round?

Of this difficulty he gives a solution, good as far as it goes—that it
is because the train of ideas is interrupted by sensations, which are
not the same in different minds, nor in the same mind at every
repetition, and which even when they are the same, are connected in
different minds with different associations. This is true, but is not
the whole truth, and a still more complete explanation of the difficulty
might have been given. The author has overlooked a part of the laws of
association, of which he was perfectly aware, but to which he does not
seem to have been always sufficiently alive. The first point overlooked
is, that one idea seldom, perhaps never, entirely fills and engrosses
the mind. We have almost always a considerable number of ideas in the
mind at once; and it must be a very rare occurrence for any two persons,
or for the same person twice over, to have exactly the same collection
Edition: current; Page: [192] of ideas present, each in the same
relative intensity. For this reason, were there no other, the ideas
which the mental state excites by association are almost always more or
less different.

A second point overlooked is, that every sensation or idea is far from
recalling, whenever it occurs, all the ideas with which it is
associated. It never recalls more than a portion of them, and a portion
different at different times. The author has not, in any part of the
Analysis, laid down any law that determines which among the many ideas
associated with an idea or sensation, shall be actually called up by it
in a given case. The selection which it makes among them depends on the
truth already stated, that we seldom or never have only one idea at a
time. When we have several together, they all exercise their suggesting
power, and each of them aids, impedes, or modifies the suggesting power
of the others. This important case of Association has been treated in a
masterly manner by Mr. Bain, both in his larger treatise and in his
Compendium, under the name of Compound Association, and he lays down the
following as its most general law. “Past actions, sensations, thoughts,
or emotions, are recalled more easily when associated either through
contiguity or similarity, with more than one present object or
impression.”* It follows that when we have several ideas in our mind,
none of which is able to call up all the ideas associated with it, those
ideas will usually have the preference which are associated with more
than one of the ideas already present. An idea A, coexisting in the mind
with an idea B, will not select the same idea from among those
associated with it, that it would if it occurred alone or with a
different accompaniment. If there be any one of the ideas associated
with A which is also associated with B, this will probably be one of
those called up by their joint action. If there be any idea associated
with A which not only is not associated with B, but whose negation is
associated with B, this idea will probably be prevented from arising. If
there are any sensations which have usually been presented in
conjunction, not with A alone, or with B alone, but with the combination
AB, still more likely is it that the ideas of these will be recalled
when A and B are thought of together, even though A or B by themselves
might in preference have recalled some other.

These considerations will be found of primary importance in explaining
and accounting for the course of human thought. They enable us, for
example, to understand what it is that keeps a train of thought
coherent, i.e. that maintains it of a given quality, or directs it to a
given purpose. The ideas which succeed one another in the mind of a
person who is writing a treatise on some subject, or striving to
persuade or conciliate a tribunal or a deliberative assembly, are
suggested one by another according to the general laws of association.
Yet the ideas recalled are not those which would be called up on any
common occasion by the same antecedents, but are those only which
connect themselves in the writer’s Edition: current; Page: [193] or
speaker’s mind with the end which he is aiming at. The reason is, that
the various ideas of the train are not solitary in his mind, but there
coexists with all of them (in a greater or less degree of constancy
according to the quality of the mind) the highly interesting idea of the
end in view: and the presence of this idea causes each of the ideas
which pass through his mind while so engaged, to suggest such of the
ideas associated with them as are also associated with the idea of the
end, and not to suggest those which have no association with it. The
ideas all follow one another in an associated train, each calling up by
association the one which immediately follows it; but the perpetual
presence or continual recurrence of the idea of the end, determines,
within certain limits, which of the ideas associated with each link of
the chain shall be aroused and form the next link. When we come to the
author’s analysis of the power of the Will over our ideas, we shall find
him taking exactly this view of it.

Concerning the simultaneous existence of many ideas in the mind, and the
manner in which they modify each other’s exercise of the suggesting
power, there is an able and instructive passage in Cardaillac’s Etudes
Elémentaires de Philosophie, which has been translated and quoted by Sir
William Hamilton in his Lectures, and which, being highly illustrative
of the preceding remarks, I think it useful to subjoin.

Among psychologists, those who have written on Memory and Reproduction
with the greatest detail and precision, have still failed in giving more
than a meagre outline of these operations. They have taken account only
of the notions which suggest each other with a distinct and palpable
notoriety. They have viewed the associations only in the order in which
language is competent to express them; and as language, which renders
them still more palpable and distinct, can only express them in a
consecutive order, can only express them one after another, they have
been led to suppose that thoughts only awaken in succession. Thus, a
series of ideas mutually associated, resembles, on the doctrine of
philosophers, a chain in which every link draws up that which follows;
and it is by means of these links that intelligence labours through, in
the act of reminiscence, to the end which it proposes to attain.

There are some, indeed, among them, who are ready to acknolwedge, that
every actual circumstance is associated to several fundamental notions,
and consequently to several chains, between which the mind may choose;
they admit even that every link is attached to several others, so that
the whole forms a kind of trellis,—a kind of network, which the mind may
traverse in every direction, but still always in a single direction at
once,—always in a succession similar to that of speech. This manner of
explaining reminiscence is founded solely on this,—that, content to have
observed all that is distinctly manifest in the phenomenon, they have
paid no attention to the under-play of the latescent activities,—paid no
attention to all that custom conceals, and conceals the more effectually
in proportion as it is more completely blended with the natural agencies
of mind.

Thus their theory, true in itself, and setting out from a
well-established principle, the Association of Ideas, explains in a
satisfactory manner a portion of the phenomena of Reminiscence; but it
is incomplete, for it is unable to account for the prompt, easy, and
varied operation of this faculty, or for all the marvels it performs. On
the doctrine of the philosophers, we can explain how a scholar repeats,
without hesitation, a lesson he has learned, for all the words are
associated in his mind according to the order in which he has studied
them; how he demonstrates a geometrical theorem, the parts of which are
connected Edition: current; Page: [194] together in the same manner;
these and similar reminiscences of simple successions present no
difficulties which the common doctrine cannot resolve. But it is
impossible, on this doctrine, to explain the rapid and certain movement
of thought, which, with a marvellous facility, passes from one order of
subjects to another, only to return again to the first; which advances,
retrogrades, deviates, and reverts, sometimes marking all the points on
its route, again clearing, as if in play, immense intervals; which runs
over, now in a manifest order, now in a seeming irregularity, all the
notions relative to an object, often relative to several, between which
no connection could be suspected; and this without hesitation, without
uncertainty, without error, as the hand of a skilful musician expatiates
over the keys of the most complex organ. All this is inexplicable on the
meagre and contracted theory on which the phenomena of reproduction have
been thought explained. . . .

To form a correct notion of the phenomena of Reminiscence, it is
requisite that we consider under what conditions it is determined to
exertion. In the first place it is to be noted that, at every crisis of
our existence, momentary circumstances are the causes which awaken our
activity, and set our recollection at work to supply the necessaries of
thought. In the second place, it is as constituting a want, (and by want
I mean the result either of an act of desire or of volition) that the
determining circumstance tends principally to awaken the thoughts with
which it is associated. This being the case, we should expect, that each
circumstance which constitutes a want, should suggest, likewise, the
notion of the object, or objects, proper to satisfy it; and this is what
actually happens. It is, however, further to be observed, that it is not
enough that the want suggests the idea of the object; for if that idea
were alone, it would remain without effect, since it could not guide me
in the procedure I should follow. It is necessary, at the same time,
that to the idea of this object there should be associated the notion of
the relation of this object to the want, of the place where I may find
it, of the means by which I may procure it, and turn it to account, etc.
For instance, I wish to make a quotation: This want awakens in me the
idea of the author in whom the passage is to be found which I am
desirous of citing; but this idea would be fruitless, unless there were
conjoined, at the same time, the representation of the volume, of the
place where I may obtain it, of the means I must employ, etc.

Hence I infer, in the first place, that a want does not awaken an idea
of its object alone, but that it awakens it accompanied with a number,
more or less considerable, of accessory notions, which form, as it were,
its train or attendance. This train may vary according to the nature of
the want which suggests the notion of an object; but the train can never
fall wholly off, and it becomes more indissolubly attached to the
object, in proportion as it has been more frequently called up in
attendance.

I infer, in the second place, that this accompaniment of accessory
notions, simultaneously suggested with the principal idea, is far from
being as vividly and distinctly represented in consciousness as that
idea itself; and when these accessories have once been completely
blended with the habits of the mind, and its reproductive agency, they
at length finally disappear, becoming fused, as it were, in the
consciousness of the idea to which they are attached. Experience proves
this double effect of the habits of reminiscence. If we observe our
operations relative to the gratification of a want, we shall perceive
that we are far from having a clear consciousness of the accessory
notions; the consciousness of them is, as it were, obscured, and yet we
cannot doubt that they are present to the mind, for it is they that
direct our procedure in all its details.

We must, therefore, I think, admit that the thought of an object
immediately suggested by a desire, is always accompanied by an escort
more or less numerous of accessory thoughts, equally present to the
mind, though, in general, unknown in themselves to consciousness; that
these accessories are not without their influence in guiding the
operations elicited by the principal notion; and it may even be added
that they are so much the more calculated to exert Edition: current;
Page: [195] an effect in the conduct of our procedure, in proportion as,
having become more part and parcel of our habits of reproduction, the
influences they exert are further withdrawn, in ordinary, from the ken
of consciousness. . . . The same thing may be illustrated by what
happens to us in the case of reading. Originally each word, each letter,
was a separate object of consciousness. At length, the knowledge of
letters and words and lines being, as it were, fused into our habits, we
no longer have any distinct consciousness of them, as severally
concurring to the result, of which alone we are conscious. But that each
word and letter has its effect,—an effect which can at any moment become
an object of consciousness,—is shewn by the following experiment. If we
look over a book for the occurrence of a particular name or word, we
glance our eye over a page from top to bottom, and ascertain, almost in
a moment, that it is or is not to be found therein. Here the mind is
hardly conscious of a single word, but that of which it is in quest; but
yet it is evident, that each other word and letter must have produced an
obscure effect, which effect the mind was ready to discriminate and
strengthen, so as to call it into clear consciousness, whenever the
effect was found to be that which the letters of the word sought for
could determine. But if the mind be not unaffected by the multitude of
letters and words which it surveys, if it be able to ascertain whether
the combination of letters constituting the word it seeks, be or be not
actually among them, and all this without any distinct consciousness of
all it tries and finds defective; why may we not suppose,—why are we not
bound to suppose, that the mind may, in like manner, overlook its book
of memory, and search among its magazines of latescent cognitions for
the notions of which it is in want, awakening these into consciousness,
and allowing the others to remain in their obscurity?

A more attentive consideration of the subject will show, that we have
not yet divined the faculty of Reminiscence in its whole extent. Let us
make a single reflection. Continually struck by relations of every kind,
continually assailed by a crowd of perceptions and sensations of every
variety, and, at the same time, occupied by a complement of thoughts; we
experience at once, and we are more or less distinctly conscious of, a
considerable number of wants,—wants, sometimes real, sometimes
factitious or imaginary,—phenomena, however, all stamped with the same
characters, and all stimulating us to act with more or less of energy.
And as we choose among the different wants which we would satisfy, as
well as among the different means of satisfying that want which we
determine to prefer; and as the motives of this preference are taken
either from among the principal ideas relative to each of these several
wants, or from among the accessory ideas which habit has established
into their necessary escorts;—in all these cases it is requisite, that
all the circumstances should at once, and from the moment they have
taken the character of wants, produce an effect, correspondent to that
which, we have seen, is caused by each in particular. Hence we are
compelled to conclude, that the complement of the circumstances by which
we are thus affected, has the effect of rendering always present to us,
and consequently of placing at our disposal, an immense number of
thoughts; some of which certainly are distinctly recognised, being
accompanied by a vivid consciousness, but the greater number of which,
although remaining latent, are not the less effective in continually
exercising their peculiar influence on our modes of judging and acting.

We might say, that each of these momentary circumstances is a kind of
electric shock which is communicated to a certain portion, to a certain
limited sphere, of intelligence; and the sum of all these circumstances
is equal to so many shocks which, given at once at so many different
points, produce a general agitation. We may form some rude conception of
this phenomenon by an analogy. We may compare it, in the former case, to
those concentric circles which are presented to our observation on a
smooth sheet of water, when its surface is agitated by throwing in a
pebble; and, in the latter case, to the same surface when agitated by a
number of pebbles thrown simultaneously at different points.

Edition: current; Page: [196]
To obtain a clearer notion of this phenomenon, I may add some
observations on the relation of our thoughts among themselves, and with
the determining circumstances of the moment.

1° Among the thoughts, notions, or ideas which belong to the different
groups attached to the principal representations simultaneously
awakened, there are some reciprocally connected by relations proper to
themselves; so that, in this whole complement of coexistent activities,
these tend to excite each other to higher vigour, and consequently to
obtain for themselves a kind of pre-eminence in the group or particular
circle of activity to which they belong.

2° There are thoughts associated, whether as principals or accessories,
to a greater number of determining circumstances, or to circumstances
which recur more frequently. Hence they present themselves oftener than
the others, they enter more completely into our habits, and take, in a
more absolute manner, the character of customary or habitual notions. It
hence results, that they are less obtrusive, though more energetic, in
their influence, enacting, as they do, a principal part in almost all
our deliberations; and exercising a stronger influence on our
determinations.

3° Among this great crowd of thoughts, simultaneously excited, those
which are connected with circumstances which more vividly affect us,
assume not only the ascendant over others of the same description with
themselves, but likewise predominate over all those which are dependent
on circumstances of a feebler determining influence.

From these three considerations we ought, therefore, to infer, that the
thoughts connected with circumstances on which our attention is more
specially concentrated, are those which prevail over the others; for the
effect of attention is to render dominant and exclusive the object on
which it is directed, and during the moment of attention it is the
circumstance to which we attend that necessarily obtains the ascendant.

Thus, if we appreciate correctly the phenomena of Reproduction or
Reminiscence, we shall recognise, as an incontestable fact, that our
thoughts suggest each other not one by one successively, as the order to
which language is astricted might lead us to infer; but that the
complement of circumstances under which we at every moment exist,
awakens simultaneously a great number of thoughts; these it calls into
the presence of the mind, either to place them at our disposal, if we
find it requisite to employ them, or to make them co-operate in our
deliberations by giving them, according to their nature and our habits,
an influence, more or less active, on our judgments and consequent acts.

It is also to be observed, that in this great crowd of thoughts always
present to the mind, there is only a small number of which we are
distinctly conscious: and that in this small number we ought to
distinguish those which, being clothed in language, oral or mental,
become the objects of a more fixed attention; those which hold a closer
relation to circumstances more impressive than others; or which receive
a predominant character by the more vigorous attention we bestow on
them. As to the others, although not the objects of clear consciousness,
they are nevertheless present to the mind, there to perform a very
important part as motive principles of determination; and the influence
which they exert in this capacity is even the more powerful in
proportion as it is less apparent, being more disguised by habit.*

(Vol. II, pp. 69-79.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [197]
[In dealing with abstract relative terms, James Mill calls attention to
a peculiarity in “abstract terms formed from the relative concrete
terms”; the abstract of one relative term “always connotes the abstract
of the other,” for example, priority and posteriority “connote” one
another. He continues (Vol. II, pp. 82-3):] This constitutes a
distinction, worth observing, between the force of the abstracts formed
from the pairs of relatives which consist of different names, as prior,
posterior; cause, effect; father, son; husband, wife;—and those which
consist of the same name, as equal, equal; like, like; brother, brother;
friend, friend; and so on. Priority and Posteriority make together a
compound name of something, of which, taken separately, each is not a
name; Causingness and Causedness, the abstracts of cause and effect,
make up between them the name of something, of which each by itself is
not a name, and so of the rest. The case is different with such
abstracts as likeness, equality, friendship, formed from pairs which
consist of the same name. When we call A like, and B like; the Abstract,
likeness, formed from the one, connotes merely the abstract, likeness,
formed from the other. Thus, as priority and posteriority make a
compound name, so likeness and likeness, make a compound name. But as
likeness and likeness are merely a reduplication of the same word,
likeness taken once very often signifies the same as likeness taken
twice. Priority never signifies as much as priority and posteriority
taken together; but likeness taken alone very often signifies as much as
likeness, likeness, taken both together. Likeness has thus a sort of a
double meaning. Sometimes it signifies only what is marked by the
abstract of one of the pair, “like, like;” sometimes it signifies what
is marked by the abstracts of both taken together. The same observation
applies to the abstracts equality, inequality; sameness, difference;
brotherhood, sisterhood; friendship, hostility; and so on.

The exposition here given of the meaning of abstract relative names is
in substance unexceptionable; but in language it remains open to the
criticism I have, several times, made. Instead of saying, with the
author, that the abstract name drops the connotation of the
corresponding concrete, it would, in the language I prefer, be said to
drop the denotation, and to be a name directly denoting what the
concrete name connotes, namely, the common property or properties that
it predicates: the likeness, the unlikeness, the fact of preceding, the
fact of following, etc.

When the author says that abstract relative names differ from other
abstract names in not being wholly void of connotation, inasmuch as they
connote their correlatives, priority connoting posteriority, and
posteriority priority, he deserts the specific meaning which he has
sought to attach to the word connote, and falls back upon the loose and
general sense in which everything implied by a term is said to be
connoted by it. But in this large sense of the word (as I have more than
once remarked) it is not true that non-relative abstract names have no
connotation. Every abstract name—every name of the character which is
given by the terminations ness, tion, and the like—carries with it a
uniform implication that what it is predicated of is an attribute of
something else; not a sensation or a thought Edition: current; Page:
[198] in and by itself, but a sensation or thought regarded as one of,
or as accompanying or following, some permanent cluster of sensations or
thoughts. (Vol. II, p. 83.)

* * * * *

[James Mill comments that] Causation has the same meaning with Power,
except that it connotes present time; Power connotes indefinite time.

The term Causation, as the author observes, signifies causingness and
causedness taken together, but I do not see on what ground he asserts
that it connotes present time. To my thinking, it is as completely
aoristic as Power. Power, again, seems to me to express, not causingness
and causedness taken together, but causingness only. Some of the older
philosophers certainly talked of passive power, but neither in the
precise language of modern philosophy nor in common speech is an effect
said to have the power of being produced, but only the capacity or
capability. The power is always conceived as belonging to the cause
only. When any co-operating power is supposed to reside in the thing
said to be acted upon, it is because some active property in that thing
is counted as a con-cause—as a part of the total cause. (Vol. II, p.
85.)

* * * * *

[Near the end of “Abstract Relative Terms,” Sect. 2 of Chap. xiv, James
Mill avers (Vol. II, pp. 86-7) that just as Noun is] the name of a
certain class of words, so Relation, is the name of a certain class of
words.

It is not, however, meant to be affirmed, that relative and relation,
are not names which are also applied to things. In a certain vague, and
indistinct way, they are very frequently so applied. This, however, is,
strictly speaking, an abuse of the terms, and an abuse which has been a
great cause of confusion of ideas. In this way, it is said, of two
brothers, that they are relative; of father and son, that they are
relative; of two objects, that they are relative in position, relative
in time; we speak of the relation between two men, when they are father
and son, master and servant; between two objects, when they are greater,
less, like, unlike, near, distant, and so on.

What, however, we really mean, when we call two objects relative (and
that is a thing which it is of great importance to mark) is, that these
objects have, or may have, relative names. [J.S. Mill’s note comes at
the end of the Section.]

The application of the word Relative to Things is not only an offence
against philosophy, but against propriety of language. The correct
designation for Things Edition: current; Page: [199] which are called by
relative names, is not Relative, but Related. A Thing may, with perfect
propriety both of thought and of language, be said to be related to
another thing, or to have a relation with it—indeed to be related to all
things, and to have a prodigious variety of relations with all; because
every fact that takes place, either in Nature or in human thought, which
includes or involves a plurality of Things, is the fundamentum of a
special relation of those Things with one another: not to mention the
relations of likeness or unlikeness, of priority or posteriority, which
exist between each Thing and all other Things whatever. It is in this
sense that it is said, with truth, that Relations exhaust all phenomena,
and that all we know, or can know, of anything, is some of its relations
to other things or to us. (Vol. II, p. 88.)

* * * * *

[In “Numbers,” Sect. 3 of Chap. xiv, James Mill says that Numbers “are
not names of objects,” but of “a certain process,” that of addition.]
One, is the name of this once performed, or of the aggregation begun;
two, the name of it once more performed; three, of it once more
performed; and so on. The words, however, in these concrete forms,
beside their power in noting this process, connote something else,
namely, the things, whatever they are, the enumeration of which is
required.

In the case of these connotative, as of other connotative marks, it was
of great use to have the means of dropping the connotation; and in this
case, it would have been conducive to clearness of ideas, if the
non-connotative terms had received a mark to distinguish them from the
connotative. This advantage, however, the framers of numbers were not
sufficiently philosophical to provide. The same names are used both as
connotative, and non-connotative; that is, both as abstract, and
concrete; and it is far from being obvious, on all occasions, in which
of the two senses they are used. They are used in the connotative sense,
when joined as adjectives with a substantive; as when we say two men,
three women; but it is not so obvious that they are used in the abstract
sense, when we say three and two make five; or when we say fifty is a
great number, five is a small number. Yet it must, upon consideration,
appear, that in these cases they are abstract terms merely; in place of
which, the words oneness, twoness, threeness, might be substituted. Thus
we might say, twoness and threeness are fiveness. [The words “to be a
name of” do not occur in this part of the Analysis, though attributing
them to James Mill, as J.S. Mill does in the following note appended to
the passage, fairly represents his usage.]

The vague manner in which the author uses the phrase “to be a name of”
(a vagueness common to almost all thinkers who have not precise terms
expressing the two modes of signification which I call denotation and
connotation, and employed for nothing else) has led him, in the present
case, into a serious misuse Edition: current; Page: [200] of terms.
Numbers are, in the strictest propriety, names of objects. Two is surely
a name of the things which are two, the two balls, the two fingers, etc.
The process of adding one to one which forms two is connoted, not
denoted, by the name two. Numerals, in short, are concrete, not
abstract, names: they denote the actual collections of things, and
connote the mental process of counting them. It is not twoness and
threeness that are fiveness: the twoness of my two hands and the
threeness of the feet of the table cannot be added together to form
another abstraction. It is two balls added to three balls that make, in
the concrete, five balls. Numerals are a class of concrete general names
predicable of all things whatever, but connoting, in each case, the
quantitative relation of the thing to some fixed standard, as previously
explained by the author. (Vol. II, pp. 92-3.)

* * * * *

[The first paragraph of “Privative Terms,” Sect. 4 of Chap. xiv, to
which J.S. Mill’s note is attached, reads:] Privative terms are
distinguished from other terms, by this; that other terms are marks for
objects, as present or existent; privative terms are marks for objects,
as not present or not existent.

The author gives the name of Privative terms to all those which are more
commonly known by the designation of Negative; to all which signify
nonexistence or absence. It is usual to reserve the term Privative for
names which signify not simple absence, but the absence of something
usually present, or of which the presence might have been expected. Thus
blind is classed as a privative term, when applied to human beings. When
applied to stocks and stones, which are not expected to see, it is an
admitted metaphor.

This, however, being understood, there is no difficulty in following the
author’s exposition by means of his own language. (Vol. II, p. 99.)

* * * * *

[James Mill chooses silence as an example of a “privative term,” saying
(Vol. II, p. 103):] Silence is the absence of sound, either all sound,
which is sometimes its meaning; or of some particular sound, which at
other times is its meaning. Sound is the name of a well-known something,
as present. Silence is the name of the same well-known something, as
absent. The first word, is the name of the thing, and its presence. The
second, is the name of the thing, and its absence. In the case of the
combination marked by the first, namely, the thing and its presence, the
thing is the prominent part, and the presence generally escapes
attention. In the case of the second, the thing and its absence, the
absence is the important part, and the thing is feebly, if at all,
attended to. [James Mill also discusses ignorance, and absent Edition:
current; Page: [201] (joined with a “particular name”), and concludes
with the following passage, to which J.S. Mill’s note is appended:] The
word Nothing, Nihil, is another generical Privative Term. That this word
has a very important marking power, every man is sensible in the use
which he makes of it. But if it marks, it names; that is, names
something. Yet it seems to remove every thing; that is, not to leave
anything to be named.

The preceding explanations, however, have already cleared up this
mystery. The word Nothing is the Privative Term which corresponds to
Every Thing. Every Thing is a name of all possible objects, including
their existence. Nothing is a name of all possible objects, including
their non-existence.

The analysis of the facts, in all these cases, is admirable, but I still
demur to the language. I object to saying, for instance, that silence is
“the name of sound and its absence.” It is not the name of sound, since
we cannot say Sound is silence. It is the name of our state of sensation
when there is no sound. The author is quite right in saying that this
state of sensation recalls the idea of sound; to be conscious of silence
as silence, implies that we are thinking of sound, and have the idea of
it without the belief in its presence. In another of its uses, Silence
is the abstract of Silent; which is a name of all things that make no
sound, and of everything so long as it makes no sound; and which
connotes the attribute of not sounding. So of all the other terms
mentioned. Nothing is not a name of all possible objects, including
their non-existence. If Nothing were a name of objects, we should be
able to predicate of those objects that they are Nothing. Nothing is a
name of the state of our consciousness when we are not aware of any
object, or of any sensation. (Vol. II, pp. 105-6.)

* * * * *

[James Mill remarks in his discussion of privative terms, that space has
been] regarded as singularly mysterious. The difficulty which has been
found in explaining the term, even, by those philosophers who have
approached the nearest to its meaning, seems to have arisen, from their
not perceiving the mode of signification of Abstract Terms; and from the
obscurity of that class of sensations, a portion of which we employ the
word extended to mark. The word space is an abstract, differing from its
concrete, like other abstracts, by dropping the connotation. Much of the
mystery, in which the idea has seemed to be involved, is owing to this
single circumstance, that the abstract term, space, has not had an
appropriate concrete. We have observed, that, in all cases, abstract
terms can be explained only through their concretes; because they note
or name a part of what the concrete names, leaving out the rest. If we
were to make a concrete term, corresponding to the abstract term space,
it must be a word equivalent to the terms “infinitely extended.” From
the ideas included under the name “infinitely Edition: current; Page:
[202] extended,” leave out resisting, and you have all that is marked by
the abstract Space.

There is great originality as well as perspicacity in the explanation
here given of Space, as a privative term, expressing, when analysed, the
absence of the feeling of resistance in the circumstances in which
resistance is frequently felt, namely, after the sensations of muscular
action and motion. The only part of the exposition to which I demur is
the classing of Space among abstract terms. I have already objected to
calling the word line, when used in the geometrical sense, an abstract
term. I hold it to be the concrete name of an ideal object possessing
length but not breadth. In like manner a Space may be said to be the
concrete name of an ideal object, extended but not resisting. The
sensations connoted by this concrete name, are those which accompany the
motion of our limbs or of our body in all directions: and along with
these sensations is connoted the absence of certain others, viz. of the
muscular sensations which accompany the arrest of that motion by a
resisting substance. This being the meaning of a Space, Space in general
must be a name equally concrete. It denotes the aggregate of all Spaces.
(Vol. II, p. 111.)

* * * * *

[Connecting the idea of infinity with that of space, James Mill
discusses its origins, and concludes:] The idea of a portion more,
adhering, by indissoluble association, to the idea of every increase, in
any or in all directions, is the idea of “infinitely extended,” and the
idea of “infinitely extended,” the connotation dropped, is the idea of
Infinite Space. It has been called a simple idea (so little has the real
nature of it been understood); while it is thus distinctly seen, to be
one of the most complex ideas, which the whole train of our conscious
being presents. Extreme complexity, with great closeness of association,
has this effect—that every particular part in the composition is
overpowered by the multitude of all the other parts, and no one in
particular stands marked from the rest; but all, together, assume the
appearance of one. Something perfectly analogous occurs, even in
sensation. If two or three ingredients are mixed, as wine and honey, we
can distinguish the taste of each, and say it is compound. But if a
great many are mixed, we can distinguish no one in particular, and the
taste of the whole appears a simple peculiar taste.

This explanation of the feeling of Infinity which attaches itself to
Space, is one of the most important thoughts in the whole treatise; and,
obvious as its truth is to a mind prepared by the previous exposition,
it has great difficulty in finding entrance into other minds.

Every object is associated with some position: not always with the same
Edition: current; Page: [203] position, but we have never perceived any
object, and therefore never think of one, but in some position or other,
relative to some other objects. As, from every position, Space extends
in every direction (i.e. the unimpeded arm or body can move in any
direction), and since we never were in any place which did not admit of
motion in every direction from it, when such motion was not arrested by
a resistance; every idea of position is irresistibly associated with
extension beyond the position: and we can conceive no end to extension,
because the place which we try to conceive as its end, raises
irresistibly the idea of other places beyond it. This is one of the many
so-called Necessities of Thought which are necessities only in
consequence of the inseparableness of an association: but which, from
unwillingness to admit this explanation, men mistake for original laws
of the human mind, and even regard them as the effect and proof of a
corresponding necessary connexion between facts existing in Nature.
(Vol. II, pp. 113-14.)

* * * * *

[In “Time,” Sect. 5 of Chap. xiv, James Mill remarks:] Of time itself we
conceive, that it is never still. It is a perpetual flow of instants, of
which only one can ever be present. The very idea of Time, therefore, is
an idea of successions. It consists of this, and of nothing else.

But there are no real successions, save successions of objects, that is
of feelings in our minds.

There is an unusual employment of language here, which if attention is
not formally drawn to it, may embarrass the reader. By objects are
commonly meant, those groups or clusters of sensations and possibilities
of sensation, that compose what we call the external world. A single
sensation, even external, and still less if internal, is not called an
object. In a somewhat larger sense, whatever we think of, as
distinguished from the thought itself and from ourselves as thinking it,
is called an object; this is the common antithesis of Object and
Subject. But in this place, the author designates as objects, all things
which have real existence, as distinguished from the instants of mere
Time, which, as he is pointing out, have not; and a puzzling effect is
produced by his applying the name Object, in even an especial manner, to
sensations: to the tickings of a watch, or the beatings of a patient’s
pulse.120 (Vol. II, p. 117.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [204]
[J.S. Mill’s note is attached to the end of the section on time.]

As is shewn in the text, Time is a name for the aggregate of the
successions of our feelings, apart from the feelings themselves. I
object, however, in the case of Time, as I did in the case of Space, to
considering it as an abstract term. Time does not seem to me to be a
name (as the author says) for the pastness, the presentness, and the
futureness of our successive feelings.121 It is rather, I think, a
collective name for our feeling of their succession—for what the author
called, in a previous section, the part of the process “which consists
in being sensible of their successiveness,” for which part, he then
said, “we have not a name.”122 This taking notice of the successiveness
of our feelings, whether we prefer to call it a part of the feelings
themselves, or another feeling superadded to them, is yet something
which, in the entire mass of feeling which the successive impressions
give us, we are able to discriminate, and to name apart from the rest. A
perception of succession between two feelings is a state of
consciousness per se, which though we cannot think of it separately from
the feelings, we can yet think of as a completed thing in itself, and
not as an attribute of either or both of the two feelings. Its name, if
it had one, would be a concrete name. But the entire series of these
perceptions of succession has a name, Time; which I therefore hold to be
a concrete name.

However inextricably these feelings of succession are mixed up with the
feelings perceived as successive, we are so perfectly able to attend to
them, and make them a distinct object of thought, that we can compare
them with one another, without comparing the successive feelings in any
other respect. We can judge two or more successions to be of equal, or
of unequal, rapidity. And if we find any series of feelings of which the
successive links follow each other with uniform rapidity, such as the
tickings of a clock, we can make this a standard of comparison for all
other successions, and measure them as equal to one, two, three, or some
other number of links of this series: whereby the aggregate Time is said
to be divided into equal portions, and every event is located in some
one of those portions. The succession of our sensations, therefore,
however closely implicated with the sensations themselves, may be
abstracted from them in thought, as completely as any quality of a thing
can be abstracted from the thing.

The apparent infinity of Time the author, very rightly, explains in the
same manner as that of Space. (Vol. II, pp. 133-5.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [205]
[At the end of “Motion,” Sect. 6 (pp. 142-6) of Chap. xiv, a lengthy
note by Bain appears (pp. 146-51); J.S. Mill’s note follows Bain’s.]

It will be both useful and interesting to the inquiring reader, if I add
to the analysis of these very complex ideas by the author of the present
treatise, and to that by Mr. Bain, the analysis given of them by the
other great living master of the Association psychology, Mr. Herbert
Spencer. The following passages are from his Principles of Psychology.
First, of Resistance:

On raising the arm to a horizontal position and keeping it so, and still
more on dealing similarly with the leg, a sensation is felt, which,
tolerably strong as it is at the outset, presently becomes unbearable.
If the limb be uncovered, and be not brought against anything, this
sensation is associated with no other, either of touch or pressure.

This is the sensation of Muscular Tension.

Allied to the sensation accompanying tension of the muscles, is that
accompanying the act of contracting them—the sensation of muscular
motion. . . . While, from the muscles of a limb at rest, no sensation
arises; while, from the muscles of a limb in a state of continuous
strain, there arises a continuous sensation which remains uniform for a
considerable time; from the muscle of a limb in motion, there arises a
sensation which is ever undergoing increase or decrease, or change of
composition.

When we express our immediate experiences of a body by saying that it is
hard, what are the experiences implied? First, a sensation of pressure,
of considerable intensity, is implied; and if, as in most cases, this
sensation of pressure is given to a finger voluntarily thrust against
the object, then there is simultaneously felt a correspondingly strong
sensation of muscular tension. But this is not all: for feelings of
pressure and muscular tension may be given by bodies which we call soft,
provided the compressing finger follows the surface as fast as it gives
way. In what then consists the difference between the perceptions? In
this; that whereas when a soft body is pressed with increasing force,
the synchronous sensations of increasing pressure and increasing
muscular tension are accompanied by sensations of muscular movement;
when a hard body is pressed with increasing force these sensations of
increasing pressure and tension are not accompanied by sensations of
muscular movement. Considered by itself, then, the perception of
softness may be defined as the establishment in consciousness of a
relation of simultaneity between three series of sensations—a series of
increasing sensations of pressure; a series of increasing sensations of
tension; and a series of sensations of motion. And the perception of
hardness is the same, with omission of the last series.

(Pp. 212-13.)

Of Extension; and first, of Form or Figure:

It is an anciently established doctrine that Form or Figure, which we
may call the most complex mode of extension, is resolvable into relative
magnitude of parts. An equilateral triangle is one of which the three
sides are alike in magnitude. An ellipse is a symmetrical closed curve,
of which the transverse and conjugate diameters are one greater than the
other. A cube is a solid, having all its surfaces of the same magnitude,
and all its angles of the same magnitude. A cone is a solid, successive
sections of which, made at right angles to the axis, are circles
regularly decreasing in magnitude as we progress from base to apex. Any
object described as narrow is one whose breadth is of small magnitude
when compared with its length. A symmetrical figure is a figure in which
the homologous parts on opposite sides are equal in magnitude. Figures
which we class as similar to each other, are such that the Edition:
current; Page: [206] relation of magnitude between any two parts of the
one, is equal to the relation of magnitude between the corresponding
parts of the other. Add to which, that an alteration in the form of
anything, is an alteration in the comparative sizes of some of its
parts—a change in the relations of magnitude subsisting between them and
the other parts, and that by continuously altering the relative
magnitudes of its parts, any figure may be changed indefinitely. Hence,
figure being wholly resolvable into relations of magnitude we may go on
to analyze that out of which these relations are formed—magnitude
itself.

(Pp. 224-5.)

Next, therefore, of Magnitude:

What is a magnitude, considered analytically? The reply is, It consists
of one or more relations of position. When we conceive anything as
having a certain bulk, we conceive its opposite limiting surfaces as
more or less removed from each other; that is, as related in position.
When we imagine a line of definite length, we imagine its termini as
occupying points in space having some positive distance from each other;
that is, as related in position. As a solid is decomposable into planes;
a plane into lines; lines into points; and as adjacent points can
neither be known nor conceived as distinct from each other, except as
occupying different places in space—that is, as occupying not the same
position, but relative positions—it follows that every cognition of
magnitude, is a cognition of one or more relations of position, which
are presented to consciousness as like or unlike one or more other
relations of position.

(P. 226.)

And finally, of Position:

This analysis of itself brings us to the remaining space-attribute of
body—Position. Like magnitude, Position cannot be known absolutely; but
can be known only relatively. The notion of position is, in itself, the
notion of relative position. The position of a thing is inconceivable,
save by thinking of that thing as at some distance from one or more
other things. The essential element of the idea will be best seen, on
observing under what conditions only, it can come into existence.
Imagine a solitary point A, in infinite space; and suppose it possible
for that point to be known by a being having no locality. What now can
be predicated respecting its place? Absolutely nothing. Imagine another
point B to be added. What can now be predicated respecting the two?
Still nothing. The points having no attributes save position, are not
comparable in themselves; and nothing can be said of their relative
position, from lack of anything with which to compare it. The distance
between them may be either infinite or infinitesimal, according to the
measure used; and as, by the hypothesis, there exists no measure—as
space contains nothing save these two points; the distance between them
is unthinkable. But now imagine that a third point C is added.
Immediately it becomes possible to frame a proposition respecting their
positions. The two distances, A to B, and A to C, serve as measures to
each other. The space between A and B may be compared with the space
between A and C; and the relation of position in which A stands to B
becomes thinkable, as like or unlike the relation in which A stands to
C. Thus, then, it is manifest that position is not an attribute of body
in itself, but only in its connection with the other contents of the
universe.

It remains to add, that relations of position are of two kinds: those
which subsist between subject and object; and those which subsist
between either different objects, or different parts of the same object.
Of these the last are resolvable into the first. It needs but to
remember, on the one hand, that in the dark a man can discover the
relative positions of two objects only by touching first one and then
the other, and so inferring their relative positions from his own
position towards each; and on the other hand, that by vision no
knowledge of their relative positions can be reached save through a
perception of the distance of each from Edition: current; Page: [207]
the eye; to see that ultimately all relative positions may be decomposed
into relative positions of subject and object.

These conclusions—that Figure is resolvable into relative magnitudes;
that Magnitude is resolvable into relative positions; and that all
relative positions may finally be reduced to positions of subject and
object—will be fully confirmed on considering the process by which the
space-attributes of body become known to a blind man. He puts out his
hand, and touching something, thereby becomes cognizant of its position
with respect to himself. He puts out his other hand, and meeting no
resistance above or on one side of the position already found, gains
some negative knowledge of the thing’s magnitude—a knowledge which three
or four touches on different sides of it serve to render positive. And
then, by continuing to move his hands over its surface, he acquires a
notion of its figure. What, then, are the elements out of which, by
synthesis, his perceptions of magnitude and figure are framed? He has
received nothing but simultaneous and successive touches. Each touch
established a relation of position between his centre of consciousness
and the point touched. And all he can know respecting magnitude and
figure—that is, respecting the relative position of these points to each
other—is necessarily known through the relative positions in which they
severally stand to himself.

Our perceptions of all the space-attributes of body being thus
decomposable into perceptions of position like that gained by a single
act of touch; we have next to inquire what is contained in a perception
of this kind. A little thought will make it clear that to perceive the
position of anything touched, is really to perceive the position of that
part of the body in which the sensation of touch is located. Whence it
follows that our knowledge of the positions of objects, is built upon
our knowledge of the positions of our members towards each
other—knowledge both of their fixed relations, and of those temporary
relations they are placed in by every change of muscular adjustment.
That this knowledge is gained by a mutual exploration of the parts—by a
bringing of each in contact with the others—by a moving over each other
in all possible ways; and that the motions involved in these
explorations, are known by their reactions upon consciousness; are
propositions that scarcely need stating. But it is manifestly impossible
to carry the analysis further without analysing our perception of
motion. Relative position and motion are two ideas of the same
experience. We can neither conceive motion without conceiving relative
position, nor discover relative position without motion. In the present,
therefore, we must be content with the conclusion that, whether visual
or tactual, the perception of every statical attribute of body is
resolvable into perceptions of relative position which are gained
through motion.

(Pp. 226-9.)

In further prosecution of the analysis:

How do we become cognizant of the relative positions of two points on
the surface of the body? Such two points, considered as coexistent,
involve the germinal idea of Space. Such two points disclosed to
consciousness by two successive tactual sensations proceeding from them,
involve the germinal idea of Time. And the series of muscular sensations
by which, when self-produced, these two tactual sensations are
separated, involve the germinal idea of Motion. The questions to be
considered then are—In what order do these germinal ideas arise? and—How
are they developed?

. . . Taking for our subject a newly-born infant, let us call the two
points on its body between which a relation is to be established, A and
Z. Let us assume these points to be anywhere within reach of the
hands—say upon the cheek. By the hypothesis, nothing is at present known
of these points; either as coexisting in Space, as giving successive
sensations in Time, or as being brought into relation by Motion. If,
now, the infant moves its arm in such a way as to touch nothing, there
is a certain vague reaction upon its consciousness—a Edition: current;
Page: [208] sensation of muscular tension. This sensation has the
peculiarity of being indefinite in its commencement; indefinite in its
termination; and indefinite in all its intermediate changes. Its
strength is proportionate to the degree of muscular contraction. Whence
it follows that as the limb starts from a state of rest, in which there
is no contraction; and as it can reach a position requiring extreme
contraction only by passing through positions requiring intermediate
degrees of contraction; and as the degrees of contraction must therefore
form a series ascending by infinitesimal increments from zero; the
sensations of tension must also form such a series. And the like must be
the case with all subsequent movements and their accompanying
sensations; seeing that, be it at rest or in action, a muscle cannot
pass from any one state to any other without going through all the
intermediate states. Thus, then, the infant, on moving its arm backwards
and forwards without touching anything, is brought to what we may
distinguish as a nascent consciousness—a consciousness not definitely
divisible into states; but a consciousness the variations of which pass
insensibly into each other, like undulations of greater or less
magnitude. And while the states of consciousness are thus incipient—thus
indistinctly separated, there can be no clear comparison of them; no
thought, properly so called; and consequently no ideas of Motion, Time,
or Space, as we understand them. Suppose, now, that the hand touches
something. A sudden change in consciousness is produced—a change that is
incisive in its commencement, and, when the hand is removed, equally
incisive in its termination. In the midst of the continuous feeling of
muscular tension, vaguely rising and falling in intensity, there all at
once occurs a distinct feeling of another kind. This feeling, beginning
and ending abruptly, constitutes a definite state of consciousness;
becomes, as it were a mark in consciousness. By similar experiences
other such marks are produced; and in proportion as they are multiplied,
there arises a possibility of comparing them, both in respect to their
degrees and their relative positions; while at the same time, the
feelings of muscular tension being, as it were, divided out into lengths
by these superposed marks, become similarly comparable; and so there are
acquired materials for a simple order of thought. Observe, also, that
while these tactual sensations may, when several things are touched in
succession, produce successive marks in consciousness, separated by
intervening muscular sensations, they may also become continually
coexistent with these muscular sensations; as when the finger is drawn
along a surface. And observe further, that when the surface over which
the finger is drawn is not a foreign body, but some part of the
subject’s body, these muscular sensations, and the continuous tactual
sensation joined with them, are accompanied by a series of tactual
sensations proceeding from that part of the skin over which the finger
is drawn. Thus, then, when the infant moves its finger along the surface
of its body from A to Z, there are simultaneously impressed upon
consciousness three sets of sensations—the varying series of sensations
proceeding from the muscles in action; the series of tactual sensations
proceeding from the points of the skin successively touched between A
and Z; and the continuous sensation of touch from the finger-end. . . .
As subsequent motions of the finger over the surface from A to Z always
result in the like simultaneous sets of sensations, these, in course of
time, become indissolubly associated. Though the series of tactual
sensations, A to Z, being producible by a foreign body moving over the
same surface, can be dissociated from the others; and though, if the
cheek be withdrawn by a movement of the head, the same motion of the
hand, with its accompanying muscular sensations, may occur without any
sensation of touch; yet, when these two series are linked by the tactual
sensation proceeding from the finger-end, they necessarily proceed
together; and become inseparably connected in thought. Whence it
obviously results that the series of tactual sensations A to Z, and the
series of muscular sensations which invariably accompanies it when
self-produced, serve as mutual equivalents; and being two sides of the
same experience, suggest each other in consciousness.

Edition: current; Page: [209]
Due attention having been paid to this fact, let us go on to consider
what must happen when something touches, at the same moment, the entire
surface between A and Z. This surface is supplied by a series of
independent nerve-fibres, each of which at its peripheral termination
becomes fused into, or continuous with, the surrounding tissue; each of
which is affected by impressions falling within a specific area of the
skin; and each of which produces a separate state of consciousness. When
the finger is drawn along this surface these nerve-fibres A, B, C, D . .
. Z, are excited in succession; that is—produce successive states of
consciousness. And when something covers, at the same moment, the whole
surface between A and Z, they are excited simultaneously; and produce
what tends to become a single state of consciousness. Already I have
endeavoured to shew in a parallel case, how, when impressions first
known as having sequent positions in consciousness are afterwards
simultaneously presented to consciousness, the sequent positions are
transformed into coexistent positions, which, when consolidated by
frequent presentations, are used in thought as equivalent to the sequent
positions.* . . . As the series of tactual impressions A to Z, known as
having sequent positions in consciousness, are, on the one hand, found
to be equivalent to the accompanying series of muscular impressions; and
on the other hand, to the simultaneous tactual impressions A to Z,
which, as presented together, are necessarily presented in coexistent
positions; it follows that these two last are found to be the
equivalents of each other. A series of muscular sensations becomes known
as equivalent to a series of coexistent positions; and being habitually
joined with it, becomes at last unthinkable without it. Thus, the
relation of coexistent positions between the points A and Z (and by
implication all intermediate points) is necessarily disclosed by a
comparison of experiences: the ideas of Space, Time, and Motion, are
evolved together. When the successive states of consciousness A to Z,
are thought of as having relative positions, the notion of Time becomes
nascent. When these states of consciousness, instead of occurring
serially, occur simultaneously, their relative positions, which were
before sequent, necessarily become coexistent; and there arises a
nascent consciousness of space. And when these two relations of
coexistent and sequent positions are both presented to consciousness
along with a series of sensations of muscular tension, a nascent idea of
Motion results.

The development of these nascent ideas, arising as it does from a still
further accumulation and comparison of experiences, will be readily
understood. What has been above described as taking place with respect
to one relation of coexistent positions upon the surface of the skin—or
rather, one linear series of such coexisting positions, is, during the
Edition: current; Page: [210] same period, taking place, with respect to
endless other such linear series, in all directions over the body. The
like equivalence between a series of coexistent impressions of touch, a
series of successive impressions of touch, and series of successive
muscular impressions, is being established between every pair of points
that can readily be brought into relation by movement of the hands. Let
us glance at the chief consequences that must ultimately arise from this
organization of experiences.

Not only must there gradually be established a connection in thought
between each particular muscular series, and the particular tactual
series, both successive and simultaneous, with which it is associated;
and not only must there, by implication, arise a knowledge of the
special muscular adjustments required to touch each special part, but,
by the same experiences, there must be established an indissoluble
connection between muscular series in general and series of sequent and
coexistent positions in general, seeing that this connection is repeated
in every one of the particular experiences. And when we consider the
infinite repetition of these experiences, we shall have no difficulty in
understanding how their components become so consolidated, that even
when the hand is moved through empty space, it is impossible to become
conscious of the muscular sensations, without becoming conscious of the
sequent and coexistent positions—the Time and Space, in which it has
moved.

Observe again, that as, by this continuous exploration of the surface of
the body, each point is put in relation not only with points in some
directions around it, but with points in all directions—becomes, as it
were, a centre from which radiate lines of points known first in their
serial positions before consciousness, and afterwards in their
coexistent positions—it follows, that when an object of some size, as
the hand, is placed upon the skin, the impressions from all parts of the
area covered being simultaneously presented to consciousness, are placed
in coexistent positions before consciousness: whence results an idea of
the superficial extension of that part of the body. The idea of this
extension is really nothing more than a simultaneous presentation of all
the impressions proceeding from the various points it includes, which
have previously had their several relative positions measured by means
of the series of impressions separating them. Anyone who hesitates
respecting this conclusion, will, I think, adopt it, on critically
considering the perception he has when placing his open hand against his
cheek—on observing that the perception is by no means single, but is
made up of many elements which he cannot think of all together—on
observing that there is always one particular part of the whole surface
touched, of which he is more distinctly conscious than of any other—and
on observing that to become distinctly conscious of any other part, he
has to traverse in thought the intervening parts; that is, he has to
think of the relative positions of these parts by vaguely recalling the
series of states of consciousness which a motion over the skin from one
to the other would involve.

(Pp. 257-63.)

These three different expositions of the origin of our ideas of Motion
and Extension, by three eminent thinkers, agreeing in essentials, and
differing chiefly in the comparative degrees of development which they
give to different portions of the detail, will enable any competent
reader of such a work as the present to fill up any gaps by his own
thoughts. Many pages of additional commentary might easily be written;
but they would not add any important thought to those of which the
reader is now in possession; and belonging rather to the polemics of the
subject than to its strictly scientific exposition, they would jar
somewhat with the purely expository character of the present treatise.

I will only further recommend to particular attention, the opinion of
Mr. Edition: current; Page: [211] Spencer, also adopted by Mr. Bain,
that our ascribing simultaneous existence to things which excite
successive sensations, is greatly owing to our being able to vary or
reverse the order of the succession. When we pass our hands over an
object, we can have the tactual and muscular sensations in many
different orders, and after having them in one order, can have them in
another exactly the reverse. They do not, therefore, become associated
with each other in a fixed order of succession, but are called up in any
order with such extreme rapidity, that the impression they leave is that
of simultaneousness, and we therefore hold the parts of tangible objects
to be simultaneous. (Vol. II, pp. 151-63.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of “Identity,” Sect. 7 of Chap. xiv.]

The author has avoided an error in the mode and order of the enquiry,
which has greatly contributed to make the explanations given by
psychologists of Personal Identity, so eminently unsatisfactory as they
are. Psychologists have almost always begun with the most intricate part
of the question. They have set out by enquiring, what makes me the same
person to myself? when they should first have enquired what makes me the
same person to other people? or, what makes another person the same
person to me? The author of the Analysis has done this, and he easily
perceived, that what makes me the same person to others, is precisely
what makes a house, or a mountain, the same house or mountain to them
to-day which they saw yesterday. It is the belief of an uninterrupted
continuity in the series of sensations derivable from the house, or
mountain, or man. There is not this continuity in the actual sensations
of a single observer: he has not been watching the mountain
unintermittedly since yesterday, or from a still more distant time. But
he believes, on such evidence as the case affords, that if he had been
watching, he should have seen the mountain continuously and unchanged
during the whole intervening time (provided the other requisites of
vision were present—light to see it by, and no cloud or mist
intervening): and he further believes that any being, with organs like
his own, who had looked in that direction at any moment of the interval
during which he himself was not looking, would have seen it in the same
manner as he sees it. All this applies equally to a human object. I call
the man I see to-day the same man whom I saw yesterday, for the very
reason which makes me call the house or the mountain the same, viz., my
conviction that if my organs had been in the same position towards him
all the time as they are now, and the other conditions necessary for
seeing had been present, my perception of the man would have continued
all the time without interruption.

If we now change the point of view, and ask, what makes me always the
same person to myself, we introduce, in addition to what there was in
the other case, the Edition: current; Page: [212] entire series of my
own past states of consciousness. As the author truly says, the evidence
on which I accept my own identity is that of memory. But memory reaches
only a certain way back, and for all before that period, as well as for
all subsequent to it of which I have lost the remembrance, the belief
rests on other evidence. As an example of the errors and difficulties in
which psychologists have involved themselves by beginning with the more
complex question without having considered the simpler one, it is worth
remembering that Locke makes personal identity consist in Consciousness,
which in this case means Memory;123 and has been justly criticized by
later thinkers for this doctrine, as leading to the corollary, that
whatever of my past actions I have forgotten, I never performed—that my
forgotten feelings were not my feelings, but were (it must therefore be
supposed) the feelings of somebody else. Locke, however, had seen one
part of the true state of the case; which is, that to myself I am only,
properly speaking, the same person, in respect of those facts of my past
life which I remember; but that I nevertheless consider myself as having
been, at the times of which I retain no remembrance, the same person I
now am, because I have satisfactory evidence that I was the same to
other people; that an uninterrupted continuity in the sensations of
sight and touch caused or which could have been caused to other people,
existed between my present self and the infant who I am told I was, and
between my present self and the person who is proved to me to have done
the acts I have myself forgotten.

These considerations remove the outer veil, or husk, as it were, which
wraps up the idea of the Ego. But after this is removed, there remains
an inner covering, which, as far as I can perceive, is impenetrable. My
personal identity consists in my being the same Ego who did, or who
felt, some specific fact recalled to me by memory. So be it: but what is
Memory? It is not merely having the idea of that fact recalled: that is
but thought, or conception, or imagination. It is, having the idea
recalled along with the Belief that the fact which it is the idea of,
really happened, and moreover happened to myself. Memory, therefore, by
the very fact of its being different from Imagination, implies an Ego
who formerly experienced the facts remembered, and who was the same Ego
then as now. The phenomenon of Self and that of Memory are merely two
sides of the same fact, or two different modes of viewing the same fact.
We may, as psychologists, set out from either of them, and refer the
other to it. We may, in treating of Memory, say (as the author says)
that it is the idea of a past sensation associated with the idea of
myself as having it. Or we may say, in treating of Identity, (as the
author also says), that the meaning of Self is the memory of certain
past sensations. But it is hardly allowable to do both. At least it must
be said, that by doing so we explain neither. We only show that the two
things are essentially the same; that my memory of having ascended
Skiddaw on a given day, and my consciousness of being the same person
who Edition: current; Page: [213] ascended Skiddaw on that day, are two
modes of stating the same fact: a fact which psychology has as yet
failed to resolve into anything more elementary.

In analysing the complex phenomena of consciousness, we must come to
something ultimate; and we seem to have reached two elements which have
a good prima facie claim to that title. There is, first, the common
element in all cases of Belief, namely, the difference between a fact,
and the thought of that fact: a distinction which we are able to cognize
in the past, and which then constitutes Memory, and in the future, when
it constitutes Expectation; but in neither case can we give any account
of it except that it exists; an inability which is admitted in the most
elementary case of the distinction, viz. the difference between a
present sensation and an idea. Secondly, in addition to this, and
setting out from the belief in the reality of a past event, or in other
words, the belief that the idea I now have was derived from a previous
sensation, or combination of sensations, corresponding to it, there is
the further conviction that this sensation or combination of sensations
was my own; that it happened to myself. In other words, I am aware of a
long and uninterrupted succession of past feelings going as far back as
memory reaches, and terminating with the sensations I have at the
present moment, all of which are connected by an inexplicable tie, that
distinguishes them not only from any succession or combination in mere
thought, but also from the parallel successions of feelings which I
believe, on satisfactory evidence, to have happened to each of the other
beings, shaped like myself, whom I perceive around me. This succession
of feelings, which I call my memory of the past, is that by which I
distinguish my Self. Myself is the person who had that series of
feelings, and I know nothing of myself, by direct knowledge, except that
I had them. But there is a bond of some sort among all the parts of the
series, which makes me say that they were feelings of a person who was
the same person throughout, and a different person from those who had
any of the parallel successions of feelings; and this bond, to me,
constitutes my Ego. Here, I think, the question must rest, until some
psychologist succeeds better than any one has yet done in shewing a mode
in which the analysis can be carried further. (Vol. II, pp. 172-5.)

* * * * *

[Chap. xv, “Reflection,” is concluded by J.S. Mill’s note.]

To reflect on any of our feelings or mental acts is more properly
identified with attending to the feeling, than, (as stated in the text)
with merely having it.124 The author scarcely recognises this as a
difference. He sometimes indeed seems to Edition: current; Page: [214]
consider attention as mental repetition; but in his chapter on the Will,
we shall find that he there identifies attending to a feeling with
merely having the feeling. I conceive, on the contrary, (with the great
majority of psychologists) that there is an important distinction
between the two things; the ignoring of which has led the author into
errors. What the distinction is, I have endeavoured to shew in my note
to the chapter on Consciousness; and the subject will return upon us
hereafter.125 (Vol. II, pp. 179-80.)

* * * * *

[Chap. xvii, “Pleasurable and Painful Sensations,” consists of only four
short paragraphs; J.S. Mill’s note is appended at the end.]

In the case of many pleasurable or painful sensations, it is open to
question whether the pleasure or pain, especially the pleasure, is not
something added to the sensation, and capable of being detached from it,
rather than merely a particular aspect or quality of the sensation. It
is often observable that a sensation is much less pleasurable at one
time than at another, though to our consciousness it appears exactly the
same sensation in all except the pleasure. This is emphatically the fact
in cases of satiety, or of loss of taste for a sensation by loss of
novelty. It is probable that in such cases the pleasure may depend on
different nerves, or on a different action of the same nerves, from the
remaining part of the sensation. However this may be, the pleasure or
pain attending a sensation is (like the feelings of Likeness,
Succession, etc.) capable of being mentally abstracted from the
sensation, or, in other words, capable of being attended to by itself.
And in any case Mr. Bain’s distinction holds good, between the emotional
part or property of a sensation (in which he includes the pleasure or
pain belonging to it) and its intellectual or knowledge-giving part.126
It must be remembered, however, that these are not exclusive of one
another; the knowledge-giving part is not necessarily emotional, but the
emotional part is and must be knowledge-giving. The pleasure or pain of
the feeling are subjects of intellectual apprehension; they give the
knowledge of themselves and of their varieties. (Vol. II, pp. 185-6.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [215]
[Again J.S. Mill’s note appears at the end of a chapter, “Ideas of the
Pleasurable and Painful Sensations, and of the Causes of Them” (Chap.
xix).]

The principal doctrine of this chapter is, that Desire, and Aversion,
are nothing but the Idea of a pleasurable sensation, and the Idea of a
painful sensation: which doctrine is then qualified by saying, that a
desire is the idea of a pleasure associated with the future, an aversion
the idea of a pain associated with the iuture.127

But according to the whole spirit of the author’s speculations, and to
his express affirmation in the beginning of the next chapter,128 the
idea of any sensation associated with the future, constitutes the
Expectation of it: and if so, it rested with him to prove that the
expectation of a pleasure, or of a pain, is the same thing with the
desire, or aversion. This is certainly not conformable to common
observation. For, on the one hand, it is commonly understood that there
may be desire or aversion without expectation; and on the other,
expectation of a pleasure without any actual feeling of desire: one may
expect, and even look forward with satisfaction to, the pleasure of a
meal, although one is not, but only expects to be, hungry. So perfectly
is it assumed that expectation, and desire or aversion, are not
necessarily combined, that the case in which they are combined is
signified by a special pair of names. Desire combined with expectation,
is called by the name of Hope; Aversion combined with expectation is
known by the name of Fear.

I believe the fact to be that Desire is not Expectation, but is more
than the idea of the pleasure desired, being, in truth, the initiatory
stage of Will. In what we call Desire there is, I think, always included
a positive stimulation to action; either to the definite course of
action which would lead to our obtaining the pleasure, or to a general
restlessness and vague seeking after it. The stimulation may fall short
of actually producing action: even when it prompts to a definite act, it
may be repressed by a stronger motive, or by knowledge that the pleasure
is not within present reach, nor can be brought nearer to us by any
present action of our own. Still, there is, I think, always, the sense
of a tendency to action, in the direction of pursuit of the pleasure,
though the tendency may be overpowered by an external or an internal
restraint. So also, in aversion, there is always a tendency to action of
the kind which repels or avoids the painful sensation. But of these
things more fully under the head of Will.129 (Vol. II, pp. 194-5.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [216]
[In Chap. xx, “The Pleasurable and Painful Sensations, Contemplated as
Passed or as Future,” James Mill says (Vol. II, p. 197) that in]
anticipation, as in memory, there is, first, the complex idea . . .;
next, the passage of the mind forwards from the present state of
consciousness, the antecedent, to one consequent after another, till it
comes to the anticipated sensation. [He illustrates by the anticipation
of an inflicted burn, and concludes (p. 198) by mentioning] the
association with this idea of the events, one after another, which are
to fill up the intermediate time, and terminate with his finger placed
in the flame of the candle. The whole of this association, taken
together, comprises the idea of the pain as his pain, after a train of
antecedents.

The process of anticipation is so precisely the same, when the sensation
is of the pleasurable kind, that I deem it unnecessary to repeat it.

This is the first place in which the author gives his analysis of
Expectation; and his theory of it is, as all theories of it must be, the
exact counterpart of the same person’s theory of Memory. He resolves it
into the mere Idea of the expected event, accompanied by the “idea of
the events, one after another,” which are to begin with the present
moment, and end with the expected event. But in this case, as in that of
Memory, the objection recurs, that all this may exist in the case of
mere Imagination. A man may conceive himself being hanged, or elevated
to a throne, and may construct in his mind a series of possible or
conceivable events, through which he can fancy each of these results to
be brought about. If he is a man of lively imagination, this idea of the
events “which are to fill up the intermediate time” may be at least as
copious, as the idea of the series of coming events for a year from the
present time, which according to the author’s theory I have in my mind
when I look forward to commencing a journey twelve months hence. Yet he
neither expects to be hanged, nor to be made a king, still less both,
which, to bear out the theory, it would seem that he ought.

The difference between Expectation and mere Imagination, as well as
between Memory and Imagination, consists in the presence or absence of
Belief; and though this is no explanation of either phenomenon, it
brings us back to one and the same real problem, which I have so often
referred to, and which neither the author nor any other thinker has yet
solved—the difference between knowing something as a Reality, and as a
mere Thought; a distinction similar and parallel to that between a
Sensation and an Idea. (Vol. II, pp. 198-9.)

* * * * *

[The penultimate paragraph of Chap. xx reads:] When a pleasurable
sensation is contemplated as future, but not certainly, the state of
consciousness is called Edition: current; Page: [217] Hope. When a
painful sensation is contemplated as future, but not certainly, the
state of consciousness is called Fear.

The author’s definitions of Hope and Fear differ from those offered in
my note (p. 194).130 He considers these words to signify that the
pleasure or the pain is contemplated as future, but without certainty.
It must be admitted that the words are often applied to very faint
degrees of anticipation, far short of those which in popular language
would be spoken of as Expectation: but I think the terms are not
inconsistent with the fullest assurance. A man is about to undergo a
painful surgical operation. He has no doubt whatever about the event; he
fully intends it; there are no other means, perhaps, of saving his life.
Yet the feeling with which he looks forward to it, and with which he
contemplates the preparations for it, are such as would, I think, by the
custom of language, be designated as fear. Death, again, is the most
certain of all future events, yet we speak of the fear of death. It is
perhaps more doubtful whether the fully assured anticipation of a
desired enjoyment would receive, in ordinary parlance, the name of Hope;
yet some common phrases seem to imply that it would. We read even on
tombstones “the sure hope of a joyful immortality.”

A still more restricted application of the word Fear, also justified by
usage, is to the case in which the feeling amounts to a disturbing
passion; and to this meaning Mr. Bain, as will be seen in a future note,
thinks it desirable to confine it.131 (Vol. II, pp. 199-200.)

* * * * *

[In Sect. 1 of Chap. xxi, “The Causes of Pleasurable and Painful
Sensations, Contemplated as Passed, or as Future,” James Mill considers
the “immediate causes.” He remarks (Vol. II, p. 201):] It may be
regarded as remarkable, that though the idea or thought of a
disagreeable sensation, as passed, is nearly indifferent, the thought of
the cause of a painful passed sensation is often a very interesting
state of consciousness. [He continues (p. 202):] The idea of the cause
of a painful sensation is so closely associated with that of the
sensation, that the one never exists without the other. But this is not
all. The anticipation of the future from the passed, is so strong an
association, that, in interesting cases, it is indissoluble. The thought
of the Cause of a passed painful sensation, is the idea of an antecedent
and a consequent. The idea of the passed antecedent and consequent is
instantly followed by that of a future antecedent and consequent; and
thus the feeling partakes of the nature of the anticipation of a future
painful Edition: current; Page: [218] sensation. [J.S. Mill’s note
appears at the end of the paragraph from which these sentences are
taken.]

The difference here brought to notice between the very slight emotion
excited in most cases by the idea of a past pain, and the strong feeling
excited by the idea of the cause of a past pain, will be confirmed by
every one’s experience; and is rightly explained by the author, as
arising from the fact that what has caused a past pain has an interest
affecting the future, since it may cause future pains. It is noticeable
that the author nowhere explains why the thought of a pain as future is
so much more painful, than the thought of a past pain when detached from
all apprehension for the future; why the expectation of an evil is
generally so much worse than the remembrance of one. This fact might
have made him doubt the sufficiency of his theory of Memory and
Expectation; since, according to his analysis, neither of them is
anything but the idea of the pain itself, associated in each case with a
series of events which may be intrinsically indifferent; and if there
were no elements in the case but those which he has pointed out, no
sufficient reason is apparent why there should be any inequality of
painfulness between the remembrance and the expectation. (Vol. II, pp.
202-3.)

* * * * *

[Pointing out that the opinion was first expressed by Dugald Stewart,
James Mill affirms] that there is no conception, that is, idea, without
the momentary belief of the existence of its object.

This is the place where the author most clearly enunciates the doctrine
which is the indispensable basis of his theory of Belief, viz. that
there is no idea “without the momentary belief of the existence of its
object.” This opinion, as the author observes, is maintained also by
Dugald Stewart;132 but I have never seen any positive evidence in its
favour. All which has been established is, that the belief may have
momentarily existed, although immediately afterwards forgotten, and
replaced by disbelief. But no proof of this momentary existence has been
given, except that it is supposed that what is not believed to be real
cannot cause strong emotion (terror, for instance), nor prompt to
outward action. Yet nothing can be more certain than that a mere idea
can exercise direct power over our nerves of motion, and through them,
over the muscles; as the author shows by examples further on.133 It is
true that, as Mr. Bain has pointed out,134 this power of an idea over
the active energies is the only germ of belief which exists originally,
and the Edition: current; Page: [219] foundation of the power of Belief
in after life; but it is not the less true that the power of Belief as
it exists in after life, stands broadly distinguished from the power of
the Fixed Idea, and that this last may operate not only without, but in
defiance of, a positive Belief. That a contrary belief has momentarily
intervened is a mere conjecture, which can neither be refuted nor
proved. (Vol. II, p. 211.)

* * * * *

[In Sect. 2 of Chap. xxi, in dealing with remote causes of pleasure and
pain, James Mill says:] The idea of a man enjoying a train of pleasures,
or happiness, is felt by every body to be a pleasurable idea. The idea
of a man under a train of sufferings or pains, is equally felt to be a
painful idea. This can arise from nothing but the association of our own
pleasures with the first idea, and of our own pains with the second. We
never feel any pains and pleasures but our own. The fact, indeed, is,
that our very idea of the pains or pleasures of another man is only the
idea of our own pains, or our own pleasures, associated with the idea of
another man. This is one not of the least important, and curious, of all
cases of association, and instantly shews how powerfully associated
trains of ideas of our pains and pleasures must be with a feeling so
compounded.

That the pleasures or pains of another person can only be pleasurable or
painful to us through the association of our own pleasures or pains with
them, is true in one sense, which is probably that intended by the
author, but not true in another, against which he has not sufficiently
guarded his mode of expression. It is evident, that the only pleasures
or pains of which we have direct experience being those felt by
ourselves, it is from them that our very notions of pleasure and pain
are derived. It is also obvious that the pleasure or pain with which we
contemplate the pleasure or pain felt by somebody else, is itself a
pleasure or pain of our own. But if it be meant that in such cases the
pleasure or pain is consciously referred to self, I take this to be a
mistake. By the acts or other signs exhibited by another person, the
idea of a pleasure (which is a pleasurable idea) or the idea of a pain
(which is a painful idea) are recalled, sometimes with considerable
intensity, but in association with the other person as feeling them, not
with one’s self as feeling them. The idea of one’s Self is, no doubt,
closely associated with all our experiences, pleasurable, painful, or
indifferent; but this association does not necessarily act in all cases
because it exists in all cases. If the mind, when pleasurably or
painfully affected by the evidences of pleasure or pain in another
person, goes off on a different thread of association, as for instance,
to the idea of the means of giving the pleasure or relieving the pain,
or even if it dismisses the subject and relapses into the ordinary
course of its thoughts, the association with its own self may be, at the
time, Edition: current; Page: [220] defeated, or reduced to something so
evanescent that we cannot tell whether it was momentarily present or
not. (Vol. II, pp. 217-18.)

* * * * *

[The first two sub-sections of Chap. xxi, Sect. 2, are entitled “Wealth,
Power, and Dignity, and Their Contraries, Contemplated as Causes of Our
Pleasures and Pains” (Vol. II, pp. 207-14), and “Our Fellow-Creatures
Contemplated as Causes of Our Pleasures and Pains” (pp. 214-30). A note
by Bain is appended at the end of the latter; J.S. Mill’s note follows
immediately.]

The two preceding subsections are almost perfect as expositions and
exemplifications of the mode in which, by the natural course of life, we
acquire attachments to persons, things, and positions, which are the
causes or habitual concomitants of pleasurable sensations to us, or of
relief from pains: in other words, those persons, things, and positions
become in themselves pleasant to us by association; and, through the
multitude and variety of the pleasurable ideas associated with them,
become pleasures of greater constancy and even intensity, and altogether
more valuable to us, than any of the primitive pleasures of our
constitution. This portion of the laws of human nature is the more
important to psychology, as they show how it is possible that the moral
sentiments, the feelings of duty, and of moral approbation and
disapprobation, may be no original elements of our nature, and may yet
be capable of being not only more intense and powerful than any of the
elements out of which they may have been formed, but may also, in their
maturity, be perfectly disinterested: nothing more being necessary for
this, than that the acquired pleasure and pain should have become as
independent of the native elements from which they are formed, as the
love of wealth and of power not only often but generally become, of the
bodily pleasures, and relief from bodily pains, for the sake of which,
and of which alone, power and wealth must have been originally valued.
No one thinks it necessary to suppose an original and inherent love of
money or of power; yet these are the objects of two of the strongest,
most general, and most persistent passions of human nature; passions
which often have quite as little reference to pleasure or pain, beyond
the mere consciousness of possession, and are in that sense of the word
quite as disinterested, as the moral feelings of the most virtuous human
being.

The author, then, has furnished a most satisfactory and most valuable
explanation of certain of the laws of our affections and passions, and
has traced the origin and generation of a great number of them. But it
must be remarked of the whole exposition, that it accounts truly, but
only partially, for this part of human nature. It affords a sufficient
theory of what we may call the mental, or intellectual element of the
feelings in question. But it does not furnish, nor does the author
Edition: current; Page: [221] anywhere furnish, any theory of what may
be called the animal element in them. Yet this is no unimportant
ingredient in the emotional and active part of human nature: and it is
one greatly demanding analysis. Let us take the case of any of the
passions: and as one of the simplest as well as one of the most powerful
of them, let us take the emotion of Fear. The author gives no account of
Fear but that it is the idea of a painful sensation, associated with the
idea of its being (more or less uncertainly) future. Undoubtedly these
elements are present in it; but do they account for the peculiar
emotional character of the passion, and for its physiological effects,
such as pallor, trembling, faltering of the voice, coldness of the skin,
loss of control over the secretions, and general depression of the vital
powers? The case would be simpler if these great disturbances of the
animal functions by the expectation of a pain were the same in kind as
the smaller modifications produced by the mere idea. This, however, is
by no means the case; Ideas do produce effects on the animal economy,
but not those particular effects. The idea of a pain, if it acts on the
bodily functions at all, has an action the same in kind (though much
less in degree) as the pain itself would have. But the passion of fear
has a totally different action. Suppose the fear to be that of a
flogging. The flogging itself, if it produced any physical
demonstrations, would produce cries, shrinkings, possibly muscular
struggles, and might by its remoter effects disturb the action of the
brain or of the circulation; and if the fear of a flogging produced
these same effects, in a mitigated degree, the power of fear might be
merely the power of the idea of the pain. But none of these are at all
like the characteristic symptoms of fear: while those characteristic
symptoms are much the same whatever be the particular pain apprehended,
and whether it be a bodily or a purely mental pain, provided it be
sufficiently intense and sufficiently proximate. No one has ever
accounted for this remarkable difference, and the author of the Analysis
does not even mention it. The explanation of it is one of those
problems, partly psychological and partly physiological, which our
knowledge of the laws of animal sensibility does not yet enable us to
resolve. In whatever manner the phenomena are produced, they are a case
of the quasi-chemistry of the nervous functions, whereby the junction of
certain elements generates a compound whose properties are very
different from the sum of the properties of the elements themselves.

This is the point which the author’s explanations of the emotional part
of human nature do not reach, and, it may even be said, do not attempt
to reach. Until, however, it is reached, there is no guarantee for the
completeness of his analysis of even the mental element in the passions:
for when the effect exhibits so much which has not, in the known
properties of the assigned cause, anything to account for it, there is
always room for a doubt whether some part of the cause has not been left
out of the reckoning. This doubt, however, does not seriously affect the
most important of the author’s analyses, viz. those which, without
resolving the emotions themselves into anything more elementary, expound
their transfer by Edition: current; Page: [222] association from their
natural objects to others; with the great increase of intensity and
persistency which so often accompanies the transfer, and which is in
general quite sufficiently accounted for by the causes to which the
author refers it. (Vol. II, pp. 233-6.)

* * * * *

[In discussing the views of Archibald Alison (1757-1839), expounded in
his Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste (Edinburgh: Bell and
Bradfute; London: Robinson, 1790), James Mill says:] I shall not follow
Mr. Alison in his illustrations of the beauty and sublimity felt in the
tones of the human voice, or in the composition of sounds, called Music;
because I have no doubt but it will be allowed that they derive the
whole of what is called their expression,—in other words, their power of
pleasing,—from the associations connected with them.

What the author thinks himself dispensed from either proving or
illustrating because he has no doubt that it will be allowed, is, on the
contrary, one of the most disputable parts of his theory. That very much
of the pleasure afforded by Music is the effect of its expression, i.e.
of the associations connected with sound, most people will admit: but it
can scarcely be doubted that there is also an element of direct physical
and sensual pleasure. In the first place, the quality of some single
sounds is physically agreeable, as that of others is disagreeable. Next,
the concord or harmony of pleasant sounds adds a further element of
purely physical enjoyment. And thirdly, certain successions of sounds,
constituting melody or tune, are delightful, as it seems to me, to the
mere sense. With these pleasures those of the associated ideas and
feelings are intimately blended, but may, to a certain extent, be
discriminated by a critical ear. It is possible to say, of different
composers, that one (as Beethoven) excels most in that part of the
effect of music which depends on expression, and another (as Mozart) in
the physical part.135

That the full physical pleasure of tune is often not experienced at the
first hearing, is a consequence of the fact, that the pleasure depends
on succession, and therefore on the coexistence of each note with the
remembrance of a sufficient number of the previous notes to constitute
melody: a remembrance which, of course, is not possessed in perfection,
until after a number of repetitions proportioned to the complexity and
to the unfamiliar character of the combination. (Vol. II, pp. 241-2.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [223]
[James Mill quotes approvingly Alison’s views on the associations
contributing to the pleasures of colour.]

The elements contributed by association are certainly more predominant
in the pleasure of colours than in that of musical sounds; yet I am
convinced that there is a direct element of physical pleasure in
colours, anterior to association. My own memory recals to me the intense
and mysterious delight which in early childhood I had in the colours of
certain flowers; a delight far exceeding any I am now capable of
receiving from colour of any description, with all its acquired
associations. And this was the case at far too early an age, and with
habits of observation far too little developed, to make any of the
subtler combinations of form and proportion a source of much pleasure to
me. This last pleasure was acquired very gradually, and did not, until
after the commencement of manhood, attain any considerable height. The
examples quoted from Alison do not prove that there is no original
beauty in colours, but only that the feeling of it is capable, as no one
doubts that it is capable, of being overpowered by extraneous
associations.

Whether there is any similar organic basis of the pleasure derived from
form, so far at least as this depends on proportion, I would not
undertake to decide.

The susceptibility to the physical pleasures produced by colours and
musical sounds, (and by forms if any part of the pleasure they afford is
physical), is probably extremely different in different organisations.
In natures in which any one of these susceptibilities is originally
faint, more will depend on association. The extreme sensibility of this
part of our constitution to small and unobvious influences, makes it
certain that the sources of the feelings of beauty and deformity must
be, to a material extent, different in different individuals. (Vol. II,
pp. 246-7.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note appears at the end of “The Objects Called Sublime and
Beautiful, and Their Contraries, Contemplated as Causes of Our Pleasures
and Pains.” Sect. 3 (Vol. II, pp. 230-52) of Chap. xxi.]

The objection commonly made to the psychological analyses which resolve
Beauty into association, is that they confound the Beautiful with the
merely agreeable. This objection is urged, for example, by Coleridge, in
his Biographia Literaria.136 He admits, with every one else, that things
not in themselves agreeable, are often made agreeable by association;
that is, the pleasantness which Edition: current; Page: [224] belongs to
the ideas with which they are associated, adheres to themselves: but
this cannot, it is asserted, be the cause of their producing the
particular emotion to which we attach the name of Beauty; because, as no
feeling of beauty belongs to the ideas that are supposed to generate the
emotion, no such feeling can be transferred from them to what they are
associated with.

Any one who has studied the Analysis up to this point, is aware of the
inconclusiveness of this last argument. That a complex feeling generated
out of a number of single ones, should be as unlike to any of those from
which it is generated, as the sensation of white is unlike the
sensations of the seven prismatic colours, is no unexampled or rare fact
in our sensitive nature.

But it will also, I think, be found, in the case of our feelings of
Beauty, and still more, of Sublimity, that the theory which refers their
origin mainly to association, is not only not contradictory to facts,
but is not even paradoxical. For if our perceptions of beauty and
sublimity are of a more imposing character than the feelings ordinarily
excited in us by the contemplation of objects, it will be found that the
associations which form those impressions are themselves of a peculiarly
imposing nature. This is apparent even from Alison; and if the author of
the Analysis had written later, he might have referred to a deeper
thinker than Alison, and a more valuable because an unconscious witness
to the truth of the Association theory. Mr. Ruskin, with profounder and
more thoughtful views respecting the beauties both of Nature and of Art
than any psychologist I could name, undertakes, in the second volume of
Modern Painters, to investigate the conditions of Beauty.137 The result
he brings out is, that every thing which gives us the emotion of the
Beautiful, is expressive and emblematic of one or other of certain lofty
or lovely ideas, which are, in his apprehension, embodied in the
universe, and correspond to the various perfections of its Creator. He
holds these ideas to be, Infinity, Unity, Repose, Symmetry, Purity,
Moderation, and Adaptation to Ends. And he is, in my judgment, to a very
considerable degree successful in making out his case. Mr. Ruskin, it is
true, never thinks of inferring that our feelings of Beauty are the
actual consequence of our having those elevating or cheering ideas
recalled to us through manifold channels of association. He deems the
emotion to be arbitrarily attached to these ideas by a pre-established
harmony. But the evidence which he adduces goes far to prove the other
point. If he succeeds, as I think he does, in showing that the things
which excite the emotions of beauty or sublimity are always things which
have a natural association with certain highly impressive and affecting
ideas (whether the catalogue which he has made of those ideas is correct
and complete or not), we need no other mode of accounting for the
peculiar character of the emotions, than by the actual, though vague and
confused, recal of the ideas. It cannot be deemed surprising that a
state of consciousness made up of Edition: current; Page: [225]
reminiscences of such ideas as Mr. Ruskin specifies, and of the grand
and interesting objects and thoughts connected with ideas like those,
must be of a more elevated character, and must stir our nature to a
greater depth, than those associations of common-place and every-day
pleasures, which often combine with them as parts of the mass of
pleasurable feeling set up in us by the objects of Nature and Art. In a
windy country, a screen of trees so placed as to be a barrier against
the prevailing winds, excites ideas of warmth, comfort, and shelter,
which belong to the “agreeable,” as distinguished by Coleridge from the
Beautiful; and these enter largely into the pleasurable feeling with
which we contemplate the trees, without contributing to give them the
peculiar character distinctive of aesthetic feelings. But besides these
there are other elements, constituting the beauty, properly speaking, of
the trees, which appeal to other, and what we are accustomed, not
without meaning, to call higher, parts of our nature; which give a
stronger stimulus and a deeper delight to the imagination, because the
ideas they call up are such as in themselves act on the imagination with
greater force.

As is observed by the author of the Analysis, the exposition in detail
of the associations which enter into our various feelings of the sublime
and beautiful, would require the examination of the subject on a scale
not suited to the character nor proportioned to the dimensions of this
Treatise.138 Of all our feelings, our acquired pleasures and pains,
especially our pleasures, are the most complex; resulting from the whole
of our nature and of our past lives, and involving, consequently, a
greater multitude and variety of associations than almost any other
phenomena of the mind. And among our various pleasures, the aesthetic
are without doubt the most complex. It may also be remarked, and is a
considerable confirmation of the association theory, that the feelings
of beauty or sublimity with which different people are affected by the
contemplation of the same object, are evidently as different, as the
pleasurable associations of different persons with the same object are
likely to be. But there are some ingredients which are universally, or
almost universally, present, when the emotions have their characteristic
peculiarity; and to which they seem to be mainly indebted for the
extraordinary power with which they act on the minds which have the
greatest susceptibility to them. These ingredients are probably more
numerous and various than is commonly suspected; but some of the most
important and powerful of them are undoubtedly pointed to, and
illustrated with great force, in the discussion which I have mentioned,
by Mr. Ruskin; to whose work I willingly refer the psychological
student, as a copious source of at least far-reaching suggestions, and
often of much more.

Supposing that all Beauty had been successfully analysed into a lively
suggestion of one or more of the ideas to which it is referred by Mr.
Ruskin, the question would still remain for psychologists, why the
suggestion of those ideas is Edition: current; Page: [226] so impressive
and so delightful. But this question may, in general, be answered with
little difficulty. It is no mystery, for example, why anything which
suggests vividly the idea of infinity, that is, of magnitude or power
without limit, acquires an otherwise strange impressiveness to the
feelings and imagination. The remaining ideas in Mr. Ruskin’s list (at
least if we except those which, like Moderation, are chiefly ancillary
to the others, by excluding what would jar with their effect) all
represent to us some valuable or delightful attribute, in a completeness
and perfection of which our experience presents us with no example, and
which therefore stimulates the active power of the imagination to rise
above known reality, into a more attractive or a more majestic world.
This does not happen with what we call our lower pleasures. To them
there is a fixed limit at which they stop: or if, in any particular
case, they do acquire, by association, a power of stirring up ideas
greater than themselves, and stimulate the imagination to enlarge its
conceptions to the dimensions of those ideas, we then feel that the
lower pleasure has, exceptionally, risen into the region of the
aesthetic, and has superadded to itself an element of pleasure of a
character and quality not belonging to its own nature. (Vol. II, pp.
252-5.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note appears at the end of Chap. xxii, “Motives,” Sect. 1,
“Pleasurable or Painful States, Contemplated as Consequents of Our Own
Acts” (Vol. II, pp. 256-62).]

A Motive is that which influences the will; and the Will is a subject we
have not yet arrived at the consideration of. Meanwhile, it is here
shewn that a motive to an act consists in the association of pleasure
with the act; that a motive to abstain from an act, is the association
of pain with it; and we are prepared to admit the truth deduced
therefrom, that the one or the other motive will prevail, according as
the pleasurable or the painful association is the more powerful. What
makes the one or the other more powerful, is (conformably to the general
laws of association) partly the intensity of the pleasurable or painful
ideas in themselves, and partly the frequency of repetition of their
past conjunction with the act, either in experience or in thought. In
the latter of these two consists the efficacy of education in giving a
good or a bad direction to the active powers.

In further elucidation of Motives, I cite the following passages from
the First Appendix to the author’s Fragment on Mackintosh139 (pp.
389-90):

Edition: current; Page: [227]
A motive is something which moves—moves to what? To action. But all
action, as Aristotle says, (and all mankind agree with him) is for an
end.140 Actions are essentially means. The question, then, is, what is
the end of action? Actions, taken in detail, have ends in detail. But
actions, taken in classes, have ends which may be taken in classes. Thus
the ends of the actions which are subservient to the pleasures of sense,
are combined in a class, to which, in abstract, we give the name
sensuality. The class of actions which tend to the increase of power,
have a class of ends to which we give the name ambition, and so on. When
we put all these classes together, and make a genus; that is, actions in
general; can we in like manner make a genus of the ends; and name ends
in general?

If we could find what the several classes of ends; sensuality for
example; ambition; avarice; glory; sociality, etc.; have in common, we
could.

Now, they have certainly this in common, that they are all agreeable to
the agents. A man acts for the sake of something agreeable to him,
either proximately or remotely. But agreeable to, and pleasant to;
agreeableness, and pleasantness, are only different names for the same
thing; the pleasantness of a thing is the pleasure it gives. So that
pleasure, in a general way, or speaking generically; that is, in a way
to include all the species of pleasures, and also the abatement of
pains; is the end of action.

A motive is that which moves to action. But that which moves to action
is the end of the action, that which is sought by it; that for the sake
of which it is performed. Now that, generically speaking, is the
pleasure of the agent. Motive, then, taken generically is pleasure. The
pleasure may be in company or connection with things infinite in
variety. But these are the accessaries; the essence, is the pleasure.
Thus, in one case, the pleasure may be connected with the form, and
other qualities of a particular woman; in another, with a certain
arrangement of colours in a picture; in another, with the circumstances
of some fellow-creature. But in all these cases, what is generical, that
is the essence, is the pleasure, or relief from pain.

A motive, then, is the idea of a pleasure; a particular motive, is the
idea of a particular pleasure; and these are infinite in variety.

Another question is, in what circumstances does the idea of a pleasure
become a motive? For it is evident, that it does not so in all. It is
only necessary here to illustrate, not to resolve the question. First,
the pleasure must be regarded as attainable. No man wills an act, which
he knows he cannot perform, or which he knows cannot effect the end. In
the next place, the idea of the particular pleasure must be more present
to the mind, than any other of equal potency. That which makes the idea
of one pleasure more potent than another; or that which makes one idea
more present to the mind than another, is the proximate cause of the
motive, and a remote cause of the volition. The cause of that superior
potency, or of that presence to the mind, is a cause of the volition,
still more remote, and so on.

(Vol. II, pp. 262-4.)

* * * * *

[Discussing the idea of Country as a motive, James Mill says:] There are
cases, though rare, in which this motive has existed in extraordinary
force; in which men have been found capable of sacrificing every thing
for their country. This happens Edition: current; Page: [228] most
readily in times of great excitement; that is, when public opinion holds
out a great reward; and when the object rather is, to ward off some
great calamity, than to obtain an accession of good.

It is too limited a view of the effect of “times of great excitement” in
intensifying the patriotic feelings, to identify it with the influence
of a more than usual reward held out by public opinion. That fact often
contributes its share, but there are other causes fully as effectual. In
times of excitement, the idea of Country, the ideas of all the interests
involved in it, and of the manner in which those interests will be
affected by our action or by our forbearance to act, exist in the mind
in greater intensity, and are recalled with far greater frequency, than
in ordinary times. Moreover, the fact that a feeling is shared by all or
many of those with whom we are in frequent intercourse, strengthens, by
an obvious consequence, all the associations, both of resemblance and of
contiguity, which give that feeling its force. This is the well-known
influence of sympathy, so strikingly evinced by the vehement feelings of
a crowd. To these might be added another influence, belonging rather to
physiology than to psychology. When the nervous system has been highly
strung up by the influence of any strong feeling, it seems to become
more acutely sensible to feeling of any sort, those feelings excepted
which jar with, and are counteracted by, the prevailing tone of the
system. (Vol. II, pp. 274-5.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note is appended to the end of Chap. xxii, Sect. 2.]

This Section is devoted to an exposition of the manner in which facts
which are not pleasures or pains, but causes of pleasures or of pains,
become so closely associated in thought with the pains and pleasures of
which they are causes, as not only to become themselves pleasurable or
painful, but to become also, by their association with acts of our own
by which they may be brought about, motives of the greatest strength.
The value of a due understanding of this fact, both for the purposes of
psychological science and for those of practical education, is evidently
very great: and the author, to whose mind the bearings of speculative
philosophy on the practical interests of the human race were ever
present, has not failed to make some ethical and political applications
of the psychological truth which he has here so excellently illustrated.
(Vol. II, pp. 278-9.)

* * * * *

Edition: current; Page: [229]
[James Mill, discussing love of fame as a motive, comments:] That we
have pleasurable associations of great potency, with this manifestation
of the favourable disposition of others towards us, is matter of common
and constant experience. It is called, in its more remarkable states,
the Love of Fame, and is known to operate as one of the most powerful
motives in our nature. One of its cases is a remarkable exemplification
of that high degree of association, which has been already explained,
and to which we have frequently had occasion to advert, in explaining
other phenomena; the degree which constitutes belief, and which gives to
that belief, even when momentary, and instantly overruled by other
associations, a powerful effect on our actions.

Not only that Praise of us, which is diffused in our lives, and from
which agreeable consequences may arise to us, is delightful, by the
associated ideas of the pleasures resulting from it; but that Praise,
which we are never to hear, which will be diffused only when we are
dead, and from which no actual effects can ever accrue to us, is often
an object of intense affection, and acts as one of the most powerful
motives in our nature.

The habit which we form, in the case of immediate praise, of associating
the idea of the praise with the idea of pleasurable consequences to
ourselves, is so strong, that the idea of pleasurable consequences to
ourselves becomes altogether inseparable from the idea of our Praise. It
is one of those cases in which the one Idea never can exist without the
other. The belief, thus engendered, is of course encountered immediately
by other belief, that we shall be incapable of profiting by any
consequences, which posthumous fame can produce: as the fear, that is,
the belief of ghosts, in a man passing through a churchyard at midnight,
may be immediately encountered by his settled, habitual belief that
ghosts have no existence; and yet his terror, not only remains for a
time, but is constantly renewed, as often as he is placed in
circumstances with which he has been accustomed to associate the
existence of ghosts.

The case here put, that of the desire of posthumous fame, affords no
real support to the author’s doctrines, that a high degree of
association constitutes belief, and that belief is always present when
we are determined to action. The case is merely one of many others, in
which something not originally pleasurable (the praise and admiration of
our fellow-creatures) has become so closely associated with pleasure as
to be at last pleasurable in itself. When it has become a pleasure in
itself, it is desired for itself, and not for its consequences; and the
most confirmed knowledge that it can produce no ulterior pleasurable
consequences to ourselves will not interfere with the pleasure given by
the mere consciousness of possessing it, nor hinder that pleasure from
becoming, by its association with the acts which produce it, a powerful
motive. It is a frequent mode of talking, to speak of the desire of
posthumous fame in a kind of pitying way, as grounded on a delusion; as
a desire which implies a certain infirmity of the understanding. Those
who thus Edition: current; Page: [230] speak must be prepared to apply
the same disparaging phrases to the interest taken in the welfare of
others after our own death; for in that case also, no beneficial
consequences to ourselves personally can ever follow from the
realization of the object of our desire. But there is nothing at
variance with reason in the associations which make us value for
themselves, things which we at first cared for only as means to other
ends; associations to which we are indebted for nearly the whole both of
our virtues, and of our enjoyments. That he who acts with a view to
posthumous fame has a belief, however momentary, that this fame will
produce to him some extraneous good, or that he shall be conscious of it
after he is dead, I shall not admit without better evidence than I have
ever seen or heard of. (Vol. II, pp. 295-6.)

* * * * *

[Concerning “dispraise,” James Mill comments:] It not unfrequently
happens, that the idea of the unfavourable sentiments of mankind,
becomes more intolerable than all the consequences which could result
from them; and men make their escape from life, in order to escape from
the tormenting idea of certain consequences, which, at most, would only
diminish the advantages of living.

They do not seek death to escape from the idea of any consequences of
the unfavourable sentiments of mankind. The mere fact of having incurred
those unfavourable sentiments has become, by the adhesive force of
association, so painful in itself, that death is sometimes preferred to
it. There is often no thought of the consequences that may arise from
the unfavourable sentiments; and when consequences are thought of, they
are usually rather those which are mere demonstrations of feeling, and
owe their painfulness to the sentiment of which they are demonstrations,
than those which directly grate upon our senses or are injurious to our
interests. It is true that a vague conception of the many unpleasant
consequences liable to arise from the evil opinion of others, was the
crude matter out of which the horror of the thing itself was primitively
formed: but, once formed, it loses its connexion with its original
source. (Vol. II, p. 297.)

* * * * *

[James Mill asserts, on the authority of Adam Smith,141 that] in minds
happily trained, the love of Praiseworthiness, the dread of
Blameworthiness, is a stronger Edition: current; Page: [231] feeling,
than the love of actual Praise, the dread of actual Blame. It is one of
those cases, in which, by the power of the association, the secondary
feeling becomes more powerful than the primary. In all men, the idea of
praise, as consequent, is associated with the idea of certain acts of
theirs, as antecedent; the idea of blame, as consequent, with the idea
of certain acts of theirs, as antecedent. This association constitutes
what we call the feeling, or notion, or sentiment, or idea (for it goes
by all those names), of Praiseworthiness, and Blameworthiness.

This paragraph, unexplained, might give the idea that the author
regarded praiseworthiness and blameworthiness as having the meaning not
of deserving praise or blame, but merely of being likely to obtain it.
But what he meant is, that the idea of deserving praise is but a more
complex form of the association between our own or another person’s acts
or character, and the idea of praise. To deserve praise, is, in the
great majority of the cases which occur in life, the principal mode of
obtaining it; though the praise is seldom accurately proportioned to the
desert. And the same may be said of blame. A powerful association is
thus, if circumstances are favourable, generated between deserving
praise and obtaining it; and hence between deserving praise, and all the
pleasurable influences on our lives, of other people’s good opinion. And
this association may become sufficiently strong to overcome the direct
motive of obtaining praise, where it is to be obtained by other means
than desert; the rather, as the desire of undeserved praise is greatly
counteracted by the thought that people would not bestow the praise if
they knew all. That what has now been stated was really the author’s
meaning, is proved by his going on to say, that praiseworthiness and
blameworthiness, as motives to action, have reference “not to what is,
or to what shall be, but to what ought to be, the sentiments of
mankind.” (Vol. II, pp. 298-9.)

* * * * *

[At the end of Chap. xxiii, “The Acts of Our Fellow-Creatures, Which Are
Causes of Our Pains and Pleasures, Contemplated as Consequents of Our
Own Acts” (the running title is “Moral Sense”), a long note by Bain
(Vol. II, pp. 302-7) is followed by J.S. Mill’s.]


I

It had been pointed out, in a preceding chapter, that Wealth, Power,
Dignity, and many other things which are not in their own nature
pleasures, but only causes of pleasures and of exemption from pains,
become so closely associated with the pleasures of which they are
causes, and their absence or loss becomes so closely associated with the
pains to which it exposes us, that the things become objects of Edition:
current; Page: [232] love and desire, and their absence an object of
hatred and aversion, for their own sake, without reference to their
consequences.142 By virtue of the same law of association, it is pointed
out in the present chapter that human actions, both our own and those of
other people, standing so high as they do among the causes both of
pleasure and of pain to us (sometimes by their direct operation, and
sometimes through the sentiments they give birth to in other persons
towards ourselves) tend naturally to become inclosed in a web of
associated ideas of pleasures or of pains at a very early period of
life, in such sort that the ideas of acts beneficial to ourselves and to
others become pleasurable in themselves, and the ideas of acts hurtful
to ourselves and to others become painful in themselves: and both kinds
of acts become objects of a feeling, the former of love, the latter of
aversion, which having, in our minds, become independent of any
pleasures or pains actually expected to result to ourselves from the
acts, may be truly said to be disinterested. It is no less obvious that
acts which are not really beneficial, or not really hurtful, but which,
through some false opinion prevailing among mankind, or some extraneous
agency operating on their sentiments, incur their praise or blame, may
and often do come to be objects of a quite similar disinterested love or
hatred, exactly as if they deserved it. This disinterested love and
hatred of actions, generated by the association of praise or blame with
them, constitute, in the author’s opinion, the feelings of moral
approbation and disapprobation, which the majority of psychologists have
thought it necessary to refer to an original and ultimate principle of
our nature. Mr. Bain, in the preceding note, makes in this theory a
correction, to which the author himself would probably not have
objected, namely, that the mere idea of a pain or pleasure, by
whomsoever felt, is intrinsically painful or pleasurable, and when
raised in the mind with intensity is capable of becoming a stimulus to
action, independent, not merely of expected consequences to ourselves,
but of any reference whatever to Self; so that care for others is, in an
admissible sense, as much an ultimate fact of our nature, as care for
ourselves; though one which greatly needs strengthening by the
concurrent force of the manifold associations insisted on in the
author’s text. Though this of Mr. Bain is rather an account of
disinterested Sympathy, than of the moral feeling, it is undoubtedly
true that the foundation of the moral feeling is the adoption of the
pleasures and pains of others as our own: whether this takes place by
the natural force of sympathy, or by the association which has grown up
in our mind between our own good or evil and theirs. The moral feeling
rests upon this identification of the feelings of others with our own,
but is not the same thing with it. To constitute the moral feeling, not
only must the good of others have become in itself a pleasure to us, and
their suffering a pain, but this pleasure or pain must be associated
with our own acts as producing it, and must in this manner have become a
motive, Edition: current; Page: [233] prompting us to the one sort of
acts, and restraining us from the other sort. And this is, in brief, the
author’s theory of the Moral Sentiments.

The exhaustive treatment of this subject would require a length and
abundance of discussion disproportioned to the compass and purposes of a
treatise like the present, which was intended to expound what the author
believed to be the real mode of formation of our complex states of
consciousness, but not to say all that may and ought to be said in
refutation of other views of the subject. There are, however, some
important parts of the author’s own theory, which are not stated in this
work, but in a subsequent one, of a highly polemical character, the
Fragment on Mackintosh: and it may be both instructive and interesting
to the reader to find the statement here. I therefore subjoin the
passages containing it.

Nature makes no classes. Nature makes individuals. Classes are made by
men; and rarely with such marks as determine certainly what is to be
included in them.

Men make classifications, as they do every thing else, for some end.
Now, for what end was it that men, out of their innumerable acts,
selected a class, to which they gave the name of moral, and another
class, to which they gave the name of immoral? What was the motive of
this act? What its final cause?

Assuredly the answer to this question is the first step, though Sir
James saw it not, towards the solution of his two questions,
comprehending the whole of ethical science; first, what makes an act to
be moral? and secondly, what are the sentiments with which we regard
it?143

We may also be assured, that it was some very obvious interest which
recommended this classification; for it was performed, in a certain
rough way, in the very rudest states of society.

Farther, we may easily see how, even in very rude states, men were led
to it, by little less than necessity. Every day of their lives they had
experience of acts, some of which were agreeable, or the cause of what
was agreeable, to them; others disagreeable, or the cause of what was
disagreeable to them, in all possible degrees.

They had no stronger interest than to obtain the repetition of the one
sort, and to prevent the repetition of the other.

The acts in which they were thus interested were of two sorts; first,
those to which the actor was led by a natural interest of his own;
secondly, those to which the actor was not led by any interest of his
own. About the first sort there was not occasion for any particular
concern. They were pretty sure to take place, without any stimulus from
without. The second sort, on the contrary, were not likely to take
place, unless an interest was artificially created, sufficiently strong
to induce the actor to perform them.

And here we clearly perceive the origin of that important case of
classification . . . the classification of acts as moral and immoral.
The acts, which it was important to other men that each individual
should perform, but in which the individual had not a sufficient
interest to secure the performance of them, were constituted one class.
The acts, which it was important to other men that each individual
should abstain from, but in regard to which he had not a personal
interest sufficiently strong to secure his abstaining from them, were
constituted another class. The first class were distinguished by the
name moral acts; the second by the name immoral.

The interest which men had in securing the performance of the one set of
acts, the Edition: current; Page: [234] non-performance of the other,
led them by a sort of necessity to think of the means. They had to
create an interest, which the actor would not otherwise have, in the
performance of the one sort, the non-performance of the other. And in
proceeding to this end, they could not easily miss their way. They had
two powers applicable to the purpose. They had a certain quantity of
good at their disposal; and they had a certain quantity of evil. If they
could apply the good in such a manner as to afford a motive both for the
performance and non-performance which they desired, or the evil, in such
a manner as to afford a motive against the performance and
non-performance which they wished to prevent, their end was attained.

And this is the scheme which they adopted; and which, in every
situation, they have invariably pursued. The whole business of the moral
sentiments, moral approbation, and disapprobation, has this for its
object, the distribution of the good and evil we have at command, for
the production of acts of the useful sort, the prevention of acts of the
contrary sort. Can there be a nobler object?

But though men have been thus always right in their general aim, their
proceedings have been cruelly defective in the detail; witness the
consequence,—the paucity of good acts, the frequency of bad acts, which
there is in the world.

A portion of acts having been thus classed into good and bad; and the
utility having been perceived of creating motives to incite to the one,
and restrain from the other, a sub-classification was introduced. One
portion of these acts was such, that the good and evil available for
their production and prevention, could be applied by the community in
its conjunct capacity. Another portion was such, that the good and evil
available could be applied only by individuals in their individual
capacity. The first portion was placed under the control of what is
called law; the other remained under the control of the moral
sentiments; that is, the distribution of good and evil, made by
individuals in their individual capacity.

No sooner was the class made, than the rule followed. Moral acts are to
be performed; immoral acts are to be abstained from.

Beside this the general rule, there was needed, for more precise
direction, particular rules.

We must remember the fundamental condition, that all rules of action
must be preceded by a corresponding classification of actions. All moral
rules, comprehended in the great moral rule, must relate to a class of
actions comprehended within the grand class, constituted and marked by
the term moral. This is the case with grand classes in general. They are
subdivided into minor classes, each of the minor classes being a portion
of the larger. Thus, the grand class of acts called moral has been
divided into certain convenient portions, or sub-classes, and marked by
particular names, Just, Beneficent, Brave, Prudent, Temperate; to each
of which classes belongs its appropriate rule that men should be just,
that they should be beneficent, and so on. . . .

In the performance of our duties two sets of cases may be distinguished.
There is one set in which a direct estimate of the good of the
particular act is inevitable; and the man acts immorally who acts
without making it. There are other cases in which it is not necessary.

The first are those, which have in them so much of singularity, as to
prevent their coming within the limits of any established class. In such
cases a man has but one guide; he must consider the consequences, or act
not as a moral, or rational agent at all.

The second are cases of such ordinary and frequent occurrence as to be
distinguished into classes. And everybody knows . . . that when a class
of acts are performed regularly and frequently, they are at last
performed by habit; in other words, the idea of the act and the
performance of it follow so easily and speedily that they seem to
cohere, and to be but one operation. It is only necessary to recall some
of the more familiar instances, to see the mode Edition: current; Page:
[235] of this formation. In playing on a musical instrument, every note,
at first, is found by an effort. Afterwards, the proper choice is made
so rapidly as to appear as if made by a mechanical process in which the
mind has no concern. The same is the case with moral acts. When they
have been performed with frequency and uniformity, for a sufficient
length of time, a habit is generated. . . .

When a man acts from habit, he does not act without reflection. He only
acts with a very rapid reflection. In no class of acts does a man begin
to act by habit. He begins without habit; and acquires the habit by
frequency of acting. The consideration, on which the act is founded, and
the act itself, form a sequence. And it is obvious from the familiar
cases of music and of speaking, that it is a sequence at first not very
easily performed. By every repetition, however, it becomes easier. The
consideration occurs with less effort; the action follows with less
effort; they take place with greater and greater rapidity, till they
seem blended. To say, that this is acting without reflection, is only
ignorance, for it is thus seen to be a case of acting by reflection so
easily and rapidly, that the reflection and the act cannot be
distinguished from one another. . . .

Since moral acts are not performed at first by habit, but each upon the
consideration which recommends it; upon what considerations, we may be
asked, do moral acts begin to be performed?

The question has two meanings, and it is necessary to reply to both. It
may be asked, upon what consideration the men of our own age and
country, for example, at first, and before a habit is formed, perform
moral acts? Or, it may be asked, upon what consideration did men
originally perform moral acts?

To the first of these questions every one can reply from his own memory
and observation. We perform moral acts at first, from authority. Our
parents tell us that we ought to do this, ought not to do that. They are
anxious that we should obey their precepts. They have two sets of
influences, with which to work upon us; praise and blame; reward and
punishment. All the acts which they say we ought to do, are praised in
the highest degree, all those which they say we ought not to do, are
blamed in the highest degree. In this manner, the ideas of praise and
blame become associated with certain classes of acts, at a very early
age, so closely, that they cannot easily be disjoined. No sooner does
the idea of the act occur than the idea of praise springs up along with
it, and clings to it. And generally these associations exert a
predominant influence during the whole of life.

Our parents not only praise certain kinds of acts, blame other kinds;
but they praise us when we perform those of the one sort, blame us when
we perform those of the other. In this manner other associations are
formed. The idea of ourselves performing certain acts is associated with
the idea of our being praised, performing certain other acts with the
idea of our being blamed, so closely that the ideas become at last
indissoluble. In this association consist the very important complex
ideas of praise-worthiness, and blame-worthiness. An act which is
praiseworthy, is an act with the idea of which the idea of praise is
indissolubly joined; an agent who is praiseworthy is an agent with the
idea of whom the idea of praise is indissolubly joined. And in the
converse case, that of blame-worthiness, the formation of the idea is
similar.

Many powerful circumstances come in aid of these important associations,
at an early age. We find, that not only our parents act in this manner,
but all other parents. We find that grown people act in this manner, not
only towards children, but towards one another. The associations,
therefore, are unbroken, general, and all-comprehending.

Our parents administer not only praise and blame, to induce us to
perform acts of one sort, and abstain from acts of another sort, but
also rewards and punishments. They do so directly; and, further, they
forward all our inclinations in the one case, baulk them in the other.
So does everybody else. We find our comforts excessively abridged by
other people, Edition: current; Page: [236] when we act in one way,
enlarged when we act in another way. Hence another most important class
of associations; that of an increase of well-being from the good-will of
our fellow-creatures, if we perform acts of one sort, of an increase of
misery from their ill-will, if we perform those of another sort.

In this manner it is that men, born in the social state, acquire the
habits of moral acting, and certain affections connected with it, before
they are capable of reflecting upon the grounds which recommend the acts
either to praise or blame. Nearly at this point the greater part of them
remain, continuing to perform moral acts and to abstain from the
contrary, chiefly from the habits they have acquired, and the authority
upon which they originally acted; though it is not possible that any man
should come to the years and blessing of reason, without perceiving, at
least in an indistinct and general way, the advantage which mankind
derive from their acting towards one another in one way, rather than
another.

We come now to the second question, viz. what are the considerations
upon which men originally performed moral acts? The answer to this
question is substantially contained in the explanation already given of
the classification of acts as moral and immoral.

When men began to mark the distinction between acts, and were prompted
to praise one class, blame another, they did so, either because the one
sort benefited, the other hurt them; or for some other reason. If for
the first reason, the case is perfectly intelligible. The men had a
motive, which they understood, and which was adequate to the end. If it
was not on account of utility that men classed some acts as moral,
others as immoral, on what other account was it?

To this question, an answer, consisting of anything but words, has never
been returned.

It has been said, that there is a beauty, and a deformity, in moral and
immoral acts, which recommended them to the distinctions they have met
with.

It is obvious to reply to this hypothesis, that the mind of a savage,
that is, a mind in the state in which the minds of all men were, when
they began to classify their acts, was not likely to be much affected by
the ideal something called the beauty of acts. To receive pain or
pleasure from an act, to obtain, or be deprived of, the means of
enjoyment by an act; to like the acts and the actors, whence the good
proceeded, dislike those whence the evil proceeded; all these were
things which they understood.

But we must endeavour to get a little nearer to the bottom of this
affair.

In truth, the term beauty, as applied to acts, is just as unintelligible
to the philosopher, as to the savage. Is the beauty of an act one thing;
the morality of it another? Or are they two names for the same thing? If
they are two things, what is the beauty, distinct from the morality? If
they are the same thing, what is the use of the name morality? It only
tends to confusion.

But this is not all. The beautiful is that which excites in us the
emotion of beauty, a state of mind with which we are acquainted by
experience. This state of mind has been successfully analysed, and shewn
to consist of a train of pleasurable ideas, awakened in us by the
beautiful object.

But is it in this way only that we are concerned in moral acts? Do we
value them for nothing, but as we value a picture, or a piece of music,
for the pleasure of looking at them, or hearing them? Everybody knows
the contrary. Acts are objects of importance to us, on account of their
consequences, and nothing else. This constitutes a radical distinction
between them and the things called beautiful. Acts are hurtful or
beneficial, moral or immoral, virtuous or vicious. But it is only an
abuse of language, to call them beautiful or ugly.

That it is jargon, the slightest reflection is sufficient to evince; for
what is the beauty of an act, detached from its consequences? We shall
be told, perhaps, that the beauty of an act was never supposed to be
detached from its consequences. The beauty consists in the Edition:
current; Page: [237] consequences. I am contented with the answer. But
observe to what it binds you. The consequences of acts are the good or
evil they do. According to you, therefore, the beauty of acts is either
the utility of them, or it is nothing at all;—a beautiful ground on
which to dispute with us, that acts are classed as moral, not on account
of their utility, but on account of their beauty.

It will be easily seen, from what has been said, that they who ascribe
the classification of acts, as moral, and immoral, to a certain taste,
an agreeable or disagreeable sentiment which they excite (among whom are
included the Scottish professors Hutcheson, and Brown, and David Hume
himself, though on his part with wonderful inconsistency)144—hold the
same theory with those who say, that beauty is the source of the
classification of moral acts. Things are classed as beautiful, or
deformed, on account of a certain taste, or inward sentiment. If acts
are classed in the same way, on account of a certain taste or inward
sentiment, they deserve to be classed under the names beautiful, and
deformed; otherwise not.

I hope it is not necessary for me to go minutely into the exposure of
the other varieties of jargon, by which it has been endeavoured to
account for the classification of acts, as moral and immoral. “Fitness”
is one of them. Acts are approved on account of their fitness. When
fitness is hunted down, it is brought to bay exactly at the place where
beauty was. Fitness is either the goodness of the consequences, or it is
nothing at all.

The same is the case with “Right Reason,” or “Moral Reason.” An act
according to moral reason, is an act, the consequences of which are
good. Moral reason, therefore, is another name, and not a bad name, for
the principle of utility.*

The following passage from another part of the same work, is also very
much to the purpose.

The terms moral and immoral were applied by men, primarily, not to their
own acts, but the acts of other men. Those acts, the effects of which
they observed to be beneficial, they desired should be performed. To
make them be performed, they, among other things they did, affixed to
them marks of their applause; they called them, good, moral,
well-deserving; and behaved accordingly.

Such is the source of the moral approbation we bestow on the acts of
other men. The source of that which we bestow on our own is twofold.
First, every man’s beneficial acts, like those of every other man, form
part of that system of beneficial acting, in which he, in common with
all other men, finds his account. Secondly, he strongly associates with
his own beneficial acts, both that approbation of other men, which is of
so much importance to him, and that approbation which he bestows on
other men’s beneficial acts.

It is also easy to shew what takes place in the mind of a man, before he
performs an act, which he morally approves or condemns.

What is called the approbation of an act not yet performed, is only the
idea of future approbation: and it is not excited by the act itself; it
is excited by the idea of the act. The idea of approbation or
disapprobation is excited by the idea of an act, because the approbation
would be excited by the act itself. But what excites moral approbation
or disapprobation of Edition: current; Page: [238] an act, is neither
the act itself, nor the motive of the act; but the consequences of the
act, good or evil, and their being within the intention of the agent.

Let us put a case. A man with a starving wife and family is detected
wiring a hare on my premises. What happens? I call up the idea of
sending him to prison. I call up the ideas of the consequences of that
act, the misery of the helpless creatures whom his labour supported;
their agonizing feelings, their corporal wants, their hunger, cold,
their destitution of hope, their despair: I call up the ideas of the man
himself in jail, the sinking of heart which attends incarceration; the
dreadful thought of his family deprived of his support; his association
with vicious characters; the natural consequences,—his future
profligacy, the consequent profligacy of his ill-fated children, and
hence the permanent wretchedness and ruin of them all. I next have the
idea of my own intending all these consequences. And only then am I in a
condition to perform, as Sir James says, the “operation of conscience.”
I perform it. But in this case, it is, to use another of his
expressions, “defeated.”145 Notwithstanding the moral disapprobation,
which the idea of such intended consequences excites in me, I perform
the act.

Here, at all events, any one may see, that conscience, and the motive of
the act, are not the same, but opposed to one another. The motive of the
act, is the pleasure of having hares; not in itself a thing anywise bad.
The only thing bad is the producing so much misery to others, for
securing that pleasure to myself.

The state of the case, then, is manifest. The act of which I have the
idea, has two sets of consequences; one set pleasurable, another
hurtful. I feel an aversion to produce the hurtful consequences. I feel
a desire to produce the pleasurable. The one prevails over the other. .
. .

. . . Nothing in an act is voluntary but the consequences that are
intended. The idea of good consequences intended, is the pleasurable
feeling of moral approbation; the idea of bad consequences intended is
the painful feeling of moral disapprobation. The very term voluntary,
therefore, applied to an act which produces good or evil consequences,
expresses the antecedence of moral approbation or disapprobation.*

I will quote one short passage more, in correction of the very vulgar
error, that to analyse our disinterested affections and resolve them
into associations with the ideas of our own elementary pleasures and
pains, is to deny their reality.

Sir James must mean, if he means anything, that to trace up the motive
affections of human nature to pain and pleasure, is to make personal
advantage the only motive. This is to affirm, that he who analyses any
of the complicated phenomena of human nature, and points out the
circumstances of their formation, puts an end to them.

Sir James was totally ignorant of this part of human nature. Gratitude
remains gratitude, resentment remains resentment, generosity generosity
in the mind of him who feels them, after analysis, the same as before.
The man who can trace them to their elements does not cease to feel
them, as much as the man who never thought about the matter. And
whatever effects they produce, as motives, in the mind of the man who
never thought about the matter, they produce equally, in the minds of
those who have analysed them the most minutely.

They are constituent parts of human nature. How we are actuated, when we
feel them, is matter of experience, which every one knows within
himself. Their action is what it is, whether they are simple or
compound. Does a complex motive cease to be a motive whenever it is
discovered to be complex? The analysis of the active principles leaves
the Edition: current; Page: [239] nature of them untouched. To be able
to assert, that a philosopher, who finds some of the active principles
of human nature to be compound and traces them to their origin, does on
that account exclude them from human nature, and deny their efficiency
as constituent parts of that nature, discovers a total incapacity of
thinking upon these subjects. When Newton discovered that a white ray of
light is not simple but compound,146 did he for that reason exclude it
from the denomination of light, and deny that it produced its effects,
with respect to our perception, as if it were of the same nature with
the elementary rays of which it is composed?*


II

The reluctance of many persons to receive as correct this analysis of
the sentiments of moral approbation and disapprobation, though a
reluctance founded more on feeling than on reasoning, is accustomed to
justify itself intellectually, by alleging the total unlikeness of those
states of mind to the elementary ones, from which, according to the
theory, they are compounded. But this is no more than what is observed
in every similar case. When a complex feeling is generated out of
elements very numerous and various, and in a corresponding degree
indeterminate and vague, but so blended together by a close association,
the effect of a long series of experiences, as to have become
inseparable, the resulting feeling always seems not only very unlike any
one of the elements composing it, but very unlike the sum of those
elements. The pleasure of acquiring, or of consciously possessing, a sum
of money (supposed not to be desired for application to some specific
purpose,) is a feeling, to our consciousness, very different from the
pleasure of protection against hunger and cold, the pleasure of ease and
rest from labour, the pleasure of receiving consideration from our
fellow-creatures, and the other miscellaneous pleasures, the association
with which is admitted to be the real and only source of the pleasure of
possessing money. In the case, then, of the moral sentiments, we have,
on the one hand, a vera causa or set of causes, having a positive
tendency to generate a sentiment of love for certain actions, and of
aversion for certain others; and on the other hand, those sentiments of
love and aversion, actually produced. This coincidence between the
sentiments and a power adequate to produce them, goes far towards
proving causation. That the sentiments are not obviously like the
causes, is no reason for postulating the existence of another cause, in
the shape of an original principle of our nature.

In a case, however, of so great interest and importance, a rigid
adherence to the canons of inductive proof must be insisted on. Those
who dispute the theory are entitled to demand that it shall conform
strictly to the general law of cause and effect, which is, that the
effect shall occur with the cause, shall not occur without the cause,
and shall bear some proportion to the cause. Unless it can be shown that
Edition: current; Page: [240] when the effect is not produced, the cause
is either absent, or counteracted by some more powerful agency; and
unless, when there is any marked difference in the effect, a difference
can be shown in the cause, sufficient to account for it; the theory must
give way, or at least, cannot be considered as proved.

The principal case in which the effect is absent, notwithstanding the
apparent presence of the cause assigned for it, is anticipated by the
author, and provided for after his manner, in the first of the passages
quoted from the Fragment on Mackintosh. There are actions (he observes)
as beneficial as any others, which yet do not excite the moral sentiment
of approbation; but it is because the spontaneous motives to those
beneficial acts are in general sufficient: as to eat when we are hungry,
or to do a service for which we are to be amply paid. There are, again,
actions of a very hurtful character, but such that the spontaneous
motives for abstaining from them may be relied on, without any
artificial addition: such, in general, are acts destructive of one’s own
life or property. But even in these cases the hurtful acts may become
objects of moral reprobation, when, in any particular case, the natural
deterrents prove insufficient for preventing them.

The author seems to think that the difference here pointed out, is
explained by the fact that the moral sentiment is in the one case
needed, in the other not needed, for producing the useful or averting
the hurtful act; that, in short, we are made to have the feeling, by a
foresight that our having it will operate usefully on the conduct of our
fellow-creatures. I cannot accept this explanation. It seems to me to
explain everything about the moral feelings, except the feelings
themselves. It explains praise and blame, because these may be
administered with the express design of influencing conduct. It explains
reward and punishment, and every other distinction which we make in our
behaviour between what we desire to encourage, and what we are anxious
to check. But these things we might do from a deliberate policy, without
having any moral feeling in our minds at all. When there is a moral
feeling in our minds, our praise or blame is usually the simple
expression of that feeling, rather than an instrument purposely employed
for an end. We may give expression to the feeling without really having
it, in the belief that our praise or blame will have a salutary effect;
but no anticipation of salutary effects from our feeling will ever avail
to give us the feeling itself: except indeed, what may be said of every
other mental feeling—that we may talk ourselves into it; that the
habitual use of the modes of speech that are associated with it, has
some tendency to call up the feeling in the speaker himself, and a great
tendency to engender it in other people.

I apprehend, however, that there is another, and more adequate reason
why the feeling of moral approbation is usually absent in the case of
actions (or forbearances) for which there are sufficient motives without
it. These actions are done, and are seen to be done, by everybody alike.
The pleasant associations derived from their usefulness merge,
therefore, in our feelings towards human life and towards our
fellow-creatures generally, and do not give rise to any special Edition:
current; Page: [241] association of pleasure with given individuals. But
when we find that a certain person does beneficial acts which the
general experience of life did not warrant us in counting upon—acts
which would not have been done by everybody, or even by most people, in
his place; we associate the pleasure which the benefit gives us, with
the character and disposition of that individual, and with the act,
conceived as proceeding from that specially beneficent disposition. And
obversely, if a person acts in a manner from which we suffer, but which
is such as we should expect from most other people in a parallel case,
the associations which his acts create in our minds are associations
with human life, or with mankind in general; but if the acts, besides
being of a hurtful kind, betoken a disposition in the agent, more
hurtful than we are accustomed to look for in average men, we associate
the injury with that very man, and with that very disposition, and have
the feeling of moral disapprobation and repugnance.

There is, as already intimated, another condition which those who hold
the Association theory of the moral sentiments are bound to fulfil. The
class of feelings called moral embraces several varieties, materially
different in their character. Wherever this difference manifests itself,
the theory must be required to show that there is a corresponding
difference in the antecedents. If pleasurable or painful associations
are the generating cause, those associations must differ in some
proportion to the difference which exists in what they generate.

The principal case in point is the case of what is called Duty, or
Obligation. It will probably be admitted that beneficial acts, when done
because they are beneficial, excite in us favourable sentiments towards
the agent, for which the utility or beneficial tendency of the actions
is sufficient to account. But it is only some, not all, of these
beneficial acts, that we regard as duties; as acts which the agent, or
we ourselves if we are the persons concerned, are bound to do. This
feeling of duty or obligation, it is contended, is a very different
state of mind from mere liking for the action and good will to the
agent. The association theory may account for the two last, but not for
the former.

I have examined this question in the concluding chapter of a short
treatise entitled Utilitarianism. The subject of the chapter is “the
connexion between Justice and Utility.”147 I have there endeavoured to
shew what the association is, which exists in the case of what we regard
as a duty, but does not exist in the case of what we merely regard as
useful, and which gives to the feeling in the former case the strength,
the gravity, and pungency, which in the other case it has not.

I believe that the element in the association, which gives this
distinguishing character to the feeling, and which constitutes the
difference of the antecedents in the two cases, is the idea of
Punishment. I mean the association with punishment, not the expectation
of it.

No case can be pointed out in which we consider anything as a duty, and
any act Edition: current; Page: [242] or omission as immoral or wrong,
without regarding the person who commits the wrong and violates the duty
as a fit object of punishment. We think that the general good requires
that he should be punished, if not by the law, by the displeasure and
ill offices of his fellow-creatures: we at any rate feel indignant with
him, that is, it would give us pleasure that he should suffer for his
misconduct, even if there are preponderant reasons of another kind
against inflicting the suffering. This feeling of indignation, or
resentment, is, I conceive, a case of the animal impulse (I call it
animal because it is common to us with the other animals) to defend our
own life and possessions, or the persons whom we care for, against
actual or threatened attack. All conduct which we class as wrong or
criminal is, or we suppose it to be, an attack upon some vital interest
of ourselves or of those we care for, (a category which may include the
public, or the whole human race): conduct which, if allowed to be
repeated, would destroy or impair the security and comfort of our lives.
We are prompted to defend these paramount interests by repelling the
attack, and guarding against its renewal; and our earliest experience
gives us a feeling, which acts with the rapidity of an instinct, that
the most direct and efficacious protection is retaliation. We are
therefore prompted to retaliate by inflicting pain on the person who has
inflicted or tried to inflict it upon ourselves. We endeavour, as far as
possible, that our social institutions shall render us this service. We
are gratified when, by that or other means, the pain is inflicted, and
dissatisfied if from any cause it is not. This strong association of the
idea of punishment, and the desire for its infliction, with the idea of
the act which has hurt us; is not in itself a moral sentiment; but it
appears to me to be the element which is present when we have the
feelings of obligation and of injury, and which mainly distinguishes
them from simple distaste or dislike for any thing in the conduct of
another that is disagreeable to us; that distinguishes, for instance,
our feeling towards the person who steals our goods, from our feeling
towards him who offends our senses by smoking tobacco. This impulse to
self-defence by the retaliatory infliction of pain, only becomes a moral
sentiment, when it is united with a conviction that the infliction of
punishment in such a case is conformable to the general good, and when
the impulse is not allowed to carry us beyond the point at which that
conviction ends. For further illustration I must refer to the little
Treatise already mentioned. (Vol. II, pp. 307-26.)

* * * * *

[In Chap. xxiv, “The Will,” when distinguishing between the effects of
external and internal sensations, James Mill remarks:] in general, as it
is easy to conceive, the internal sensations are a leading cause of such
actions as take place in the internal organs of the Body. Edition:
current; Page: [243] The actions which take place in the interior of the
body are not always, nor perhaps even generally, produced by sensations.
A large portion of them are not preceded by any sensation of which we
are aware, and have been ascertained to depend on nerves not terminating
in the brain, which is the seat of sensation, but stopping at the spinal
cord. These actions are inferred to be the results of a mere physical
stimulus, operating either upon the local nerves, or upon the spinal
ganglions with which those nerves communicate, and not attended with any
consciousness.

Many of the instances which the author goes on to enumerate, of muscular
action excited by sensation, are, in all probability, cases of this
description. The muscular action is directly excited by the physical
irritation of the nerves, and any sensation which accompanies it is not
its cause, but a simultaneous effect. (Vol. II, p. 331.)

* * * * *

[James Mill (Vol. II, pp. 352-4) calls attention to a “double operation”
in] the formation and execution of motives. The first association starts
from the pleasure. The idea of the pleasure is associated with its
immediate cause, that cause with its cause, and so on, till it reaches
that act of ours which is the opposite end of the train. The process may
stop here, and in that case the motive does not excite to action. If it
excites to action, the process is exactly reversed. In the first process
of association, the pleasure was the first link in the chain, the action
the last; in the second process, the action is the first, the pleasure
the last. When the first process only is performed, the association is
called motive. When the second is performed it is called will.

A difficulty, however, presents itself. The first process terminates in
an Idea of the action. The second process commences with an Idea of the
action. The Idea of the action is thus excited twice. But the first time
it is not followed by the action; the second time it is. How is this to
be reconciled with the supposed constancy of connexion between the
muscular action and the Idea which produces it? The difficulty is solved
by observing, that the phrase, “Idea of the action,” has two meanings.
There are two Ideas, very different from one another, to both of which
we give the name, “Idea of the action.” Of these Ideas, one is the
outward appearance of the action, and is always a very obvious Idea. The
other is the copy of those internal sensations which originally called
the muscles into action, to which, from habit of not attending to them,
we have lost the power of attending. This last is by no means an obvious
Idea. And the mind passes from it so quickly, intent upon the action
which is its result, that it is almost always swallowed up in the mass
of association. It constitutes, in fact, one of the most remarkable
instances of that class of links in a chain, which, how important soever
to the Edition: current; Page: [244] existence of the chain, are passed
over so rapidly, that the existence of them is hardly ever recognised.

This last Idea alone, is that upon which the contraction of the muscle
is consequent. In the process of association which we call the motive,
as described above, the first of the two above-mentioned ideas of the
action, that of its outward appearance, is the idea excited. If the
association stops there, the motive is inoperative; if the association
does not stop there, but the idea of the outward appearance of the
action, calls up that other, the idea of the internal feelings of the
action, the motive is then operative, and we are said to will.

If we are asked, how an Idea, as that of the outward appearance of an
act, should at one time excite an idea, as that of the internal feelings
of the act, at another time not excite it, we can only refer to the laws
of association, as far as they have been ascertained. We know there are
certain cases of association, so strong, that the one Idea never exists
without calling up the other. We know there are other cases in which an
Idea sometimes does, and sometimes does not, call up such or such an
Idea. Sometimes it is easy to trace the cause of this variety; sometimes
difficult.

This analysis of the power of the Will over muscular action is
substantially that of Hartley, though more clearly and forcibly stated,
and more amply illustrated. In the field of mental philosophy this is
the point at which Hartley approached nearest to the most advanced
thoughts of his successors, and left least for them to do beyond the
task of commentators and defenders.148

The doctrine of Hartley on the Will may be summed up in the following
propositions. 1. All our voluntary movements were originally automatic:
meaning by automatic, involuntary, and excited directly by sensations.
2. When a sensation has the power of exciting a given muscular action,
the idea of that sensation, if sufficiently vivid, will excite it
likewise. 3. The idea of the sensation which excites an automatic action
of the muscles, persists during the action, and becomes associated with
it by contiguity, in such a manner as to be itself, in its turn, excited
by any vividly recalled idea of the muscular act. 4. The following is
what takes place in voluntary motion. The idea of the end we desire,
excites by association the idea of the muscular act which would procure
it for us. The idea of this muscular act excites, by association, the
idea of the sensation which originally excited the same muscular action
automatically. And lastly, the idea of this sensation excites the
action, as the sensation itself would have done. 5. These associations
being formed gradually, and progressively strengthened by repetition,
this gives us the explanation of the gradual and slow process whereby we
gain what is called command of our muscles; i.e. the process by which
the actions, originally produced automatically by sensations; come to be
produced, Edition: current; Page: [245] and at last, to be easily and
rapidly produced, by the ideas of the different pleasurable ends to
which those muscular actions are the means. 6. In this chain of
association, as is so often the case in chains of association, the links
which are no otherwise interesting to us than by introducing other
links, gradually drop out of consciousness, being, after many
repetitions, either forgotten as soon as felt, or altogether thrown out;
the latter being the supposition which Hartley apparently favours. The
link that consists in the idea of the internal sensations which excited
the muscular action when it was still automatic, being the least
interesting part of the whole series, is probably the first which we
cease to be aware of. When the succession of the ideas has become, by
frequent repetition, extremely prompt, rapid, and certain, another link
tends to disappear, namely, the ideas of the muscular feelings that
accompany the act. A practised player, for example, on a keyed
instrument, becomes less and less conscious of the motions of his
fingers, until there at last remains nothing in his consciousness to
shew that the muscular acts do not arise without any intermediate links,
from the purpose, i.e. the idea in his mind, which made him begin
playing. At this stage the muscular motion, which, from automatic, had
become voluntary, has become, from voluntary, what, in Hartley’s
phraseology, is called secondarily automatic; and it seems to be his
opinion that the ideas which have disappeared from consciousness, or at
all events from memory, have not been (as maintained by Stewart)149
called up, and immediately afterwards forgotten, but have ceased to be
called up; being, as it were, leapt over by the rapidity with which the
succeeding links rush into consciousness.

This theory, as we have seen, is adopted, and more fully worked out, by
the author of the Analysis. He proves, by many examples, that sensations
excite muscular actions; that ideas excite muscular actions; and that,
when a sensation has power to excite a particular muscular action, the
idea of the sensation tends to do the same. It is true that many, if not
most, of what he presents as instances of muscular action excited by
sensations, are cases in which both the sensation and the muscular
action are probably joint effects of a physical cause, a stimulus acting
on the nerves. This misapprehension by the author reaches its extreme
point when he declares traumatic tetanus to be produced not by the wound
but by the pain of the wound; and cramps to be produced by sensations,
instead of merely producing them.150 But the error is quite immaterial
to the theory of the Will; the two suppositions being equivalent, as a
foundation for the power which the idea of the muscular sensation
acquires over the muscular action. Whether the sensation is the cause of
the automatic action, or its effect, or a joint effect of the cause
which produces it—on all these hypotheses the sensation and the action
are conjoined in such a manner, as to form so close an association by
contiguity that the idea of the Edition: current; Page: [246] sensation
becomes capable of exciting the action. This being conceded, it follows,
by the ordinary laws of association, that whatever recals the idea of
the sensation, tends, through the idea, to produce the action.

Now, there is nothing so closely associated with the idea of the
muscular sensation, as the idea of the muscular act itself, such as it
appears to outward observation. Whatever, therefore, calls up strongly
the idea of the act, is likely to call up the idea of the accompanying
muscular sensation, and so produce the act. But the idea of the act is
called up strongly by anything which makes us desire to perform it; that
is, by an association between it as a means, and any coveted pleasure as
an end. The act is thus produced by our desire of the end; that is
(according to the author’s theory of desire) by our idea of the end,
when pleasurable; which, if an end, it must be. The pleasurable
association may be carried over from the ultimate end to the idea of the
muscular act, through any number of intermediate links, consisting of
the successive operations, probably in themselves indifferent, by which
the end has to be compassed; but this transfer is strictly conformable
to the laws of association. When the pleasurable association has reached
the muscular act itself, and has caused it to be desired, the series of
effects terminates in the production of the act. What has now been
described is, in the opinion of the author, the whole of what takes
place in any voluntary action of the muscles. At the close of the
chapter we shall consider whether there is any part of the facts, for
which this theory does not sufficiently account.151 (Vol. II, pp.
354-8.)

* * * * *

[In his chapter on the will, James Mill examines (Vol. II, pp. 362-72)
the process of “Attention.” He initially explains it thus (p. 362):] We
seem to have the power of attending, or not attending to any object; by
which is meant, that we can Will to attend to it, or not to attend. By
attending to an object, we give it the opportunity of exciting all the
ideas with which it is associated. By not attending to it we deprive it
of more or less of that opportunity. And if the will has this power over
every idea in a train, it has thence a power, which may be called
unlimited, over the train. [He later remarks (p. 363):] A painful or a
pleasurable sensation is a peculiar state of mind. A man knows it, only
by having it; and it is impossible that by words he can convey his
feeling to others. The effort, however, to convey the idea of it, has
given occasion to various forms of expression, all of which are greatly
imperfect. The state of mind under a pleasurable or painful sensation is
such, that we say, the sensation engrosses the mind; but this really
means no more than that it is a painful or pleasurable sensation; and
that such a sensation is a state of mind very different Edition:
current; Page: [247] from an indifferent sensation. The phrase,
engrossing the mind, is sometimes exchanged for the word Attention.
[J.S. Mill’s note comes at the end of the further analysis of the
process.]

The account here given of Attention, though full of instructive matter,
I cannot consider to be at all adequate. When it is said that a
sensation, by reason of its highly pleasurable or painful character,
engrosses the mind, more is meant than merely that it is a highly
pleasurable or painful sensation. The expression means, first, that when
a sensation is highly pleasurable or painful, it tends, more or less
strongly, to exclude from consciousness all other sensations less
pleasurable or painful than itself, and to prevent the rising up of any
ideas but those which itself recals by its associations. This portion of
the facts of the case is noticed by the author, though not sufficiently
prominent in his theory. But there is another portion, altogether
untouched by him. Through this power which the sensation has, of
excluding other sensations and ideas, it tends to prolong its own
existence; to make us continue conscious of it, from the absence of
other feelings which if they were present would either prevent us from
feeling it, or would make us feel it less intensely; which is called
diverting our attention from it. This is what we mean when we say that a
pleasurable or painful idea tends to fix the attention. We mean, that it
is not easy to have, simultaneously with it, any other sensation or
idea; except the ideas called up by itself, and which in turn recal it
by association, and so keep it present to the mind. Becoming thus a
nearly exclusive object of consciousness, it is both felt with greater
intensity, and acquires greater power of calling up, by association,
other ideas. There is an increase both in the multitude, the intensity,
and the distinctness of the ideas it suggests; as is always the case
when the suggesting sensation or idea is increased in intensity. In this
manner a sensation which gets possession of our consciousness because it
is already intense, becomes, by the fact of having taken possession,
still more intense, and obtains still greater control over the
subsequent train of our thoughts. And these also are precisely the
effects which take place when, the sensation not being so pleasurable or
painful as to produce them of itself, or in other words to fix the
attention, we fix it voluntarily. All this is as true of Ideas as of
Sensations. If a thought is highly painful, or pleasurable, it tends to
exclude all thoughts which have no connexion with it, and which if
aroused would tend to expel it—to make us (as we say) forget the pain or
the pleasure. By thus obtaining exclusive possession of the mind, the
pleasurable or painful thought is made more intense, more painful or
pleasurable; and, as is the nature of pains and pleasures, acquires, in
consequence, a greater power of calling up whatever ideas are associated
with it. All this is expressed by saying that it fixes the attention.
And ideas which are not of themselves so painful or pleasurable as to
fix the attention, may have it fixed on them by a voluntary act. In
other words, the will has power over the attention.

But how is this act of will excited, and in what does it consist? On
this point the Edition: current; Page: [248] author’s analysis is
conclusive, and admirable. The act, like other voluntary acts, is
excited by a motive; by the desire of some end, that is, of something
pleasurable; (including in the word pleasurable, as the author does,
exemption from pain). What happens is, that, the idea on which we are
said to fix our attention not being of itself sufficiently pleasurable
to fix it spontaneously, we form an association between it and another
pleasurable idea, and the result then is that the attention is fixed.
This is the true account of all that we do when we fix our attention
voluntarily; there is no other possible means of fixing it. It thus
appears, that the fixing of attention by an act of will depends on the
same law, as the fixing it by the natural pleasantness or painfulness of
the idea. Of itself the idea is not pleasant or painful, or not
sufficiently so to fix the attention; but if it were considerably more
pleasant or painful than it is, it would do so. It becomes considerably
more pleasurable by being associated with the motive—that is, by a fresh
association of pleasure with it—and the attention is fixed. This
explanation seems complete.

It may be said, however, by an objector, that this accounts only for the
case in which the voluntary attention flows easy and unimpeded, almost
as if it were spontaneous; when the mere perception that the idea is
connected with our purpose—with the pleasurable end which suggested the
train of thought, at once and without difficulty produces that exclusive
occupation of the mind with it, which is called fixing the attention.
But it often happens that the mere perception of its connexion with our
purpose is not sufficient: the mind still wanders from the thought: and
there is then required a supplementary force of will, in aid of
association; an effort, which expends energy, and is often both painful
and exhausting.

Let us examine, then, what takes place in this case. The association of
the thought with the pleasurable end in view, is sufficient to influence
the attention, but not sufficient to command it. The will, therefore,
has to be called in, to heighten the effect. But in this case, as in
every case, the will is called into action by a motive. The motive, like
all other motives, is a desire. The desire must be either the same
desire which was already felt, but made more effectual than before, or
another desire superadded to the first. The former case presupposes the
latter: for the desire which was not sufficient to fix the attention
firmly on that which is the means to its fulfilment, cannot be
sufficient to call forth the voluntary effort necessary for fixing it:
some other desire must come to its assistance. What, then, is this other
desire? The question is not difficult. The present is one of the complex
cases, in which we desire a different state of our own desires. By
supposition, we do not care enough for the immediate end, that is the
idea of it is not sufficiently pleasurable, or the idea of its
frustration sufficiently painful, to exert the force of association
required. But we are dissatisfied with this infirmity of our desires: we
wish that we cared more for the end: we think that it would be better
for us if either this particular end, or our ends generally, had greater
command over our thoughts and actions than they have. There is thus
called up, by our sense of the Edition: current; Page: [249]
insufficiency of our attention in the particular case, the idea of
another desirable end—greater vigour and certainty in our mental
operations. That idea superadds itself to the idea of the immediate end,
and this reinforcement of the associating power at last suffices to fix
the attention. Or (which is the same thing in effect) the painful idea
is called up, of being unable to fix our attention, and being in
consequence thwarted generally in our designs; and this pain operates,
in the same manner as a pleasure, in fixing our attention upon the
thought which, if duly attended to, will relieve us from the oppressive
consciousness.

It will be asked, whence come the sense of laborious effort, and the
subsequent feeling of fatigue, which are experienced when the attention
does not fix itself spontaneously, but is fixed with more or less
difficulty by a voluntary act? I conceive them to be consequences of the
prolongation of the state designated by the author, in the text, as a
state of unsatisfied desire.152 That state, whatever view the
psychologist takes of it, is a condition of the brain and nerves, having
physiological consequences of great importance, and drawing largely on
that stock of what we call nervous energy, any unusual expenditure or
deficiency of which produces the feeling of exhaustion. The waste of
energy, and the subsequent exhaustion, are greatest when the desire
seems continually on the point of obtaining its gratification, but the
gratification constantly eludes it. And this is what actually happens in
the case supposed. The attention continually fastens on the idea which
we desire to attend to, but, from the insufficient strength of the
pleasurable or painful association, again deserts it; and the incessant
alternation of hope and disappointment produces, as in other cases, the
nervous disturbance which we call the sense of effort, and which is
physiologically followed by the sensations of nervous exhaustion. It is
probable that whatever is not muscular in the feeling which we call a
sense of effort, is the physical effect produced by a more than usual
expenditure of nervous force: which, reduced to its elements, means a
more than usually rapid disintegration and waste of nervous substance.

Let me here remark, that the recognition, by the author of the Analysis,
of a peculiar state of consciousness called a state of unsatisfied
desire, conflicts with his doctrine that desire is nothing but the idea
of the desired pleasure as future. In what sense is it possible to speak
of an unsatisfied idea? If even we insert the omitted element of Belief,
and resolve desire not into the mere idea, but into the expectation of a
pleasure; though we might rationally speak of an unsatisfied
expectation, it would only mean an expectation not fulfilled, in other
words, an expectation of pleasure not followed by the pleasure; an
expectation followed by a mere negation. How a pleasant idea, followed,
not by a pain, but by nothing at all, is converted into a pain, the pain
of unsatisfied desire, remains to be explained: and the author has not
pointed out any associations which account for it. If it be said that
the expectation is perpetually renewed and perpetually disappointed,
this is Edition: current; Page: [250] true, but does not account for
more than a continual alternation between a pleasant idea and no idea at
all. That an element of pain should enter into unsatisfied desire, is a
fact not explained by the author’s theory; and it stands as evidence
that there is in a desire something inherently distinct from either an
idea or an expectation. (Vol. II, pp. 372-7.)

* * * * *

[J.S. Mill’s note (which is followed, pp. 382-95, by an extensive one of
Bain’s) comes at the end of the chapter on the will.]

The analysis contained in this chapter affords, as it appears to me, a
sufficient theory of the manner in which all that we denominate
voluntary, whether it be a bodily action or a modification of our mental
state, comes to be produced by a motive, i.e. by the association of an
idea of pleasure or of exemption from pain with the act or the mental
modification. But there is still an unexplained residuum which has not
yet been brought to account. There are some bodily movements the
consequence of which is not pleasure, but pain. Painful states of
consciousness, no less than pleasurable ones, tend to form strong
associations with their causes or concomitants. The idea, therefore, of
a pain, will, no less than that of a pleasure, become associated with
the muscular action that would produce it, and with the muscular
sensations that accompany the action; and, as a matter of fact, we know
that it does so. Why, then, is the result not merely different, but
contrary? Why is it that the muscular action excited by association with
a pleasure, is action towards the pleasure, while that excited by
association with a pain is away from the pain? As far as depends on the
law of association, it might seem that the action, in both cases, would
be towards the fact with which the action is associated. There are some
remarkable phenomena in which this really happens. There are cases in
which a vivid imagination of a painful fact, seems really to produce the
action which realizes the fact. Persons looking over a precipice are
said to be sometimes seized with a strong impulse to throw themselves
down. Persons who have extreme horror of a crime, if circumstances make
the idea of committing it vividly present to their mind, have been
known, from the mere intensity of their horror, to commit the crime
without any assignable motive; and have been unable to give any account
of why they committed it, except that the thought struck them, that the
devil tempted them, and the like. This is the case of what is sometimes
called a fixed idea; which has a sort of fascinating influence, and
makes people seek what they fear or detest, instead of shunning it. Why
is not this extremely exceptional case the common one? Why does the
association of pain with an act, usually excite not to that act, but to
the acts which tend to prevent the realization of the dreaded evil?

Edition: current; Page: [251]
It seems, that as the author has had to admit as an ultimate fact, the
distinction between those of our sensations which we call pleasures and
those which we call pains, considered as states of our passive
sensibility, so also he would be compelled to admit, as a fact unreached
by his explanations, a difference between the two in their relation to
our active faculty; an attraction in the one case, and a repulsion in
the other. That is, he must admit that the association of a pleasurable
or painful idea (at all events when accompanied by a feeling of
expectation) with a muscular act, has a specific tendency to excite the
act when the idea is that of a pleasure, but, when it is the idea of a
pain, has a specific tendency to prevent that act, and to excite the
acts that are associated with the negation of the pain. This is
precisely what we mean when we say that pleasure is desired, that pain
is an object of aversion, and the absence of pain an object of desire.
These facts are of course admitted by the author: and he admits them
even as ultimate: but, with his characteristic dislike to multiply the
number of ultimate facts, he merges them in the admitted ultimate fact
of the difference between pleasure and pain. It is chiefly in cases of
this sort—in leading him to identify two ultimate facts with one
another, that his love of simplification, in itself a feeling highly
worthy of a philosopher, seems to mislead him. Even if we consent to
admit that the desire of a pleasure is one and the same thing with the
idea of a pleasure, and aversion to a pain the same thing with the idea
of a pain—it remains true that the difference which we passively feel,
between the consciousness of a pleasure and that of a pain, is one fact,
and our being stirred to seek the one and avoid the other is another
fact; and it is just this second fact that distinguishes a mere idea of
something as future, from a desire or aversion. It is this conscious or
unconscious reference to action, which distinguishes the desire of a
pleasure from the idea of it. Desire, in short, is the initiatory stage
of volition. The author might indeed say, that this seeking of the
sensation is involved in the very fact of conceiving it as pleasant; but
this, when looked into, only means that the two things are inseparable;
not that they are, or that they can ever be thought of, as identical; as
one and the same thing.

It appears, then, that there is a law of voluntary action, the most
important one of all, which the author’s explanations do not attempt to
reach. Yet there is no necessity for accepting that law as ultimate. A
theory resolving itself into laws still more fundamental, has been
propounded by Mr. Bain in his writings, and a masterly statement of it
will be found in the succeeding note. If, as I expect, this theory makes
good its footing, Mr. Bain will be the first psychologist who has
succeeded in effecting a complete and correct analysis of the Will.

In the same note will be found an analysis of the case of an idée
fixe—the most striking case of which, is that of a terrific idea,
exceptionally drawing the active power into the direction which leads
towards the dreaded catastrophe, instead of, as usual, into the opposite
direction. This peculiar case obliges us to acknowledge the coexistence
of two different modes in which action may be excited. There is the
normal agency of the ideas of a pleasure and a pain, the one determining
an action Edition: current; Page: [252] towards the pleasure, the other
an action away from the pain; and there is the general power of an
extremely strong association of any kind, to make the action follow the
idea. The reason why the determination of action towards a pain by the
idea of the pain is only exceptional, is, that in order to produce it,
the general power of a strong association to excite action towards the
fact which it recals, has to overcome the specific tendency of a painful
association to repel action from that fact. But the intensity of the
painful idea may be so great, and the association of the act with it so
strong, as to overpower this repulsive force by a greater attractive
force: and it is then that we find the painful idea operating on action
in a mode contrary to the specific property which is characteristic of
it, and which it usually obeys.

It has been suggested, that the intensity with which the mind sometimes
fixes upon a frightful idea, may operate by paralysing for the time
being the usual voluntary efforts to avoid pain, and so allowing the
natural impulse to act on a predominant idea to come into play. (Vol.
II, pp. 379-82.)

* * * * *

[Chap. xxv, “Intention,” concludes the Analysis. J.S. Mill’s note comes
at the end of the examination of the term, and before the final five
paragraphs in which, by way of peroration, James Mill places this
theoretical work in relation to the practical studies that would
complete the “Doctrine of the Human Mind.”]

This chapter is devoted to clearing up the confusion and disentangling
the ambiguity connected with the word Intention. And it fully attains
the purpose, save where the refusal to admit any difference between
expectation and a strong association, throws a certain haze over an
operation into which they both enter.

Intention, when the word is used in reference to our future conduct, is
well characterized by the author as “the strong anticipation of a future
will.”153 It is an unfaltering present belief that we shall hereafter
will a particular act, or a particular course of action. There may be,
over and above this belief, an intention “that nothing shall occur to
hinder that intention of its effect;” “the intention not to frustrate an
existing intention.” The author thinks that “this second intention is
included in the first:” but it is not necessarily so. It is the first
intention, fortified by some additional motive which creates a special
desire that this particular desire and intention should continue. It is
another case of what the author never recognizes, the desire of a
desire.

Intention, when we are said to intend the consequences of our actions,
means the foresight, or expectation of those consequences; which is a
totally different thing Edition: current; Page: [253] from desiring
them. The particular consequences in question, though foreseen, may be
disagreeable to us: the act may be done for the sake of other
consequences. Intention, and motive, are two very different things. But
it is the intention, that is, the foresight of consequences, which
constitutes the moral rightness or wrongness of the act. Which among the
many consequences of a crime, are those, foresight of which constitutes
guilt, and non-foresight entitles to acquittal, depends on the
particular nature of the case. We may say generally, that it is the
hurtful consequences. When the question arises judicially, we must say
it is the consequences which the law intended to prevent. Reverting to
the author’s illustration;154 a person who gives a drug to a patient,
who dies in consequence, is not guilty (at least of an intentional
crime) if he expected good consequences, or no consequences at all, from
its administration. He is guilty, if he expected that the consequence
would be death; because that was the consequence which the legislator
intended to prevent. He is guilty, even if he thought that the death of
the patient would be a good to the world: because, though the law did
not intend to prevent good to the world, it did intend to prevent
persons from killing one another. Judged by a moral instead of a legal
standard, the man may be innocent; or guilty of a different offence,
that of not using his thinking faculty with sufficient calmness and
impartiality, to perceive that in such a case as that of taking life,
the general presumption of pernicious consequences ought to outweigh a
particular person’s opinion that preponderant good consequences would be
produced in the particular instance. (Vol. II, pp. 401-2.)

Edition: current; Page: [254] Edition: current; Page: [255]


BOTANICAL WRITINGS
 1840–61

Edition: current; Page: [256] Edition: current; Page: [257]


Botanical Writings


Calendar of Odours
 APRIL 1840

Memories of Old Friends, Being Extracts from the Journals and Letters of
Caroline Fox, from 1835 to 1871, ed. H.N. Pym, 2nd ed., 2 vols. (London:
Smith, Elder, 1882), Vol. I, pp. 166-7. Headed: “A Calendar of Odours,
Being in Imitation of the Various Calendars of Flora by Linnaeus and
Others.” Concluded: “To Miss Caroline Fox, from her grateful friend,
J.S. Mill.” As unpublished, not in Mill’s bibliography. Mill,
accompanied by his mother and his sisters Clara and Harriet, was at
Falmouth from 16 March to 10 April 1840, during the last illness of his
brother Henry, who died there of tuberculosis on 4 April. He prepared
the calendar for Caroline Fox during the last week of his stay.

the brilliant colouring of Nature is prolonged, with incessant changes,
from March till October; but the fragrance of her breath is spent before
the summer is half ended. From March to July an uninterrupted succession
of sweet odours fills the air by day and still more by night, but the
gentler perfumes of autumn, like many of the earlier ones here for that
reason omitted, must be sought ere they can be found. The Calendar of
Odours, therefore, begins with the laurel, and ends with the lime.

March—Common laurel.

April—Violets, furze, wall-flower, common broad-leaved willow,
apple-blossom.

May—Lilac, night-flowering stocks and rockets, laburnum, hawthorn,
seringa, sweet-briar.

June—Mignonette, bean-fields, the whole tribe of summer roses, hay,
Portugal laurel, various species of pinks.

July—Common acacia, meadow-sweet, honeysuckle, sweetgale or double
myrtle, Spanish broom, lime.

In latest autumn, one stray odour, forgotten by its companions, follows
at a modest distance—the creeping clematis which adorns cottage walls;
but the thread of continuity being broken, this solitary straggler is
not included in the Calendar of Odours.

Edition: current; Page: [258]


Rare Plants in West Surrey
 JUNE 1841

Phytologist, I (June 1841), 30. No. 3 in Art. IX, “Varieties; Original
and Select”; under this heading appeared the editor’s selection of
extracts from correspondents’ letters listing stations at which
specimens were found. Signed “J.S. Mill; Kensington, June 1, 1841.” Not
republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography only in the general note,
“Various lists of plants found in different parts of England, in a
monthly publication, called the Phytologist during 1841” (MacMinn, p.
53).

ribes rubrum and nigrum, the former in many places, the latter
abundantly in one place, by the side of the Mole near Esher: perfectly
wild and completely naturalized. Turritis glabra, abundant and fine by
the road-side between Hampton and Sunbury. Diplotaxis tenuifolia, a rare
plant in Surrey, is very abundant above Walton Bridge. Cerastium
arvense, on banks by the side of the Thames below Walton Bridge.


Isatis Tinctoria
 JUNE 1841

Phytologist, I (June 1841), 30. No. 4 in Art. IX, “Varieties; Original
and Select.” Signed “Id. [i.e., J.S. Mill; Kensington,] June 8, 1841.”
Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see
“Rare Plants in West Surrey” above. The square brackets are those of the
Phytologist’s editor.

isatis tinctoria is now growing in prodigious luxuriance in the
chalk-quarries close to the town [of Guildford]. It grows (in many
instances) out of clefts in the precipitous chalk cliff, and makes
almost a bush of flowers from the same root. Geranium lucidum I again
found in my old locality, near St. Catherine’s Hill.


Notes on Plants Growing in the Neighbourhood of Guildford, Surrey
 AUGUST 1841

Phytologist, I (Aug. 1841), 40-1. Art. XIV. Signed “J.S. Mill, Esq.” Not
republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Rare
Plants in West Surrey” above.

impatiens fulva. At whatever period introduced, this plant is now so
thoroughly naturalized, that it would be pedantry any longer to refuse
it that place in the Edition: current; Page: [259] English Flora, which
has been accorded on less strong grounds to many plants originally
introduced from abroad. For many miles by the side of the Wey, both
above and below Guildford, it is as abundant as the commonest river-side
plants, the Lythrum Salicaria or Epilobium hirsutum; and my friend Mr.
Henry Cole1 informs me that it is found in various places by the same
river all the way to its junction with the Thames. It is equally
abundant on the banks of the Tillingbourne, that beautiful tributary of
the Wey; especially at Chilworth, where it grows in boundless profusion:
and near Albury, where I saw it for the first time in 1822. The plant
stated by Sir J.E. Smith to be growing near Guildford,2 under the name
of Impatiens Noli-me-tangere, is doubtless no other than this plant. The
Noli-metangere, which I have seen growing about Windermere, in the
Pyrenees, and in Switzerland, is very distinct from this.

Geranium lucidum; in most of the lanes about Guildford.

Fumaria capreolata; near Losely, and by the roadside between Guildford
and Merrow.

Fumaria parviflora; in corn-fields on the summit and southern declivity
of the Hog’s Back; and in lanes at its foot.

Valerianella dentata (or Fedia dentata); corn-fields on the chalk hills
on both sides of Guildford, abundantly.

Isatis tinctoria; in great perfection in the chalk-pits close to the
town, on the Shalford road; as noticed in The Phytologist, p. 30.3

Hippuris vulgaris; in one of the ponds in Clandon Park.

Bupleurum rotundifolium. This plant grew, last summer, in a corn-field
on the brow of the hill by the path leading from Guildford to Martha’s
Chapel. The field having been sown this summer with a green crop, which
was removed early, the plant cannot now be found.

Campanula hybrida; abundant in the lower part of the same field.

Corydalis claviculata. This plant formerly grew close to Martha’s
Chapel, but I have sought for it this year in vain.

Dipsacus pilosus; most abundant near Chilworth, especially in the
hanging wood.

Androsaemum officinale; near Albury, but sparingly.

Saponaria officinalis; near Shere.

Stellaria glauca. This interesting and elegant plant grows in marshy
meadows by the river Wey, near the foot of St. Catherine’s Hill.

Menyanthes trifoliata; now (whatever may formerly have been the case) a
rare Edition: current; Page: [260] plant in Surrey. It grows on Gomshall
Common, in the vale of Albury; where I also once found a double variety
of Cardamine pratensis.

Papaver hybridum; in corn-fields between Guildford and Martha’s Chapel.
Papaver dubium is as common in the neighbourhood as P. Rhoeas.

Lepidium sativum; naturalized by the side of the Wey.

Nasturtium sylvestre and Barbarea praecox: not unfrequent by the side of
the Wey.

Rhamnus catharticus and Frangula; the former not unfrequent on the
downs, the latter abundant in a wood near Compton.

Orobanche major; at Martha’s Chapel.

Listera Nidus-avis; in a heathy wood between Guildford and Martha’s
Chapel. With this exception I have not been able to find near Guildford
any of the less common Orchideae so numerous near Dorking.

Salvia verbenaca. St. Catherine’s Hill; Merrow Church-yard; and various
other places.

Cistopteris fragilis and Asplenium Ruta-muraria. These ferns grow in
considerable abundance on a wall by the road-side at Albury, where I
first found them in 1824, and again this summer.

Marchantia polymorpha; on the perpendicular face of the cutting on the
road to Godalming, at the foot of St. Catherine’s Hill. Geranium lucidum
grows on an old wall on the opposite side of the road.


Cnicus Forsteri
 SEPTEMBER 1841

Phytologist, I (Sept. 1841), 61. No. 21 in Art. XXIII, “Varieties;
Original and Select,” Signed “J.S. Mill; Kensington, July 13, 1841.” Not
republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Rare
Plants in West Surrey” above.

cnicus forsteri I saw growing by hundreds last month in a piece of
marshy ground formerly part of Ditton Common; at least it was the plant
I previously found near Weybridge and sent to Sir W. Hooker.1 It was
growing with various numbers of flowers from one up to four, each on a
separate and generally a long stalk. On comparing it with the books both
English and foreign, and especially with Decandolle’s description of his
Cirsium anglicum2 (our Cnicus pratensis), I have little doubt that it is
merely a variety of that, and that C. Forsteri, as you suggested, has no
existence as a species.

Edition: current; Page: [261]


Additional Guildford Stations
 SEPTEMBER 1841

Phytologist, I (Sept. 1841), 64. No. 32 in Art. XXIII, “Varieties;
Original and Select.” Signed “J.S. Mill; Kensington, August 24, 1841.”
Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see
“Rare Plants in West Surrey” above.

since the publication of the list of Guildford plants in the last number
of The Phytologist,1 Fumaria claviculata has been refound in its old
locality, Martha’s Chapel, and likewise on the extensive common near
Shalford, called Blackheath. Epipactis latifolia has been found at the
Sheepleas, and Cuscuta Europaea in an osier holt by the river Wey, a
short distance above Guildford, entwined round nettles, the Spiraea
Ulmaria, and the osiers themselves.


Polygonum Dumetorum
 NOVEMBER 1841

Phytologist, I (Nov. 1841), 91. No. 58 in Art. XXXIII, “Varieties.”
Signed “J.S. Mill; Kensington, October 3, 1841.” Not republished. For
the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Rare Plants in West
Surrey” above.

polygonum dumetorum grows copiously in the hedges on more than one part
of the road from the Woking-Common station to Guildford.*

Edition: current; Page: [262]


Rarer Plants of the Isle of Wight
 NOVEMBER 1841

Phytologist, I (Nov. 1841), 91-2. No. 59 in Art. XXXIII, “Varieties.”
Signed “J.S. Mill.” Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s
bibliography, see “Rare Plants in West Surrey” above.

i observed the following less common plants in the Isle of Wight, during
a week’s tour in July, some years ago.1


MARITIME PLANTS

Matthiola, (no doubt) incana, or Cheiranthus incanus, in inaccessible
places on Compton Cliffs, Freshwater Bay. The same plant grows most
abundantly in places overhanging the sea on the promontory of Posilipo,
and other similar situations near Naples, where it flowers copiously in
February, and little children collect bouquets of the plant at great
apparent risk, to sell to passers by.

  ---------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
  Cakile maritima                                Atriplex littoralis
  Adenarium (Arenaria) peploides                 Beta maritima
  Pyrethrum maritimum (Ryde)                     Euphorbia Peplis (Sandown Bay)
  Convolvulus Soldanella (sands near Yarmouth)   Arundo arenaria
                                                 Triticum Nardus
  Salsola Kali (Ryde)                            
  ---------------------------------------------- --------------------------------


SALT MARSHES NEAR YARMOUTH

  --------------------- -----------------------
  Althaea officinalis   Salicornia herbacea
  Tamarix gallica       Chenopodium maritimum
  --------------------- -----------------------


IN A MARITIME BOG AT EASTON, NEAR FRESHWATER

  --------------------- -------------------
  Ranunculus Lingua     Scirpus maritimus
  Epipactis palustris   Cladium Mariscus
  --------------------- -------------------


MISCELLANEOUS

Poa bulbosa. Alum Bay.

Mentha rotundifolia. This plant, so common on the continent, but
comparatively so unfrequent in England, grows on the Undercliff, in a
maritime situation, near Puckaster Cove.

Edition: current; Page: [263]
Lathyrus sylvestris and Rubia peregrina. Common in hedges on the
Undercliff. The former grows in profusion on the landslip near
Bonchurch.

Iris foetidissima. As common on the Undercliff, and (if I recollect
right) in other parts of the island as in Devonshire.

Inula Helenium. By the side of a lane between Yarmouth and Freshwater
Bay, but sparingly.


PLANTS COLLECTED SHORTLY AFTERWARDS ON THE COAST OF HAMPSHIRE, OPPOSITE TO THE ISLE OF WIGHT

Atriplex portulacoides. Abundant in salt marshes at Lymington.

Bartsia viscosa and Fumaria capreolata. Roadside between Lymington and
Exbury.

Euphorbia stricta. Cornfields near Beaulieu river.

Campanula hederacea. New Forest, near Ashurst Lodge.

Parnassia palustris, Drosera longifolia and Myrica Gale. In various
parts of the Forest.


Corrections and Additions in Mr. Mill’s List of Plants in the Isle of Wight
 JANUARY 1842

Phytologist, I (Jan. 1842), 132-3. No. 97 in Art. XLV, “Varieties.”
Signed “J.S. Mill; Kensington, December 20, 1841.” The corrections and
additions are to the previous item, pp. 262-3 above. Not republished.
Not listed in Mill’s bibliography.

line 34, for Triticum Nardus read T. junceum. Tamarix gallica, (line 37)
has most probably been introduced into the locality near Yarmouth. Poa
bulbosa (line 42) must be erased from the list: the mistake arose from
an imperfect specimen of a grass from Alum Bay having been compared by a
friend with continental specimens of Poa bulbosa, in its viviparous
state. The Alum Bay plant was afterwards found to be an Agrostis. To the
plants growing in salt marshes at Yarmouth, add Triglochin maritimum and
Potamogeton pectinatum. To those of the New Forest add Triglochin
palustre.


The Phytologist; a Botanical Magazine
 DECEMBER 1843

Westminster Review, XL (Dec. 1843), 524-5. Running title: “Miscellaneous
Notices.” Signed “S.” Not republished. Identified in an incomplete entry
in Mill’s bibliography as “A Edition: current; Page: [264] short notice
of ‘The Phytologist’ in the Miscellaneous Notices of the Westminster
Review for December 1843 (No. )”

(MacMinn, p. 56).

we think it highly desirable that such lovers of botany as are not yet
aware of the fact, should be apprised that there has now existed, for
nearly two years, a botanical magazine, at the low price of one
shilling. This little periodical is not intended to compete with the
large works which are addressed to the scientific public, and are the
appointed vehicles for the more recondite discoveries and discussions of
vegetable physiology. Without excluding such discussions when they can
be brought within the limits of the work, the Phytologist addresses
itself less to scientific physiologists than to naturalists in the more
popular acceptation of the term; and especially to such as wander over
the hills and fields of our native country in search of its rarer
plants, or who delight in observing their habits and peculiarities. Of
the merits of the work in this capacity it is almost a sufficient
recommendation that Mr. Newman, the author of the accurate and
interesting History of British Ferns, has made its pages the vehicle for
giving to the botanical public, as a sequel to that work, a similar
history of the British Lycopodiaceae Equisetaceae, and adjacent
families, which is now nearly complete, and not inferior in excellence
to the British Ferns.1 In the genus Equisetum especially, Mr. Newman has
corrected serious mistakes, and cleared up important ambiguities.

The Phytologist has contained various interesting and valuable
discussions on other British plants, as, for example, that by which it
was for the first time conclusively shown, by Mr. Luxford and others,2
that the Monotropahypopitys is not, as it was so long supposed to be, a
parasitical plant. The value of this journal to local collectors of
plants is very great, as almost every number contains a local flora, or
catalogue of the plants growing in some particular district. An account
is also regularly given of the contents of the more interesting papers
read before the Linnaean Society, and published in its transactions. And
under the head of Varieties, admission is given to the briefest notice
of any fact interesting to the lover of botany.

We are the more desirous of calling the attention of our botanical
readers to this periodical, as we perceive with regret a statement in a
recent number that it does not yet pay its expenses, and without an
increase of its sale cannot be much longer continued.3 It will be a real
discredit to the growing class of botanical amateurs, if Edition:
current; Page: [265] they suffer so useful a medium for mutual
communication among themselves to perish for want of the very trifling
support which would continue it in existence.


Notes on the Species of Oenanthe
 FEBRUARY 1845

Phytologist, II (Feb. 1845), 48-9. Signed “J.S. Mill / Kensington,
January, 1845.” Not republished. Not listed in Mill’s bibliography.

the readers of The Phytologist, and all botanists, are much indebted to
Mr. H.C. Watson for his careful, and I believe accurate investigation,
in the January number, of the three species of Oenanthe, hitherto
confounded under the names of peucedanifolia and pimpinelloides (Phytol.
ii. 11).1 I have long been convinced that there was some unknown
quantity to be determined among the English species of this very
interesting genus, which has until lately received very little critical
investigation in this country. It is not generally known that one of
these three species grows abundantly in so familiar and much frequented
a locality as Battersea fields. I have observed it there for more than
twenty years past, in a small patch of grass land, which is passed
through in crossing the fields diagonally from Nine Elms, at an acute
angle with the direction of the river. Valeriana dioica and Polygonum
Bistorta grow copiously near the spot. I have never yet been able to
procure the fruit, as the grass is always cut before the plant is out of
flower. But the leaves, the tubers, and the bracteae, agree in their
characters with Mr. Watson’s Oe. Smithii, and quite differ from those of
Oe. Lachenalii. The same plant, or one apparently the same, has been
seen by me many years ago, as well as lately, in meadows adjoining the
river Wey, near Weybridge. Neither of these stations appears to be known
to Mr. Watson; to whom I can also contribute an authentic station for
his Oe. pimpinelloides, viz. a maritime bog at the little village of
Bishopstone, near Seaford, in Sussex, where I gathered unquestionable
specimens in July, 1827.2

While I am on the subject of this genus, I should be glad if any of your
correspondents could inform me whether they have ever found the Oe.
crocata with the yellow acrid juice, which until lately has been
attributed to it by all botanists. I have examined numberless living
specimens of the plant in Surrey, and Edition: current; Page: [266]
other counties around London, for the express purpose, and have never,
in any one single instance, discovered the smallest vestige of such a
juice. The assertion is a curious example of the servile manner in which
even scientific observers copy each other’s statements, without
verifying them.


Correction of an Error in the “Notes on the Species of Oenanthe”
 APRIL 1845

Phytologist, II (Apr. 1845), 116. Signed “J.S. Mill, Kensington, March,
1845.” The reference is to the previous item, pp. 265-6 above. Not
republished. Not listed in Mill’s bibliography.

since my note on the species of Oenanthe was printed (Phytol. ii. 48),
my specimens from Battersea, Weybridge and Seaford have had the
advantage of being examined by Mr. Watson. That gentleman confirms my
statement respecting the Battersea and Weybridge plants, which he
decides to be his Oenanthe Smithii, the peucedanifolia of Smith. The
plant from Seaford, which I had classed as the pimpinelloides, he
pronounces to be Oenanthe Lachenalii; and he has fully satisfied me,
both by his high authority, and by a comparison of specimens with which
he has most courteously supplied me, that I was previously unacquainted
with the true Oe. pimpinelloides.


Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants
 MAY 1856

Phytologist, n.s. I (May 1856), 331-2. The first entry under the heading
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which is also the running
title. Signed “J.S.M.” Not republished. Identified in Mill’s
bibliography only in the general note, “Botanical Notes signed J.S.M. in
the second series of the Phytologist, No. 13, for May 1856, and in many
subsequent numbers”

(MacMinn, p. 88).

in the “Descriptive British Botany,” publishing in the Phytologist, it
is stated, under the initials of Mr. Irvine, that he has never observed
Isatis tinctoria (except an occasional straggler) on the west side of
the river Wey.1 It will be agreeable to Edition: current; Page: [267]
this accurate and trustworthy investigator of localities (by whose
indications many others as well as myself must have been often guided to
rare plants) to be informed that this fine plant grew in the utmost
profusion in 1849 (and doubtless grows still) in the great chalk-quarry
near Compton, on the south side of the Hog’s Back, a place easily
overlooked by a passing botanist from being masked by a Larch-wood in
front.

It is also stated that Iberis amara grows in fields in
Berkshire—Pangbourne and Streatley.2 The range of this very local plant
is considerably wider than these words would import, as it is also found
in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire; especially, and most plentifully, in
the range of country north of the Thames, from Henley to Maidenhead.

My experience agrees with that of your Tring correspondent (p. 105) as
to the botanical poverty of the Chiltern Hills,3 a fact the more
remarkable as the southern portion of the same chalk district is one of
the richest in the midland counties. Alchemilla vulgaris however grows
in the woods of Chequers; and I have found Paris quadrifolia in a woody
ravine adjoining Stokenchurch Common. Buxus sempervirens helps to adorn
the steep chalky declivities near Ellesborough, and grows also on the
hills between Tring and Dunstable. Pyrola minor I have gathered on the
same range of hills, further south, near Nettlebed; and in great
profusion in various parts of the woody region towards Wycombe and
Marlow.

As you have thought it worth while to print a new Surrey locality for
Lycopodium Selago,4 which has been found in that county by several
botanists, you will perhaps allow me to mention one which I believe not
to be generally known. The Lycopodium grows in considerable abundance on
the east side of a sort of pass through and over Chobham Ridges, leading
in the direction of Frimley. The path goes directly through the large
field which Mr. Watson, some years ago, pointed out as a habitat of
Arnoseris pusilla;5 and in the same field I found, in October, 1849, a
moderate quantity of Linaria purpurea, a plant of which the
indigenousness has been doubted, but this situation closely resembles
the continental localities of the plant.

The Phytologist very judiciously directs much of its attention to the
geographical distribution of plants. On this subject much may be learnt
by the careful examination of a single county, and there are counties
and even smaller districts in England which deserve particular notice as
forming the transition between two distinct botanical regions, or
combining portions of both. The Isle of Wight is an example of the first
kind, Surrey of the second. That county, besides its great Edition:
current; Page: [268] variety of geological structure and of vegetation
as thereon dependent, contains within its narrow limits an eastern and
what may be termed a sub-western flora. The domain of the latter is the
tract of heath and sand extending from Esher and Moulsey diagonally to
Hindhead and Haslemere. While a great proportion of the plants of the
eastern region are wanting in this, it possesses many which are not
found further east, and is still more distinctly characterized by the
abundance of several, of which only stragglers are found in the region
of Croydon, Godstone, Reigate, and Dorking. It is the chosen seat of
Apera Spica-Venti; Silene anglica; Hypochoeris glabra (which abounds
there, while I have seen it nowhere else in Surrey except a few
straggling plants on Reigate Heath); Erysimum cherianthoides and
Marrubium vulgare (both found near Reigate, but in no similar
abundance); Athyrium Filix-foemina, more profuse there than elsewhere;
Myrica Gale; Senecio sylvaticus; Geranium lucidum; Rhynchospora alba; I
believe I might add Hieracium rigidum, but the Surrey Hieracia, though
less numerous, require revision as much as those of Yorkshire. Campanula
Rapunculus is plentiful in one corner of the district. Among its
varieties are Campanula patula; Comarum Palustre; the two Elatines,
Hydropiper and hexandra; Chaetospora nigricans, which I had the good
fortune to rediscover in its old recorded locality, Bagshot Heath;
Hippuris vulgaris; Utricularia minor; Arnoseris pusilla; Linaria
purpurea; Leonurus Cardiaca; Allium vineale; Zannichellia palustris;
Ceterach officinarum.

Has Calamintha Nepeta been ever really found in Surrey? Several
botanists have thought they had found it, but by no search in the
localities indicated have I discovered anything nearer to it than
Calamintha officinalis. A Calamintha taller than officinalis, but with
much smaller leaves, resembling those of Origanum vulgare, and with a
stem not erect, but ascending from a bend near the root, which I believe
to be C. Nepeta, I have seen in various places on the Continent, among
others especially near Rouen; and this plant grows, or did grow in 1843,
by the side of the road from Marlow to Hedsor and Clifden. I last year
recognized what seemed the same plant (but did not botanically examine
it) between Eynsford and Farningham, in Kent. Perhaps some one among
your correspondents, who has attended to the subject, would give your
readers the benefit of his experience.


Plants Growing Wild in the District of Luxford’s Reigate Flora
 JUNE 1856

Phytologist, n.s. I (June 1856), 337-43. The heading continues, after
the title above: “Omitted Both in That Work and in the Supplementary
List by Mr. Holman, Published in the Old Series of the Phytologist in
September, 1841.” Running title: “Reigate Flora.” The Edition: current;
Page: [269] references are to Luxford’s A Flora of the Neighbourhood of
Reigate, Surrey, Containing the Flowering Plants and Ferns (London: Van
Voorst; Reigate: Allingham, 1838), and Henry Martin Holman, “Additions
to Luxford’s Reigate Flora,” Phytologist, I (Sept. 1841), 1-4. Six
errors presumably arising from the printer’s misreading of Mill’s hand
were identified in the October number (see “Reigate Plants” below):
“north-eastern” erroneously for “south-eastern” (269.29), “Maiden Park”
for “Marden Park” (271.3), “rocks of Box Hill” for “roots of Box Hill”
(271.6), “Woodbatch” for “Woodhatch” (271.9), “Wenham Mill” for “Wonham
Mill” (271.29 and 273.33), and “Godbroke” for “Gadbroke” (272.42); these
corrections are all made in the text below. Signed “J:S. Mill.” Not
republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see
“Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

(the district extends from Leith Hill on the west, to Godstone and its
neighbourhood on the east.)

Thalictrum flavum. By the Mole below Sidlow Bridge.

Ranunculus parviflorus. On the steepest part of Brockham Hill, in Elder
thickets about half-way up the hill, abundantly.

Fumaria capreolata. Near Buckland, by the footpath leading to the chalk
hills.

Nasturtium sylvestre. Most plentiful in the dry bed of the Mole, between
Mickleham and Leatherhead, and in streams north of Leatherhead.

Barbarea praecox. By the road from Dorking to Capel, near the
commencement of the Holmwood.

Arabis hirsuta. Juniper Hill, Mickleham Downs, Box Hill, and other parts
of the chalk hills near Dorking. This plant is so characteristic of the
Surrey Hills, that its not having been found in the immediate
neighbourhood of Reigate is a curious anomaly.

Erysimum cheiranthoides. Copiously in a cultivated field near Doover’s
Green, to the left of the Brighton road. By the Mole, near the footpath
from Betchworth to Brockham. (This plant, common in the north-western
half of the county, is rare in the south-eastern.)

Camelina sativa. Among wheat in the open upland fields between Ashtead
and Leatherhead, in one spot, plentifully, 1849.

Spergula nodosa. On the grassy slope of Box Hill, plentifully.

Geranium pyrenaicum. About Leatherhead, Dorking, and Reigate, not
unfrequent.

Petroselinum segetum. By the side of the Brighton road, on the ascent of
Cockshot Hill, sparingly, 1845.

(Archangelica officinalis, banks of the Mole, near Brockham, I hesitate
to insert, not having seen it there since 1824, and being unable to
answer for my having correctly determined it at that distant date.)

Caucalis daucoides. In a cornfield adjoining Norbury Park, on the summit
of the hill (1822).

Edition: current; Page: [270]
Onopordon Acanthium. Merstham. This fine Thistle occurs in many other
parts of the county, but I have not observed it elsewhere in the Reigate
district.

Silybum marianum. Corner of Earlswood Common, near the church (1845),
but possibly an outcast. This Thistle, being rather frequent in the
adjoining parts of Kent, will probably be found permanently established
somewhere in East Surrey.

Hypochaeris glabra. Sparingly on Reigate Heath, near the race-course
(1849). One of the characteristic plants of the north-western district
of Surrey.

Campanula Rapunculus. In a shady lane on Cockshot Hill, sparingly
(1845).

Verbascum Lychnitis. Sparingly at the foot of the chalk-coomb near
Quarry Farm. I have found this handsome Mullein nowhere else below the
hills, though not uncommon above them, both in East Surrey and in West
Kent.

Mentha rotundifolia. Ashtead Park.

Melissa officinalis. Sparingly in Coldharbour Lane, Dorking (1849). This
naturalized plant has now several authentic stations in Surrey. The only
one known to me in which it is sufficiently abundant to hold out much
promise of permanency, is a bank by the private road which connects the
high-road from Kingston to Leatherhead, with the church and village of
Chessington.

Chenopodium rubrum (or urbicum?). By the road from Reigate to Dorking,
near Betchworth; also near Nutfield.

Sagittaria sagittifolia. In the Mole at the foot of Box Hill.

Lemna polyrrhiza. Dorking mill-pond; and ditches in various places.

Potamogeton perfoliatus. In the Mole near Sidlow Bridge.

Potamogeton pusillus, β. major (compressus, Sm.). Ditch in the valley of
Nutfield Marsh.

Luzula sylvatica. In the wood below Headley Church, towards
Walton-on-the-hill.

Scirpus caespitosus. Earlswood Common.

Carex divulsa. Cockshot Hill and other places.

Carex pallescens. In long grass on the south side of the Merstham ponds
(1849). This rich locality, unexplored at the time of the publication of
Luxford’s Flora, contains Typha angustifolia (in the western pond),
Epipactis palustris (in ditches adjoining), Astragalus Glycyphyllos (on
the border of Warwick Wood), and Lathyrus sylvestris (clustering on the
copse itself).

Carex binervis. Broadmoor (Leith Hill).

Carex vesicaria. In the Mole, at Sidlow Bridge.

(Carex axillaris has been found near the foot of Colley Hill by Mr.
Hanson, of Reigate.)1

Avena fatua. Found near Littleton in 1845.

Edition: current; Page: [271]
Koeleria cristata. Brockham Hill (1824). Not found (to my knowledge)
since that time in the Reigate district; but grows abundantly above the
hills, between Warlingham and the Woldingham and Marden Park district.

Catabrosa aquatica. Ditches at Leatherhead, near the great rise of clear
water in the bed of the Mole.

Brachypodium pinnatum. About the roots of Box Hill; and copiously by the
grassy side of the road from Epsom to Headley, between Hundred-acre
Field and the great chalk-pit at Ashtead.

Triticum caninum. Hedges by the roadside between Woodhatch and Sidlow
Bridge.

Equisetum sylvaticum. In the swampy wood below Coldharbour on the north
side of the range (one of the finest Fern localities in Surrey,
especially for Osmunda).

Equisetum palustre. Frequent in ponds and by wet roadsides. Its omission
in Luxford’s Flora can only be accidental.

Chara vulgaris. In a clear pool by the footpath from Wray Common to the
Merstham Road. On the top of the chalk-hills between Walton and Headley
Heaths.

Chara flexilis. In the great rise of water at Leatherhead.

The following are omitted stations of Plants included in the Flora, or
in Mr. Holman’s Supplementary List:—

Aquilegia vulgaris. On the summit of Box Hill, in the wood; and in other
woods, as well as by the sides of fields, near Dorking.

Berberis vulgaris. Near the summit of either Reigate Hill or Colley
Hill, in 1826 or 1827: not seen since that time.

Corydalis claviculata. About the base of Boar Hill, and in the swampy
wood north of Coldharbour.

Cardamine amara. In the swamp at Whiggey; near Buckland; by the stream
above Wonham Mill; and (sparingly) in various places near Dorking.

Thlaspi arvense. On the summit of Redstone Hill (1848).

Reseda Luteola. Along the foot of the chalk hills towards Godstone.

Viola palustris. In the swamp at Whiggey, copiously. At the lower
extremity of Broadmoor, and in the ravine which descends from Leith Hill
to Wotton.

Dianthus Armeria. In the vale of Mickleham.

Silene anglica. Border of a field, in the bottom intervening between
Walton and Headley Heaths.

Hypericum Androsaemum. Near the cascade of Fillbrook, in the grounds of
Tillingbourne, at the foot of Leith Hill.

Hypericum Elodes. In a bog at Coldharbour, and in wet parts of
Broadmoor.

Geranium Pratense. By the Mole near Mickleham, sparingly.

Radiola Millegrana. Abundant near the summit of Leith Hill.

Edition: current; Page: [272]
Rhamnus cathartica. Box Hill, Mickleham Downs, and other places on the
chalk hills.

Rhamnus Frangula. In the woody and bushy parts of Boar and Leith Hills.

Genista tinctoria. Found in 1822 near Dorking, on the side next Boar
Hill; the exact place forgotten. This plant is rather abundant near the
Godstone railway station, and being common in Kent, both above and below
the hills, is likely to be found near Reigate; probably in the Weald.

Anthyllis Vulneraria. Chalk hills towards Godstone.

Lathyrus Nissolia. In a shaw near Doover’s Green, to the left of the
high-road.

Lathyrus sylvestris. This very ornamental plant is not confined to
Warwick Wood, but clothes the thickets and hangs in festoons at
intervals along the base of the chalk hills nearly to Godstone.

Spiraea Filipendula. Abundant on Mickleham Downs, Box Hill, etc.

Tormentilla reptans. Holmwood.

Rubus Idaeus. Summit of Box Hill. Boar Hill.

Rosa rubiginosa. Box Hill. Mickleham Downs. Chalk hills towards
Godstone.

Epilobium angustifolium. Boar Hill.

Sedum acre. In dry, bare places on the steep sides of Brockham Hill. Box
Hill. Juniper Hill, and the intervening ravine.

Silaus pratensis. Plentiful in meadows near Dorking; Betchworth and
Reigate.

Asperula cynanchica. Very common on the chalk hills near Dorking.

Valeriana dioica. Bog near the Mole at Brockham.

Erigeron acris. Lower slopes of Buckland Hill. Box Hill, copiously.
Westhumble.

Gnaphalium sylvaticum, β (S. rectum). Betchworth Hill. Kingswood warren.
Boar Hill woods.

Serratula tinctoria. Woods about Headley and Walton.

Phyteuma orbiculare. Mickleham Downs. In the great Ashtead chalk-pit,
plentiful. On the ridge of the chalk hills between Merstham and
Catherham in abundance.

Ligustrum vulgare. Box Hill. Leith Hill woods.

Vinca minor. Copiously, and certainly wild, in a hollow road on the
south slope of Park Hill. I have this winter found it in an exactly
similar situation (the steep side of a deep cutting in a sandy soil),
about a mile from St. Mary Cray, on the road to Chelsfield, in Kent. I
notice this circumstance as bearing on the question respecting the
indigenousness of the plant.

Chlora perfoliata. Copiously on Box Hill, Buckland Hill, and the chalk
hills near Quarry Farm, between Merstham and Godstone.

Menyanthes trifoliata. Bogs about Leith Hill.

Atropa Belladonna. Norbury Park; Brockham Hill; steep chalky side of Box
Hill. Profusely about the roots of the hills near Quarry Farm.

Hyoscyamus niger. Lane between Brockham and Gadbroke.

Edition: current; Page: [273]
Orobanche major. Summit of the hill named Dorking’s Glory (1823).

Antirrhinum Orontium. Frequent in the Weald.

Pedicularis palustris. Leith Hill.

Veronica montana. Woods about Boar and Leith Hills.

Salvia verbenaca. Near Leatherhead.

Scutellaria minor. Abundant on Leith Hill.

Nepeta Cataria. Sidlow Bridge. Road to Buckland.

Ajuga Chamaepitys. Brockham Hill, and between Leatherhead and Headley.

Anagallis tenella. Leith Hill abundantly.

Littorella lacustris. New Pond on Earlswood Common.

Euphorbia stricta. By the Mole near Betchworth Park Mill, sparingly
(1845). Fields near Woolver Farm, in the Weald. Field adjoining
Earlswood Common. Field at the foot of Boar Hill, near Coldharbour Lane.
I have some difficulty in believing the identity of this plant with the
hairy Euphorbia platyphylla.

Orchis Morio. Meadows about Headley, Mickleham, and Reigate
occasionally.

Aceras anthropophora. Profusely on Colley and Buckland Hills, and
between Box Hill and Juniper Hill.

Ophrys apifera. Copiously in the same localities as the last, and on the
lower slopes of the hills near Quarry Farm.

Ophrys muscifera. Same localities, and chalk hills near Godstone.

Epipactis latifolia. Copse to the right of the Merstham Road, beyond
Wray Common. Box Hill.

Epipactis purpurata. Grove near Merstham Church, sparingly.

Allium ursinum. Woods of Marden Park most profusely.

Actinocarpus Damasonium. Ponds on Headley and Walton Heaths in
abundance.

Butomus umbellatus. In the Mill-pond at Dorking; and in the bed of the
Mole between Mickleham and Leatherhead, abundant.

Triglochin palustre. In ditches near the rise of water at Leatherhead.

Lemna trisulca. Pool in a dense thicket a little beyond the Merstham
ponds.

Lemna gibba. In Dorking Mill-pond so abundantly as to be piled up in
heaps on the edge.

Scirpus setaceus. Earlswood Common. Ravines of Leith Hill.

Carex paniculata. In boggy shaws at Wonham Mill.

Carex stellulata. Leith Hill.

Carex flava. Broadmoor.

Carex pendula. Boggy wood between Reigate Heath and the Buckland Road.
Most abundant at the foot of the chalk hills near Oxted.

Carex Pseudo-cyperus. In the pond of Gatton Park (1826 or 1827).

Triodia decumbens. Reigate Heath. Broadmoor. Abundant on the summit of
Leith Hill.

Molinia caerulea. Broadmoor.

Nardus stricta. Leith Hill.

Edition: current; Page: [274]
Equisetum fluviatile. Profusely by the Merstham Road and in Gatton Park.

Lastrea Oreopteris. Leith Hill, copiously; and about the roots of Boar
Hill towards Coldharbour Lane.

Polystichum aculeatum and angulare. Lanes in the valley of Nutfield
Marsh. In the swampy wood north of Coldharbour, already mentioned.

Athyrium Filix-foemina. Leith Hill, abundantly. Reigate Heath. Thicket
near Littleton. Hedges by the Buckland Road. Swampy wood north of
Coldharbour.

Asplenium Trichomanes. On trunks of trees near Betchworth.

Blechnum boreale. Leith Hill, Boar Hill, etc., copiously.

Osmunda regalis. Foot of Boar Hill (north side). In the swampy wood
north of Coldharbour, forming large and tall thickets visible at a great
distance.


Note on West Surrey Plants
 JULY 1856

Phytologist, n.s. I (July 1856), 392. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries.” Signed “J.S.M.” Not
republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see
“Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

if you print my Plantae Rariores of North-western Surrey,1 it may be as
well to add Cirsium anglicum (Carduus pratensis), which has two good
habitats in the district; and also (though belonging to its extreme
point) that decidedly western plant Scilla autumnalis, which I have seen
growing on Moulsey Hurst, where it grew in Ray’s time.2


Reigate Plants
 OCTOBER 1856

Phytologist, n.s. I (Oct. 1856), 460-1. The article begins with a list
of the six errata in “Plants Growing Wild in the District of Luxford’s
Reigate Flora,” that are corrected in its text above. Running title:
“Reigate Plants.” Signed “J.S. Mill.” Not republished. For the
identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis
Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

this list of plants is in a great degree superseded by the new Reigate
Flora, just Edition: current; Page: [275] published by Mr. Brewer;1
which, as might be expected, contains most of the plants which I have
mentioned, with many others which I had not detected. I had however the
good fortune of finding some which have escaped even Mr. Brewer. Of one
of these (Catabrosa aquatica) I have observed a new station, much nearer
to Reigate, even since the publication of Mr. Brewer’s work, viz. in the
swamp at Whiggey, on the west side of the Brighton road, at a very short
distance from the stile: so difficult is it to exhaust this rich
botanical district, in which I do not believe there is anywhere a square
quarter of a mile not containing one or several rare plants.

Might I take the liberty of asking Mr. Brewer, through your journal,
whether Alchemilla vulgaris is set down as growing in “damp meadows on
the banks of the Mole, and in other places in the neighbourhood of
Dorking,”2 from his own observation, or on the authority of Luxford’s
Flora?3 I have always suspected a mistake on the part of Mr. Luxford’s
informant, not as to the plant, but the locality, as I can hardly
imagine that a plant so conspicuous, and incapable of being mistaken for
any other, can exist in some abundance in that neighbourhood without my
having seen it in thirty-five years’ botanical knowledge of the
locality.

Permit me to ask a similar question respecting Carex teretiuscula near
Whiggey, which has been suspected to be an error of Mr. Luxford.4

Mr. Brewer locates Carex ovalis in “damp situations on Reigate Heath and
Redhill.”5 To these may be added Earlswood Common, which is at present
covered with it.

In my list I omitted one of the habitats of Sagittaria sagittifolia—near
the Merstham ponds.

Has any of your correspondents attended to Veronica with the variegated
corolla of V. agrestis and the large flower of V. Chamaedrys? It is not
very uncommon in Surrey, and I last year observed it in great abundance
in cornfields on the heights overtopping Smitham bottom, between Croydon
and Beggar’s Bush. Is this a permanent variety of agrestis? and is it
not often mistaken for V. Buxbaumii, reports of which are now starting
up everywhere, though wanting not only the uniformly blue colour of
Buxbaumii, but the broadly divergent lobes of the fruit?

Edition: current; Page: [276]


Plants Growing on and near Blackheath
 APRIL 1857

Phytologist, n.s. II (Apr. 1857), 93. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries.” Signed “J.S.M.” Not
republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see
“Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

torilis nodosa.—On the grassy slope above Hyde Vale.

Trifolium striatum.—Very abundantly along the road crossing the heath
diagonally towards Morden College, and the prolongation of that road
into Blackheath Park (June, 1856).

Trifolium (or Trigonella) ornithopodioides.—Very scantily by the same
road, in front of the Paragon, in 1853. Not seen since; but Blackheath
being one of the recorded stations of this small inconspicuous plant, it
probably still exists on some other part of the heath.

Tragopogon porrifolius.—In some abundance in a corner of a meadow by the
prolongation (already mentioned) of the diagonal road into Blackheath
Park. The plant has been completely established in the locality for some
years past. There is nothing to show its origin; but it is to be feared
that the progress of building will shortly root it out.

Senecio viscosus.—A weed on the glebe-land at Lee, in profusion (1851).
The land is now covered with houses, but the plant has survived this
peril, being still found in considerable quantity by the roadside.


Late (Early?) Flowering Plants: Plants in Flower in the District of Eltham and Chiselhurst, in November, 1857
 JANUARY 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (Jan. 1858), 319-20. Headed as title. Running
title: “Late (Early?) Flowering Plants.” Signed “J.S. Mill.” Not
republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see
“Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

Ranunculus acris.
Tormentilla reptans.
Centaurea nigra.
Ranunculus repens.
Tormentilla officinalis.
Lapsana communis.
Papaver Rhoeas.
Fragaria vesca.
Hypochoeris radicata.
Fumaria officinalis.
Geium urbanum.
Taraxacum Dens-leonis.
Capsella Bursa-pastoris.
Spiraea Ulmaria.
Leontodon hispidus.
Sisymbrium officinale.
Epilobium montanum.
Oporinia autumnalis.
Sinapis arvensis.
Pimpinella Saxifraga.
Hieracium Pilosella.
Raphanus Raphanistrum.
Aethusa Cynapium.
Sonchus asper.
Spergula arvensis.
Sison Amomum.
Sonchus oleraceus.
Arenaria serpyllifolia.
Heracleum Sphondylium.
Campanula rotundifolia.
Stellaria media.
Pastinaca sativa.
Erica cinerea.
Stellaria graminea.
Anthriscus sylvestris.
Erica Tetralix.
Cerastium triviale.
Lonicera Periclymenum.
Calystegia sepium.
Lychnis vespertina.
Hedera Helix.
Solanum nigrum.
Malva sylvestris.
Cornus sanguinea.
Veronica agrestis.
Malva rotundifolia.
Bellis perennis.
Veronica Buxbaumii.
Geranium pusillum.
Anthemis nobilis.
Lamium album.
Geranium robertianum.
Maruta Cotula.
Lamium purpureum.
Ilex Aquifolium.
Chrysanthemum segetum.
Galeobdolon luteum.
Ulex europaeus.
Leucanthemum vulgare.
Ballota foetida.
Spartium scoparium.
Achillea Millefolium.
Stachys Betonica.
Trifolium repens.
Senecio vulgaris.
Stachys sylvatica.
Trifolium pratense.
Senecio viscosus.
Thymus Serpyllum.
Vicia sepium.
Senecio aquaticus.
Clinopedium vulg. _Sm._
Rosa arvensis.
Senecio Jacobaea.
Prunella vulgaris.
Rubus discolor.
Carduus acanthoides.
Chenopodium album.
Rubus corylifolius?
Cirsium arvense.
Plantago Coronopus.
Polygonum Persicaria.
Euphorbia helioscopia.
Poa annua.
Rumex obtusifolius.
Urtica urens.
Lolium multiflorum.
Rumex pratensis?
Glyceria fluitans.
Alopecurus agrestis.
Euphorbia Peplus.

In flower in December:

  -------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------
  Ranunculus repens.         Tormentilla reptans.     Senecio vulgaris.
  Capsella Bursa-pastoris.   Fragaria vesca.          Taraxacum Dens-leonis.
  Sinapis arvensis.          Spiraea Ulmaria.         Oporinia autumnalis.
  Raphanus Raphanistrum.     Pimpinella Saxifraga.    Helminthia echioides.
  Stellaria media.           Aethusa Cynapium.        Sonchus asper.
  Stellaria graminea.        Sison Amomum.            Sonchus oleraceus.
  Geranium robertianum.      Heracleum Sphondylium.   Lamium album.
  Ilex Aquifolium.           Cornus sanguinea.        Lamium purpureum.
  Ulex europaeus.            Bellis perennis.         Ballota foetida.
  Rubus discolor.            Maruta Cotula.           Euphorbia Peplus.
  Rubus corylifolius?        Achillea Millefolium.    
  -------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------

Edition: current; Page: [278]
The following may be added to the list of December flowering plants:

  ------------------------ ----------------------- ---------------------
  Ranunculus acris.        Hypochoeris radicata.   Euphorbia exigua.
  Alliaria officinalis.    Senecio Jacobaea.       Urtica urens.
  Stellaria Holostea.      Solanum nibrum.         Poa annua.
  Cerastium triviale.      Veronica agrestis.      Glyceria fluitans.
  Lonicera Periclymenum.   Veronica Buxbaumii.     Dactylis glomerata.
  ------------------------ ----------------------- ---------------------

All of these which are not in the list for November (except perhaps
Euphorbia exigua) are freshly come out.


Hutchinsia Petraea
 MAY 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (May 1858), 446. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which also serves as running
title. Signed “J.S.M.” Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s
bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants”
above.

plants in bloom on March 29: Anemone nemorosa, Veronica hederaefolia,
Nepeta Glechoma, Salix Caprea, and Taxus baccata. Hutchinsia is very
fine and abundant in the old place.


Leucojum Aestivum
 JULY 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (July 1858), 510. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which also serves as running
title. Signed “J.S.M., May 17, 1858.” Not republished. For the
identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis
Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

i have seldom enjoyed a greater botanical pleasure than in finding
yesterday, for the first time, the Leucojum in the Plumstead Marshes. I
had always missed it hitherto by seeking for it above Greenwich,
according to the fallacious indication (no doubt true once) of Curtis
and Smith.1 I was delighted to see that in two Edition: current; Page:
[279] different swamps, both already well known to me, this beautiful
plant exists in such profusion that all the botanists in England would
scarcely exhaust it; and as both places are within the practising-ground
of the Arsenal, they are not likely to be drained and built over.


Clifton Plants
 JULY 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (July 1858), 512. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which also serves as title.
Signed “J.S.M., May 26, 1858.” Not republished. For the identification
in Mill’s bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other
Plants” above.

i have just returned from Bristol, where I found Arabis stricta, Trinia
vulgaris, Potentilla verna, Geranium sanguineum, Convallaria
Polygonatum, the last not yet in flower.


Plants on Sherborn Sands, Blackheath, and Other Stations
 SEPTEMBER 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (Sept. 1858), 554-5. Appeared in the section
entitled “Extracts from Correspondence,” which also serves as running
title. Signed “J.S.M.,” dated “June 22nd.” Not republished. For the
identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis
Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

. . . i found Elymus abundant about Sherborn Sands, which, it may be new
to you to hear, are now shut up; but the key can be had for asking for,
without the bore of an attendant. I have investigated the corner of
Blackheath, and soon sighted Geranium pratense. Being thus satisfied
that I was in the right place, I sought and found, among a profusion of
Trifolium striatum and minus, three Medicagines, being lupulina,
maculata, and another, prostrate, with spinous fruit and unstained
leaves. This last could not be minima, as it was far from having entire
stipules; but on comparing it with undoubted specimens of maculata,
though I could find no difference in the fruit, I flattered myself that
there was somewhat more of denticulation on the stipules, and that it
might be denticulata. But alas! next day I found others exactly like,
except that they had no more denticulation, and here and there a trace
of stain on the leaves. On the whole, I fear this is not the denticulata
of foreign botanists, or else, as you surmise, theirs does not differ
from maculata. I do not think there are any other Medicagines in the
locality this year.

Edition: current; Page: [280]
I see in British Plants you date the discovery of L. Martagon in Headley
Copse from 1840.1 If so, I can claim earlier discovery, as I have known
it there from 1826. For a year or two it puzzled me grievously, as I
dared not think it could be Martagon; but about 1829 I found it in
flower, and, I believe, wrote to Sir W. Hooker about it; but he, as you
know, repudiated it as a British plant.2 I should like to know if I was
also the first to notice Impatiens fulva. I found it below the bridge at
Albury, in 1822, but mistook it for Noli-me-tangere. Apropos, I searched
last Monday the skirts of Weston Wood for Arundo Epigejos, but
fruitlessly. I see you consider Adiantum a maritime plant;3 I suppose
therefore it is so in the British Islands; but I have never known it as
such, its habitats in the Alps, Italy, etc., being those of
Scolopendrium,—damp walls, vaults, very shady and moist ruins, the spray
of waterfalls, etc., and in no way affecting maritime localities.


Some Derbyshire Plants
 SEPTEMBER 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (Sept. 1858), 556. Appeared in the section entitled
“Extracts from Correspondence,” which also serves as running title.
Signed “J.S.M.,” dated “July 23rd, 1858” and (in the text) “July 30th,
1858.” Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s bibliography,
see “Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

. . . i have been out for a few days, with some botanical results. You
have probably found, like myself, that when one goes to a neighbourhood
known for rare plants one seldom finds those one seeks for: one finds
others which one did not expect. It has not so happened with me this
time, for during a day at Matlock I found one of the two special
rarities of that place, Thlaspi virens, Bab. (alpestre, Sm.), still not
entirely out of flower; and I have plenty for you as well as myself, if
you would like to have any. The other plants worth mentioning which I
found at Matlock were Arenaria verna, still spangling the hillsides with
its blossoms; Cardamine impatiens, plentiful; Convallaria majalis,
Arabis hirsuta, Campanula Edition: current; Page: [281] latifolia, and
Geranium pratense, all in abundance: its usual northern substitute, G.
sylvaticum, I did not see.

Other plants in Derbyshire:—Silene nutans, Dovedale and Wyedale;
Vaccinium Vitis-idaea, Chatsworth; Rosa villosa and R. tomentosa, Monsal
Dale and its vicinity; Myrrhus odorata, Millersdale; also, I believe,
between Castleton and Hathersage; Cochlearia officinalis and Thalictrum
flexuosum (or rather, perhaps, T. calcareum), abundant on rocks above
Castleton; Viola lutea (which I prefer calling, with De Candolle, V.
sudetica,1 as it has a blue variety), on all mountains and hills near
Castleton; the blue variety occasionally; Polypodium calcareum, in
clefts of rocks between Bakewell and Buxton; Cystopteris fragilis, in
similar situations there, and near Castleton; Carduus heterophyllus,
plentiful in wet ground by the river Wye, near Cowdale turnpike, two
miles from Buxton, on the Bakewell Road; Polemonium coeruleum, on rocks
by the same road, one mile from Buxton, but so difficult to be got at
that I only secured one specimen. . . .—July 30th, 1858. I will send
Silene along with Thalictrum. My specimens are not from Dovedale, though
I saw the plant there, but from Wyedale, about a mile above Ashford,
near Bakewell. The leaf of the Viola from New Brighton is very much like
that of some specimens I brought from Italy under the name of V. montana
or Ruppii, both of which are considered forms of canina. . . .—Among the
Derbyshire plants which I saw I omitted Allium vineale, near Matlock (at
the very top of the High Tor), and Saxifraga hypnoides, in various
places, but always much past flower, even in places where Cardamine
pratensis was still flowering.


Linaria Purpurea
 SEPTEMBER 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (Sept. 1858), 566. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which also serves as running
title. Signed “J.S.M.” Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s
bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants”
above.

touching the murality of Linaria purpurea, the only two places where I
have seen it undoubtedly wild were cornfields: one near Frimley, in
Surrey, in the large cornfield noted by Mr. Watson as a station of that
thumping plant Arnoseris pusilla;1 the other was on the Mont des
Alouettes, a richly cultivated eminence in Edition: current; Page: [282]
La Vendée, along with Lathyrus angulatus, a plant which will probably
some day find its way here as an agrarian plant. The exact similarity of
the habitat in these two cases satisfied me that L. purpurea has as much
right to be considered a British as a French plant.


Faversham Plants
 OCTOBER 1858

Phytologist, n.s. II (Oct. 1858), 597-8. Entitled “Extracts from
Correspondence,” part of “Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which
serves as running title. Signed “Very truly yours, J.S.M.,” dated
“August 11, 1858.” Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s
bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants”
above.

. . . i have made my projected excursion to Faversham, and have been
rewarded by finding Peucedanum in the very place mentioned in Smith’s
English Flora,1 a very little way out of the town, on the east bank of
the river or creek which descends from it to the sea. It is so abundant
as to be in no danger of extirpation, and, as you have never been there,
it is worth while going to see it. The other plants I found in that
neighbourhood are Calamintha Nepeta, almost as profusely as you have
described your having found it in Essex;2 Verbascum Lychnitis on a wall,
and Hippuris vulgaris. I next went to the Isle of Sheppey, where I
enriched myself with Inula crithmoides, a plant I never before saw
growing. I saw also Spartina stricta, and I should like to consult you
on an erect Chenopodiaceous plant. I cannot even tell if it is an
Atriplex or a Chenopodium. The enlarged calyx has not yet appeared, but
perhaps it is not sufficiently advanced, though it sheds small, flat,
dark-coloured seeds in abundance. When passing Strood, I went down to
the old place by the river and found Lepturus, which I never happened to
find in England before. The place is sadly cut up, not only by the
railway, but still worse by brickmaking: however, there is still
abundance of all the plants that used to be there—even Glaux
maritima—except Juncus maritimus, which I did not see. I shall be happy
to send you specimens of Peucedanum or Inula.


Lepidium Ruderale
 APRIL 1859

Phytologist, n.s. III (Apr. 1859), 127. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which serves as the running
title. Signed “J.S.M.” Not republished. Edition: current; Page: [283]
For the identification in Mill’s bibliography, see “Observations on
Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants” above.

lepidium ruderale, stated in the Report of the Greenwich Natural History
Society1 to have been growing, last year, in the lane which goes out of
the south-west corner of Kidbrook Common, is there in profusion this
year also; and so many-seeded a plant having found a locality propitious
to it, has every chance of remaining there till the botanist’s crack of
doom, “a trowell ticking against a brick.”2

Mentha Pulegium, another plant in the Society’s general list, is
flourishing round a small pond on the eastern edge of Chiselhurst
Common.

I have had a day in Tilgate Forest, and have succeeded in finding
Cicendia. As it was not abundant, I was sparing of it.


Wallflower Growing on the Living Rock
 MAY 1860

Phytologist, n.s. IV (May 1860), 160. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries,” which serves as running title.
Signed “J.S.M.” Not republished. For the identification in Mill’s
bibliography, see “Observations on Isatis Tinctoria and Other Plants”
above.

it seems to be noticed as remarkable (see Phytologist, vol. iv, p. 6)
that Mr. Sim found Cheiranthus Cheiri on the living rock.1 It grows
profusely on the precipitous part of St. Vincent’s Rock, at the end next
Bristol.


Spring Flowers of the South of Europe: Remarks on Some of the Spring Flowers of the South of Europe, and on Their Representatives in the British Isles
 OCTOBER 1860

Phytologist, n.s. IV (Oct. 1860), 289-96. Running title: “Spring Flowers
of the South of Europe.” Signed “J.S.M.” Not republished. Identified in
Mill’s bibliography as “An article Edition: current; Page: [284] headed
‘Spring Flowers of the South of Europe’ in the Phytologist for October
1860”

(MacMinn, p. 93).

the english botanist who has resided or travelled in the countries of
southern Europe, and has filled his herbarium with the treasures of
their copious Flora, must often have thought, with almost envious
regret, of the comparative poverty of our own. But as we have no power
to change the lot which in this matter the general arrangements of
Nature have assigned to us, we shall do well to look at its brighter
side, and find matter for congratulation in some points of superiority
which our indigenous Flora, meagre though it be in comparison with those
of France and Italy, nevertheless possesses over the richest regions of
the basin of the Mediterranean. Two of these points have particularly
impressed me in the course of a tolerably extensive wandering over the
south of Europe, and I will communicate them here for the benefit of
those who may not already have adverted to them.

The first is our pre-eminence in Ferns. Though the species of
Phaenogamous plants in (for instance) the French Flora, outnumber ours
almost in the ratio of four to one, the species of Ferns in the two
countries are about equally numerous, and indeed nearly identical. In
the excellent Flora of MM. Grenier and Godron the only Ferns which are
not (under the same or some other name) included in the fourth edition
of Mr. Babington’s Manual, are two Nothoclaenae, N. Marantae and vellea
(the last found only in Corsica), Pteris cretica (also confined to
Corsica), Cheilanthes odora, and Scolopendrium Hemionitis.1 Two more,
Ophioglossum lusitanicum and Grammitis leptophylla, are, as British
plants, limited to the Channel Islands. On the other hand, Lastrea
Foenisecii, Hymenophyllum Wilsoni, and Trichomanes radicans, among the
most precious of our ferny treasures, have not hitherto been discovered
in France. We are thus scarcely outnumbered in species of Ferns by the
whole of France, Corsica included. But when we compare this country, not
with all France, but with the part of it which in most branches of
botany we have greatest reason to envy,—the Mediterranean provinces,—we
find that they, in this particular department, have cause to envy us,
their powerful sun and dry atmosphere, to which they owe their vegetable
riches, being unfavourable to the growth of nearly all the more
beautiful Ferns. It is only the damper, Atlantic provinces of France,
the west and north-west, which offer any parallel in this particular to
our green commons and moist hedgesides. Our numerous Lastreas, our
Lady-Fern, our Polystichums, our Blechnum, our Osmunda, in the true
South are scarcely to be met with out of the mountains. Our Sussex
Hymenophyllum, Edition: current; Page: [285] except an indication in
Corsica, is known as a French plant solely in Brittany. Even our common
Brake, the Pteris aquilina, is rarely met with in the plains of the
Mediterranean region. The only Ferns which are at all widely diffused in
that portion of France, are the Ceterach, which, as in our western
counties, abounds on walls and rocks; the commoner Aspleniums
(Trichomanes, Ruta-muraria, and Adiantum-nigrum), the universal
Polypodium vulgare, and, most beautiful of all, the Maidenhair, Adiantum
Capillus-Veneris, which haunts the spray of falling water, and lines all
cavities which combine dampness with depth of shade. Here, then, is one
of the loveliest families of the Vegetable Kingdom, one of those which
by their verdure, grace, and conspicuousness, and by their abundance in
climates suited to them, do most to beautify the face of nature, and in
which the opulent South cannot be for a moment compared in wealth with
our modest northern latitudes.

Another advantage which we possess, and which has not perhaps been so
much remarked upon, is our striking superiority over the South,
considered generally, in the flowery beauty of our spring. We are indeed
greatly surpassed in the mere number of species which flower at that, as
at every other season. But the multitude and splendour of gregarious
flowering plants which constitute the floral brilliancy of the South,
and to which our mild summer can show nothing comparable, does not
really begin until the Cisti are in bloom. Nearly the whole glory of an
English April and May is derived from plants which, universal with us,
are scarcely, or not at all, known in the South, except as mountain
plants. We may count on our fingers the few ornaments of our spring
which are common to us with the Mediterranean provinces of France. They
possess the Celandine and the Sweet Violet in abundance. They have our
Daisy, and our three common Buttercups, R. repens, R. acris, and R.
bulbosus. Cardamine pratensis is found, but not, as with us, in almost
every wood or hedge; only in irrigated meadows and by the sides of
streams. Our common Symphytum abounds, and so does the common Polygala;
and, best of all, the Blackthorn and the Whitethorn are as much at home
in their hedges and thickets as in ours. Now, however, I am at the end
of the list. I do not believe I have omitted anything of importance. On
the other hand, mark the catalogue of our spring plants which (except in
the mountains, or in some very peculiar localities) do not grow in the
southern countries of Europe.

Of wood plants they have neither our Wood Anemone (A. nemorosa), nor our
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis Acetosella), nor our Woodruff (Asperula odorata),
nor our Primrose (Primula vulgaris), nor our Hyacinth (Endymion nutans),
nor our Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis), nor the graceful Adoxa
Moschatellina, nor the beautiful Allium ursinum. Of meadow plants they
want the Cowslip (Primula veris), the Daffodil (Narcissus
Pseudo-narcissus), the Marsh Marigold (Caltha palustris), and both our
early Orchides, O. mascula and O. Morio. Of the plants which adorn our
hedges and banks, they have neither the Wood Violet (V. canina, or V.
sylvatica), the wild Strawberry (Fragaria vesca), the delicate Edition:
current; Page: [286] Ranunculus auricomus, the elegant white Potentilla
Fragariastrum, the starry Stellaria Holostea, the fragrant Ground-ivy
(Nepeta Glechoma), the cheerful Mercurialis perennis, nor the
bright-eyed Germander Speedwell (Veronica Chamaedrys). There are but few
of our water plants which flower in spring, but they want the loveliest
of these, Hottonia palustris. Of early heath plants they have neither
our Bilberry (Vaccinium Myrtillus), nor our brightly coloured
Pedicularis sylvatica. Among flowering trees they have not at all, or
but rarely, either the Crab-apple (Pyrus Malus) or the splendid White
Beam-tree of our chalk-hills, the Pyrus Aria. A still greater deficiency
is the absence of the two plants which by their masses of deep yellow,
convert many of our spring landscapes into the likeness of Turner’s
pictures—the Furze (Ulex europaeus) and Broom (Sarothamnus scoparius).
The former they do not possess at all, the latter nowhere in the plains,
except occasionally about the roots of the mountain ranges.

It will be said, if they have not these plants, they have equivalents:
and this is true, but the equivalents are seldom equally beautiful, and
scarcely ever so abundant and so universal. The case of the Anemones is
one of the most favourable which can be cited. The equivalent of Anemone
nemorosa in central Italy is A. apennina, one of the doubtful plants of
our Flora; and this is certainly as beautiful and nearly as abundant,
where it prevails, as A. nemorosa, but it prevails only in a limited
range. In southern Italy the place is occupied by the starlike A.
hortensis. But neither of these is found, except as a rarity, in the
south of France. The blue and red Anemone of our gardens, A. coronaria,
is the most widely diffused of all the Anemones of the South, and in the
places where it is most abundant, it is one of the most gorgeous flowers
of the year. But this, though commoner than the two others, is but
partially distributed in Mediterranean France. The substitutes for our
Broom and Furze are much more inadequate. There is a small Furze, Ulex
provincialis, (parviflorus of Grenier and Godron,)2 extremely local in
its distribution, neither so large nor so beautiful as our dwarf Furze,
and which can at most be allowed to pair off with Genista anglica. In
almost every part of Europe, however, there is some prickly Leguminous
plant, which in early spring colours the landscape with its yellow
blossoms. In Sicily it is Calycotome spinosa, formerly a Cytisus. In the
south of France and the neighbouring provinces of Spain, it is Genista
Scorpius, a low bush, whose thorny branches, spreading on every side,
are very rough to handle. Later in the year those regions are dotted
over with the stately and powerfully fragrant Spartium junceum, the
Spanish Broom of our gardens; but this is a summer ornament, a plant of
the Cistine period. Still later the Genista tinctoria displays itself
with a beauty and luxuriance far greater than in our colder climate.
Advancing from the plains to the mountain regions of the Cevennes and
the eastern Pyrenees, and leaving the Spartium junceum at their foot, we
come first upon the English Broom in the lower zone of the mountains,
among the Chestnut and Beech woods; then, above these, another Broom,
more Edition: current; Page: [287] bushy, tougher, coarser, but still
beautiful, Sarothamnus purgans. All these plants are highly gregarious,
and colour great spaces of country in a similar manner to our Furze and
Broom; but, if we except S. junceum, they are far inferior. Not one of
them has either the height, the size of flowers, the delicate
enamel-like polish of corolla, nor combines so rich a verdure with its
golden inflorescence, as those matchless ornaments of our spring.

The Narcissi are perhaps the greatest riches of the vernal meadows in
the South. The Daffodil is indeed absent, but N. poeticus is frequent,
though nowhere but in the mountains have I seen it in any profusion: the
meadows of the Pyrenees are positively white with its blossoms. Some of
the many-flowered species of this genus are met with in the plains; in
some localities N. Tazetta is frequent; the gorgeous N. stellatus, or
orientalis, is found in others; and there is a Narcissus near
Naples—probably N. serotinus—in flower all the winter, and with which I
have seen the plain of Paestum quite covered in February. All these,
however, are very local. Veronica Teucrium comes near in beauty to V.
Chamaedrys, but is scarcely equal to it, and not nearly so universal.
Oxalis corniculata (itself a British plant) is a poor substitute for
Oxalis Acetosella; while, for the Primrose, Cowslip, Hyacinth, Woodruff,
and Lily-of-the-valley, there is no equivalent at all. When we consider
the exquisite beauty of all these, and the immense abundance of the
three first in almost all neighbourhoods, and of the two last in some,
the assertion will not appear paradoxical that the South, with all its
number and variety of species, is on the whole poorer in those flowering
plants which make spring beautiful, than our otherwise less favoured
botanical region of the earth.

In what precedes, I have been speaking of the south of Europe generally.
But there are particular places in it which, from local circumstances,
combine much of the character of northern vegetation with that of the
more sunny regions which surround them, and these places are the
paradise of the botanist, as they are of the lover of Nature. I will
endeavour to give an account of one of these, and will begin by
describing its situation, since this determines the main peculiarities
of its botanical character, and the richest Flora is almost always found
among the most splendid scenery.

Whoever has been at Rome is familiar with at least the appearance of the
group of noble though not very lofty mountains (for, indeed, it is
visible from many streets of the city,) which stands isolated at some
distance from the sea on one side, and from the mountain barrier of the
Campagna on the other, and is the delight of painters by the aerial
purple tint with which it fills up one-half of the southern side of the
landscape. Almost all the part of these mountains which is visible from
Rome is clothed with thick forests, but nearly their whole base on the
northern and western sides is studded, at a small elevation above the
plain, with a succession of small towns which, and their neighbourhood,
are the resort of the richer Romans and resident foreigners during the
unhealthy season. Omitting Frascati and other places which face to the
north, the western base is occupied by Albano, La Riccia, and Gensano:
Albano, which forms the angular point, being alone visible from Edition:
current; Page: [288] Rome. Both in scenery and in vegetation this place,
more, perhaps, than any other in Italy, combines the peculiar character
and features of southern Europe with a large share of those of England.
Its elevation is sufficient to command the whole breadth of the
Campagna, and a considerable space of sea beyond. The view from the
western side of the town has the solemn, though not sombre, but
cheerful, stateliness characteristic of Italian landscape, while on the
land side the forests range from the summits of the mountains to the
very border of the town, and on the boundary which separates the two
regions, an avenue of full-grown forest trees, so rare in most parts of
the Continent, stretches along the whole length of the winding road
leading from Albano to the beautiful village of Castel Gandolfo,
situated on the rim of the crater which holds the blue volcanic lake of
Albano. Beyond Castel Gandolfo are grassy downs, which combine with the
forest to produce the likeness of verdant England in the centre of
Italy, and the resemblance extends to botany as well as to scenery. The
spring Flora of this region is of an almost English character, though
the particular species are mostly such as are either rare, or do not
grow at all in England. On the downs of Castel Gandolfo are found
Hesperis (now Arabis) verna, with its flower resembling Virginia Stock,
and one of the most graceful of the Irides, I. tuberosa. Along the
circuit of the lake, Lunaria biennis, the “Honesty” of our
cottage-gardens, exhibits its lilac, cross-like flowers, and its large,
flat, almost nummular, pods. Nearer to the town, Lithospermum
purpureocoeruleum puts forth its bright, metallic-looking blossoms. The
woods abound with the yellow Anemone ranunculoides; the light-blue
Scilla bifolia, with its hyacinth-like leaves; Pulmonaria officinalis,
another plant of cottage-gardens, and indigenous in England, with its
flowers of various hues on the same stalk, and its broadly-spotted
leaves; the snowy Allium pendulinum; the rarer of our two species of
Solomon’s-seal (Convallaria multiflora); one of the smaller
Aristolochiae (A. longa); the four-whorled and delicate-leaved Asperula
taurina, a plant of the Alps; and the smaller of the two English
Symphyta, S. tuberosum. Further on in the woods, towards La Riccia, we
meet with Narcissus poeticus. Further still, near Gensano, we come upon
the Bladder-nut of our shrubberies, Staphylea pinnata; Dentaria
bulbifera, one of the finest of our rarer indigenous plants; and the
blue Iris of our gardens, I. germanica. If we would ascend the highest
member of the mountain-group, the Monte Cavo, we must make the circuit
of the north flank of the mountains by Marino, on the edge of the Alban
Lake, and Rocca di Papa, a picturesque village in the hollow
mountain-side, from which we climb through woods abounding in Galanthus
nivalis and Corydalis cava, to that summit which was the arx of Jupiter
Latialis, and to which the thirty Latian cities ascended in solemn
procession to offer their annual sacrifice. The place is now occupied by
a convent, under the wall of which I gathered Ornithogalum nutans, and
from its neighbourhood I enjoyed a panoramic view, surely the most
glorious, in its combination of natural beauty and grandeur of
historical recollections, to be found anywhere on earth.

The eye ranged from Terracina on one side to Veii on the other, and
beyond Veii Edition: current; Page: [289] to the hills of Sutrium and
Nepete, once covered by the Ciminian forests, then deemed an
impenetrable barrier between the interior of Etruria and Rome. Below my
feet, the Alban mountain, with all its forest-covered folds, and in one
of them the dark-blue lake of Nemi: that of Albano, I think, was
invisible. To the north, in the dim distance, the Eternal City; to the
west, the eternal sea; for eastern boundary, the long line of Sabine
mountains, from Soracte, past Tibur, and away towards Praeneste. The
range then passed behind the Alban group, and became invisible, but
reappeared to the south-east as the mountain-crescent of Cora and
Pometia, enclosing between its horns the Pontine marshes, which lay
spread out below as far as the sea-line, extending east and west, from
Terracina in the bay of Fondi, the Volscian Anxur, to the angle of the
coast where rises suddenly, between the marshes and the sea, the
mountain promontory of Circeii, celebrated alike in history and in
fable. Within the space visible from this one point the destinies of the
human race were decided. It took the Romans nearly five hundred years to
vanquish and incorporate the warlike tribes who inhabited that narrow
tract, but this being accomplished, two hundred more sufficed them to
complete the conquest of the world.


Botany of Spain. A Few Days’ Botanizing in the North-Eastern Provinces of Spain, in April and May, 1860
 AUGUST 1861-FEBRUARY 1862

Phytologist, n.s. V (Aug., Oct., Nov., Dec., 1861), 225-36, 296-303,
327-30, 356-62, and VI (Feb., 1862), 35-45. Running title: “Botany of
Spain.” The sub-headings in the text indicate the serial divisions; the
printer’s error in the last, numbering it “IV” rather than “V,” has been
corrected, and the many emendations indicated by Mill in the Somerville
College copies of the articles have been accepted (see App. G for a
list). Not signed, but identified in the table of contents as by Mill.
Mill was accompanied on the trip by his step-daughter, Helen Taylor
(1831-1907). Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “A
series of papers entitled ‘A few days Botanizing in the North Eastern
Provinces of Spain in April and May 1860’ published in the Phytologist
for August, October, November, December 1861 and January [sic] 1862”

(MacMinn, p. 94).


No. I.: Catalonia

there is hardly any country in Europe whose floral treasures are less
known to botanists than those of Spain. That country has produced few
indigenous botanists. She possesses, practically speaking, no local
Flora; the only one known Edition: current; Page: [290] to Europe being
the old, rare, and costly work of Cavanilles, in which, along with such
of the native plants as were known in his time, descriptions and figures
are given of the American and other exotics cultivated in the Madrid
Botanical Garden.1 There is another book, which the present writer had
never heard of, but which he saw on a bookstall at Barcelona; a Flora of
Spain, bearing a date soon after the middle of the last century, in
which the names given to species are Linnaean, but the genera are
arranged on the simple and primitive plan of alphabetical order.2 M.
Boissier, to whom the botany of the Mediterranean basin is so much
indebted, has made excursions in several parts of Spain, the botanical
results of which have been published.3 And this is nearly all which has
been done for Spanish botany. Yet the country is one of the most largely
endowed in our quarter of the globe, with the conditions on which
variety of indigenous vegetation depends. It reaches further south than
any country in Europe; the rock of Gibraltar being some fifty miles
nearer to the Equator than the most southern promontories of Sicily or
Greece. The low latitude of the northern provinces, compared with
England, Germany, and the greater part of France, is more than
compensated by their mountainous character, which renders their
vegetation a copious sample of all northern climates, to the Arctic
inclusive. Modern investigation has shown that there is as marked a
difference between the western and eastern Floras, as between the
northern and southern; and of this distribution also, both branches are
fully represented in the Peninsula. Its northern and western coasts,
especially if we include Portugal, are the typical example of the
western or Atlantic Flora; while the dry eastern districts, from the
Pyrenees to Carthagena (and no doubt the south coast also), belong in
all respects to the Mediterranean portion of the eastern botanical
region. Of soils there are all varieties, from the richest alluvion to
the barest granitic or calcareous rock; and the proportion of waste is
probably unequalled in any European country, Greece and Turkey excepted.

That a country with these attractions to botanists, should have been so
little explored by them, is an effect, doubtless, of the same causes
which have made, until lately, the resort of travellers thither, for any
but commercial purposes, comparatively infrequent; the disturbed state
of the country through civil war, the danger from banditti, and the
absence of the facilities for travelling afforded by roads, inns, and
means of conveyance. The first two of these hindrances have completely,
and, it is to be hoped, permanently disappeared. Civil wars are ended,
and brigands are now never heard of. The remaining difficulties are in a
course of Edition: current; Page: [291] rapid removal. Security and
freedom—for in spite of the imperfections of her institutions and of her
administration, Spain is a free country—are producing their natural
fruits. The impulse given to the national mind by political
emancipation; the freedom of speaking and printing which has been
enjoyed for nearly a generation; the downfall of the Inquisition, and
the decline of the great enemy of modern ideas, the Catholic hierarchy
(for Spain, though still a Catholic, is no longer a priest-ridden
country) have brought that fine people once more into the full current
of European civilization. In the material department of national
improvement, Spain is rapidly recovering her lost ground. Instead of the
desolate and neglected appearance which we are taught to expect, every
province which I visited, except the naturally arid and unfertile plain
of Aragon, wore the appearance of diligent and careful agriculture, and
not unfrequently of active and successful manufacturing industry. The
soil of Spain will soon be completely intersected by railroads. The
lines from Madrid to Valencia and Alicante, from Cadiz through Xeres and
Seville to Cordova, are open throughout. Of those from Madrid to the
French frontier, at both extremities of the Pyrenean chain, large
portions have been opened, as well as many shorter and branch railways.
The common roads are now numerous, and some of them good. The diligences
surprise one by their number. Their rapidity was already noted at a time
when the state of the road seemed hardly compatible with that quality.
But what most surpassed my expectation was the inns. My experience is
indeed limited to a few provinces. There, however, they are not only, in
the great towns, very tolerable, but even in small roadside places we
found them equal to the small country inns of France. The hotels of
Madrid, indeed, cannot be compared to those of the great towns of
France, and are inferior to those of some places in Spain itself; but
Madrid, except in being the seat of the government and Court, is the
capital of Castile rather than of Spain. At Barcelona, Valencia, and
Zaragoza, there are hotels about on a par with those of provincial towns
of secondary rank in France; while not only at places like Tarragona or
Guadalaxara, but even at an insignificant village like Alcolea, on the
plateau of Castile, a hamlet distinguished by nothing but by being one
of the stopping-places of the diligences from Madrid to Zaragoza, we
found a roadside inn at which it was possible to sleep and even to make
some stay in comfort. I should not indeed advise any one to travel in
these provinces in the months of August and September, both on account
of the heat, and of the plague of insects which might at that season be
expected. But these months are later or earlier than a botanist in the
south of Europe has any inducement to travel. Botanists, walking
tourists, and all who are accustomed to penetrate into the nooks and
corners of a country, will find Spain, in the present day, no more
closed to them than any other part of Europe.

I should not presume to offer as worthy of attention, such fragmentary
notices as I could pick up in a mere run through any country whose
botany was known, and which possessed local Floras. Even as regards
Spain, my passing observations Edition: current; Page: [292] have little
of the value which would belong to those of a profound botanist. My only
qualifications are delight in the subject, and some acquaintance with a
considerable portion of the general Flora of Southern Europe. I have
therefore to apologize beforehand for many deficiencies, and doubtless
for some errors. It requires a really good botanist to investigate the
plants of a country, with a universal “Species Plantarum” for his sole
guide: neither can a traveller carry about with him De Candolle’s
Prodromus and Kunth’s Enumeratio,4 which, moreover, even joined
together, are not complete; and to determine plants by them afterwards
from dried specimens, is a task of which every one knows the difficulty.
The books I had with me were the Flore de France, by Grenier and Godron;
Woods’ Tourist’s Flora (in which Spain is not included);5 and by way of
a general Flora, the Compendium of Persoon,6 which, notwithstanding the
extreme brevity and frequent want of precision of its descriptions,
enabled me to determine some plants which I could not otherwise have
identified. I must premise further, that the only mode of travelling in
Spain (except on horseback) being by public conveyances, want of time,
and of information as to halting-places, confined us for the most part
to journeys from one large town to another; and the rapid pace of the
diligences precluded even that common resource of Continental
travelling, taking advantage of hills for pedestrian exploration of
roadsides. My experience therefore of Spanish botany was mostly confined
to the immediate vicinity of considerable towns. Of the intermediate
spaces I saw, in general, only what could be seen from a diligence drawn
by from ten to sixteen mules at full gallop, or through the windows of a
railway carriage; and thus, although I passed a whole month in Spain, I
had but a few days of real botanizing during that period, which extended
from the middle of April to the middle of May, in an extremely backward
season. It is a proof of the botanical riches of the country, that with
only these opportunities and such imperfect qualifications, I can still
furnish a respectable list of plants.

The province which I first visited, and of which I saw most, was
Catalonia; which, both botanically and geologically, may serve as a
representative of the whole north-east region of Spain. It differs from
Aragon and Valencia chiefly in being more mountainous. Its northern
portion is a confused heap of mountains; and all the way to Barcelona
these come down to, or very near, the sea. Towards Barcelona they open
out into a crescent of no great depth, leaving a semicircular plain, in
the centre of which, on the sea, stands this fine city, rich in the
signs of Edition: current; Page: [293] prosperous industry, and hemmed
in by a girdle of populous villages as prosperous as itself. Close
beside it, on a hill cultivated to the top, is the celebrated but not
formidable-looking fortress of Monjuich, the scene of so many exploits
in the old wars. The plain is rich and fertile, without artificial
irrigation, at least in the usual Spanish manner, by canals. Such
irrigational apparatus as I saw (all of which was quite close to
Barcelona) consisted of those curious irrigation-towers, the work of the
Saracens, which form a conspicuous, and, at first sight, a puzzling
feature in the country about Palermo. The plain is crossed here and
there by gullies, cut deep into the soil by the torrents of rain which
must descend at certain seasons from the adjacent mountains.

The conditions of soil and climate in Catalonia, are much the same as in
the Mediterranean provinces of France, and the botany accordingly is
very similar. It is the country of the Olive, the Fig, the Vine, and,
further south, of the spreading and shady but stiff-leaved Caruba
(Ceratonia Siliqua) but not of the Orange and the Myrtle. The aloe
(Agave americana), and the Prickly Pear (Cactus Opuntia) are found; but
not, as in Sicily, in wild abundance, forming a great feature in the
landscape. The first chiefly appears in the form of hedges (as in
Roussillon); and the Cactus I did not observe further north than
Tarragona. There too I first came upon the Palmetto (Chamaerops
humilis), the dwarfish representative of the mighty family of Palmae;
that stiff low prickly bush which half covers with its chevaux-de-frise
of fan-like leaves the vast wastes of Sicily. It abounds also on the
line of road from Tarragona to Valencia, and its fibres are made into a
kind of matting, the production of which is part of the domestic
industry of the country. The plants of the Catalonian landscape were
chiefly those of the rocky calcareous wilds of Languedoc and Provence,
called locally Garrigues, from the provincial name (according to M.
Léonce de Lavergne) of the dwarf evergreen Oak which covers them;7 the
Quercus coccifera, in which the Kermes insect, the European variety of
the cochineal, elaborates its brilliant dye. This, and Quercus Ilex, are
the principal representatives of the old Order Amentaceae. Pistacia
Lentiscus, the Mastic-tree of Scripture8 (to my surprise I saw little of
the still finer P. Terebinthus, though equally or more common in the
south of France); the fragrant Tree-Heath (Erica arborea); the still
more powerfully odorous woody Thyme (Thymus vulgaris), inferior in
beauty, but superior in odour to our T. Serpyllum (which grows there
also); that common southern plant, the Rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis); the Spanish Broom of our gardens (Spartium junceum) with
its intoxicating perfume; the prickly Broom of the south of France
(Genista Scorpius), which though humbler in stature than our tall Furze,
colours the Edition: current; Page: [294] landscape in spring with
similar masses of brilliant yellow, while it projects its sword-like
flowering branches vertically and laterally, like the dwarf autumnal
Furze of our commons; these form the most conspicuous clothing of the
uncultivated ground in the coast region of Catalonia. The honeyed Koniga
maritima, in flower at all seasons, and especially after other flowers
have disappeared, covers the ground, both waste and cultivated, to great
distances from the sea; and another winter plant, Diplotaxis erucoides
(which is brought into Rome by cartloads in full flower throughout
January), adorns the cultivated lands with its light-grey cruciform
blossoms. If to these we add several species of Cistus and Helianthemum
(of which hereafter), a tolerably complete idea is given of the
vegetation, as it exhibits itself at this season to an eye merely
wandering over the face of the country.

To proceed to local details; the plants of Barcelona may be divided into
those of the plain, and those of the crescent of low calcareous
mountains which overlook it. The brightest flower of the plain, in these
spring months, is Hypecoum procumbens, a Papaveraceous plant, with a
flower like that of Chelidonium majus, and about as large, though the
plant itself is small in comparison. It has a long, crooked pod, and its
leaves are cut like those of an Erodium. Notwithstanding the name
procumbens, the plant, though spreading, is erect, and grows copiously
among the corn, in appearance like an agrarian Ranunculus, of greater
size and finer quality than R. arvensis. I found this plant in other
parts of Spain, and I had already found it near Perpignan. I will not
affirm that some of it may not be H. grandiflorum, if there be any real
difference between the two. I met with another undoubtedly different
Hypecoum further south, which will be commemorated in its place. Of
Ranunculi I noticed near Barcelona only R. bulbosus, and the aquatic but
not batrachian species muricatus, allied to sceleratus, but with a fruit
of a somewhat similar character to arvensis. A fine Fumaria, with large
white and purple flowers (which I also saw near Perpignan), seemed to be
muralis of Grenier and Godron;9 but those authors, I observe, have on
reconsideration decided their plant to be not one species but three,
none of them the true muralis of Sonder.10 The Cruciferae I noticed were
those common plants of southern France, Sisymbrium irio and
obtusangulum, and Lepidium Draba. Reseda Phyteuma, a plant nearly
resembling odorata, but without its smell, was here, as in most parts of
the south of Europe, abundant. This plant reaches so far north in
France, that it might well have been looked for in England. The family
Geraniaceae is represented by Erodium malachoides. Oxalis corniculata,
and the brittle bush Coriaria myrtifolia, with its currant-like racemes
clothing its dry-looking branches long before the leaves come out, are
here common. Of Leguminous Edition: current; Page: [295] plants, the
most worthy of notice is Lathyrus Ochrus, a procumbent species, with
large oval leaflets, (like a greater and paler L. Aphaca,) which haunts,
as in Sicily, low moist places in the alluvial ground. The place of our
Lotus corniculatus is taken by another Sicilian plant, the equally
yellow and not less elegant L. ornithopodioides. Another Leguminous
plant, with oval leaflets and round leaf-like stipules, is Arthrolobium
(formerly Ornithopus) scorpioides. Of Rosaceae, the principal is that
happily ubiquitous shrub, the Hawthorn; I did not examine whether in
both its forms or only in one. It is curious that the form monogyna is
sometimes the only one found in a large tract of country. According to
Gussone, there is no other in Sicily.11 The only Potentilla I saw was P.
verna, which is rather frequent. The Composites were those common in the
south: Sonchus tenerrimus, like our common Sowthistle, but much more
fragile and delicate; Picridium vulgare, with its urceolate flowers and
hard scarious phyllaries; that ornament of banks, Urospermum
Dalechampii, and the coarser U. picroides; the small Marigold, Calendula
arvensis; this last is found as far north as Normandy, and I believe no
botanist knows, any more than myself, why it does not grow in Kent. Who
can tell why Specularia Speculum, the Venus’s Looking-glass of our
gardens, comes up to the very Straits of Dover as a cornfield plant,
while, though so generally cultivated in England, we never see it wild,
even as an escape from culture?—or why Orlaya grandiflora, which I have
gathered in cornfields between Boulogne and St. Omer, should not be
found in England at all?—or why that commonest of Continental weeds,
even on the sands opposite the English coast, Eryngium campestre, should
be the rarest of rare plants in England, and should not spread even when
introduced as a ballast plant. These secrets of vegetation will,
perhaps, be some day unveiled. The only Thistles in flower near
Barcelona, at this early season, were the same as in Sicily; Carduus
pycnocephalus (allied to C. tenuiflorus) and the elegant Galactites
tomentosa. Of Boragineae, I observed the common Borage, and a fine
Echium, perhaps the violaceum of the Channel Islands, but it was not
sufficiently advanced to enable me to distinguish it with perfect
certainty from E. plantagineum, one of the handsomest of the tribe,
which, as well as others, has been confounded under the name violaceum.
The Scrophularineae were Antirrhinum Orontium; the brilliantly yellow
Linaria supina; Scrophularia peregrina of Italy and Sicily; S. canina of
southern and middle Europe. The genus Euphorbia was largely represented:
E. Peplus and helioscopia of course; those fine plants serrata and
Characias, the first common in the south of France, the second
everywhere in the South (E. Cyparissias and gerardiana, so frequent in
southern Europe, I did not see); but the principal Euphorbia of the
plain of Barcelona is E. terracina, less striking in appearance Edition:
current; Page: [296] than some of these, but more curious when examined.
The calycinal glands characteristic of the genus, which in this, as in
many other species, are of a crescent form, are terminated in E.
terracina by a pair of setae, exactly resembling the antennae of an
insect. The Monocotyledoneae which I noted were that common weed Muscari
comosum, the wild original of one of the ornaments of our gardens, and
Asphodelus fistulosus, the smallest European species of its genus, not
general in the south of France, though not unknown there, but most
plentiful here as well as in Sicily. Of Ferns, no abundance could be
expected in these dry climates, but the Ceterach grew plentifully here
and elsewhere, as did also the Maidenhair (Adiantum Capillus-Veneris),
wherever there was local dampness and depth of shade.

The mountain Flora of Barcelona is much more copious, and as I explored
it twice, at some interval of time, I can give a rather fuller account
of it. Apart from their form and composition, these heights would
scarcely be entitled to a more ambitious name than that of hills. The
range, at least this part of it, is of small breadth, and the line of
summit looks down upon a wide extent of country, rugged and rocky
enough, but of little elevation, though varied with occasional
eminences, among which the lofty and many-pinnacled ridge of Monserrat
is supreme. The rocks of the maritime range are calcareous, like those
of Bas-Languedoc and Provence, and the mountain sides are cut through by
deep ravines, of which the gullies that intersect the plain are a
continuation. The rocks, though in most parts thickly clothed with bushy
shrubs, show few trees, except a pine-grove here and there. The species
of the Pine I did not verify, but it had the aspect of P. halepensis,
the common Pine of the Mediterranean provinces of France. The remaining
wood was chiefly Ilex, kept low and bushy by the woodcutters. The floral
treasures of this range are considerable. Leguminosae are the most
abundant. Besides the thorny Genista Scorpius and the Spanish Broom, I
noticed two other plants of kindred character: the Furze which fills so
large a place in the winter Flora of Provence (Ulex parviflorus, or
provincialis), and the thorny Cytisus, which covers Sicily in March with
its yellow blossoms, Calycotome spinosa, unless I am mistaken in this
last, which was not yet in flower. Of non-thorny Cytisi there were as
many as three: C. candicans (Genista of some authors), one of the most
elegant, and here the most flowery of this elegant genus; C. triflorus,
a shrub of the height of a man, which blackens in drying, and with which
all who have botanized near Naples must be familiar; and the dwarfish C.
argenteus (by some called Argyrolobium linnaeanum), one of the Garrigue
plants of the south of France. Anthyllis was represented by A.
tetraphylla, a Palermo plant; Trifolium, by the well-named T. stellatum;
Medicago by several, which, for want of sufficiently developed fruits, I
did not determine, but which were apparently some of the common ones of
the south of France,—M. minima, denticulata, praecox, Gerardi,
orbicularis, or marginata. The commonest of the Coronillae of southern
France, C. Emerus, made a large display of its loosely hung Edition:
current; Page: [297] blossoms. Here, as everywhere in Spain, the
Hippocrepis comosa, the charm of English chalk hills, brought pleasant
remembrances of the floral beauties of Surrey and Kent, though often,
doubtless, confounded with H. glauca, a plant equally common, and if
specifically different, perfectly resembling comosa in habit and general
appearance. The Lathyri were represented by the delicate and slender L.
setifolius, and the large-flowered L. Clymenum (tenuifolius of
Gussone),12 which I have also found at Perpignan and at Palermo. Vicia
presented me with V. tenuifolia of Roth,13 an improved likeness of V.
Cracca; and the much less beautiful triflora of Tenore,14 the first
plant I met with which is not a native of France. Astragalus offered a
species rather insignificant in appearance, A. sesameus, a plant not
unlike, at the first glance, to Bisserrula Pelecinus; and another, the
commonest, but one of the most gorgeous of this splendid genus, which
grows in Normandy, and ought to grow in Kent, A. monspessulanus. My
Catalonian specimens were not of the usual colour, but paler, and with a
mixture of yellow; a character attributed to the neighbouring A.
incanus, but not, so far as I know, to any form of monspessulanus; this
plant, however, seemed to possess the essential characters of the more
common species. Among Leguminosae not yet in flower, I may mention two
common plants of southern Europe, the bushy Dorycnium suffruticosum,
with its small round heads of pale flowers, which I have known to whiten
at a distance large spaces of ground; and the trefoiled Psoralea
bituminosa, with its elegant flowering clusters, and long axillary
peduncles.

The greatest ornaments however of these bushy hills were the Cisti,
which form in some places a great part of the whole vegetation. Without
reckoning Helianthemums, there were four species of Cistus proper;
bushes covered all over with large and brilliant blossoms; the decumbent
salviaefolius, with its milk-white cups; the erect albidus, with its
grey foliage and delicate mallow-coloured flowers, larger than the
largest wild Rose; the stiffish, narrow-leaved monspeliensis, with
flowers rather smaller than salviaefolius, flat and wheel-like, instead
of cup-shaped; and a rarer species than any of these, C. Ledon, which,
with monspeliensis, by their viscous touch, and rich resinous smell,
form a transition to the real European Gum Cisti, C. ladaniferus and
laurifolius. The Cisti, happily for Spanish landscape, are, like the
Ericae, gregarious plants, and, of all Cisti I know, none are so
gregarious as C. Ledon. Near Perpignan, and on the plateau of Morières,
near Avignon, it covers acres of ground. Of Corolliflorae not previously
mentioned, I noticed a Verbascum, probably V. Boerhavii; the deep blue
Lithospermum purpurocaeruleum, not unknown in England, and one of the
most frequent as well as beautiful of the wood and thicket plants of the
South in April Edition: current; Page: [298] and May; Veronica Teucrium,
which vies with, if it does not surpass our beautiful Chamaedrys; that
curious plant, Lavandula Stoechas, named, like several other plants,
from the isles of Hyères, but tolerably general in the south of Europe;
and Stachys hirta, a plant in France confined to the extreme
south-eastern corner. Other plants in flower were, a rare but rather
dull-looking Polygala, P. rupestris, growing in clefts of the rocks;
Paronychia argentea, one of the ornaments of Sicily, carpeting the
ground with its silvery inflorescence and herbage; Osyris alba, a
scraggy bush of the family Eleagneae, abundant in the South, which,
covered at this season with yellow blossoms, fills the air all around
with a powerful fragrance like that of the Galia. At the back of the
ridge, looking towards the north and north-west, I came upon plants of a
decidedly English character. Euphorbia Characlas and serrata were
replaced by E. amygdaloides; and I found here the first Orchid I saw in
Spain, Cephalanthera ensifolia, a rare, but still a British species. Our
common wild Strawberry was occasionally visible. These were nearly all
the plants of interest which I saw in flower. Most of the Compositae
were not yet in a state to be recognizable. The only ones in flower were
Senecio vulgaris and viscosus. Inula viscosa, and Phagnalon (or Conyza)
saxatile were distinguishable. The plants not in flower included several
of the most characteristic shrubs of southern Europe: the gorgeous
Pomegranate, the evergreen Phillyraea media, the common Arbutus (A.
Unedo), and one of the most powerfully and sweetly odoriferous of
European climbers, which retains its fragrance for many years in the
herbarium, Smilax aspera. To these let me add the perfoliate Lonicera
implexa, and another Honeysuckle, which was probably etrusca, the other
common one of the South; for our Woodbine is in southern Europe a
mountain plant, and our garden L. caprifolium I have seen wild only in
Italy. The curious Asparagus acutifolius; Bupleurum rigidum, one of the
oddest species of a genus already anomalous among Umbellifers; and
Daphne Gnidium, an ornament of late summer and autumn, complete the list
of my observations in the Barcelona mountains, with the exception of
Monserrat, the copious botany of which I keep for a separate notice.

Many of the plants above enumerated, I afterwards met with in the same
line of country further north, where another evergreen oak, the Cork
tree (Quercus Suber), abounds, and its produce is an important article
of commerce. Here, too, the English Broom, Sarothamnus scoparius, makes
its appearance, even in the plain, at least near the foot of the
mountains. Other common English plants, Stellaria Holostea,
Chrysanthemum segetum, Centaurea Cyanus, are abundantly visible to the
passing eye, together with Lavandula Stoechas, Cistus albidus and
salviaefolius, Ulex parviflorus, Euphorbia terracina and amygdaloides,
Muscari comosum, and an Ononis, probably Natrix. In the woody hills near
Gerona, in the middle of May, I had a botanical walk of considerable
interest. A deep shady wood of deciduous trees afforded the beautiful
Geum sylvaticum (otherwise atlanticum). This, with Onobrychis supina,
and the dwarfish and quaint Lithospermum Edition: current; Page: [299]
apulum, I observed nowhere else in Spain. I found also (besides many of
the Barcelona plants) the beautiful Allium roseum, the rush-like
Aphyllanthes monspeliensis, with its large and curiously lined azure
flowers, the narrow-leaved Phillyraea (P. angustifolia) of our
shrubberies; a Sideritis, (I believe S. hirsuta); and a
characteristically southern tree of the family Urticeae, Celtis
australis, the Micocoulier of the south of France: not to mention
Helleborus foetidus, Aquilegia vulgaris, Alyssum calycimum, Potentilla
reptans, and sundry common Ranunculi and Helianthema.


No. II.: Tarragona, Valencia, Zaragoza [1]

the place in spain which added most to my Barcelona stock of plants, was
Tarragona; a fortified town, picturesquely situated on a hill
overlooking a broad space of sea from north to south, and commanding
westward a wide stretch of uneven rocky ground, in which cultivation and
waste are blended in varying proportions. I will not lengthen the record
by speaking again of any plant mentioned in my former paper, except
Dorycnium suffruticosum, Lonicera implexa, and Phagnalon saxatile, all
of which I here found in flower; and except the Prickly Pear and
Palmetto, which I have already mentioned that I first saw at this place.
Here too was another Cistus, with large white flowers, Cistus
umbellatus, a Helianthemum of some writers; and growing copiously on a
wild rocky hill, the original Gladiolus of our flower-gardens, G.
byzantinus, far more beautiful, to my thinking, than the spotted ones of
modern introduction. This plant I had only before seen wild at Floridia,
near Syracuse. It is not a plant of the French Flora, though France can
boast of several species of this fine genus. The one I best know, G.
communis of Bertoloni, segetum of Grenier and Godron,15 which grows
profusely in the corn at Avignon and elsewhere, is of a paler colour
than G. byzantinus, with petals of more unequal length, and hung more
loosely together. The G. communis of the French botanists I do not
know.16

But Tarragona supplied too great a harvest of botanical treasures to be
catalogued wtihout some sort of arrangement. To begin, then, at the
beginning, I will first mention Clematis Flammula, the decumbent though
climbing species of the south of Europe; where however the more
luxuriant Clematis of our own hedges and thickets is also not
unfrequent. This last I do not remember seeing in Spain, except at
Monserrat. Of Fumitories there were two, the parviflora, and a less
common plant, with a dense oval head of dark flowers, F. spicata. The
remaining Thalamiflorae which I noticed were those common garrigue
Helianthemums, Edition: current; Page: [300] the white H. pilosum
(allied to polifolium) and that very variable plant, the bright-yellow
H. italicum; three species of Silene, S. quinquevulnera, S. hispida (I
believe) of Desfontaines, recognized by the Flore de France only as a
Corsican plant,17 and a third (S. turbinata), not in the French Flora at
all, which will be more particularly mentioned hereafter; Althaea
hirsuta, a plant rather general in the South; Erodium romanum, still
more common, resembling a large-flowered E. cicutarium, without a stem;
and one of the common Rues of the south of France (with the
characteristic odour), Ruta angustifolia. Of Leguminosae there was still
greater variety. To many of the Barcelona species were added Lotus
edulis, with its thick curved pods, a plant which I had found in Sicily;
and a Melilotus, I believe sulcata; the densely downy Medicago marina,
the only beach plant in flower here at this period of the season; a
Scorpiurus, probably the common species, S. subvillosa, though its
backward condition disables me from speaking positively; and a
Hippocrepis, much more curious than the comosa, H. ciliata, whose
slender, jointed, crescent-shaped pods are scooped out on the inner side
in bay-like, nearly circular indentations, penetrating beyond the middle
of the breadth, and justifying the title of Horse-shoe Vetch. This plant
was long confounded with H. multisiliquosa, L., which it seems is a
different species; but those who have seen our plant side by side with
H. unisiliquosa, will feel tempted to persist in giving it the
contrasted name. The next in order of the plants which I noticed, is the
blue Asperula arvensis. The Compositae included the common Immortelle of
the garrigues, Helichrysum Stoechas; a Santolina (I believe) which I
also found further south, but which I will not venture to name; the
brilliant Chrysanthemum coronarium, only coming into flower; a most
delicate little plant, the annual Daisy (Bellis annua), more daintily
coloured but more humble-looking than even its better-known sister; and
lastly, one of the most curious of the Cynareae, Leuzea conifera, not
six inches high, with a flower occupying half its length, like a
yellowish-white cone, with a small opening at the top. The Corolliflorae
were many and interesting: the exquisitely coloured Anagallis caerulea;
the splendid Convolvulus althaeoides, in size resembling C. sepium, L.,
in colour, C. arvensis; the creeping Echium calycinum, one of the least
beautiful of its handsome tribe; our common Snapdragon, Antirrhinum
majus, which here and in Languedoc is as splendid as in English
flower-gardens; Linaria triphyllos, a plant of cultivated ground, and
its taller but less conspicuous sister, L. simplex; one of the
handsomest of the genus Orobanche, O. speciosa, in the same field as the
Linaria first mentioned; Plantago Lagopus, and the rarer and more
curious P. albicans; and six of the family Labiatae, being Mentha
rotundifolia; the common Lavender, Lavandula Spica; that common plant of
the south of Europe, Sideritis romana; Salvia clandestina (otherwise
horminoides), an ally of S. verbenaca; Edition: current; Page: [301]
Micromeria graeca, one of a small-leaved, wiry genus, detached from
Satureia, and characteristic of the extreme south of Europe; and, last
of all, the magnificent Phlomis Lychnitis, covered with a grey down all
over, except the large bright-yellow flowers. This genus counts, I
believe, only three European species, which are at the head of European
Labiatae in the size and brilliancy combined with the multitude of their
flowers. One of the species, P. Herba-venti, is widely and rather
copiously branched, forming, though herbaceous, a kind of small bush; it
is found at Montpellier and other places in the south of France. Our
species, P. Lychnitis, has a simple stem, with great whorls of flowers,
like those of the taller and still more magnificent ornament of Sicily
and Greece, P. fruticosa. The Apetalae I noticed were Euphorbia
flavicoma, segetalis, and Paralias (the last not yet in flower); an
Urtica of the pilulifera section, possibly pilulifera itself, which I
did not stop to determine; and the picturesque Passerina hirsuta, not a
beach plant, but seldom or never found far from the sea, and which in
February hangs in profusion from the cliffs of Bagnoli, on the approach
to Pozzuoli from Naples. Of Monocotyledonous plants the handsomest I
saw, except the Gladiolus, was a plant looking like a Scilla or
Hyacinthus, and with small pendent flowers, of a bluish colour (if I
remember right) while growing, but turning red in drying. The petals,
which are united at the base, consist of three shorter and broader,
alternating with and included within the same number of longer. This I
decided to be Uropetalum serotinum (Lachenalia serotina of some
authors). I found but one specimen. A more singular plant was an
Asparagus, of which more hereafter. These, with Juncus acutus, on wet
ground near the sea, and two grasses, Gastridium lendigerum and the
beautiful Lamarckia aurea (which, in spite of its name, is, at least
until withered, rather silvery than golden), complete the record of the
best and richest herborization (that of Monserrat excepted) which I have
made on Spanish soil. Properly however it was not one, but two
herborizations on the same ground, at an interval of about a fortnight.

From each of the other centres at which I halted in my journey, I made
but one botanizing expedition. The results however were not without
interest.

The plain, well named Huerta (garden) of Valencia, has been often
described. It is a rich mass of cultivation, fertilized by the elaborate
system of irrigation for which it is indebted to the Moors, consisting
of canals traversing the country above its level, from which large or
small ramifications are carried into or along the edge of every field.
The rivers, which from the shortness of their course are nowhere
considerable, are so drained by the canals that in summer they may be
crossed dry-shod as they approach the sea. A region of this character is
seldom favourable to the botanist; and the mountains, if that name may
be given to the heights which support the great plateau of Castille, are
too far off to be within reach of an ordinary excursion. The wild plants
therefore were chiefly those of cultivated ground, or of the damp
borders of streams; of the former class, two were especially abundant
and conspicuous: Allium roseum, which had delighted me on the hills of
Patras and Edition: current; Page: [302] elsewhere, with its umbels of
brilliant flowers; and a tall large-flowered Silene, with something of
the port and colour of the elegant Lychnis Viscaria. This plant, which
is not in the French Flora, I make out to be S. turbinata of Gussone.18
Of more common plants I observed Anagallis arvensis, and a frequent corn
plant in eastern and southern Europe, Saponaria Vaccaria. The waterside
species which I remarked were Euphorbia pilosa, a large species, in a
dense greyish coat, which frequents similar situations in the valley of
the Rhone, and other parts of the South; the universal Iris Pseudacorus;
and a gigantic Thalictrum, which I had not the means of determining.
This is a poor tale of plants for so southern a region; but after about
an hour’s walk, I came to a patch of rocky ground, which, being above
the region of the irrigation, had remained in the state of garrigue, or
had only vines and olives growing on it, and this furnished me with
plants of a different order and greater variety. Here I first saw the
lurid and night-odorous Stock of English greenhouses, Matthiola tristis,
a plant which also grows in Provence. The garrigue abounded with the
narrow-leaved and silvery Convolvulus Cneorum, bringing reminiscences of
Megara and Corinth. A Hedysarum, I believe H. humile, made its
appearance in small quantity, as did the uniformly grey and downy
Mercurialis tomentosa, unlike the dark-green hue of the two English
species, and with its fructification not spiked but clustered or
solitary. Here I again saw Hippocrepis ciliata and Smilax aspera. The
decumbent Alkanna tinctoria (formerly a Lithospermum) spread out as
usual its stems close to the ground, with their terminal clusters of
blue flowers, and their thick covering of leaves, incrusted underneath
with the dense calcareous soil in which the plant delights. In the
herbarium it sometimes stains the paper with a violet dye. I found here,
though in small quantity, a species not French (angustifolia, I
believe), of the very southern genus Sideritis, which, by its wiry look
and the spinous induration of its sepals, speaks plainly of the arid
climates in which it flourishes. But the strangest plant I saw was a
bushy mass of Thorns, exactly resembling a small furze-bush in winter,
when without traces of leaves; until, on looking for the yellow
papilionaceous blossoms, I perceived instead a profusion of small
greenish hexandrous flowers, pendent on short thin footstalks from near
the axillae of the wiry and thorny sprays projecting from the stem. By
the aid of Persoon I identified this as a plant of Spain, and especially
of this part of it, Asparagus horridus.19 It is the same which I
afterwards found, in my way back, at Tarragona.

The only other noticeable plant which I saw at Valencia was the stately
Asphodelus ramosus, of which I had seen at Tarragona a few roots (as I
believed) still far from flowering. It does not seem to be a common
plant in these parts of Spain, though widely spread in the Mediterranean
region. It abounds in many parts of Languedoc and Provence, near Rome
and in some other parts of Italy; and in Edition: current; Page: [303]
Sicily it, together with the Palmetto, covers nearly all the
uncultivated ground. I am afraid, indeed, that the meadows, celebrated
by poets, from which Proserpine was carried off while gathering flowers
with her attendant maidens, were in truth no other than these Asphodel
wastes, which, notwithstanding the beauty of the plant, are by no means
so pleasing to the eye or the mind as a real English or mountain meadow.
This Asphodel is now called by French botanists A. microcarpus. It is
confined to the hotter districts of Europe. There is another species or
race, called by them A. subalpinus, which covers in large masses the
middle regions of some of the higher Pyrenees, and it is said also of
the Alps. On a superficial view this is not distinguishable from the
former. A. albus is also a French species, and there is another allied
to it, which has only of late become known in France itself, for it is
not mentioned by De Candolle. It was seen by the present writer in its
native place before the publication of the third volume of Grenier and
Godron, in which it is for the first time distinguished and described.20
It has been named by them A. sphaerocarpus, and I will venture to make
it the subject of a short digression.

Perhaps English botanists may some day turn their steps towards a region
not yet much frequented by them, but which has many claims to their
notice,—the peninsula of Brittany. The tour of this province is one of
the most attractive short Continental excursions which an Englishman can
make. In the first place, it is about the cheapest; a consideration no
less important to botanists than to others, their pursuit not being one
of those which bring in a golden harvest. The inn charges, when once
fairly within the peninsula, are (or were half-a-dozen years ago) less
than two-thirds of the ordinary scale of travelling in France. Besides
being the cheapest, this excursion is one of the most beautiful of those
which are easily and quickly accessible, and its style of beauty is that
which English people usually prefer. The interior resembles, more nearly
than anything else on the Continent, the wilder and rockier parts of
England, while the coast scenery rivals that of Cornwall. The journey
also naturally combines with a visit to that corner of the British
dominions so interesting to an English botanist and to a political
economist, the Channel Islands. The north coast of Brittany has not, as
far as I could observe, much of botanical attraction, if we except the
neighbourhood of Dinan, which produces Galeopsis villosa, Gratiola
officinalis, Sinapis Cheiranthus, Sedum album, reflexum, and rubens,
Tragopogon porrifolius, and others. But the southern coast, from the
peninsula of Penmarch to the Loire, unites the attraction of rare plants
with that of its unrivalled Druidical remains. Among these last, the
traveller will scarcely fail to visit those of the peninsula of
Locmariaker; and if he does so, it should not be from Auray, but from
Vannes, in a boat down the river, and across the gulf or inland sea
known as the Mer de Morbihan. Among the numerous islands (the popular
imagination reckons three hundred and sixty-five) Edition: current;
Page: [304] with which the sea is studded, he will doubtless land on a
small one bearing the name of Gâvr Innis, and containing one of the
rarest of Druidical monuments, a chamber entirely covered in, smaller
certainly than the remarkable one near Saumur, but excelling it in being
subterraneous, and (what is still more important) solitary. This island
is full of the Asphodel in question. I was told that it grows on several
of the other islands, and that its white flowers (replaced when I saw it
in June by red fruits) are the glory in spring of this marine region.
The authors of the Flore de France enumerate four other localities, all
in the west or west centre of France, but three of these four have a
mark of interrogation attached to them by the authors.21


No. III.: Tarragona, Valencia, Zaragoza [2]

from valencia to madrid we travelled all the way by railroad, and had no
opportunity of botanizing, except an hour’s walk at the point where the
Valencia branch meets the Alicante line. This point is Almansa, in the
kingdom of Murcia, and the railway-station is in the very field of
battle, where the English arms sustained one of the few defeats they
underwent in the war of Marlborough and Queen Anne.22 To write the name
Almanza is in every way a mistake; it is spelt with and s, and that
letter in Spanish is never sounded like z. The shabby-looking little
country town, which I only saw from outside, is still, probably, much
what it was then. The adjacent country was mostly, at this season, in a
freshly-ploughed state, and my botanizing was limited to a strip of
ground between two lines of cultivation. There, however, I found Adonis
autumnalis, Sisymbrium Irio and Sophia, Erysimum perfoliatum, a Camelina
(I believe sylvestris), Hypecoum procumbens, a single plant of another
Hypecoum, H. pendulum, the curiously podded Enarthrocarpus arcuatus, and
the fine dark-coloured Poppy, Roemeria hybrida. It is remarkable (and
could scarcely have happened at any season but early spring) that all
the plants I saw were of the three neighbouring families, Ranunculaceae,
Papaveraceae, and Cruciferae.

While at Madrid I did not botanize; the time we passed there was
occupied with the town itself, and especially its almost unrivalled
picture-gallery, which they who have not seen are unacquainted with one
of the two great schools of painting of the world. The neighbouring
country is a treeless and bushless expanse of corn—a uniform green in
spring, a melancholy stubble in autumn—comprising the lofty plateau of
Castille, of which the monotonous swell has neither the variety of hills
nor the imposingness of a real plain. It is as unpromising to the
botanist as it Edition: current; Page: [305] is unattractive to the
lover of nature, to whose eye everything about the capital of todas las
Españas is wearisome, save at the few points from which he can look over
the north edge of the plateau, across a broad valley, to the snowclad
mountains of Guadarrama, by the blasts from which sentries are said to
have been frozen to death at the gates of Queen Isabella’s palace.23

My next botanizing was in a walk in the dusk near Guadalaxara, the place
where the railway from Madrid towards Zaragoza at that time terminated;
it has since been extended further. This little town is made imposing by
the vast château of the Mendozas, a building which tells of Spain in
what are called her great ages, being in reality the ages by which she
was ruined. The only new plant which met my eye was Reseda undata, now
identified with R. alba, a plant of our gardens, sometimes found in
England as an escape from culture, to me indissolubly associated with
the place where I first saw it, the ruins of Nero’s Golden House.24

I was more successful at Alcolea, the small village mentioned in my
former paper,25 halfway between Guadalaxara and Calatayud, the first
considerable town in Aragon. The plants which were here in flower, were
those of a much earlier time of year, owing to the great elevation of
the plateau on which, though now drawing near to its eastern boundary,
we still were. Though it was the 1st of May, Genista scorpius (which
near Avignon begins to flower in February) had not yet expanded its
buds. Erysimum perfoliatum also, was not yet in flower. Hutchinsia
petraea, the plant of St. Vincent Rocks and Eltham churchyard, was
there; Potentilla verna, another Clifton plant; two Crucifers which grow
near Rome and flower in March, Arabis verna and the less beautiful
Calapina Corvini; another Arabis, probably ciliata; two Veronicae of the
earliest spring, hederaefolia and triphyllos; an Alyssum, new to me,
which I believe to be A. perusianum, a plant noted in the Flore de
France, with only one habitat (in the Eastern Pyrenees);26
Ceratocephalus falcatus, formerly classed as a Ranunculus, whose small
flower gives birth to an oval head of scythe-shaped carpels, sometimes
equalling in dimensions all the rest of the plant; and last of all,
abounding among the young corn, a plant of the Order Primulaceae, with a
small bright flower sunk in the hollow of a very large calyx, which I
did not at first see to be a lowland species of the highland genus
Androsace; it is A. maxima, which I found again at Zaragoza, and the
seeds of which are said in the country to be edible. Of plants not in
flower I noted only a Euphorbia and the formidable Thistle Picnomon
Acarna.

From Zaragoza, the prosperous capital of a backward province, noted for
its glorious siege and for its two splendid cathedrals, I made a
successful herborization. The immediate vicinity contains abundance both
of waste and Edition: current; Page: [306] cultivated land, dry rocky
garrigue, and low arable, fertilized by water tumbling in cascades from
sluices in a broad canal carried along a very high embankment. Of plants
already mentioned I noted Roemeria hybrida, Fumaria spicata, Mathiola
tristis, Lepidium Draba, Sisymbrium obtusangulum and Irio, two
Helianthema, Genista Scorpius, and I believe Calycotome spinosa,
Hippocrepis ciliata and comosa, Vicia triflora, Paronychia argentea,
Helichrysum Stoechas, Thymus vulgaris (a variety with a lemon scent),
Plantago Lagopus and albicans, Mercurialis tomentosa, Asphodelus
fistulosus, and a small variety of A. ramosus. I have hardly anywhere
seen Ranunculus repens so magnificent. The following were new to me, in
Spain at least:—an Adonis, I believe A. microcarpa; Papaver hybridum in
profusion; the richly-coloured Glaucium corniculatum (otherwise
phoeniceum), a plant also of Avignon; a cruciferous siliculose plant of
dried-up appearance, not unlike in aspect to an advanced state of
Alyssum campestre or calycinum, but which proved on examination to be
Berteroa incana; a tall Reseda allied to lutea, I believe R.
fruticulosa; to Hippocrepis ciliata was added a larger species, with
pods similarly jointed and scooped out, H. unisiliquosa; the spreading
Hedypnois polymorpha, with its clumsy club-like peduncles; the
red-flowered and downy-coated Cynoglossum cheirifolium, one of the
handsomest of its tribe; a fine dark-flowered Teucrium, not in the
French Flora,—I made it out to be T. thymifolium; lastly, a tiny grass,
with a round, rather prickly head, Echinaria capitata.

At Lerida my botanizing was limited to a single field, but in that small
space (besides Alyssum calycinum and the beautiful Anchusa italica of
our gardens, a common cornfield plant in Spain and all over southern
Europe as high up as Burgundy on the east and La Vendée on the west) I
found four plants which I did not see elsewhere in Spain; two species of
Silene, S. conica, and the rarer, more stately, and larger-flowered S.
conoidea; a less handsome, not to say ugly, Boragineous plant, Nonnea
ventricosa, one of the roughest of its rough tribe, without the usual
lustrous beauty of their flowers; and the rather vulgar-looking sister
of an otherwise most elegant race, Malcolmia africana.

Between Lerida and Tarragona I saw from the diligence the following
plants, scattered in abundance over the country:—Roemeria hybrida,
Lepidium Draba, Cistus (if I mistake not) umbellatus, Ulex parviflorus,
Convolvulus althaeoides, Cynoglossum cheirifolium, Mercurialis
tomentosa, a Gladiolus, and the blue Aphyllanthes monspeliensis. To
these I will subjoin the following, which seemed universal in the parts
of Spain which I have botanically visited:—Adonis autumnalis, Lychnis
vespertina, Agrostemma Githago, Vicia sativa, Scandix Pecten-Veneris,
Maruta Cotula, Podospermum laciniatum, Hieracium sylvaticum, or some of
the many species (or supposed species) allied to it, Anchusa italica,
Lycopsis arvensis, Lithospermum arvense and officinale, Plantago
Coronopus and lanceolata. And here ends Spanish botanizing, with the
exception of a visit to Monserrat, and two days at the end of May in the
Spanish Pyrenees, of Edition: current; Page: [307] which I will
endeavour to give some account in a future number of the Phytologist.27


No. IV.: Monserrat

the celebrated mountain Monserrat (which there is no good reason for
writing with the French orthography, Montserrat), consists of a long
range of many summits, which from their peak-like and serrated
appearance, when seen from far off, might be supposed to be of slate.
The greater is the surprise of the traveller when he finds on approach,
that the whole mountain is composed of pudding-stone, and that the
turrets and pinnacles are not pointed, but rounded. The highest summit
is stated to be 3800 feet above the sea, from which its distance is not
great, and the mountain is a conspicuous object from the coast road,
south of Barcelona. From the northern, or rather north-eastern coast, it
could also be seen for a considerable space, were not the view
intercepted by intervening high ground. From the range behind Barcelona,
a fine view of it may be had; but at an angle which does not give it the
advantage of its entire length. It is only from the Tarragona road, at a
considerable distance from Barcelona, that it can be seen spread out
lengthwise in its full dimensions. On a ledge in a receding hollow (or
coomb) of the mountain, nearly in the middle of its length, and
seemingly about the middle of its height (though really much lower),
stands the famous monastery. Like the other monasteries of Spain, once
so wealthy and powerful, it is now shorn of its glories; but it is still
inhabited by a few monks, though in a number disproportioned to the size
and aspect of the edifice, and their hospitality is extended to
travellers to the extent of lodging, but not of food; which last is
supplied at a tolerable restaurant within the precincts of the convent,
the utility of which establishment atones for its violation of the
religio loci. The lodging in the convent itself is gratuitous; but
travellers who can afford it, make a donation (also gratuitous) to the
funds of the convent. The sleeping chambers, or cells, are neat,
sufficiently commodious, beautifully clean, and the views from their
windows magnificent. The one which I occupied looked across the hollow
of the mountain, upon the splendidly wooded other horn of the crescent,
then vocal with numerous nightingales. A copious spring, which issues
from the mountain just outside the gateway, had, no doubt, a share in
originally deciding the locality of the convent.

The easiest way to Monserrat from Barcelona is by the Manresa railway,
one of the four which diverge from that city. From the railway station
to the mountain there is a broad and good carriage-road, by means of
which tourists and pilgrims are landed in the very yard of the convent,
from that universal symbol and Edition: current; Page: [308] instrument
of modern civilization, an omnibus. If this commodious mode of access
makes the expedition less romantic, it does not make the place less
beautiful. The prosaic vehicle winds its way up the mountain-side
through, for the South, a rather dense wood, which, more or less open,
according as the woodcutters have been more or less recently in
operation, covers a great part of the mountain, both in its higher and
lower regions. There is another mode of approach at the southern end of
the mountain from the Martorell station of the Valencia railway; but on
this side there is neither carriage nor road, but a mule-path only, and
travellers must make their way up the mountain and along its side to the
convent, either on foot or mounted. Beyond the monastery there is no
road higher up; but mountain paths are not deficient. The path to the
top, after a stiff climb, leads for a considerable distance along a
wooded ravine hemmed in by summits of a pillar-like or sugar-loaf
character. The view from the highest of these includes the greater part
of Catalonia, northward to the Pyrenees, westward and southward towards
the Segre and the Ebro.

I can hardly speak in sufficiently strong terms of the profusion and
variety of the flowers, southern and northern, Mediterranean, subalpine,
and almost alpine, which covered the mountain-side when I saw it; not
always in separate regions, but often mixed together on the same spot.
It is fitting to begin with the trees and shrubs, which, still more than
flowers, give the general character to a landscape. The Quercus Ilex and
coccifera of the South (the latter not so plentiful as in many other
places) are combined with the Holly (Ilex Aquifolium) of the North. A
denizen of both equally, the Box-tree (Buxus sempervirens), here attains
a lofty growth. The Juniper of our chalk downs (Juniperus communis) is
joined with J. phoenicea, a Southern and a garrigue plant. With Celtis
australis, the Micocoulier, a Mediterranean tree, is found the Mountain
Ash (Pyrus Aucuparia) of the North. Another flowering rosaceous shrub,
Amelanchier vulgaris, abounds, as it usually does where there are clefts
in calcareous rocks, from the stony hills of Provence to the chalk
cliffs above the Seine in Normandy. The Laurustinus (Viburnum Tinus), a
plant of Italy and the south of France, is side by side with another of
the same genus, V. Lantana, the Wayfaring-tree of our chalk hills.
Phillyrea media and Rhamnus Alaternus, natives of the garrigue, which
reach English shrubberies, are accompanied by the Mastic, Pistacia
Lentiscus, the Terebinth, P. Terebinthus, and the universal Hedera
Helix.

But the flowers of Monserrat are more various and remarkable than the
wood products. I have seen few places in the South where the vernal
wood-flowers are so abundant. The blue colour is that which
predominates. The lovely Hepatica, of which the pink is rare compared
with the far more beautiful blue variety, glistens from under every
thicket. A flower of still deeper blue, our early Polygala calcarea,
helps perhaps even more to colour the mountain-side. Viola canina is in
like profusion; as is also, in the barer places, the peculiarly Southern
Aphyllanthes monspeliensis, a leafless plant (as the name indicates), of
the Order Junceae, but Edition: current; Page: [309] which, wherever it
grows, studs the ground with ornamental blue flowers, each division of
the corolla marked by a midrib of a deeper blue. In the lower regions of
the mountain, Linum narbonense expands its still finer and larger blue
flowers, the most magnificent of their tribe. In the shady woods, our
Columbine, Aquilegia vulgaris, is not unfrequent. Another of the most
abundant flowers is Globularia vulgaris, a plant unknown to England
(though not requiring a very Southern climate), whose round heads are
also blue, though of a less beautiful tint. Another plant of the same
genus, G. Alypum, is also here met with, a more decidedly Southern
species, though rarer even in the South than G. vulgaris. Of flowers
other than blue, one of the most plentiful—it is so indeed wherever it
grows in the Pyrenees, the Cevennes, or the burning rocky wastes of the
Mediterranean—is the rosy Saponaria Ocymoides, with its masses of
blossom carpeting the ground. Anthyllis Vulneraria is frequent; that is,
its red-flowered variety, much the commonest in the South. Of Cisti I
only saw the purple C. albidus, the most beautiful of the common
species, and only matched by the very similar C. villosus, which
supplies its place in Sicily and Greece. But there were numerous
Helianthema, among which one white (probably H. apenninum) and several
yellow, which, not feeling quite certain that I have determined them
rightly, I forbear to name. The red Valerian, Centranthus ruber (which
we possess, though probably naturalized, in Greenhithe chalk-pits and
other places in Kent), here showed its dark-red masses; a fact rather
exceptional, for I have found C. angustifolius much more common, both in
the French Alps, the Pyrenees and the mountains of the south of France.
On a turfy part of the mountain-side, at a considerable elevation, I
found Ranunculus gramineus, a handsome and rather rare plant allied to
R. Flammula and Lingua; and at a height above that, Arbutus Uva-ursi
(now Arctostaphylos) spread out its luxuriant stems and pitcher-like
flowers. The small yellow Narcissus, N. juncifolius, formerly confounded
with N. Jonquilla, grew copiously in the same region; and near the
summit of the mountain (on the grassy ledge on which are the ruins of
the highest hermitage, that named after St. Jerome),28 N. biflorus, more
beautiful than even N. poeticus, filled the air with rich fragrance.

But the plant most associated with Monserrat is Ramondia pyrenaica,
known to those who have botanized at Gavarnie, Esquierry, and other
places in the Higher Pyrenees, as one of the most exquisite vegetable
productions of that mountain chain. This plant, the only European
representative of the Order Cyrtandraceae, was earliest known and
described (under the name Verbascum Myconi) as a Monserrat plant; these
excepted, it has, I believe, no other known habitat. I was fortunate
enough to find on a rock, a plant or two already in flower; not on the
higher part of the mountain, but on its lower slope, very near the
carriage-road. Edition: current; Page: [310] Though I possessed far more
beautiful specimens collected on the rocky side of the torrent at
Gavarnie, it gave me great pleasure to find it in what, if not its first
abode, is at least the first place in which it was scientifically
recognized.

The remaining plants which I observed on Monserrat I shall enumerate in
the usual order. They are doubtless but a small part of the botanical
riches of the mountain, so many plants being, at this early time of the
year (the second week of May, in a very backward season), not only not
in flower, but not yet recognizable. Of Ranunculaceae, there were
Clematis Vitalba and two Thalictra; one of these had not even begun to
flower; another, in the lower region of the mountain, and in very small
quantity, had barely begun, and I could not with certainty determine it.
Its appearance is not the usual one of a Thalictrum, and if a French
species, it must be T. tuberosum. Ranunculus gramineus I have mentioned,
to which add R. bulbosus and Helleborus foetidus. Of Crucifers, I saw
Arabis sagittata, Gerardi, and Turrita; Cardamine hirsuta; Biscutella
laevigata abundantly, the smooth, though hard form, which justifies the
name (not B. ambigua, the common one of the South, now generally
accounted a variety of the former); an Erysimum; Sisymbrium Irio,
Columnae, and obtusangulum; Diplotaxis erucoides; and, of course,
Alyssum calycinum, and Lepidium Draba. The Resedae were represented by
R. Phyteuma and R. fruticulosa. The Caryophylleae, by Silene italica,
with other large and small species of that genus, not in flower; and an
Arenaria unknown to me. Of Oxalideae, I noticed O. corniculata; of
Geraniaceae, only two Erodiums, E. ciconium and malachoides. Leguminosae
were, as usual, abundant. Besides Calycotome spinosa and Genista
Scorpius, there was a light-green dwarf Genista, one of several species
which have leaves on the upper part and only thorns on the lower part;
the real Spanish broom, G. hispanica. The Cytisi were C. argenteus, and
that bush of golden flowers, C. sessilifolius. The Astragali were A.
monspessulanus, and a species with pods like large hooks, A. hamosus.
Besides these, and the Anthyllis already mentioned, there were Dorycnium
suffruticosum, Lotus corniculatus, Psoralea bituminosa, Coronilla
Emerus, Hippocrepis comosa (unless I mistook H. glauca for it),
Arthrolobium scorpioides, and Lathyrus setifolius. Of Rosaceae, besides
several Roses not yet in flower, there were Pyrus communis, Potentilla
verna, the wild Strawberry (Fragaria vesca), and Poterium Sanguisorba.
Umbellifers, at this season, I could scarcely expect to find; I only
noticed, of course not in flower, the common Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)
and the tall Bupleurum fruticosum, with its large, entire, coriaceous
leaves. I observed Momordica Elaterium, the European representative of
the Cucumber tribe; several Honeysuckles, Lonicera implexa, Xylosteum,
and perhaps others; various Sedums, one apparently altissimum, and a
Rubia, probably peregrina; none of these however were in flower. Several
Galiums were, but I did not stop to determine them. The Compositae which
I was able to recognize at this season were, Pallenis (formerly
Buphthalmum) spinosa, Calendula arvensis, Urospermum Dalechampii and
picroides, (all common plants); Crepis albida, a fine Edition: current;
Page: [311] mountain plant, which seemed as much at home here as in the
Pyrenees; a Santolina, and, I believe, a Phagnalon; the last two not yet
in flower. The Heaths were Erica arborea, and another (probably
multiflora) out of flower. Of Primulaceae, I only noticed Anagallis
arvensis. Of Boragineae, an early-flowering Order, there were several:
Asperugo procumbens exhibited its ugly form in luxuriant tangled masses,
under the walls of the convent. On the mountain-side the handsome
Lithospermum fruticosum put forth its blue funnel-shaped flowers. Echium
vulgare and Borrago officinalis make up the list. Of the Order Solaneae
I only remarked Hyoscyamus niger, a plant very widely diffused, though
seldom abundant in any of its localities (an English station, the
chalk-hill near Boxley, is an exception). There was a Verbascum,
resembling V. Thapsus, Antirrhinum majus, and an Orobanche of a
blood-red colour. Labiatae, a numerous Order on the calcareous wastes of
the South, were rather frequent, and later in the year there are, no
doubt, many more. Lavandula Spica and Phlomis Lychnitis were there, but
not yet in flower; Thymus vulgaris and Rosmarinus officinalis of course;
Salvia clandestina; a Teucrium not in flower, I believe the
dark-coloured one which I had found near Zaragoza; Sideritis hirsuta,
one of the goodliest of its stiff genus. Of Plantains, I saw only the
common Plantago Cynops. Of Apetalae, only Daphne Laureola, and four
Euphorbiae, E. Characias, serrata, amygdaloides, and another. The
Monocotyledoneae, besides those previously mentioned, were Orchis
mascula; Gladiolus byzantinus (in the hot lower regions); the furze-like
Asparagus (A. horridus), which I first found at Valencia; Tamus
communis; Smilax aspera; Ruscus aculeatus, a plant which looks more
congenial to the South than to the damp thickets which shelter it in our
own country; Convallaria Polygonatum; Asphodelus ramosus and fistulosus,
and lastly, though not yet in flower, Lilium Martagon, that ornament of
mountain woods on the continent of Europe, which though existing in
profuse abundance in several similar localities in our south-eastern
counties, an idle scrupulosity so long kept out of our British Floras.

Here I am obliged to end what is no doubt a very scanty sample of the
treasures by which, a botanist able to visit Monserrat repeatedly and at
various seasons, might hope to have his labour rewarded. There only
remains to be recorded a two days’ excursion in the Spanish Pyrenees,
and my memoranda of Spanish botany will have been exhausted.


No. V.: Spanish Pyrenees; Andorra

a short excursion from the French to the Spanish side of the Pyrenees,
about a fortnight after the termination of our tour in Spain, yielded
some botanical acquisitions which deserve to be added to the brief
records already given of Spanish botany. The interval had been passed in
the richest botanical districts of Edition: current; Page: [312] the
Eastern Pyrenees, but with results unexpectedly scanty, the backwardness
of the season having deprived me of the majority of the plants which I
might otherwise have reasonably expected. I hoped that on the southern
side of the chain I might have better fortune; nor was I altogether
disappointed.

We crossed the watershed of the Eastern Pyrenees at the head of the long
oblique valley of the river Tet, which during the greatest part of its
length forms, not a right, but an acute angle with the general direction
of the mountain-chain. The range is crossed, not by a pass, but by a
considerable breadth of gently sloping and waving corn country, which,
though flanked by lofty summits and dark fir woods, is as easily
traversable by an army as Salisbury Plain, and an invasion of either
country from the other at this point would meet with no physical
obstacles near the summit, whatever they might possibly find in the
defiles lower down. Accordingly, the deficiency of natural is made up,
on the French side at least, by artificial defences. A green knoll on
the border of the waving country is crested by one of the most strongly
fortified military posts in the country, the town of Mont Louis,—for a
town in all respects it is, though with only a few hundred
inhabitants,—overtopped by a citadel, the work of Vauban,29 larger than
the town itself. At this point the French territory projects for some
miles on the Spanish side of the Pyrenees, as the Spanish territory does
on the French side about the head-waters of the Garonne. French
Cerdagne, as it is still popularly called, forms a richly cultivated
valley, or rather, inclined plane, of such width as to make the high
mountains which bound it appear what I might almost call distant. This
fertile slope is terminated by a little stream, which separates
Bourg-Madame, the frontier village in the French territory, from
Puycerda, the capital of Spanish Cerdagne, a genuine Spanish town of
some importance, on a height which projects far into the valley, and
commands, from a small planted promenade on its southern side, a view
over the Spanish part of the valley and the adjoining mountains, which
it was worth the whole journey to see. From Puycerda to Urgel, the chief
place in this part of the Spanish Pyrenees, is a long day’s journey on
foot or on muleback. The valley differs from mountain valleys in general
in being more picturesque in the descent than in the ascent, the upper
extremity, as may be gathered from what has already been said, being the
tamest instead of the boldest part of its Alpine panorama. The beauty
seemed always to increase as we descended the valley, Urgel itself being
the most beautiful place in the whole descent.

The Flora of this district, as usual on the southern declivities of
mountain ranges, is a mixture of mountain plants with those of the
plains below. In the upper part of the valley the meadows have the
floral magnificence characteristic of the Pyrenees, where the open
mountain pastures in June, before the grass has been cut or the cattle
driven in among them, are often one mass of bloom, giving its colour
Edition: current; Page: [313] to the mountain sides from a great
distance. The meadows for many miles below Puycerda were of this
character. They were as white with Narcissus poeticus as English meadows
at the same season are yellow with Buttercups. In other places the dark
variety of Columbine (Aquilegia vulgaris) divided the honours with the
Narcissus, or engrossed the larger part; while several Umbellifers in
full flower contributed a different kind of white colour to the mixture,
particularly Chaerophyllum hirsutum, with a plant resembling Pimpinella
magna, and, I believe, Ligusticum pyrenaeum; the fruits of neither being
yet in a state to admit of their being determined. The other plants of
which I made a note are the following:

Of Ranunculaceae, the finest, besides the Columbine, was Adonis flammea,
with flowers of the same bright colour but greater size than those of A.
autumnalis. A. pyrenaica, though common among the corn near
Bourg-Madame, I did not see on the Spanish side of the frontier. The
remaining Ranunculaceae were Clematis Vitalba and Flammula, Helleborus
foetidus (a plant universal in the Pyrenees), and Caltha palustris. The
Papaveraceae I saw were Papaver Rhoeas, Chelidonium majus, and Hypecoum
procumbens. There were, as usual, many Crucifers. Of Alyssums, there
were (besides A. calycinum) the plant which I had found at Alcolea, and
called A. perusianum, and a yellow species akin to montanum, A.
cuneifolium. Erysimum lanceolatum, a frequent plant of the Pyrenees, was
there, with its large bright yellow flowers; and three Sisymbria, S.
Sophia, obtusangulum, and a common Pyrenean species, with a mass of
flowers succeeded by long spikes of slender highly curved pods, S.
austriacum, the most common variety of which is otherwise known as
Sinapis pyrenaica. The only Arabis I noticed was, I believe, Gerardi.
The Biscutella was not the Monserrat species (or variety), but the
common Mediterranean plant, B. ambigua. I had previously found in the
valley of the Tet, near Fonpedrouze, a much rarer species, B.
cichoriifolia, resembling the former in little except the twin shields,
from which the genus derives its name. Of other Siliculosae, I noted
Iberis amara, Thlaspi arvense, Lepidium heterophyllum, the plant of
which our L. Smithii is classed by French botanists as a variety,30 and
the stately spreading Neslia paniculata, with its nearly globular pods.
The genus Cistus seemed wanting in this district, though one of its
noblest species, a Gum-Cistus, C. laurifolius, abounds where it was less
to be looked for, on the sloping side of the corresponding French
valley, a short distance below Mont Louis. The only Helianthemum I saw
was either H. vulgare or one of the plants which are sometimes reckoned
varieties of it. As might be expected, there were Reseda Phyteuma and
fruticulosa and Polygala vulgaris. The Caryophylleae visible were
Saponaria ocymoides and vaccaria, the common Lychnis vespertina and
Agrostemma Githago, Silene inflata, and the elegant S. saxifraga, with
its funnel-shaped flowers, so common in the mountain valleys of the
south of Europe. There were two splendid Linums, L. narbonense and a
Edition: current; Page: [314] smaller plant with paler flowers, which I
suppose to be decumbens, intermediate between tenuifolium and
suffruticosum. The Malvaceae were the common Malva rotundifolia and
sylvestris. The Geraniaceae were Erodium cicutarium, Geranium
Robertianum, sanguineum, and pyrenaicum. The name of the last,
mysterious to those to whom it is only known as a plant of Surrey and
Kent, is intelligible to those who have seen its abundance in the
Pyrenees. The Wild Vine (Vitis vinifera) spread its climbing stems and
grasping tendrils over the bushes.

Of Calyciflorae, I begin with the Terebinth-tree, Pistacia Terebinthus.
Leguminosae were, as usual, one of the most abundant of all the Orders.
Along with the Genista Scorpius of the plains there was G. sagittalis of
the mountains, and G. pilosa of both; all plants which by their beauty
do credit to this fine genus. Of Cytisi, there was the beautiful C.
sessilifolius. The only Trefoils I observed were T. pratense and repens;
but the prevailing Medicago was a special plant of the Eastern Pyrenees,
M. suffruticosa. The Viciae were in number five: V. sativa, sepium,
cracca, a glorious dark-purple species (V. onobrychioides), and the
duller-coloured V. pannonica. Lotus corniculatus and Hippocrepis comosa
abound here as everywhere. I saw but one Astragalus, I believe A.
purpureus, a purple-flowered, erect, rather dwarfish plant, approaching
to A. hypoglottis. I conclude the Order with the small decumbent
Sainfoin of southern Europe, Onobrychis supina. Of the Order Rosaceae,
there were Crataegus Oxyacantha, Amelanchier vulgaris, and Poterium
Sanguisorba; but the genus Rosa, above all, was in profusion. The town
of Urgel is in the midst of a sort of garden of wild Roses: every hedge
and enclosure is loaded with them in a quantity and of a size to which I
never saw even an approach elsewhere. The species must be numerous, but
I regret my inability to record them. The fatigue of the journey, the
multitude of other plants to determine and put into paper, and the
difficulty of dealing with this genus without the fruit and without
proper books, deterred me from the attempt. Rosa tomentosa, or some
species near to it, appeared to be one, and another resembled, in the
appearance of its stem, R. spinosissima, but with much larger flowers;
in fact, as I have already mentioned, the size of the Roses was quite as
remarkable as their profuse abundance.

Saxifraga Aizoon, now in full flower, one of the common mountain species
of the Alps and Pyrenees, dotted the rocks of the valley with its white
rosettes of spatulate coriaceous leaves. Sedums were numerous: among
others, S. acre, Telephium, and (though not in flower) altissimum, like
a large white-flowered S. reflexum. Another plant of the same Order,
Umbilicus pendulinus, as common on moist rocks and walls in the south of
Europe as in our western counties, was also present. Bryonia dioica was
visible, and Paronychia serpyllifolia, a mountain species, takes the
place of P. argentea. Of Umbellifers, besides those already mentioned, I
saw Heracleum Sphondylium (unless it was the very similar H.
pyrenaicum), Bupleurum rotundifolium, and, I believe, Orlaya platycarpa.
The Cornel-tree (Cornus sanguinea) was as common here as elsewhere. Of
the Order Edition: current; Page: [315] Caprifoliaceae, there were the
common Elders (Sambucus nigra and Ebulus), and two Honeysuckles,
Lonicera implexa of the plains, and Xylosteum of the mountains. There
were the blue Asperula arvensis and several Galia; two Valerianeae, V.
officinalis and Centranthus angustifolius; Dipsacus sylvestris, and a
Knautia, apparently a variety of K. arvensis.

Compositae were of course less numerous than in the plains or at a later
period of the year. There were, however, several. Achillea odorata, a
plant of southern Europe, like a dwarf A. Millefolium, with a sweet
smell of camomile, was one. With this was a Santolina, probably S.
Chamaecyparissias, an Artemisia, probably campestris, and the universal
Leucanthemum vulgare. Of Thistles on this occasion I have no note. The
Centauries were C. Cyanus, C. Scabiosa, and another species, not
uncommon on the less elevated mountains of the South, C. pectinata,
deriving its name from the comb-like structure of its involucral
appendages. Of Cichoraceous Compositae, I noticed Scorzonera humilis,
Tragopogon pratensis, a Hieracium (H. murorum?), the fine blue Lactuca
of Continental cornfields, which almost reaches our own latitudes, L.
perennis, and two much rarer plants, both of which I only found within a
short distance of Urgel, one in the bed of the torrent, a stiff, widely
branched plant, coated all over with a fine white wool, which I guessed
rather than ascertained to be Andryala macrocephala of Boissier;31 and,
growing within the spray of a waterfall, a Sonchus, with undivided
leaves, allied to S. maritimus, which was certainly S. crassifolius.

Passing now to the Corolliflorae, I did not find in this day’s journey
either Gentianeae or Primulaceae, plants which, for the most part,
require higher elevations, or at least cooler and moister valleys.
Vincetoxicum officinale, so abundant on calcareous soils, even far
north, and which ought to grow in England, was there; so also Privet
(Ligustrum vulgare), a plant equally at home in north and south; and the
only European Jasminum, J. fruticans, a yellow species, and rather
frequent in the south of France, but not beyond the Mediterranean
region. Our northern Ash, Fraxinus excelsior, grows here, which, in the
south, is principally a mountain tree. I saw no Convolvulus, except C.
arvensis, though I should have expected C. cantabrica, which comes up as
high, or higher, in other southern mountains. The Boragineae were not
remarkable: Echium vulgare, Lithospermum arvense and officinale, Anchusa
italica, Lycopsis arvensis, and our common Cynoglossum, C. officinale.
The Solaneae were Solanum Dulcamara, as common in the south as in the
north, and Hyoscyamus niger. There were several Verbascums, V. floccosum
apparently being one. Scrophularineae and Labiatae were, as might be
expected, the most numerous Orders; of the former there were
Scrophularia canina and nodosa, Rhinanthus glaber, Veronica Teucrium and
serpyllifolia, the stately Digitalis lutea, Linaria supina, and two
Antirrhinums proper—the pale-flowered A. Asarina, which, as in many
other parts of the Edition: current; Page: [316] Pyrenees, hangs like
tapestry on the perpendicular rocks, and A. latifolium, looking like a
yellow variety of majus. The Labiatae were Lavandula Spica and Mentha
sylvestris (the British plant so common in Switzerland), Salvia
clandestina, and another (I believe phlomoides), our ugly Ballota
foetida, Lamium maculatum, Stachys recta, which, like Digitalis lutea,
reaches northward as far as Normandy; both the Thymes, T. vulgaris and
Serpyllum; and in great abundance a common Sideritis, S. scordioides.
Globularia nana, as elsewhere in the Pyrenees, coated the rocks with its
small leaves, its numerous heads of flowers, and its clumsy woody stems,
so creeping that they seem adherent to the soil. An Armeria, seemingly
A. plantaginea, represented the Order Plumbagineae; and Plantago was
represented by P. media, and the mountain species, P. carinata.

Of Apetalae, the most worthy of notice was Aristolochia Pistolochia,
with its almost black flowers, one of the smallest species of this
curious genus. The Polygoneae were Polygonum Bistorta, as abundant as it
usually is in moist mountain meadows, Rumex acetosa, and R. scutatus,
with its singular leaves, a plant as common in the vineyards near
Coblentz as in the south of Europe. The Euphorbiae were E. serrata,
Cyparissias, Characias, the polished E. nicaeensis, and another, to me
unknown. To these may be added the shrubs or trees, Quercus coccifera,
Buxus sempervirens, and Celtis australis.

The Monocotyledoneae were finer than I expected, and finer than I found
in my next day of botanizing. There were Orchis mascula, O. galeata (by
some reduced to militaris, but the form of the flower, admirably figured
by Woods,32 is decidedly different), Aceras anthropophora, which
recalled pleasing memories of the Surrey hills; Narcissus poeticus, as
already mentioned; one of the plants common to alpine and maritime
situations, Allium Schoenoprasum (but I am not sure this plant does not
belong to the next day’s district); the Grasses, Bromus tectorum, Briza
media, Aegilops ovata, Melica Magnolii; and the Ferns, Asplenium
Trichomanes and Adiantum Capillus-Veneris.

Urgel, properly La Seu (or Seo) de Urgel, better known locally as La Seu
simply (the See, its bishop having for many centuries been one of the
chief princes of the country), is the most characteristic, old-looking,
and picturesque of small Spanish towns. We entered it after nightfall. I
shall never forget the moonlight look of its dark streets, its jalousies
and overhanging balconies. The situation is one of the most glorious in
the whole Pyrenees. It lies far down in the long valley which we had
been a day and a half in descending; but the valley does not open to the
plain; it is crossed, and, in appearance, closed a little below the
town, by a low range, with a striking peaked outline, which regaled our
eyes as we saw it before us during the latter half of our day’s journey,
and appeared more beautiful still when seen from the promenade outside
the walls of Urgel, or from the terrace or loggia of our very Spanish,
but quite habitable inn. All experienced travellers know how much the
Edition: current; Page: [317] beauty of a range of mountains, under a
glaring sun, is improved by seeing it on its shady side. Of the little
narrow plain into which the valley expands immediately round Urgel, I
can say nothing botanically, except to repeat that it is a perfect
paradise of Roses.

We had decided to find our way back to France by the valley of Andorra.
Of this curious middle-age republic, independent equally of Spain and
France, though under their joint protectorate, a description may be read
in the Edinburgh Review for April last.33 The writer has given a very
interesting account of its history and of its institutions; but he seems
somehow to imagine that he is the discoverer of Andorra, at least to
Englishmen. It was however explored as long ago as about 1824, by two
eminent English botanists—Mr. Bentham and Mr. Walker Arnott; the former
of whom, in the narrative of his tour in the Pyrenees, prefixed to his
valuable catalogue of their plants, gave a clear and succinct
description of the country.34 Since then it has been occasionally
visited by English tourists, one of whom, Mr. Erskine Murray, devoted to
it no small portion of his well-known book.35 Respecting the
institutions of the country, much was left for the reviewer to do; and
he has done it, to all appearance, well. He makes one statement,
however, which I hope is not correct, that “in this republic education
is a thing almost unknown.”36 I cannot affirm that this is not the fact;
but the standard French Guide to the Pyrenees, the elaborate volume of
Joanne, affirms that “l’instruction publique est plus répandue en
Andorre que dans les territoires voisins de l’Ariége et d’Urgel; les
écoles sont gratuites, et la plupart des jeunes gens aisés vont faire
leurs études à Toulouse ou à Barcelone.”* The reviewer’s description of
the local features of the country is that of one who has only visited it
from the French side. He says it is “isolated by mountains on every
frontier.”37 This is neither more nor less true of the Val d’Andorre
than it is of every other Pyrenean valley. None of them have more than
one outlet into the plain. Andorra is simply the upper end of a Edition:
current; Page: [318] Spanish valley (one of several which meet at
Urgel), with the addition of two other valleys branching out of it. From
France of course they can only be reached across the main chain, but the
access from Spain is not more difficult nor mountainous than that to any
other place in the Pyrenees.

In the lower or Spanish part of the valley the plants were chiefly those
which I had seen in the descent from Puycerda, with one or two
additional, particularly Phalangium Liliago, an elegant white-flowered
plant of the Order Asphodeleae, and a fine Thistle, which I had seen in
a former year on the Spanish side of another of the Pyrenean passes,
Cirsium rivulare. When however we entered Andorra, the Flora soon
assumed a far more mountain character, though here also occasionally
varied by southern plants, the most remarkable of which was a Maple,
Acer monspessulanum, with three-lobed coriaceous leaves. To begin at the
beginning, Trollius europaeus now raised its globular heads in the rich
meadows; and I saw, for the first time in Spain, two mountain Ranunculi,
R. Villarsii, L., towards the head of the valley, and the tall white R.
aconitifolius, the stateliest of its tribe. Of Crucifers there were now
a Barbarea (probably B. arcuata), Arabis thaliana and turrita, Sinapis
Cheiranthus, Nasturtium pyrenaicum, which, in spite of its name, is not
a peculiarly Pyrenean plant; and one which is more so, Cardamine
latifolia, like a greatly magnified C. pratensis, with leaves shaped
like those of the Watercress. Two of our common Violets now appeared,
Viola canina and V. tricolor; while to Silene Saxifraga was added S.
nutans, and a very beautiful common plant of the Alps and Pyrenees, S.
rupestris, as well as Stellaria Holostea and Cerastium arvense. Along
with Geranium Robertianum and pyrenaicum there was in abundance G.
sylvaticum of the English mountains. I saw also Oxalis corniculata. A
tall bush, belonging to the Flora of the high mountains, Rhamnus
alpinus, was here in full flower. The Leguminosae were fewer than usual;
they included the Broom of the middle region of the southern mountains,
Sarothamnus purgans, Coronilla Emerus, the stiff, but not inelegant
Trifolium montanum, Astragalus monspessulanus, and the red variety of
Anthyllis Vulneraria. Of Rosaceae, there were added to those already
recorded, Rosa rubiginosa, Potentilla verna, and Alchemilla vulgaris. Of
Saxifragae, besides S. Aizoon, there was our beautiful S. granulata (a
mountain plant in the south of Europe), and a far rarer species than
either, S. media. The Umbellifers appeared to be the same as in the
previous day. To the common Elders was added Sambucus racemosa, now in
full flower; it bears red instead of black fruit, and in that state I
had found it in some of the forests near the Rhine, especially that of
Stolzenfels, near Coblenz. Of Rubiaceae, I only noted Galium cruciatum.
The only additional plant of the Order Compositae (except the Cirsium
previously mentioned) was Achillea chamaemelifolia, a plant of the
Eastern Pyrenees. The Corolliflorae also were mostly those which I had
seen in the other valley. I must however add Pinguicula grandiflora, a
plant common in the Pyrenees, often mistaken for a Violet by the
non-botanical traveller; the exquisite Primula farinosa, of the Alps and
the north of England; the Edition: current; Page: [319] large Alpine
Forget-me-not (Myosotis alpestris); a tall Pedicularis, P. verticillata,
growing profusely in the meadows near the principal village of the
Republic; and, lastly, Marrubium vulgare. Of Polygona, besides P.
Bistorta, there was a peculiar and curious mountain species with
panicled inflorescence, P. alpinum. Rumex scutatus re-appeared, with R.
Acetosella. Among monocotyledonous plants, Paradisia Liliastrum reigned
supreme; a stately plant, with flowers of the purest white, of the shape
and almost the size of a Hemerocallis, which Pyrenean tourists will see
abundant, at its season, in the Vallée de Lys, near Bagnère de Luchon.
Narcissus poeticus was as plentiful as ever; Platanthera bifolia was
another ornament; Muscari comosum made its appearance, and in the lower
and warmer part of the valley our blue garden Iris (I. germanica) grew.
A Veratrum, probably V. album, so common in the Alps and Jura, not yet
in flower, raised its strong, thick, green stems. The following plants,
all of which were common to this with the preceding valley, I will
simply enumerate:

  ------------------------- ------------------------ ----------------------------
  Clematis Vitalba.         Reseda fruticulosa.      S. Telephium (and others).
  Caltha palustris.         Saponaria ocymoides.     Umbilicus pendulinus.
  Aquilegia vulgaris.       Erodium cicutarium.      Lonicera Xylosteum.
  Helleborus foetidus.      Medicago suffruticosa.   Achillea odorata.
  Chelidonium majus.        Lotus corniculatus.      Tragopogon pratensis.
  Sisymbrium Sophia.        Crataegus Oxyacantha.    Fraxinus excelsior.
  Sisymbrium obtusangul.    Amelanchier vulgaris.    Convolvulus arvensis.
  Sisymbrium austriacum.    Bryonia dioica.          Lithospermum arvense.
  Lepidium heterophyllum.   Sedum dasyphyllum.       Cynoglossum officinale.
  Hyoscyamus niger.         Stachys hirta.           Euphorbia serrata.
  Veronica Teucrium.        Lamium maculatum.        Euphorbia Cyparissias.
  Veronica serpyllifolia.   Sideritis scordioides.   Orchis mascula.
  Rhinanthus glaber.        Globularia nana.         Bromus tectorum.
  Scrophularia canina.      Armeria plantaginea.     
  Mentha sylvestris.        Buxus sempervirens.      
  ------------------------- ------------------------ ----------------------------

At the foot of the ascent to the lofty pass (the Col de Puymaurin) we
encountered in profusion four of the most interesting plants we had yet
seen; the tall Anemone alpina, with its great flowers, of the
sulphur-coloured variety (which I have found the commonest both in the
Alps and Pyrenees); the mountain Umbellifer (Meum athamanticum), a plant
rare in the English mountains, common in the Pyrenees and Cevennes;
Orchis sambucina, with its great spikes of flowers, both purple and
yellow; and the delicately beautiful Tulipa Celsiana, also a plant of
the Cevennes. As we wound our way up the face of the mountain towards
the Col, we came among decidedly Alpine plants; the three Gentians which
light up the lofty pastures with their dark blue flowers, G. acaulis and
verna, known to all Alpine explorers; G. pyrenaica, peculiar to the
Eastern Pyrenees; the small white-flowered Edition: current; Page: [320]
Ranunculus pyrenaicus, the lovely Hepatica, Corcus vernus, and a pink
Androsace, common on the Pyrenean summits, long confounded with A.
carnea of the Alps, but to be described, as I am told, in the Supplement
to the Flore de France, under the name of A. Lagerii.38 One plant,
though I did not see it till just on the French side of the pass, I
cannot help mentioning, and with this I close my list: that exquisitely
fringed and strangely coloured plant, one of the most delicate of Alpine
vegetable products, the plant so much admired by Mr. Ruskin, Soldanella
alpina.39 From this place a long and gradual descent brought us into the
beautiful valley of the Ariége; and being now in a country well
explored, and possessed of excellent Floras, I at last end this long
memorandum, and finally take my leave.


Verbascum Thapsiforme
 OCTOBER 1862

Phytologist, n.s. VI (Oct. 1862), 314. Appeared in the section entitled
“Botanical Notes, Notices, and Queries.” In the “Communications
Received” section a letter from Mill is mentioned (ibid., p. 320); the
quoted words are presumably from that (non-extant) letter. Not
republished. Not listed in Mill’s bibliography.

our esteemed correspondent “J.S.M.” in his homeward journey saw much of
Verbascum thapsiforme between Vienna and Switzerland, in “the Austrian
Highlands, where, like many other plants, it grows much more luxuriantly
than in the North.” Some good examples of this species have been seen in
the Chelsea Botanic Garden.

Edition: current; Page: [321]


MEDICAL REVIEWS
 1834, 1842

Edition: current; Page: [322] Edition: current; Page: [323]


Medical Reviews


Dr. King’s Lecture on the Study of Anatomy
 NOVEMBER 1834

Monthly Repository, VIII (Nov. 1834), 817-18. Subtitled: “Delivered at
the reopening of the School founded by the late Joshua Brooks, Esq.
October 1, 1833.” In the “Critical Notices” section. A review of The
Substance of a Lecture Designed as an Introduction to the Study of
Anatomy Considered as the Science of Organization: and Delivered at the
Reopening of the School, Founded by the late Joshua Brookes, Esq.
October 1st, 1833 (London: Longman, et al., 1834), by Thomas King
(1802-39). Unsigned. Not republished. Identified in Mill’s bibliography
as “A brief notice of Dr. King’s lecture on the study of anatomy; in the
Monthly Repository for November 1834”

(MacMinn, p. 42).

dr. king’s lecture is an excellent specimen of the lucid and methodical
exposition and philosophic views of the nature of classification which
characterise the French anatomists and physiologists. It also contains a
surprising quantity, considering its shortness, of the most important
elementary facts of the human organization, explained in a manner
peculiarly well suited, not only to learners, but even to non-medical
readers. Dr. King has evidently some of the highest qualities of an able
teacher.


Carpenter’s Physiology
 JANUARY 1842

Westminster Review, XXXVII (Jan. 1842), 254. Headed with the title of
the book reviewed: “Principles of General and Comparative Physiology,
intended as an Introduction to the study of Human Physiology, and as a
guide to the Philosophical pursuit of Natural History, by William B.
Carpenter, M.D., Lecturer on Physiology in the Bristol Medical School,
etc. Second Edition, 1841. [London:] Churchill.” In the “Miscellaneous
Notices” section. Signed “S.” Not republished. Identified in Mill’s
bibliography as “A short notice of Dr. Carpenter’s Principles of General
and Comparative Physiology, in the Westminster Review for January 1842”

(MacMinn, p. 54).

this is a book to which justice cannot be done without a much fuller
notice than can be given in this part of our journal, and we shall
probably return to it in a future Edition: current; Page: [324] number.
The author (who is the son of the late respected Dr. Lant Carpenter, of
Bristol, and who, though still a young man, has long been known as a
physiologist of eminence)1 has not only accumulated in this work a
richer store of the mere facts of the science than we believe is to be
obtained in the same compass elsewhere, but has displayed in an eminent
degree one of the principal attributes of a philosopher, as
distinguished from a mere man of science, the power of generalizing. To
the experienced reader, it is already some indication of this quality,
that Dr. Carpenter includes in his design the physiology of plants as
well as of animals, the best physiologists being now convinced that so
far as respects mere organic life, the formation, nutrition, and
reproduction of the living body (independently of the superadded
casualties of sensation and voluntary motion), there is no fundamental
distinction between the animal and vegetable creation, but both are
governed by essentially the same organic laws, variously modified by
circumstances.

In Dr. Carpenter’s book this and a large body of similar truths are
established and illustrated with a very uncommon degree of philosophic
power, and the work may be considered as a clear exposition of the
highest generalities yet arrived at in the science of life. As such
breadth of speculation and reach of philosophy, applied to this subject,
have not hitherto been often exemplified in this country, English
writers having remained greatly inferior in this highest scientific
attribute to the physiologists of France and Germany, it is highly
creditable to our scientific and medical public that Dr. Carpenter’s
work has been warmly welcomed and highly applauded by almost all the
professional periodicals,2 and by most of those scientific authorities
whose praise confers real honour.

Edition: current; Page: [325]



Wills and Deed of Gift
 1853-72

23 May, 1853

This is the last Will and Testament of me John Stuart Mill of the East
India House in the City of London and of Blackheath Park in the County
of Kent First I nominate and appoint my dearest Wife Harriet Mill1 her
daughter Miss Helen Taylor William Ellis2 of the Marine Indemnity
Assurance Office Great Winchester Street in the aforesaid City of London
and of Champion Hill in the Parish of Camberwell in the County of Surrey
Esquire and William Thomas Thornton3 of the East India House aforesaid
and of Marlborough Hill Saint Johns Wood in the County of Middlesex
Esquire joint Executrixes and Executors of this my will And I bequeath
the sum of fifty pounds to each of them the said Harriet Mill Helen
Taylor William Ellis and William Thomas Thornton And as to all the real
estate to which at the time of my decease I shall be entitled in
possession remainder reversion or expectancy or in or over which I have
a disposing power and all the rest and residue of my personal estate and
after payment thereout of my debts and funeral and testamentary expenses
and the legacies herein before bequeathed I give devise Edition:
current; Page: [328] bequeath and appoint the same and every part
thereof unto my said wife her heirs executors administrators and assigns
for her and their own absolute use and benefit And in the event of my
said wife Harriet Mill departing this life in my lifetime I give and
bequeath the same and every part thereof unto her daughter the said
Helen Taylor her heirs executors administrators and assigns for her and
their own absolute use and benefit In witness whereof I have hereunto
set my hand this twenty third day of May one thousand eight hundred and
fifty three

J.S. Mill

Signed and acknowledged by the above named John Stuart Mill as and to be
his last Will and Testament in the presence of us present at the same
time who at his request in his presence and in the presence of each
other have hereunto subscribed our names as witnesses

Robt. S. Gregson Solr. 8 Angel Court Throgmorton St. London

Geo. Wm. Walker his Clerk.

14 February 1872

This is a Codicil to the last Will of me John Stuart Mill of No. 10
Albert Mansions Victoria Street in the City of Westminster Esquire dated
the twenty third day of May one thousand eight hundred and fifty three
Whereas by my said Will I gave and devised all my real estate and all
the residue of my personal estate to my late dearest wife Harriet Mill
and in the event of her dying in my lifetime I gave and bequeathed the
same unto her daughter Miss Helen Taylor for her absolute use and
benefit and I appointed my said late wife the said Helen Taylor William
Ellis and William Thomas Thornton to each of whom I bequeathed the sum
of fifty pounds Executors thereof And whereas I have made several
Codicils to my said Will And whereas since the date of my said will my
said dear wife has departed this life and her remains have been interred
in a Tomb or Vault in the public Cemetery of the Town of Avignon in
France Now I do hereby revoke all the codicils I have ever made to my
said will and I also revoke the said appointment of executors in the
said will made and also the said legacies to each of such executors
thereby given and in case my stepdaughter Miss Helen Taylor shall
survive me then and in such case I nominate and appoint her to be the
sole Executor or Executrix of my said Will and of any Codicil thereto
and devise bequeath and confirm to her her heirs executors
administrators and assigns All and singular the real and personal estate
of whatsoever nature kind and description I may die seised or possessed
of or entitled to for her and their own proper use and benefit
absolutely I also nominate and appoint the said Helen Taylor to be my
literary Executor or Executrix of my said Will and of any Codicil
thereto with full and absolute power and license to her to edit all or
any of my literary works and to publish all or any of my manuscripts as
Edition: current; Page: [329] she in her sole discretion may think fit
And whereas in these days no one is secure against attempts to make
money out of his memory by means of pretended biographies I therefore
think it necessary to state that I have written a short account of my
life which I leave to the absolute charge and controul of my said
stepdaughter Miss Helen Taylor to be published or not at her will and
discretion4 and in the event of her death in my lifetime to the charge
and controul of William Thomas Thornton of No. 23 Queens Gardens Hyde
Park Square on condition that he publishes the same within two years of
my decease And I hereby declare that all papers and materials available
for an account of my life are in the possession of my said stepdaughter
and of her only and that no other person has such knowledge of either my
literary or private life as would qualify him or her to write my
biography In the event of the said Helen Taylor predeceasing me then and
in such case I nominate and appoint the said William Thomas Thornton and
William Ellis of No. 6 Lancaster Terrace Regents Park in the said County
of Middlesex Esquire to be the Executors and Trustees of my said Will
and of any Codicil thereto and subject to the said Helen Taylor
predeceasing me as aforesaid I make the following bequests and
dispositions I bequeath to my stepson Algernon Taylor of Tetsworth in
the County of Oxford Esquire the sum of one thousand pounds I bequeath
to Elizabeth Taylor Mary Taylor and John Cyprian Taylor5 the two
daughters and son of the said Algernon Taylor the respective sums of one
thousand pounds each Provided always that in case at my death the said
Elizabeth Taylor Mary Taylor and John Cyprian Taylor or any of them
shall be under the age of twenty one years then I direct that their
respective legacies of one thousand pounds each or the legacies or
legacy of such of them as shall be then minors or a minor shall be
retained by the said William Thomas Thornton and William Ellis or other
the trustees or trustee for the time being of my said will and any
codicil thereto Upon trust to pay the same respectively to them her or
him when and if they she or he shall attain the age of twenty one years
And upon further trust in the meantime to invest the same in any of the
modes of investment hereinafter specified and pay the interest dividends
and income thereof to their her or his father or guardians or guardian
for their her or his benefit and advantage And I declare that the
receipt of their said father guardians or guardian as the case may be
shall be an effectual discharge for such interest dividends and income
and every part thereof Provided always and I hereby further declare that
if the said Elizabeth Taylor and Mary Taylor or either of them shall be
married at my death or shall marry previously to their or her attaining
the said age of twenty one years then and in such case and Edition:
current; Page: [330] thereupon I declare that the said William Thomas
Thornton and William Ellis and the survivor of them and the executors
and administrators of such survivor or other the trustees or trustee for
the time being of my said will and any codicil thereto shall hold the
said two legacies of one thousand pounds each or the said legacy of such
one of them the said Elizabeth Taylor and Mary Taylor as shall be then
so married or shall so marry as aforesaid Upon trust to invest the same
in the names or name or under the legal control of them or him the said
trustees or trustee for the time being in any of the public stocks or
funds or Government securities of the United Kingdom or India or upon
freehold copyhold leasehold or chattel real securities in England or
Wales or in or upon the stocks funds shares debentures mortgages or
securities of any Corporation Company or Public Body in the United
Kingdom or India in which my estate or any part thereof may be invested
at the time of my decease but not in any other mode of investment and
may from time to time vary or transpose such stocks funds shares and
securities into or for others of any nature hereby authorised at their
or his discretion And shall pay the interest dividends and income
thereof during the lives or a life of such married legatees or legatee
respectively as the case may be to such person or persons as they or she
respectively may from time to time notwithstanding coverture appoint by
any writing under their or her hands or hand respectively but not by any
mode of anticipation and in default of such appointment into their or
her hands respectively for their or her sole and separate use
respectively independently and exclusive of their or her husbands or
husband respectively and their or his debts control and engagements
respectively but so that they or she respectively shall not dispose
thereof in any mode of anticipation And the receipts in writing of them
or her respectively or of such person or persons as they or she
respectively shall appoint to receive the said interest dividends and
income in manner aforesaid but not in any mode of anticipation shall
notwithstanding coverture be effectual discharges for the same And from
and after their or her deaths or death respectively shall stand
possessed of and interested in the said legacies or legacy respectively
or the stocks funds shares and securities representing the said legacies
or legacy respectively and the interest dividends and income thereof
respectively Upon and for such trusts intents and purposes and in such
manner as they or she respectively by their or her last wills or will
codicils or codicil or other testamentary writings or writing
respectively to be duly executed notwithstanding coverture shall direct
or appoint and in default of such direction or appointment and so far as
any such direction or appointment if incomplete shall not extend In
trust for the person or persons who under the statutes made for the
distribution of the estates of intestates would under the decease of
them or her the said Elizabeth Taylor and Mary Taylor respectively be
entitled to their or her personal estate respectively in case they or
she had died possessed of the same respectively intestate and without
having been married and to be divided between or amongst the same
persons if more than one respectively in the shares in which the same
would under the same statutes be divided between or Edition: current;
Page: [331] amongst them respectively And I declare that in case the
said Elizabeth Taylor Mary Taylor and John Cyprian Taylor or any of them
shall not attain the age of twenty one years or in the case of the said
Elizabeth Taylor and Mary Taylor or either of them failing to attain
such age and without having contracted marriage then and in each such
case I direct that the same legacies or legacy as the case may be shall
be held upon such and the like trusts for the benefit of the survivors
in equal shares or for the survivor if but one as are hereinbefore
declared in respect to the legacy of one thousand pounds given to each
of them I bequeath to the said William Thomas Thornton and William Ellis
their executors administrators and assigns the sum of two thousand five
hundred pounds Upon trust to invest the same in any of the securities
hereinbefore mentioned with reference to the investments of the said
legacies of one thousand pounds each in favour of the said children of
the said Algernon Taylor together with the like powers of varying and
transposing from time to time such investments or any of them And to pay
the interest dividends and income thereof during the life of my sister
Mary Elizabeth Colman6 the wife of Charles Colman Esquire to such person
or persons as she the said Mary Elizabeth Colman may from time to time
notwithstanding coverture appoint by any writing under her hand but not
by any mode of anticipation and in default of such appointment into her
own hands for her sole and separate use independently and exclusively of
the said Charles Colman and of any future husband but so that she shall
not dispose thereof in any mode of anticipation and the receipts in
writing of the said Mary Elizabeth Colman or of such person or persons
as she shall appoint to receive the said dividends interest and income
thereof in manner aforesaid but not in any mode of anticipation shall
notwithstanding coverture be effectual discharges for the same And from
and after the death of the said Mary Elizabeth Colman upon and for such
trusts intents and purposes and in such manner as the said Mary
Elizabeth Colman shall by her last will or any codicil or testamentary
writing to be by her duly executed notwithstanding coverture direct or
appoint and in default of such direction or appointment and so far as
any such direction or appointment if incomplete shall not extend In
trust for the person or persons who under the statutes made for the
distribution of the estates of intestates would at the decease of the
said Mary Elizabeth Colman be entitled to her personal estate in case
she had died possessed of the same intestate and widow and to be divided
between or amongst the same persons if more than one in the shares in
which the same would under the same statutes be divided between or
amongst them I bequeath to Minnie daughter of the said Charles and Mary
Elizabeth Colman the sum of one thousand pounds and to Stuart Colman
Henry Colman and Archibald Colman sons Edition: current; Page: [332] of
the said Charles and Mary Elizabeth Colman the sum of five hundred
pounds each Provided always that in case at my death the said Minnie
Colman Stuart Colman Henry Colman and Archibald Colman or any of them
shall be under the age of twenty one years the said legacies
hereinbefore bequeathed to them or the legacies or legacy of such of
them as shall then be minors or a minor shall be retained by the said
William Thomas Thornton and William Ellis or the executors and trustees
for the time being of my said will and any codicil thereto Upon trust to
pay the same to them him or her when and if they he or she shall attain
the age of twenty one years And upon further trust in the meantime to
invest the same respectively in any of the investments hereinbefore
specified and pay the interest dividends and income thereof respectively
to the said Mary Elizabeth Colman or to such person or persons as she
shall notwithstanding coverture direct or appoint for their his or her
benefit and advantage and her or her appointees receipts alone shall be
sufficient discharges for the same but in case of her death during my
lifetime or subsequently without having made any such direction or
appointment as last aforesaid then Upon trust to pay such interest
dividends and income during the respective minorities of the said Minnie
Colman Stuart Colman Henry Colman and Archibald Colman to their
respective Guardians and to be applied by them for their respective
benefits and the receipts of such guardians shall be sufficient
discharges for the same Provided always and I hereby further declare
that if the said Minnie Colman shall be married at my death or shall
marry previously to her attaining the said age of twenty one years then
and in such case and thereupon I declare that the said William Thomas
Thornton and William Ellis and the survivor of them and the executors
and administrators of such survivor or other the trustees or trustee for
the time being of my said will and any codicil thereto shall invest the
said legacy of the said Minnie Colman in any of the investments
hereinbefore specified with the like powers of varying and transposing
the same and any of them and shall stand possessed of and interested in
the stocks funds shares and securities and the interest dividends and
income thereof Upon and for the same and the like trusts intents and
purposes and in the same and the like manner as are hereinbefore
declared respecting the said legacies and the funds stocks shares and
securities representing such legacies and the interest dividends and
income thereof hereinbefore bequeathed in favor of the said Elizabeth
Taylor and Mary Taylor in the event of their being married at my death
or marrying previously to their attaining the age of twenty one years in
the same manner in every respect as if the same trusts were here
repeated in totidem verbis mutatis mutandis And I declare that if the
said Minnie Colman Stuart Colman Henry Colman and Archibald Colman or
any of them shall not attain the age of twenty one years or in the case
of the said Minnie Colman failing to attain such age and without having
contracted marriage then and in such case the same legacies or legacy as
the case may be shall be held upon such or the like trusts for the
survivors in equal shares or for the survivor if but one as are
hereinbefore declared in respect of the respective legacies given to
each of them I Edition: current; Page: [333] bequeath the sum of five
hundred pounds to the Governors Treasurers or other proper Officers of
the “Royal Society for the prevention of Cruelty to Animals” whose
Offices are at No. 105 Jermyn Street Saint James Westminster in the said
County of Middlesex for the benefit of that Institution and I declare
that the receipt of the Treasurer for the time being of the said Royal
Society for the prevention of Cruelty to Animals shall be an effectual
discharge for the same legacy which I direct to be paid out of my pure
personal estate I bequeath the like sum of five hundred pounds to the
Treasurer or other the proper Officers of the “Land Tenure Reform
Association” whose Offices are at No. 9 Buckingham Street Strand in the
said County of Middlesex for the benefit of that Institution and I
declare that the receipt of the Treasurer for the time being of the said
“Land Tenure Reform Association” shall be an effectual discharge for the
same legacy which I direct to be paid out of my pure personal estate I
bequeath to the said William Thomas Thornton and William Ellis their
executors administrators and assigns the sum of three thousand pounds in
trust for such one of the now existing Universities of Great Britain and
Ireland as shall be or at the time of my death shall have been the first
in point of time to throw open all its degrees to female students such
sum of three thousand pounds to be paid out of my pure personal estate
to the Chancellor Governors Trustees or other proper Officers of such
University within six calendar months after my decease or as the case
may be immediately upon such degrees being thrown open as aforesaid in
trust to endow a fellowship to which only females shall be eligible And
in like manner I bequeath in favour of such University the further sum
of three thousand pounds to be paid out of my pure personal estate in
trust to endow therewith two scholarships to be held by female students
exclusively And I direct that in the meantime and until the fulfilment
of such conditions as aforesaid the said William Thomas Thornton and
William Ellis and the survivor of them and the executors and
administrators of such survivor or other the trustees or trustee for the
time being of my said will and any codicil thereto shall stand possessed
of the said two sums of three thousand pounds and three thousand pounds
Upon trust to invest the same in any of the stocks funds shares and
securities hereinbefore mentioned with the like powers as hereinbefore
mentioned of varying and transposing all or any of such investments And
shall from time to time accumulate the interest dividends and income
thereof in the way of compound interest by investing the same and the
resulting income thereof in or upon any such investments as are
hereinbefore mentioned all which accumulations shall go in addition to
and accretion of and be held upon the same trusts as are hereby declared
of and concerning the said sums of three thousand pounds and three
thousand pounds Provided always and I hereby declare that in case the
aforesaid conditions shall not be fulfilled within the space of twenty
years after my death then and in such case I direct that the same
legacies of three thousand pounds and three thousand pounds and the
accumulations aforesaid shall be applied by the trustees for the time
being of my said will and any codicil thereto in whatever way Edition:
current; Page: [334] they in their absolute and uncontrolled discretion
judge most beneficial to the education of women I bequeath all
copyrights I may die possessed of to John Morley7 of Pitfield Down
Puttenham near Guildford in the County of Surrey Esquire his executors
administrators and assigns Upon trust to apply the proceeds thereof in
aid and support of some periodical publication which shall be open to
the expression of all opinions and shall have all its articles signed
with the name of the writer and subject to the fulfilment of such
conditions on the part of any such periodical publication I leave the
selection of such publication to the said John Morley and subject to the
trust aforesaid I declare that the said John Morley his executors or
administrators shall stand possessed of and interested in all such said
copyrights and the proceeds thereof In trust for such person or persons
as the said John Morley shall by his last will or any codicil or
testamentary writing to be by him duly executed give or bequeath the
same subject nevertheless to the same trusts as those under which the
said John Morley himself held the said copyrights and the proceeds
thereof during his lifetime I bequeath to the said William Thomas
Thornton and William Ellis the sum of one hundred pounds each I direct
that all the legacies hereinbefore bequeathed shall be paid free of all
legacy and succession duties and that the duty on the legacies given to
the said Society for the prevention of Cruelty to Animals to the said
Land Tenure Reform Association and to the said University shall be paid
out of my pure personal estate And I hereby direct and declare that all
manuscripts letters and copies of letters to and from me which may be in
my possession at my death shall belong exclusively to and be at the
disposal of my literary executor and should I not before my death have
made a selection of such of them as it may be useful or interesting to
publish I hereby authorize and request my said literary executor to make
such a selection the letters so selected either by myself or by my said
literary executor to be published with the aforesaid memoir of my life
whenever the said memoir shall be published and all my other letters to
be destroyed unless my said literary executor shall desire to retain
them or any of them And in case the said Helen Taylor shall die before
me or if she shall survive me but die without having nominated by will a
successor to her self as my literary executor then I appoint the said
William Thomas Thornton to be my literary executor and I direct that the
above mentioned memoir of my life and all other manuscripts and writings
left by me on which I shall have written the words “For Publication” and
signed such words with my name shall be published with all convenient
expedition And I declare that the profits if any that may arise from
such publication by the said William Thomas Thornton shall go and belong
to the said William Thomas Thornton his executors administrators and
assigns absolutely for his and their own use and benefit I devise and
bequeath all my real estate whatsoever and wheresoever charged in aid of
my personal estate with my funeral Edition: current; Page: [335] and
testamentary expenses debts and legacies other than charitable legacies
and all my residuary personal estate including as well real as personal
estate over which I have or shall have at the time of my death a general
power of appointment unto and to the use of the said William Thomas
Thornton his heirs executors administrators and assigns absolutely And I
declare that the trustees or trustee for the time being of my said will
and any codicil thereto shall have the fullest powers of apportioning
blended trust funds and of determining whether any moneys are to be
treated as capital or income and generally of determining all matters as
to which any doubt difficulty or question may arise under or in relation
to the execution of the trusts of my said will or any codicil thereto
And I declare that every determination of the said trustees or trustee
in relation to any of the matters aforesaid whether made upon a question
formally or actually raised or implied in any of the acts or proceedings
of the said trustees or trustee in relation to the premises shall bind
all parties interested under my said will and any codicil thereto and
shall not be objected to or questioned upon any ground whatsoever And I
hereby declare that the receipt of the said trustees or trustee for the
time being acting in the execution of the trusts of my said will and any
codicil thereto for any moneys payable to them or him by virtue thereof
or in the execution of the trusts or powers thereof shall effectually
discharge the person or persons paying the same therefrom and from being
bound to see to the application or being answerable for the loss or
misapplication thereof Provided always and I hereby declare that if the
said trustees hereby constituted or either of them shall die in my
lifetime or if they or either of them or any trustee or trustees to be
appointed as hereinafter provided shall after my death die or go to
reside permanently abroad or desire to be discharged or refuse or become
incapable to act then and in every such case it shall be lawful for the
surviving or continuing trustees or trustee for the time being and for
this purpose every refusing or retiring trustee shall if willing to act
in the execution of this power be considered a continuing trustee or for
the acting executors or executor administrators or administrator of the
last surviving or continuing trustee to appoint a new trustee or new
trustees in the place of the trustee or trustees so dying or going to
reside permanently abroad or desiring to be discharged or refusing or
becoming incapable to act as aforesaid and upon every or any such
appointment as aforesaid the number of trustees may be augmented or
reduced but so that the number thereof be not less than two And upon
every such appointment all the moneys stocks funds shares and securities
if any then vested in the trustees or trustee for the time being or in
the executors or administrators of the last surviving or continuing
trustee shall be so assigned and transferred that the same may be vested
in the surviving or continuing trustee or trustees jointly with such new
trustee or trustees or in such new trustee or trustees solely as the
case may require And every trustee appointed as aforesaid may as well
before as after the said trust premises if any shall have been so vested
act or assist in the execution of the trusts and powers of my said will
and any codicil thereto as fully and effectually Edition: current; Page:
[336] to all intents and purposes as if I had hereby constituted him a
trustee Provided always and I hereby declare that the trustees for the
time being of my said will and any codicil thereto shall be respectively
chargeable only for such moneys stocks funds shares and securities as
they shall respectively actually receive notwithstanding their
respectively signing any receipt for the sake of conformity and shall be
answerable and accountable only for their own acts receipts neglects and
defaults respectively and not for those of each other nor for any banker
broker or other person with whom or into whose hands any trust monies or
securities may be deposited or come nor for dispensing wholly or
partially with the investigation or production of the lessor’s title on
lending money on leasehold securities nor for otherwise lending on any
security with less than a marketable title nor for the insufficiency or
deficiency of any stocks funds shares or securities nor for any other
loss unless the same shall happen through their own wilful default
respectively And also that the said trustees or trustee for the time
being may reimburse themselves and himself or pay and discharge out of
the trust premises all expenses incurred in or about the execution of
the trusts or powers of my said will and any codicil thereto I devise
and bequeath all the estates which at my death shall be vested in me
upon any trusts or by way of mortgage and of which I shall at my death
have power to dispose by will unto the said William Thomas Thornton and
William Ellis their heirs executors and administrators respectively
according to the nature thereof respectively upon the trusts and subject
to the equity of redemption which at my death shall be subsisting or
capable of taking effect therein respectively but the money secured on
such mortgages shall be taken as part of my personal estate And whereas
I have already made and executed in France a Will disposing of my estate
and property situate in that Country now I do hereby confirm such will
and do declare that nothing in my said will dated the twenty third of
May one thousand eight hundred and fifty three or in this Codicil
contained save and except as to the said hereinbefore mentioned
manuscripts letters and copies of letters shall affect or be deemed to
affect any of the dispositions and contents generally of my said will so
made in France as aforesaid it being my express desire and intention
that my said will dated the twenty third of May one thousand eight
hundred and fifty three and this Codicil shall not extend to embrace or
dispose of save as to such manuscripts letters and copies of letters as
aforesaid the estate and property disposed of or dealt with in such said
will so made by me in France as aforesaid or any property or estate
situate and being in France whereof I may die possessed or entitled to
Lastly I desire and direct that my mortal remains may be buried in the
said tomb of my dear wife in the said Cemetery at Avignon and that the
same shall on no account or pretext whatsoever be buried in any other
place wheresoever In witness whereof I have set my hand to this Codicil
contained in eight sheets of paper this fourteenth day of February one
thousand eight hundred and seventy two

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [337]
Signed and acknowledged by the said John Stuart Mill as and to be a
Codicil to his last Will and Testament in the presence of us present at
the same time who in his presence at his request and in the presence of
each other have hereunto subscribed our names as witnesses the
alterations opposite which our initials are placed having been first
made

Robt. S. Gregson Solr. 8 Angel Court Throgmorton Street

London

Theophilus Wm. Starkey 8 Angel Court Solicitor Clerk to Mr. R.S. Gregson

Proved at London with a Codicil 5th September 1873 by the Oath of Helen
Taylor Spinster the sole Executrix named in the said Codicil to whom
Administration was granted.

14 February, 1859

Testament

L’an mil huit cent cinquante neuf et le quatorze février.

Par-devant nous Paul Giéra,8 notaire à Avignon, soussigné, et en
présence des témoins ci-après nommés également soussignés;

A Comparu

M. John Stuart Mill, rentier, demeurant à Blackheath Park près de
Londres.

Lequel étant sain d’esprit, ainsi qu’il en est apparu à nous notaire et
témoins, a dicté à nous notaire, qui l’avons écrit desuite de notre
main, en présence des dits témoins et tel qu’il nous l’a dicté, le
testament dont la teneur suit:

aSans entendre révoquer le testament que j’ai fait en Angleterre à la
date du vingt trois mai mil huit cent cinquante trois, testament que
j’entends au contraire maintenir et confirmer; Je lègue et laisse à ma
fille adoptive, Hélène Taylor, fille de ma défunte épouse

1° Un pavillon et la terre sur laquelle il est construit, en nature de
jardin, labour et vigne de la contenance d’environ vingt neuf ares
quatre vingt huit centiares, situé sur le territoire d’Avignon, clos de
St-Véran ou de la Folie que j’ai acquis de M. Mouzin suivant acte du dix
huit novembre dernier reçu par le dit Me Giéra. Pour le posséder et en
jouir dès le jour de mon décès sans être astreinte à en demander
délivrance.

2° le terrain que j’ai acquis dans le cimetière St Véran d’Avignon,
ainsi que le tombeau que j’y bfais édifierb.

Edition: current; Page: [338]
Je désire être inhumé dans ce tombeau.

Je désire que ma fille adoptive et son frère cAlgernon Taylorc y soient
également inhumés.

J’entends que dans le cas où ma fille adoptive ne disposerait pas de ces
propriétés ou de l’une d’elles, celles ou celle dont elle n’aura pas
disposé appartiennent après elle au Conseil Presbytéral de l’Eglise
réformée à Avignon, à charge par le dit Conseil de maintenir le tombeau,
et de l’entretenir en bon état; ainsi que les plantations que ma fille
ou moi y aurons faites.

A cet effet je lègue éventuellement les dits objets au dit Conseil
presbytéral.

C’est ma volonté dont je requiers acte.

Ainsi fait et passé à Avignon dans un salon au premier étage de notre
maison d’habitation rue Banasterie en présence de Mrs Jean Xavier Louis
Duprat, négociant, Jean Etienne Ernest Duprat, négociant, Jean Emmanuel
Duprat, employé de la Banque de France, et Jean Xavier Emile Duprat,
commis négociant, tous domiciliés et demeurant à Avignon, témoins requis
et signés avec le testateur et nous notaire.

Le présent testament et tout le contenu ci-dessus a été lu par nous
notaire au testateur en présence des dits témoins qui ont assisté sans
désemparer.9

J.S. Mill

11 January, 1864

Testament

L’an mil huit cent soixante quatre et le onze Janvier.

Devant nous Me Jules Giéra, notaire à Avignon soussigné, et en présence
des témoins ci-après nommés également soussignés;

a comparu

Mr John Stuart Mill, propriétaire rentier demeurant et domicilié à
Blackheat Parc, près de Londres.

Lequel étant sain d’esprit, ainsi qu’il en est apparu à nous notaire et
témoins, a dicté à nous notaire, qui l’avons écrit de suite de notre
main, en présence des dits témoins et tel qu’il nous l’a dicté, son
testament dont la teneur suit:

Je déclare confirmer dans tout leur contenu les dispositions écrites
dans mon testament reçu par Me Paul Giéra notaire à Avignon le quatorze
février mil huit cent cinquante neuf et à ces dispositions j’ajoute les
suivantes en forme de codicile.

Je lègue et laisse à ma fille adoptive Hélène Taylor, fille de ma
défunte épouse

1° un corps de terre en nature de prés situé sur le territoire d’Avignon
quartier des Fontaines de la contenance d’environ vingt neuf ares et tel
que je l’ai acquis de Edition: current; Page: [339] dame Anne Rozan
épouse Martin suivant acte reçu par Me Jules Giéra le douze Septembre
mil huit cent soixante deux,

2° un autre corps de terre, partie en nature de pré partie en vigne et
jardin situé sur les mêmes territoires et quartier, attenant au
précédent, et tel que je l’ai acquis de Mrs Challe frères, Marandon,
Perrier et Raymond suivant acte reçu par Me Jules Giéra le quatre
Janvier courant,

3° enfin je lui lègue également tous les immeubles que je pourrais
acquérir par la suite sur le territoire d’Avignon

pour jouir du tout à dater du jour de mon décès et en disposer à sa
volonté.

Tel est ma volonté dont je requiers acte.

Ainsi fait et passé à Avignon en l’étude de nous notaire, en présence de
MM. Albert Roche aspirant au notariat, M. Paulain Malosse, élève de
notaire, M. Charles Morénas tourneur, Charles Bontour sacristain de la
paroisse St Pierre, tous les quatre domiciliés et demeurant à Avignon,
témoins requis et signés avec le testateur et nous notaire.

Sur notre interpelation les témoins ont déclaré qu’ils sont majeurs
citoyens français qu’ils jouissent de leurs droits civils et qu’ils ne
sont ni parents ni alliés au degrés prohibés par la loi soit du
testateur soit de la légatrice.

le présent testament et tout le contenu a été lu par nous notaire au
testateur en présence des témoins dénommés qui ont assisté sans
désemparer.

J.S. Mill

21 January, 1867

Testament

L’an mil huit cent soixante sept et le dvingt-und Janvier.

Devant nous Me Jules Giéra, notaire à Avignon, soussigné, et en présence
des témoins ci-après nommés, également soussignés

a Comparu

Mr John Stuart Mill, propriétaire rentier, demeurant et domicilié à
Blackheat Parc, près Londres.

lequel, étant sain d’esprit, ainsi qu’il en est apparu à nous notaire et
témoins, a dicté à nous notaire, qui l’avons écrit desuite de notre
main, en présence des dits témoins et tel qu’il nous l’a dicté, son
testament codicile, dont la teneur suit:

Je déclare confirmer dans tout leur contenu les dispositions écrites
dans mon testament, reçu par Me Paul Giéra le quatorze février mil huit
cent cinquante neuf et dans le codicile de ce testament reçu par Me
Jules Giéra le onze janvier mil huit cent soixante quatre

et à ces dispositions j’ajoute les suivantes toujours en forme de
codicile.

Edition: current; Page: [340]
Je lègue et laisse à ma fille adoptive Mlle Hélène Taylor, fille de ma
défunte épouse

tous les biens meubles et immeubles que je posséderai en France à mon
décès et notamment les immeubles que je possède ou posséderai à Avignon
ou sur son territoire, avec tous les objets mobiliers, valeurs
industrielles ou deniers comptant qui se trouveront dans mes maisons
d’habitation à Avignon au moment de mon décès, sans exception ni
réserve, donnant au mot objet mobilier et biens meubles, le sens le plus
large que comporte la loi.

pour jouir du tout à dater du jour de mon décès et en disposer à sa
volonté.

Ces nouvelles dispositions ne pourront nuire aux dispositions
supplémentaires exprimées dans mon testament reçu par Me Paul Giéra.

Telle est ma volonté dont je requiers acte.

Ainsi fait et passé à Avignon en l’étude de nous notaire, en présence de
M. Jean Agricol Brouchier Commissaire aux inhumations, M. Jean Antoine
Chaspoul, propriétaire rentier, M. Albert Roche, aspirant au notariat,
et M. Joseph Céylan sous-sacristain de la paroisse St Pierre, tous les
quatre domiciliés et demeurant à Avignon.

Témoins requis et signés avec le testateur et nous notaire.

les dits témoins sur notre interpelation ont chacun dit être majeurs,
français, jouissant de leurs droits civils, et non parents ou alliés du
testateur et de la légataire.

le présent testament et tout le contenu a été lu par nous notaire au
testateur en présence des témoins qui ont assisté sans désemparer.10

J.S. Mill

27 February, 1869

Donation

Stuart Mill à Taylor

L’an mil huit cent soixante eneufe et le vingt sept février.

Devant Me fMichel dit Baulieuf, licencié en droit, notaire à Avignon, en
présence des deux témoins ci-après nommés, tous soussignés,

A Comparu

Monsieur John Stuart Mill, rentier, demeurant à Blackheath Park, près de
Londres.

Lequel a par les présentes, fait donation entrevifs

A Melle Hélène Taylor, propriétaire rentière, domiciliée à Londres,
demeurant actuellement à Avignon, gsa belle filleg,

Edition: current; Page: [341]
Ici présente et acceptant expressément

Des biens dont la désignation suit:

1° Un pavillon et la terre sur laquelle il est construit en nature de
jardin, labour et vignes, de la contenance d’environ vingt neuf ares
quatre vingt huit centiares, situé sur le territoire d’Avignon, clos de
St Véran ou de la folie, confrontant au levant Cade, au midi le chemin
de la folie, au couchant les hoirs Boyer, au nord Martin née Rozan ou le
donateur.

Le comparant a acquis ledit immeuble de M. Pierre Alexis Mouzin,
propriétaire ancien boulanger et Marie Thérèse Drôme, son épouse,
demeurant à Avignon, suivant acte du dix huit novembre mil huit cent
cinquante huit, Paul Giéra notaire à Avignon, transcrit au bureau des
hypothèques d’Avignon le vingt trois du même mois, et a payé le prix de
cette vente, suivant quittance reçu par M. Paul Giéra, le quinze février
mil huit cent cinquante neuf.

2° Une pièce de terre en nature de pré, situé sur le territoire
d’Avignon, quartier des fontaines, de la contenance de vingt neuf ares,
limitée au nord par Maradon, le donateur et autres, au midi la terre
ci-dessus, au levant Cade, au couchant Martin-Rozan.

Cette terre fut acquise par le donateur de Madme Anne Rozan, épouse de
Louis Charles Martin, propriétaire cultivateur, demeurant à Avignon,
suivant acte reçu par Me Giéra hnotaire à Avignonh, le douze septembre
mil huit cent soixante deux, transcrit au bureau des hypothèques
d’Avignon, le vingt quatre septembre même année, vol. 423, no. 67. Le
prix fut payé comptant.

3° Une terre partie en nature de pré et partie labourable située sur le
territoire d’Avignon, quartier du pont des deux eaux et des fontaines,
d’une contenance d’environ soixante dix sept ares trente cinq centiares,
y comris une petite parcelle séparée et en dépendant d’environ cinq ares
dix centiares. Le plus grand de ces deux corps confronte au levant et au
midi Joseph Rozan, au couchant Lubière, au nord une traverse; la petite
parcelle confronte au levant et au midi Toussaint Ferrière, au couchant
Richard, au nord Lubière. Les bâtiments construits sur ladite terre font
aussi partie de la donation.

4° Une parcelle de terre en nature de pré de la contenance de quarante
ares dix sept centiares, située sur le territoire d’Avignon, clos des
fontaines, faisant du no. 291 de la section H.H. du plan cadastral, et
confrontant au levant M. Cléments, au midi le donateur, au couchant
Marandon, au nord un chemin d’exploitation.

5° Une pièce de terre en prairie située sur le même territoire, même
clos des fontaines, et une langue de terre complantée en saules située
au couchant de ladite prairie dont elle est séparée par une distance de
quatorze mètres; de la contenance ensemble de trente quatre ares quatre
vingt centiares. La prairie confronte au levant Marandon, au midi Martin
dit la vierge, au couchant Ferrier ou le donateur, au nord les hoirs
Ytier; la langue de terre confronte au couchant un canal d’arrosage, au
levant Ferrier.

Edition: current; Page: [342]
6° Une terre en nature de pré, située sur le même territoire et
quartier, d’une contenance de quarante un ares quatre vingt dix huit
centiares, confrontant au levant Raymond, au midi le donateur, au
couchant Martin dit la vierge et autres, au nord les hoirs Ytier.

Ces quatre derniers immeubles ont été acquis par le donateur; savoir:

la première, de Etienne Trophine Isidore Marandon, boulanger, demeurant
à Avignon;

la deuxième, de MM. Antoine Challe, André Challe, et Valentin Challe,
frères, marchands d’huiles et de fromages, demeurant à Avignon;

la troisième, de M. Paul Joseph Marie dit Raymond, propriétaire rentier,
demeurant à Avignon;

la quatrième, de M. Jean Pierre Ferrier, propriétaire cultivateur,
demeurant sur le territoire d’Avignon, quartier de Courtine;

le tout suivant acte reçu par Me Giéra, ile quatre Janvier mil huit cent
soixante quatre, transcrit au bureau des hypothèques d’Avignon, le vingt
un janvier, même année, vol. 437, no. 82.

Le prix de la vente relatif aux propriétés aliénées par Challe, Raymond
et Ferrier fut quittancé dans l’acte; le prix de la parcelle vendu par
Marandon a été payé suivant actes des dix novembre et quatorze décembre
mil huit cent soixante quatre et quatorze mars mil huit cent soixante
cinq, notaire Me Giéra.

7° enfin les meubles et objets mobiliers décrits et estimés à la somme
de deux mille cent quarante cinq francs en un état dressé par les
parties à la date de ce jour, lequel devant être enregistré en même
temps que ces présentes est demeuré ci-joint, après avoir été certifié
véritable par les parties, et que dessus il a été apposé une mention la
constatant signée des parties et du notaire, et des témoins.

Les immeubles sont donnés en l’état où ils se trouvent et avec toutes
leurs dépendances, sans exception ni réserve, et jsansj garantie tant de
la mesure exprimée que du bon état des bâtiments; mais avec garantie de
tous troubles, évictions et autres empêchements quelconques, le donateur
s’y obligeant expressément.

Jouissance

La donataire aura la propriété des objets donnés, et elle en prendra la
jouissance par la perception à son profit des loyers, fermages et
revenus, le tout à compter d’aujourd’hui.

Elle se reconnaît en possession des meubles et objets mobiliers donnés.

Les Soussignés

Monsieur John Stuart Mill, rentier, demeurant à Blackheath Park, près de
Londres, d’une part

Edition: current; Page: [343]
Et Mademoiselle Hélène Taylor, propriétaire rentière, domiciliée à
Londres, demeurant à Avignon, sa belle fille, d’autre part.

Dressent ainsi qu’il suit l’Etat descriptif et estimatif des meubles et
objets mobiliers dont M. Mill doit faire donation à Melle Taylor; lequel
sera annexé à l’acte de donation.

  ------------------------------------------------- ------
  Quatre bibliothèques, six cent cinquante francs   650
  Six tapis, deux cent septante cinq francs         275
  Cinq tables, cent cinquante francs                150
  Un canapé, quatre vingt dix francs                90
  Deux fauteuils, soixante francs                   60
  Dix chaises, quarante francs                      40
  Une commode, trente francs                        30
  Trois lits, trois cent vingt cinq francs          325
  Un chiffonnier, cent dix francs                   110
  Un paravent, quinze francs                        15
  Neuf cent quatre vingt deux volumes               
  Quatre cents francs                               400
  Total des objets inventoriés ci dessus            
  Deux mille cent quarante cinq francs              2145
  ------------------------------------------------- ------

Fait à Avignon, le vingt sept février mil huit cent soixante neuf.

John Stuart Mill

Helen Taylor

Conditions

La donataire acquittera les impôts de toute nature des immeubles donnés,
à partir d’aujourd’hui.

Elle supportera les servitudes passives pouvant grêver ces immeubles,
sauf à s’en défendre et à profiter de celles actives, s’il en existe, à
ses risques et périls, sans que cette stipulation puisse conférer à des
tiers plus de droits que ceux qu’ils pourraient avoir en vertu de la loi
ou de titres réguliers non prescrits.

Elle entretiendra pour le temps qui reste à courir les baux verbaux ou
écrits qui peuvent avoir été consentis par le donateur, de manière à ce
que celui ci ne soit point inquiété à cet égard.

M. Mill déclare qu’une partie des terres données est affermie à M.
Antoine Bathelemy, aubergiste, demeurant à Avignon, suivant acte reçu
par Me Giéra, le vingt un décembre mil huit cent soixante quatre, dont
la donataire déclare avoir parfaite connaissance.

Déclarations

M. Mill déclare

Qu’il n’est personnellement dans aucun des cas spécifiés dans les
articles 2121 et 2124 du Code Napoléon.

Que les formalités de purge légale ont été remplies sur la vente
consentie par Mouzin, ainsi qu’il résulte du dépôt fait au greffe du
tribunal d’Avignon, le vingt Edition: current; Page: [344] cinq novembre
mil huit cent cinquante neuf, de la notification fait aux personnes
désignées par la loi, par exploit de Berlandier huissier, du sept
décembre suivant, et de l’insertion au Mémorial de Vaucluse du neuf du
même mois, enregistré le quinze, fol. 88, case 1 par Ravoux qui a perçu
deux francs vingt centimes.

Que ces mêmes formalités ont été remplies sur les ventes consenties par
Marandon, les frères Challe, et Ferrier, ainsi qu’il résulte de pièces
déposées aux minutes de Me Giéra, le vingt kseptk septembre mil huit
cent soixante cinq.

Qu’il n’y avait pas lieu à purger d’hypothèques légales les terres
vendues par dame Martin et par Raymond.

Enfin que tous les immeubles ci-dessus sont entièrement libres
d’hypothèques.

Titres

Le donateur a remis à la donataire qui le reconnaît:

1° Tous les actes de vente ci-dessus mentionnés, dans lesquels se trouve
établie l’origine de la propriété de chacun des immeubles donnés.

2° Tous les titres de propriété plus anciens, ainsi que les pièces de
purge légale et les certificats après ltranscription et purgel.

3‘ et le bail consenti à Barthelemy, et plus haut mentionné.

Evaluation

Pour la perception du droit d’enregistrement, les parties évaluent les
immeubles donnés à un revenu annuel de mille cinquante francs.

Election de domicile

Pour l’exécution des présentes, les parties font élection de domicile, à
Avignon, en l’étude de Me mBaulieum.

Dont acte en minute

Fait et passé à Avignon, en l’étude, en présence de MMrs Jean François
Puy, élève de notaire et Charles Morénas, tourneur, tous deux demeurant
et domiciliés à Avignon.

Témoins instrumentaires requis.

Et après lecture, les parties ont signé avec les témoins et le notaire.

La lecture du présent acte par le notaire et la signature par les
parties ont eu lieu en la présence réelle des deux témoins
instrumentaires.11

John Stuart Mill

Helen Taylor

Edition: current; Page: [345]




buccaneers and slave-dealers were the first to discover that there was a
geographical distribution of moralities as well as of animals; they
found that common honesty, like its emblem, the common house-dog,
degenerated sadly as it approached the line; that piracy and kidnapping
flourished in the same temperature as beasts of prey and venomous
reptiles. Their charts regulated their morals; every observation to
determine their latitude was a lesson in ethics, and the sun’s altitude
gave an accurate measure of the height to which it was lawful to extend
their violence. Of late years moral geography has been permitted to fall
a little into oblivion; the world even seemed disposed to believe that
the essence of principle is its universality; that virtue and vice
depend neither upon parallels nor meridians; Edition: current; Page:
[360] and that Humboldt’s isothermal lines mark temperature only,1 and
do not convey the slightest information respecting a nation’s capacity
for justice and freedom. Thanks to those eminent philosophers, Mr.
Maclean and Mr. Grove Price,2 this spreading delusion is on the point of
being dispelled; the philosophical discoveries of the slavers and
buccaneers will be worthily supported by our modern Conservatives, ever
steady advocates of

-   

    The good old rule, the simple plan,
-   

    That they should take who have the power,
-   

    And they should keep who can.3

These sages and their followers have established, that in all countries
north of the fiftieth degree of northern latitude, Popery is an
abomination, whose endurance calls loudly to heaven for vengeance, and
municipal institutions nuisances that ought to be abated; but when we
pass to the south of that mystic line, the horror of Popery changes into
a profound respect for his Catholic Majesty, a sincere veneration for
that ancient conservative institution, the Inquisition, and a burning
zeal that would consign liberal gainsayers to an auto-da-fé.4 Some
ascribe this apparent discrepancy to the delight of these gentlemen in
abstractions; their zeal is for the church, any church, quocumque modo
church; the church, which in their minds is a more abstract idea than
even that of a lord mayor without a gold chain and fur robe (which was
so puzzling to Martinus Scriblerus),5 seeing that it includes not the
notions of religion, creed, or discipline. And this theory derives
Edition: current; Page: [361] some confirmation from a recent version of
some of these philosophers’ speeches into tolerable rhyme, and plainer
reason than these gentlemen ordinarily use:

-   

    -   

        The church is in danger, alas!
    -   

        The church is in danger, alas!
    -   

        Which church? Pho! you fool!
    -   

        The creed is no rule,
    -   

        Be it Koran, or Bible, or mass, or mass,
    -   

        Be it Koran, or Bible, or mass!

-   

    -   

        The church is in danger, alas!
    -   

        The church is in danger, alas!
    -   

        The church which we cry for,
    -   

        The church we will die for,
    -   

        Is the church in which priests can amass, amass,
    -   

        The church in which priests can amass!

-   

    -   

        The true church is Popish in Spain;
    -   

        In Portugal Popish again;
    -   

        In fine, to be brief,
    -   

        That church is the chief
    -   

        Which boasts of the largest domain, domain,
    -   

        Which boasts of the largest domain!

-   

    -   

        Then here’s to the church, in despite
    -   

        Of the knaves who for liberty write!
    -   

        Great Mammon’s the Lord
    -   

        By all churches ador’d,
    -   

        And the church that’s establish’d is right, is right,
    -   

        The church that’s establish’d is right!

-   

    -   

        Then toast inquisitions in Spain!
    -   

        Drink Tories and churchmen again,
    -   

        Put a foot on the people,
    -   

        Add a yard to the steeple,
    -   

        And cry from the pulpit, amen, amen!
    -   

        And cry from the pulpit, amen!6

But this explanation, though it may show why Popery may be a blessing in
Spain, and a curse in Ireland, throws no light on the second point,
municipal institutions; it leaves us still to guess why west of us all
local privileges and local self-government should be swept away, while
south of us the fueros of the Biscayans, however useless to themselves
or pernicious to the rest of Spain, must be supported even at the hazard
of placing the Peninsula beyond the pale of civilization. Our first
theory therefore claims the preference,—that Messrs. Maclean and Price
(with their followers, the Inglises, Goulburns, Peels, Edition: current;
Page: [362] Hardinges, and unchanged* Burdetts), have revived the
neglected science of moral geography, to the great edification and
advantage of the present and all future generations; that they have
given to its principles a strength, a permanence, and an extension not
contemplated by the original authors, and that they may therefore claim
rather to be its founders than its revivers. Sumite superbiam quaesitam
meritis.7

Whatever other reflections may be justly excited by the late debates on
Spanish affairs,8 we cannot help congratulating our country on the
extraordinary growth of the philanthropic virtues which was exhibited on
the Tory benches, and the near prospect of the conversion in particular
of some of our military senators to quakerism. The morality of warfare
has been discussed with an ethical rigour, and at the same time a
sentimental eloquence, which would not have disgraced the classic shades
of the Academy. Hear how wisely and philosophically our military Plato,
Sir Henry Hardinge, discusses this delicate point of morals:

There was another mode of viewing this subject—namely, as affecting the
moral character of this country, which, in his opinion, was a matter of
high consideration. It remained a matter of deep consideration for the
inhabitants of this Christian country whether his Majesty’s Ministers
and that House should allow men, the natives of this country, to become
accustomed to shed the blood of their brother men in a quarrel in which
they were not interested. It was a matter of deep consideration whether,
by such proceedings as those he alluded to, they should train up our
countrymen to scenes of bloodshed and murder, which had never been
approached in any modern warfare.9

So many of our half-pay officers have exchanged general orders for holy
orders that the church militant is no longer a questionable phrase among
us, and this piece of sermonizing may probably be designed to announce
the gallant officer as a candidate for the mitre. The late Archbishop of
Cashel10 began life as a Edition: current; Page: [363] midshipman in the
navy, at a time when Lord Gambier had not commenced his efforts to
substitute psalms for oaths, and tracts for cards,11 and when the name
of temperance societies was unknown to our sailors; yet in his instance
the quarterdeck was found to supply as good a system of preparatory
education as the universities, and the cockpit sent forth a prelate that
would not have disgraced the cloister. Here assuredly is a precedent
which will more than justify Sir Henry’s elevation; the camp is as good
a school for clerical instruction as a man-of-war, and a dean has
informed us, that

-   

    To give a young gentleman right education,
-   

    The army’s the only good school in the nation.12

To our extract from this probationary sermon we must add the commentary
of another eminent moralist, Lord Mahon, especially as he gives us
history to aid philosophy, and illustrates “wise saws” by “modern
instances”:13

In the debate last evening one principal point under discussion was how
far historical precedent could be adduced to justify the present policy
of Great Britain. Upon that point he believed scarcely any precedent had
been adduced except from the dark ages of our history, when it was not
unusual for men to engage in war in the service of foreign powers,
without any regard to the interests of their sovereign or country in its
issue. At that time soldiers of this character were termed mercenaries,
a term which he would not apply to the British Legion in Spain, because
he was aware that the spirit of that term had been misunderstood by many
persons, and he did not at all mean to insinuate that the persons who
formed part of that legion were actuated—as the expression was supposed
to imply—by none but mercenary motives. So far from intending any
imputation of this kind, he believed that the intentions of those
individuals were honourable; and so believing, he would be the last
person to cast a stigma upon them in their absence. But he did say
this—that looking at the position in which Great Britain was placed,
this legion stood in a situation in which British soldiers ought not to
stand—a position for which he could only find a parallel in the
mercenaries he had alluded to in the darker ages of our history. When we
thus revived one of the features in our ancient and less civilized
history, we could hardly be surprised to see the laws against
witchcraft, and the old penal code, which were scarcely less barbarous,
called also into existence. He hoped that in future the progress of our
advancing civilization would be marked by humanity, and a respect for
human life.14

The abstract moral question, how far the trade of a soldier is
consistent with the duties of a man and a Christian, is here very
unnecessarily mooted. We have no objection to anything which can
possibly be said in denunciation of medicines, if Edition: current;
Page: [364] we can first get rid of diseases. We are quite ready to join
in the cry of “No prisons,” when the thieves shall all be converted to
the faith of “No thieving;” but when the cry comes from the friends and
partisans of the thieves, we like it not. War may be stigmatized
universally, and we are quite ready to give our vote for its abolition
in a universal congress of mankind: but while the enemies of freedom are
allowed to levy their vassals, embattle their slaves, and organize their
dupes, assuredly the friends of freedom have a right to employ their own
thews and sinews to check the onward flow of barbarism and tyranny.15

But Lord Mahon asks for modern precedents; this worthy aspirant to the
honours of the Historical Muse can find no parallel to the service of
the British Legion, save in the darker periods of our history:—The reign
of Queen Elizabeth is not wont to be accounted such, nor are Sir Philip
Sidney and Sir Horatio Vere generally reckoned among “mercenaries” and
“buccaneers.”16 There are, indeed, some more modern transactions which
Lord Mahon may have had in his eye:—It is not very long since Indian
savages were taken into British pay to butcher our brethren in America;
and history of no very ancient date records, that the emissaries of an
English king17 were seen in the soldier-market of every petty German
despot, bargaining as coolly as carcase-butchers in a shambles, for
Hessians, Hanoverians, Brunswickers, and Saxons, to crush men fighting
for privileges dearer and more valuable than the Biscayan fueros,
because they were the rights of mankind, and not those of a petty
province. If General Evans18 be a mercenary for accepting pay from Queen
Isabella, what name must be given to George III, paying blood-money and
head-money to margraves and landgraves for the hire of their subjects?
We do not like moral maxims which go just so far, and no farther, than
suits the interest of the moralizer.

Mr. Walton puts the objection in a much more tangible shape, and with
him we readily join issue:

Among men, acts must be estimated not merely by their moral turpitude,
but by their effect on society, and what can be more generally
mischievous, what better calculated to put everything under the yoke of
violence, than to propagate opinions by the sword, and apply to
politics, what formerly prevailed in religious matters, the fanatical
bloody spirit of forcible proselytism? My gallant countryman knows by
experience the miseries of war, and can be really think himself
justified in inflicting them on the numerous Spaniards who happen to
differ from him on points of internal Spanish policy? What would become
of society, if every political enthusiast, not satisfied with oppressing
our patience by tedious harangues, should force his foolish fancies on
our acceptance by military violence?19

Edition: current; Page: [365]
Against such doctrine as this we have not a word to say: whoever excites
civil war, whoever rebels against an established government, unless he
has so plainly the majority with him that he succeeds almost without a
struggle, acts under a terrible responsibility. But we beg to inform Mr.
Walton that the Legion went to assist not rebels, but an established
government; not to excite but to suppress a civil war. Mr. Walton should
preach to his friend Don Carlos. A sermon against thieving should not be
addressed to the thief-catcher, but to the thief.*

Edition: current; Page: [366]
The doctrine, that the soldiers and officers of the Legion fought in a
quarrel in which they were not interested, and in the issue of which
“the interests of their sovereign or country” were not involved, is
false at both points. Without entering into the niceties of the case,
there was not one among them who did not know that he was fighting for
free institutions against despotism; for Reformers against Tories, at
home and abroad. Such a quarrel is not one in which Englishmen or
Irishmen are not “interested.” And as to the indifference of the Spanish
contest to “the interests of their sovereign and country,” it was a
contest in which both sovereign and country had found sufficient
inducements either of interest, or of duty, for binding themselves by
treaty to a direct and positive co-operation. It may be meant to assert,
though the intention is disclaimed, that the officers and soldiers of
the Legion sold their services for pay, without caring for the justice
of the cause. Among so large a body this must no doubt be true of no
inconsiderable proportion; but so it is of all military bodies; for
instance, of those who have entered the British army as officers or
soldiers at any period during the last hundred years. The Legion at
least knew what they were hired to fight for; but those who enter the
British army are hired (we say it not invidiously, but to express what
no one will deny, that they Edition: current; Page: [367] enter it from
the ordinary motives from which men engage in any other profession,)
they are hired, we say, to fight, they know not for what; certainly, in
any of our wars since Queen Anne’s time,20 for no good: perhaps to fight
against, not for, the cause of free institutions. The good Major
Cartwright21 laid down his commission rather than fight against the
Americans; how few, in the British army, have shown similar virtue; yet
how many, both in the American and in the French war, must have felt
that the cause they were in arms against was that which ought to
prevail! The Tory moralist, who deems these honourable men, and General
Evans and his followers adventurers, must be a very pretty illustration
of the doctrine of Helvetius, that our notions of virtue are corollaries
from our notions of our own interests.22

But a more complicated question than the morality of the Legion’s
conduct is the value of its services. There is no use in disguising our
belief that the friends of liberty in Spain and England have been
disappointed by the general results of the expedition, and that the
successes of our countrymen have neither been so early nor so decisive
as had been expected. It was clearly the knowledge of this feeling that
animated the supporters of Sir Henry Hardinge’s motion.23 The time
chosen for the debate was the moment when temporary failure was likely
to produce temporary unpopularity. This point was eloquently urged by
Mr. Ward:

He asked them, why was not the policy of the Government with regard to
Spain made the subject of complaint during the present session till now?
He asked in what material point the line of policy pursued in
consequence of the quadruple alliance24 was changed, so as to cause the
present motion? (Cheers.) There were precisely the same grounds for the
motion. (Cheers.) They had been threatened with it during the whole of
the recess—(cheers); they had heard nothing but denunciations of the
policy of the Noble Lord (Palmerston) from every organ of the
Conservatives. They had been told up to the first day of the session of
the expensive mode of intervention, of the neglect of British interests,
and of the incapacity of the Noble Lord the Secretary for Foreign
Affairs. What was the result of all this? It happened that three days
before the meeting of Parliament intelligence was received of a victory
gained by the combined forces of the Queen of Spain and the British
Legion. And so great was the reaction which attended the receipt of this
intelligence, and so great was the interest excited in the public mind
by the gallantry of our fellow-countrymen in Spain, that the Right Hon.
Baronet the Member for Tamworth, feeling that the moment was very
unpropitious for such a discussion, quelled some little symptoms of
insubordination, and availed himself of the very first opportunity that
the forms of the House allowed to express his admiration of the conduct
and gallantry of the brave men who had successfully defended Edition:
current; Page: [368] Bilbao.25 (Cheers.) The Hon. Member for Sandwich
(Mr. Grove Price)26 and the Hon. and Learned Member for Oxford (Mr.
Maclean), of whose devotion to the cause of absolutism there could not
be the least doubt, submitted in silence to the course pursued by the
Right Hon. Baronet the Member for Tamworth. He would ask, what prevented
the Hon. and Gallant Officer (Sir H. Hardinge) from bringing forward
this motion on that occasion, and what encouraged him to do so now?
(Loud cheers.) The simple fact was, that success no longer beamed so
decisively on the cause of liberty in the Peninsula. (Great and
continued cheering.) This was the first time that he had heard in the
British House of Parliament that a fair ground for abandoning an ally
was that he was unfortunate. (Loud cheers.) He had heard often the
opposite argument used. He had heard the misfortunes of those with whom
we were in alliance stated, and never unsuccessfully, as a plea for
additional struggles and exertion on our part. (Cheers.) It was reserved
for the Hon. and Gallant Officer (Sir H. Hardinge) to reverse this, and
to make the want of success a plea for shamefully abandoning the
engagements to which we were solemnly bound by treaty.27

But though success has nothing to do with the policy of the quadruple
treaty, it is a very important element in the Spanish controversy; for
if the British Legion be useless, if its presence in the Peninsula does
not very materially promote the Queen’s cause, it is doing incalculable
mischief to the cause it was embodied to serve. The Duke of Wellington’s
reasoning on this head is conclusive, and his speech, when the question
was deliberated in the Lords, points out errors of system, the more to
be lamented as they cannot be denied.28

Military criticism by a person at a distance from the scene of
operations is equally difficult and ungracious. Before questioning the
prudence of the conduct of General Evans, or the wisdom of his
operations, we must be acquainted with the circumstances of his
position. According to his adversaries, the materials of the British
Legion were the worst possible. Mr. Walton, and he is more temperate in
his description than the majority of the Carlist writers, says, “that
the privates were the lowest and vilest of our urban rabble, refined or
still further debased (for I know not which term to choose) by a mixture
of Irish peasants. Among them might be here and there scattered a
disbanded soldier.”29 The soldiers were certainly undisciplined, and
were therefore likely to evince little patience in suffering, and to
lose subordination under the smart of disappointment. Did these raw
recruits, on their landing, find comfortable quarters, proper rations,
and regular pay? On the contrary, all parties confess that they had to
endure more privations and misery than those which disorganised the
veterans of Wellington in his retreat from Burgos. It is highly
creditable to the perseverance and fortitude of General Evans, that
under such circumstances he has been able to keep his men together as a
Edition: current; Page: [369] military body at all; and in every
examination of his conduct, this great difficulty must be allowed to
have its full weight. It is also uncertain how far his actions have been
controlled by Spanish orders, influenced by Spanish counsels, or misled
by Spanish promises of co-operation. But, after having made every fair
allowance for the difficulties of the position in which General Evans
was placed, the disappointments he experienced, and the frequent failure
of the promises on which he relied, we must reluctantly confess that his
strategetic skill seems far inferior to his perseverance, fortitude, and
spirit. The Duke of Wellington’s criticisms on the movements of the
legion appear to be too well founded:

After a certain period,—he believed, as soon as the original money was
expended,—the corps was sent down to join the other troops in the
neighbourhood of Vittoria. They remained there during the winters of
1835 and 1836, struggling with every possible distress! but a crisis was
approaching—it became necessary that Great Britain should take a more
active part in the war—that something should be done to produce some
effect in a certain place called the Stock Exchange. Accordingly this
corps, towards the spring of the year, was brought to Santander and St.
Sebastian, and employed in the relief of the blockade which had been
maintained for some time by Guibelalde.30 It was then found absolutely
necessary to raise this blockade, and the British squadron, under the
command of a most active and able officer,31 for whom he (the Duke of
Wellington) entertained the highest respect, employed their 68-pounders,
and forced in the works of the Carlist line on 6th of May. What was the
effect? The blockade was still maintained a little further off, out of
the reach of the fire of the British fleet, and there it had remained up
to the present time. Excepting this, he defied the noble lord32 to show
any single advantage which had been gained of any description from that
day to this. The whole distance that the blockade had been removed was
one mile. General Evans might have left the Carlists in their original
position without any inconvenience whatever being felt by the town,
because he (the Duke of Wellington) happened to know that the
communication by sea could not have been prevented, even if the whole
British fleet had been blockading the places, instead of being stationed
there to give facility to the communication. The whole inconvenience
felt by the town from the position the Carlists had taken up was,
neither more nor less than, that some ladies and gentlemen were
prevented taking the waters. He would say further, that his firm belief
was, that the connexion between the legion and the fleet had been
injurious to the military affairs of the Queen of Spain. That was his
decided opinion, from what he knew of the nature of the country, and
more particularly from the position which was the strength of Don
Carlos. There was one point which military men perfectly understood, and
that was, that if great corps were to act together, there must be a
communication between them. If there were no communication, then the
attempt at co-operation would in all probability lead to such disasters
as had occurred at Hernani; and it was to him most surprising that
General Evans, who appeared an able man, and deserving of the confidence
of his Majesty’s Government, and the Queen of Spain, with the experience
he had had, of the difficulty of carrying on communications in that
country, should not have felt the danger of his position, and placed
himself in communication with the corps with which he was co-operating,
instead of being at a distance from his Majesty’s fleet.33

Edition: current; Page: [370]
Indeed the best tacticians disapprove of his entire plan of operations,
both in conception and execution; they say, “that he had no business to
go to Vittoria; being there, he had no business to come back; he had no
business in Bilbao, which is a dangerous position for an army; he failed
at Fontarabia in his first attack for want of coup d’oeil and
promptness,” and his recent success scarcely atones for his error. He
appears indeed to have made every attack, and fought every action, till
within the last three months, without any object in view except the
immediate battle. Hence all his proceedings are desultory, all his
actions isolated, his victories unproductive of permanent result, and
not unfrequently followed by rout or retreat. This defect appears
especially conspicuous in his only positive disaster, at Hernani, which
was principally occasioned by the General’s not rightly considering his
position; he fought his way with great energy and determination to the
heights overlooking Hernani, but when these were attained he seems to
have regarded the future as a matter of little import. Major Richardson
not unjustly remarks,

Surely the experience of the past, at that very same Hernani, ought to
have satisfied the Lieutenant-General that an attempt would be made to
turn his flanks and gain his rear the moment a forward movement was made
upon the town. This is the Carlist system of warfare; and favoured as
they are by the hilly and wooded character of the country, nothing is
more easy of accomplishment. It was precisely in this manner they
attempted and had very nearly succeeded in turning us during the
reconnoissance upon Hernani in 1835.34

The circumstances of the battle have been stated with tolerable accuracy
by Lord Alvanley:

On the 1st of March the general had under him a combined force of 13,000
men, besides the aid of 400 British marines and 20 guns. On the 15th
they had taken the heights above Hernani: his position was on those
heights. On his right his position was very strong, and on his left was
the village of Astigarraga, which was not occupied. As he (Lord
Alvanley) understood the attack upon Hernani, it was this. It was
commenced about nine in the morning; the troops were very much fatigued
by the operations of the two or three preceding days. About half past
eleven a column of about 4,000 Carlists, who had advanced by forced
marches to the action, attacked the rear of General Evans, by the bridge
of Astigarraga, of which they took possession. The Carlist force marched
steadily forward, and the consequence was that the army under General
Evans retired before their pursuers in the greatest disorder. So little,
however, were the Carlists aware of the retreat, that it was at first
taken to be a ruse de guerre, and had they pursued the flying force with
vigour they would have gained a greater victory. When the Carlists were
upon the heights, the soldiers under the English general they distinctly
saw, like an undisciplined mob, rushing onwards towards the outer works
of St. Sebastian. It was but justice, however, to add, that from the
general to the lowest officer, every effort was made by them to quell
the panic which had seized the troops, but without effect—and every
means they could devise was resorted to, in order to retrieve what had
been thus just lost. Undoubtedly it might be asked where was the reserve
which ought to have been kept? It appeared that no reserve had been
made.35

Edition: current; Page: [371]
The panic was the simple result of surprise; the Carlists appear to have
pushed their battalions across the bridges of the Uramea almost without
interruption, and nearly the first intimation of their presence was the
impetuous and unexpected attempt to turn the extreme left, where General
Chichester’s36 brigade was stationed. But the Carlist reinforcement did
not arrive until nine o’clock, there was therefore sufficient time to
secure the heights, which are strong and well wooded, by abattis and
field-works. General Evans should have remembered that his was the
accessary, not the principal army, and he should, therefore, have taken
measures to secure and defend the advantages he had gained until he
could communicate with the principal army (Espartero’s),37 and
ascertained its true position. This communication might have been made
in two or three days by sea, and in a less time by land, if General
Evans had been sufficiently prudent to establish any secret channels of
intelligence. The subsequent conduct of the legion has sufficiently
retrieved its character from the imputation of cowardice, to which it
was exposed by the panic at Hernani; but even yet we are unable to
perceive in the General’s movements any proof of his having formed a
fixed and comprehensive plan for his campaign.

Able strategists, acquainted with the country which is the seat of war,
are of opinion that the true line of operations by General Evans would
have been along the French frontier of St. Sebastian; establishing
strong fortified points as he moved, until the communication with
Pampeluna was secure. He would thus have cut off the Carlists from their
French succours and resources; he would have been able to obtain from
France supplies of provisions and the munitions of war for his own men;
the enemy would have been forced to attack him in his chosen position,
instead of his being compelled to attack them on the ground which they
had previously selected as most favourable to their operations. To the
employment of the greater part of the Queen’s forces in this quarter
there is one apparent objection of some moment,—the road to Madrid would
have been left open, and the Carlists would have had an opportunity of
making a dash on the capital. But this might have been obviated by
having one compact, well-equipped field corps, constantly concentrated
near the Ebro, ready to move under a good commander, and meet the
Carlists whenever they attempted to make a push in that direction.

But here another and rather a difficult question presents itself; have
the Spaniards a good commander? Espartero certainly is not such, or he
would never have attacked at Bilbao on the side he did; nor, having
gained his battle there, would he have suffered the enemy to rally after
their defeat, when a vigorous pursuit would have destroyed them as a
military body. Narvaez shewed both talent and energy, but he is in
disgrace;38 the rest are men incapable of acting without Edition:
current; Page: [372] instruction, which they will not submit to receive.
It is not necessary to attribute the failures of Cordova, Sarsfield, and
others, to treachery; the experience of the Peninsular war has taught us
that Spanish armies make a great figure on paper, and rarely anywhere
else. When closely examined, their numbers begin to illustrate the
theory of vanishing fractions; their equipments bring to mind the Irish
metaphor of being “clothed with nakedness,” and their capacity of
motion, described as that of the hare, scarcely equals the tortoise.
Things have not altered for the better since the days of Sir John
Moore,39 and Spanish emblazonment must be always taken with, what the
heralds call, an abatement.

General Evans has now quitted the legion, and in a farewell address has
given a summary of its history,40 to which we know of no parallel but
that of the celebrated King of France, who,

-   

    With fifty thousand men,
-   

    Marched up the hill, and then marched down again.41

The strictures of Richardson, Shaw, and Hall, on the conduct of the
legion,42 are not half so severe as the implied censures of the
commander himself; his enumeration of its services merely recites
battles without an object, and victories without a result; the logical
blunder of argument in a vicious circle, receives the stratagetic
exemplication of movement in a vicious circle; nothing is proved by the
one, nothing accomplished by the other. Carlos, we are told, has
abandoned Biscay; the Queen’s troops are close upon his track; his ruin,
nay, his capture, is certain. Two days elapse, and, lo, Carlos is in
Catalonia, the cradle of fanaticism; the British Legion, without
officers or organization; Espartero gone to look for the Carlists “round
about Estella:” Oraa43 opening a passage for the factious from
Barbastro, in obedience to his country’s proverb, “build a silver bridge
for thine enemy;” and Baron de Meer taking care, if possible, not to
hurt the cause to which he is openly opposed, and secretly attached.44
In fact, the Spanish army, like the British Horse-guards,45 is
independent of the reforming government, and hence, Edition: current;
Page: [373] every liberal movement is paralysed, and faction allowed to
gather its chief strength from the culpable weakness and contemptible
cowardice of its adversaries.

Into the disputes between General Evans and his officers we have no wish
to enter: whether he has succumbed to the Spanish ministry, and
sacrificed the claims of his followers to please the Court of Madrid;
whether they have expected too much, and betrayed their disappointment
by acts of insubordination, are questions it would not be fair to
discuss on ex parte evidence, though there is sufficient variance in the
charges made against the discipline of the General, for us to see that
some of them, at least, have been coloured by passion and prejudice, and
that the character of others might be materially altered by explanation.
But this scarcely concerns the public, and has no connection whatever
with the object of our article. That object requires that we should here
take our leave of General Evans and the Legion, and pass to a subject of
greater moment,—the conduct of our own Government with reference to the
Spanish contest; the principles of foreign policy properly applicable to
the case, and how far the Quadruple Treaty, and the measures which have
been taken in execution of it, are in conformity to those sound
principles.

An opinion has been advanced, and ably supported, by one of the most
distinguished advocates of the popular cause in Parliament, Mr. Roebuck,
which condemns altogether any interference of one country in the
internal commotions of another; and holds, that England should meddle
with other nations only when other nations meddle with her, by impeding
her commerce, or plundering the property of her people.46

We cannot subscribe to this doctrine; nor can we help regretting that a
man of so much eminence among that section of the popular party in
England, with whom alone the friends of freedom throughout Europe can be
expected to sympathize, should have published to all Europe an opinion
so calculated to alienate that sympathy; or confirm the opinion already
so deeply rooted of our selfishness as a nation, by seeming to shew that
the only party among us who might have been deemed an exception to that
selfishness, is not so; an opinion, moreover, so contrary to the spirit
of the present times, which is not less than in the time of the
Reformation, a spirit of mutual helpfulness, a sense of common interest,
among persons of congenial opinions in all nations.

Nevertheless, all rational friends of popular institutions should be
ready, whenever necessary, to express, in their most emphatic terms,
their adherence to as much as is true of Mr. Roebuck’s proposition;
namely, the condemnation of wars of propagandism. Self-defence justifies
much: Revolutionary France, standing at bay against all the despots in
Europe, had the amplest justification for invoking, in the name of
universal liberty, the aid of every disturbed spirit in Edition:
current; Page: [374] Europe, who might respond to the call. But if the
despots would have let France alone, France would not have been
justified in raising, merely for the promotion of free institutions, a
war of opinion against the despots. The attempt to establish freedom by
foreign bayonets is a solecism in terms. A government which requires the
support of foreign armies cannot be a free government. If a government
has not a majority of the people, or at least a majority of those among
the people who care for politics, on its side; if those who will fight
for it, are not a stronger party than those who will fight against it,
then it can only have the name of a popular government; not being able
to support itself by the majority, it must support itself by keeping
down the majority, it must be a despotism in the name of freedom; like
the Directorial Government of France, which decimated its representative
bodies, and sent all opposition journalists to Cayenne, in defence of
Liberty and the Revolution.47 There is a party of really sincere
patriots on the continent of Europe, who look back to the Convention as
their model,48 and avowedly seek to govern for the interest of the
majority by the agency of a patriotic and energetic minority: but we
have no faith in the government of a few, even when they speak in the
name of the many, nor do we believe in the stability of representative
institutions when the people, who are to be represented by them, do not
care sufficiently about them to fight for them. Nobody will long enjoy
freedom when it is necessary for another to assert it for him.

We hold it, therefore, as an inviolable principle that an enslaved
people should be left to work out their own deliverance. But of this
principle it is a necessary part, that if unaided, they shall also be
unhindered. If free nations look on inactive, despots must do so too.
Non-interference is not a principle at all unless it be adopted as a
universal principle. If freedom cannot be established by foreign force,
it does not, therefore, follow, that by foreign force it should be
allowed to be crushed.

If it were possible, as it will be in time, that the powers of Europe
should, by agreement among themselves, adopt a common rule for the
regulation of wars of political opinion, as they have already adopted so
many for the regulation of their private quarrels, it is easy to see
what the purport of the agreement should be. When a struggle breaks out
anywhere between the despotic and the democratic principles, the powers
should never interfere singly; when they interfere at all, it should be
jointly, as a general European police. When the two parties are so
unequal in strength that one can easily prevail, and keep the other
down, things should be allowed to take their course. If parties are
nearly balanced, and general Edition: current; Page: [375] anarchy or
protracted civil war, is likely to ensue, the powers should interfere
collectively, and force the combatants to lay down their arms and come
to a compromise, and should send their own troops against the party that
refused to do it. This is no idle speculation: it has been twice done
within ten years: once in Greece; and again, in Holland and Belgium.
Much contemptuous sarcasm was expended some years ago upon the
conference and its several hundred protocols.49 Doubtless these were
much more ridiculous than as many pitched battles, but a trifle more
humane. We regard those ridiculed protocols as constituting the most
important step in European civilization, which has been taken for
generations past. They were a sign that with the growth of humanity, and
also the interests of commerce and the arts of peace, war, long the
sport of despots, had become such an object of fear and detestation to
the governments of Europe, both free and despotic, that they would not
suffer it to exist in the smallest corner of Europe, if it could be
prevented; rather should the jarring interests of constitutional and
despotic monarchies, which, in other days, would have admitted of no
compromise, be discussed quietly over a table, and adjust themselves by
talk, as they best could, that so all might combine and send a kind of
European Constabulary to Antwerp to part the combatants, and handcuff
the more obstinate fellow of the two, who would not submit and have the
cause tried by a sort of European Sessions of the Peace. Is this a small
thing, does the reader think, in the history of European civilization?
It is simply the first step towards getting rid of war; a beginning
towards doing for public wars what was done for private wars when
tribunals were established to adjudicate the quarrels from which those
wars arose, and a police to execute the decision.

The case of Don Carlos and the Queen of Spain is parallel to that of
Greece, and to that of Holland and Belgium; exactly the kind of dispute
which might be, and ought to be, put down by European interference.
Other prospect of its termination there seems none; neither party,
according to all appearances, can hope to subdue the other; neither will
hear of any proposition for a peaceful settlement; the exasperation must
grow, must become more and more furious, until human beings are changed
into savage beasts, all kinds of raging passions being kindled, not only
between the actual combatants, but among all persons throughout Spain
who find their means of subsistence rendered precarious, and their hopes
of a settled government blighted by Carlists or traitors, or Moderates
or Exaltados, or whatever persons they happen to consider responsible
for the protraction of the struggle. If Edition: current; Page: [376]
ever there was a call demanding a similar intervention to that which
took place at Antwerp, this does. But intervention of the same sort, and
by the same parties, there cannot now be.

For we have been speaking only of what would be desirable if all the
powers of Europe could agree that no one of them should interfere
singly; that the principle of not interfering, except by common consent,
and the joint act of all Europe, should be adopted and enforced by all
other nations, against any power which might choose to infringe it. But
this principle (we need hardly say) has not been adopted. Russia has
interfered in Poland, Austria (a still more unequivocal case) in Modena
and the Papal dominions. In these circumstances, England and France had
two courses open to them. One was to enforce non-interference, and go to
war with Russia, unless she withdrew from Poland; with Austria, unless
she withdrew from all parts of Italy, not included in her own
possessions. This would have been in itself the most eligible course,
most conformable to the principles of sound international moralists; but
as it would have implied a European war and its attendant evils, evils
far greater than any good which could have been done to Poland or Italy,
we think this course was very rightly avoided. Another course remained
for adoption: As Austria and Russia had been suffered to interfere,
unopposed, in the internal affairs of independent states in the East of
Europe, so might England and France assume the power of interfering, to
the exclusion of the despotic powers in the West of Europe; and the
right to do, singly, whatever might with propriety be done, in Spain and
Portugal, by a Congress of all Europe. This course was adopted, and its
result was the Quadruple Treaty. The Quadruple Alliance was formed when
Don Carlos and Don Miguel were both in Portugal; it was an agreement
between the guardians of the young Queens to save them from the
machinations of their uncles, and was ratified by the Kings of France
and England,50 on the very reasonable ground that the restoration of
tranquillity to the Peninsula was necessary to preserve the peace of
Europe. The design of the treaty is very clearly expressed in the
preamble:

Her Majesty the Queen-Regent of Spain, during the minority of her
daughter, Isabella II, Queen of Spain, and his Imperial Majesty the Duke
of Braganza, Regent of the kingdoms of Portugal and the Algarves, in the
name of Queen Donna Maria II, intimately convinced that the interest of
the two Crowns imperiously demand the immediate and vigorous exertion of
their mutual efforts for terminating hostilities, which heretofore had
for their object the overthrow of her Portuguese Majesty’s throne, and
now afford countenance and support to discontented subjects of the
kingdom of Spain: their said Majesties, desirous at once to secure the
means of restoring peace and internal prosperity to their dominions, and
to establish on a reciprocal and solid basis the bonds of future amity
between the two states, have agreed to unite their forces, for the
purpose of obliging the Infante Don Carlos of Spain, and the Infante Don
Miguel of Portugal, to evacuate the territories of the latter kingdom.51

Edition: current; Page: [377]
The official answer of the British King, when appealed to, declares the
design of the ratifying powers,

The two latter Sovereigns, taking into consideration the interest with
which the safety of the Spanish Monarchy must always inspire them, and
animated with the most ardent desire for the restoration of peace both
to the Peninsula and Europe, and his Britannic Majesty taking into
further consideration the special obligations which result from his
ancient alliance with Portugal, have consented to act as parties to the
said treaty.52

Before the ratification was completed, this treaty produced a decisive
effect; Don Miguel abandoned Portugal, and Carlos, surrounded by Don
Pedro’s troops, had no means of escape but by seeking refuge on board a
British ship of war. He was received without any stipulations on either
side, and he at least has had no reason to complain that his confidence
was violated. There are circumstances to be explained respecting the
residence of Don Carlos in London, which we fear would not bear a very
rigid scrutiny. It is not in our power to remove the veil by which they
are covered, but there are some grounds for suspicion that the refusal
of Carlos to resign his pretensions on assurance of protection and a
pension, was encouraged, if not dictated, by some members of an
anti-national party in Great Britain. In the meantime the rebellion
burst forth in the Northern provinces; it was instigated by the monks,
it was supported by the organized bands of smugglers, it was recruited
from the neighbouring districts, which abound with idle and discontented
peasants, habituated to a wandering life from the continued
disorganization of Spain. The folly of Castanon, who published a
proclamation,53 abolishing the fueros without any instructions direct or
implied from the government, gave the insurgents a pretext for their
rebellion, and furnished them with a popular war-cry, a matter of vast
importance in a civil war. Carlos secretly escaped from England, passed
through France undetected, we are not quite sure that we can say,
unsuspected, and appeared in the midst of the insurgents, where his
presence gave unity to their desultory operations. This was an
unforeseen case; it did not, therefore, come within the letter of the
Quadruple Treaty, but it manifestly is included in its spirit. Spain and
Portugal are both included in the words of the preamble; Carlos was
assuredly more likely to disturb the tranquillity of the Peninsula in
Biscay than Portugal, and it must be remembered that, but for the timely
protection afforded him by a British vessel, his opportunities of doing
mischief would have been brought to an abrupt termination. The
additional articles were, in fact, nothing more than an adaptation of
the original treaty to altered circumstances; and the new stipulations
were strictly limited by the circumstances; no one article has been
pointed out which does not of necessity arise from the new position
taken by the Pretender. But though many of the conservative orators
adhered to the policy of the Quadruple Treaty, which the Duke of
Wellington Edition: current; Page: [378] himself had sanctioned during
his late brief tenure of office, they insisted that the present
ministers had gone beyond their engagements, by permitting the marines
to serve on land, and by directing Lord John Hay to take every
opportunity of co-operating with the Queen’s forces. If the British
naval force did not co-operate with the royalists, what would be the
meaning of his “Britannic Majesty acting as a party to the Quadruple
Treaty?” The additional article binds us to aid the Queen with military
stores and a naval force;54 but how is the naval force to be employed? A
blockade without a declaration of war every publicist knows would be
clearly illegal. Blockade is a belligerent right that can only be
exercised by principals, the attempt to enforce it by auxiliaries is
contrary to the law of nations and the law of England. As Carlos has no
fleet, assistance by a naval force could not possibly mean that we
should attack a non-existent navy; the limits of our obligations must
consequently be measured by the mode in which a naval force is usually
employed along a line of coast in co-operation with a land force. Now,
in every such conjuncture recorded in English history, the employment of
marine forces on shore went to a greater extent than the aid given to
the Queen’s armies by Lord John Hay.*

The Quadruple Treaty was a well-aimed attempt to put down, in its early
stages, a civil war, which threatened, if not so put down, to become
that scourge to the Peninsula, and deformity in the sight of Europe,
which, in spite of the interference, it has since become. The occasion
is now more urgent, and the interference, which has hitherto taken
place, not sufficient. What follows? That the Quadruple Treaty was
wrong? No: but that something much more decisive, something going the
full length of what was done between Holland and Belgium, would now be
justifiable; and advisable, if it can be done consistently with the
general peace of Europe.

We are ignorant whether such a joint interference, by France and
England, as would enable them to put down the civil war, and constitute
them judges of the concessions to be made to the insurgent provinces,
would be consented to by Edition: current; Page: [379] France; or if
consented to, would be possible without provoking a war with the other
powers of Europe. That evil would far outweigh the good which, in this
instance, would be obtained by hazarding it. We pretend not to decide
the question, for we are in ignorance of some of the material
circumstances; but we would impress, with all the energy in our power,
upon those with whom the decision depends, that an interference, of the
kind we have suggested, is the only satisfactory denoûement which seems
possible to the present anarchy in the Peninsula, that it should be
attempted at the very earliest moment at which it would be practicable,
without a civil war: and that anything short of this, however required
by the faith of treaties already concluded, is now of proved inefficacy,
and is a mere paltering with the difficulties of the case.

Before we close this article, it is perhaps advisable to add a few
remarks on the substantial merits of the quarrel to which the civil war
owes its origin. For every part of the Spanish question has been made a
subject of angry controversy; and most (though, to their credit be it
said, not all) of the Tory writers55 and orators, have not been ashamed
to contend, that the Spanish liberals are fighting, not for, but
against, both liberty and legitimacy; trampling upon the one, as
embodied in the fueros of the Basque provinces, and the other, as
incarnated in the worthy author of the Durango decree.

The latter point at least is speedily disposed of. Carlos’s pretended
right rests upon the Salic law, which had never the force of law in
Spain. The Salic law was not the ancient rule of succession, it was
first introduced by the Bourbon, Philip V, the great grandfather of Don
Carlos. Females could always succeed in Castille, Leon, and Portugal; it
was by a marriage with the heiress of Navarre that a King of France
obtained a claim to that kingdom,56 and though females were excluded in
Arragon, yet it was through a Princess57 that its inheritance passed to
the Counts of Catalonia. It was by the right of female succession that
the house of Austria reigned in Spain; it was by the same right that the
Bourbons themselves occupied the throne. It formed a part of the
Partidas,58 or system of constitutional law, which Philip swore to
observe on his succession to the throne.

The Salic law could only be established in two ways, by the old forms of
the constitution, or by the despotic will of the sovereign. If the
advocates of Don Carlos take their stand on the former ground, the
answer is, that the forms as well as the substance of the constitution
were violated when Philip V established his law Edition: current; Page:
[380] of agnation,59 and that, conscious of its invalidity, he did not
register it in the form usual with similar acts; while again, if we pass
over the Cortes of 178960 as secret and irregular, we have the Cortes of
Cadiz in 1812,61 representing the nation and acting in the name of the
King, which abolished the decree of Philip, restored the ancient law de
Partidas, and re-established the right of female succession to the
crown. Finally, the decree of Ferdinand, constituting his daughter his
successor,62 was just as regularly sanctioned by a Cortes as Philip’s
law of agnation. If, on the other hand, the Sovereign’s will be regarded
as despotic in Spain, the question is at an end, for Carlos must confess
that Ferdinand had a right to rule the succession as he liked; and this
view seems to have been taken by the King’s confessor and his minister
Calomarde,63 when, during his dangerous illness at La Granja in 1832,
they seduced him to sign a new will, settling the crown on Don Carlos.
Ferdinand’s recovery disconcerted their plan, but their effort plainly
shows that the partisans of Don Carlos at that time felt that the Salic
law was a very weak support to their favourite’s claims. If Carlos
appeals to the constitution, the question is decided against him; the
will of the Sovereign is against him; and what is of far more importance
than either, a majority of the nation is against him.

Greatly as circumstances have changed since 1830, Inglis’s account of
Spain in that year contains the most accurate information respecting the
state of public opinion in the Peninsula that is yet available to
English readers.* The only correction to be made in his estimate of
parties is the addition of the Moderates to the Liberals, and the
alienation from the Carlists of a portion of the Castilian Edition:
current; Page: [381] peasantry. He is a less picturesque writer than
Lord Carnarvon,64 but his weakness of colouring is more than compensated
by his accuracy of outline; above all, he is impartial, for though a
liberal in sentiment, he carried the fear of being warped by prejudice
to such an excess, that he not unfrequently seems to have given the
weight of his authority to the opposite side. Experience, however, has
proved the truth of his statements respecting Spain and Ireland, the two
unfortunate countries whose destinies have been the plague of parties
and the bane of politicians. An author publicly praised by Lord
Aberdeen65 must assuredly be received as a fair witness by the
Conservatives, and his evidence is highly valuable on that part of the
Spanish question connected with the province, which is the principal
seat of war, the peculiar situation of Biscay, and the nature of the
fueros, or privileges enjoyed by its inhabitants. Are the fueros
valuable in themselves, or are they mere empty flatteries to national
pride? Is their preservation consistent with the establishment of
constitutional freedom throughout the Peninsula? Are they cherished by
the Biscayans themselves? The latter point again resolves itself into
the double enquiry, are the fueros popular with all the Biscayans, or
only with a part? and what part?

We need not go very deep into history to discover the value of a name as
the watchword of party in civil warfare; the possessive pronoun has cost
the English nation too large a sum for any doubt to exist respecting its
price; the phrase our colonies in America, and our kingdom of Ireland,
repeated by every English peasant, as if the mystic pronoun conferred on
him some unknown advantage of ownership, has cost us millions of debt,
the total loss of one country, and not a little difficulty in the
preservation of the other. Now, in some particulars, “our fueros” are
just as worthless to the Biscayans, as “our colonies” were to the
English peasants; the King of Spain, for instance, is only lord of
Biscay, just as the Queen of England is only a Duchess in Lancashire and
a Countess in Cheshire. Our palatine counties have suffered the nominal
distinction to fall into oblivion, but the Biscayans attach some
importance to a difference of title which flatters and fosters the
feelings of independence. It was one of the errors of the
constitutionalists to disregard these prejudices in favour of forms,
childish perhaps, but not injurious, and in their love of conformity, to
abolish those playthings which delight children of a larger growth, and
serve to keep them from mischief. With the vulgar and the ignorant,
exclusive possession of anything greatly enhances its imaginary worth;
had the fueros been common to all the provinces of the Peninsula, they
would lose Edition: current; Page: [382] the greater part of their
fictitious value, and even now the gallant defence made by the citizens
of Bilbao proves that, though they have not lost their hold over the
minds of the peasants in the interior, they are more justly appreciated
by the mercantile classes. But in the present state of the contest, the
abolition of the Basque privileges can scarcely be considered as staked
on the issue; it is rather desired to extend such of them as are
advantageous to all the inhabitants of the Spanish Peninsula. This no
doubt will be offensive to the pride of some Biscayans, for the same
reason that Catholic Emancipation was odious to the Irish Orangemen;
they will no longer be able to triumph in the degradation of their
neighbours. From the earliest ages despots have found supporters by
using the argument of the affectionate parent—“Take your physic, Tommy,
and you shall have the dog to kick;” but liberals presume to think that
Tommy might be cured in a better way.

No objection exists to the retention of any fueros which merely gratify
hereditary pride; those that are really useful elements of government
have been adopted in the Spanish Constitution, but there are some
useless to the Biscayans themselves, but prejudicial to the rest of the
community, which artful men have succeeded in blending with those that
are innocent and advantageous. The provinces have the privilege of
importing foreign goods, free of duty, but they are not permitted to
transmit them to the rest of Spain; custom-houses are placed upon the
frontiers of Castille; and the same system of prevention and of
smuggling necessarily result, which are found on the Swiss and Belgian
frontiers of France. Mr. Inglis records a circumstance which proves that
the Basques are not the only persons interested in the maintenance of
this anomaly:

I had been told that on entering Old Castille we should be subjected to
a rigorous Custom-house search; but in Spain, such matters always depend
upon circumstances. A Colonel in the Spanish service chanced to occupy a
seat in the diligence; and no Custom-house officer in Spain dare to put
a person holding a military commission to a moment’s inconvenience. The
consequence was, that in place of being detained three hours upon the
bridge, until every packet should be lowered and opened, the Colonel
merely thrust his arm out of the window; and the Custom-house officers,
seeing around his wrist the proofs of his military rank, doffed their
caps, and stood back; and the diligence passed on.66

The demi-official pamphlet entitled The Policy of England towards Spain,
declares that the question of the fueros “resolves itself into the
highly unromantic one of a tariff.”67 But though unromantic, it is
essentially connected with the commercial prosperity of the country; the
anomalies of a double financial system have proved ruinous to the trade
of the Basque as well as the Castilian provinces; they have rendered
smuggling a regular hereditary profession; they have been the chief
cause of the dilapidation of the public finances, and the low estimation
of Edition: current; Page: [383] private commerce; but they have been
profitable to corrupt officials, to a set of desperadoes long at enmity
with law; in fine, to the greater part of those who form the strength of
the army of Don Carlos. Their effect on the general prosperity of Biscay
is very well described in the pamphlet to which we have alluded:

The Basque Provinces, in short, as a necessary consequence of their
privileges, have long been treated, with respect to commerce, as a
foreign nation by the rest of Spain. They were forbidden to trade with
the Americans—Spanish colonial goods were not allowed to be imported
direct to their ports—their vessels were looked upon as foreign, and the
Basques, moreover, were placed upon the same footing as foreigners with
respect to those productions of Spain which are absolutely necessary to
them for their own consumption: while their own productions, being
treated as foreign, were subject to enormous duties upon entering
Castille.

The consequences of such a state of things may be easily conceived; they
are the same as exist in some other countries at this moment. The
sea-port towns and the manufacturers are hostile to a system which
destroys foreign trade and excludes their productions from a profitable
market, while the inland people and those who dwell upon the frontier
are violent in support of the system, which necessarily creates the
enormous smuggling trade by which they have enriched themselves.

There accordingly exists throughout the exempted provinces every variety
of opinion respecting their privileges, some desiring to be altogether
assimilated to the rest of Spain, others claiming to be put upon a
commercial equality with the neighbouring provinces; while a third, and
the most numerous party, not venturing to put forward their real motives
against any change of a commercial system which is manifestly injurious
to their country, clamour for the absolute maintenance of the
privileges, and under the mask of patriotism advocate their right to
fill their own pockets by smuggling.68

We should have the same controversy in kind, though not in degree, were
our own government to equalize the spirit-duties in England and Ireland;
and we saw some examples of it when free trade in silk was under
discussion.69 The gains of contraband traffic are always sweeter than
those of honest trade; the peasants along the frontiers of Castille have
found smuggling lucrative, and they fight for a sovereign who promises
to perpetuate it along with the other abuses of the old system; the
citizens of Bilbao find the fueros ruinous to their commerce, and
therefore they contend for a government that holds out some promise of
reformation. This point is ably stated in the pamphlet from which we
have quoted:

But if the Basques are fighting for their privileges, what is it that
the town of Bilbao has been fighting against? Can we have a greater
proof that it is fanaticism, and not fueros that maintains the cause of
Don Carlos than the heroic conduct of Bilbao in its different sieges,
though this once flourishing and most loyal town may be supposed to have
as much interest as any other part of the country in the maintenance of
Biscayan privileges? And yet Bilbao has resisted all the forces of Don
Carlos, commanded by his best officers and aided by foreign engineers,
being an open town without fortifications, and, as a military position,
pronounced indefensible. It has held out contrary to all the rules of
art, solely by the native Edition: current; Page: [384] valour and
resolution of its inhabitants, who, wonderful to relate, have resolved
rather to perish amidst the ruins of their houses than yield to the
generous champion of their country’s privileges; and is not this single
fact enough to sweep away all the nonsense which is talked about
privileges and fueros?70

Before the present contest began, Bilbao contained citizens anxious for
the regeneration of their country. Mr. Inglis declares,

I heard several of the most respectable inhabitants of Bilbao express
openly much dissatisfaction at the political debasement of Spain, and
breathe ardent wishes for the diffusion of intellectual and religious
light; but they added, what my own knowledge has since fully confirmed,
that I should not find in any other part of Spain the same enlightened
views as I had found in Biscay.71

From the character of the Biscayan provinces, we naturally turn to the
character of the new Spanish government. Is it such as to afford the
lovers of freedom good and reasonable grounds for hope, that the success
of the Christinos will lead to the permanent establishment of good
institutions in the Peninsula? We cannot maintain the affirmative
without some great and even disheartening qualifications. Isabella has
shewn some of that jealousy towards free institutions which
characterizes the policy of Louis Philippe; her Estatuto Real was little
better than a mockery; her acceptance of the Constitution was more than
reluctant.72 But the great consolation is, that the Queen and the
Apostolicals have gone too far in hostility to admit of their
differences being reconciled; her safety is so completely identified
with the triumph of the constitutionalists, that we see no reason to
fear her imitating the treachery of her late husband. Adolphe de
Bourgoing, a steady partisan of Don Carlos, describes her as clever and
ambitious,* and he mentions some anecdotes of her management of her
husband which seem to justify his opinion:

Naturally diffident, Ferdinand VII feared that his Queen would not
intermeddle in the affairs of the State. That young Princess did not
care to show any desire of taking an active part in politics. A
Neapolitan, and remarkable for her tact, she accustomed her husband, by
the tenderness of her care, and the constancy of her caresses, to feel
uneasy when absent from her side. She at first used to withdraw at the
precise moment he received his Ministers, affecting great reserve and a
perfect indifference to political affairs; but she took care that her
apartment should be in the immediate vicinity of the Council Chamber.
She, for a time, permitted the King to remain alone, but soon,
complaining that her solitude was wearisome, and that she could not
endure his absence, she declared that she could not be so long separated
from him. Thenceforth she used to come into the council-chamber,
pretending to Edition: current; Page: [385] say some tender things to
him, as if she feared that he had been wearied by grave and tedious
discussion; when she retired she left the door of his room open, and
thus apparently apart, without being really absent, she took an active
share in all the ministerial deliberations. Finally, she came and openly
took her seat in the council, declaring that she could not endure
separation from her well-beloved husband and king. From participating in
the deliberations, she finally proceeded to directing them altogether,
at least her voice was always potential and decisive.

Mr. Inglis testifies to the influence she thus acquired over the mind of
Ferdinand; his affection even burst forth in “a right merry and
conceited jest,” and as it is the first and last we have seen recorded
of this monarch, we shall extract the anecdote:

I happened to be walking one day in the Balle de Alcala, when the royal
carriage drove up to the door of the Cabinet of Natural History, and
being close by, I stopped to see the King and Queen. The King stepped
from the carriage first; he then lifted from the carriage a large poodle
dog, and then the Queen followed, whom, contrary no doubt to royal
etiquette, his Majesty did not hand, but lifted and placed on the
pavement; and then turning to the crowd who surrounded the carriage, he
said to them, “Pesa menos el matrimoni;” which means, matrimony is a
lighter burden than the dog,—a very tolerable jeu d’esprit to have come
from Ferdinand VII.73

From all that we have been able to learn, the personal character of the
Queen does not seem to justify a very high degree of confidence in her
sincerity or her firmness. Let us now look to those by whom she is
surrounded. The most casual reader of the debates in the Cortes must
feel convinced, that there is very little statesmanlike talent in the
leading public men of Spain; too many of them remind us of Churchill’s
censure of Mossop, they

-   

    To particles affix emphatic state,
-   

    While principles ungrac’d like lackeys wait.74

Arguelles, Galliano, Mendizabel, and Valdez, have, however, shewn a fair
share of skill in the business of politics;75 the last especially is an
able financier; but still we cannot hide from ourselves, that the
Liberals show a want of practical acquirements, which must long expose
them to great inconvenience, and perhaps not unfrequently endanger their
cause. But before giving full scope to censure, it is only fair to take
into account the paucity of individuals, in the subordinate and working
departments of the government, untainted by corrupt practices. A country
to which we have referred more than once in the course of this article
affords sad proof of the difficulties that beset the progress of
reformation, when ancient and Edition: current; Page: [386] profitable
abuses have made the whole body of inferior functionaries interested in
the maintenance of corruption. It is now notorious that intrigues
against Lord Grey’s government were formed every day in the Castle of
Dublin, that underlings were combined to baffle the designs of their
superiors, and that by their machinations Tory rule was perpetuated
under a Reform ministry.76 Liberality in political opinion is apt to be
connected with exalted views of human nature, and the zealous
philanthropist rarely makes the abatements in his estimate of humanity,
necessarily required by the effects of misrule and the habits produced
by the practice of corruption. The Spanish patriots are not the only
Liberals who have suffered from neglecting St. Paul’s advice, “Despise
not the day of small things.”77

Our chief ground for hope, however, is in the Spanish people: Captain
Cook, who had better opportunities of estimating the real nature of
public opinion than most travellers have enjoyed, declares,

The Queen’s party comprises, almost without exception, every man of
talent or information in Spain. Nearly all the nobility, all the
military men of rank and station, and nearly all the others; every man
and woman in the country who is at par, and all above it. In fact,
almost every one who can read or write; no inconsiderable number even of
the clergy and amongst the constituted bodies. In short, all the mind of
Spain is arrayed in favour of the present government, not because it was
the will or interest of the late King to change the succession, but
because it is the real law of the country, and that it is a question of
good or bad government. . . . So widely spread was the feeling in favour
of the change of system (in 1833), that of a most extended acquaintance
I had through the country in every station of life, from the highest
downwards, of every profession and calling, I should be puzzled now to
point out a single male or female who was a Carlist.78

We have a striking verification of this testimony from Don Carlos
himself; he has found that Absolutism is no longer, even in Biscay, a
good gathering cry, and he has attempted to revive his waning popularity
by the promise of a Constitution!

We have no fear, therefore, of the success of the Carlists; our fear is
of a prolonged civil war, growing disorganization in the country, and
such a dispersion of all the elements of peaceful society as shall
render a stable government for many years to come an impossility in the
Peninsula. It is to prevent these evils, that we invoke the early
interference of England and France, for a peaceful termination of the
struggle.

General Shaw’s Memoirs have reached us as this article was going through
the press. Restricted as we are in space and in time, it is impossible
to bestow on them more than a few cursory observations. His letters,
published as they were written, Edition: current; Page: [387] may be
taken as the testimony of a witness favourable to General Evans; and
their evidence fully confirms our opinion that though a gallant soldier,
the commander of the British Legion is deficient in foresight, in
energy, and in prudence; that, in short, he wants the qualities
necessary to ensure a successful campaign—a far different thing from a
successful battle. He left England without having appreciated the
difficulties of the position he was to occupy. Like our Ministers in the
late war, he seems to have placed implicit confidence in Spanish boasts;
and if he escaped such a calamity as the retreat to Corunna, it must be
attributed rather to the stupidity of the Carlists than to the merits of
the Christinos or their auxiliaries. Accustomed to have “great means at
their command,”79 engineering in a small way was not much to the taste
of the British officers, and they neglected what Don Pedro80 used to
call “substitutions,” which, however despicable in the eyes of a
martinet, must ever be of importance in desultory warfare.
Notwithstanding the “voluminous staff”81 appointed by the
Commander-in-Chief, there was from the beginning a confusion and want of
system which would have been ruinous, if the Legionaries had not proved
themselves superior in character and conduct to the regular British
troops in the retreat from Burgos. One instance of the dangerous
unsteadiness at head-quarters must be noticed:

While at Velorado a circumstance occurred which gave me a great deal of
uneasiness, and which was the cause, perhaps, more than any other
circumstance, of interfering with discipline, because it hurt that
respect for the “dignity of office,” without which no subordination can
exist. On the 25th of November I got an official letter from the
Adjutant-General, finishing, “Sergeant-Major Dwyer, 4th Regiment, having
been promoted to the rank of acting Adjutant and Ensign in the 7th
Regiment, you will please to order him into head-quarters, and to report
himself at this office with as little delay as possible.” On getting
this letter I instantly sent for Dwyer to my quarters, ordered him, to
his astonishment, to cut off his stripes as sergeant-major, then took
him by the hand and wished him joy, and regretted that I could not ask
him to dine with me, as he must start for Briviesca immediately.—He was
of course proud and gratified, and away he went. His situation in the
4th Regiment was immediately filled up; and, two days afterwards, he
came into my quarters weeping, to say he was sent back to his regiment
as a sergeant, and that he was ashamed to show his face among his old
comrades after such a disgrace. He seemed, as far as I had been able to
judge, a good soldier; and, to prove that I had nothing to do with this,
I read to him his official appointment, and advised him to take his
disappointment, as I had done about the generalship, and all would be
right. But, no; I saw his spirit was broken.*

The best criticism on the proceedings of the Legion and its commander is
a prophecy; it is contained in a letter from Colonel W. Napier, the
fearless author of Edition: current; Page: [388] the History of the
Peninsular War,82 addressed to General Shaw’s brother, and dated Bath,
28th September, 1835:

What you say of Evans’s situation does not surprise me. I have always
looked to Spanish hospitals as the ultimate bivouac of his auxiliaries.
While Evans remains in towns near the sea coast, and the enemy will face
him in the field, I have little doubt that he will get the best of this
squabble as soon as his men are disciplined. He is bold and prompt;
though I do not much approve of his ensconcing himself in Bilbao, which
I told him before he went, he would find a bad position. He should
rather keep to St. Sebastian, and move to the French frontier, from
whence he can, if he has money, get his supplies cheaply and securely,
and yet operate upon the rear of the Carlists; for instance, I would
rather have made a forced march from St. Sebastian by Mondragon upon
Durango, and so have fallen from the high ground upon the rear of the
Carlists, than have moved out of Bilbao to meet them from the low
ground. I suppose, however, his men are still too much of a mob to try
such a march. What he will do when he has to take the field permanently
I cannot conceive.

Ten thousand men are an army; an army to move must have mules and
convoys; will the Spaniards, who cannot pay their own men, pay his? Then
will come the disputes and jealousies of his Spanish generals. Nous
verrons!

I remain, dear Sir, etc.

W. Napier.83

We have no wish, even if we had time, to enter into all the details of
mismanagement described by General Shaw; the besetting sin of the
expedition was an obstinate adherence to British regulation, which the
peculiar nature of the Spanish service rendered wholly inapplicable.
Money, munitions of war, means of transport, were not to be had when the
moment arrived that rendered them all necessary; while general orders,
issued as if in mockery, prescribed the most minute regulations
respecting food and sleep, when each man had nothing but his length of
damp earth or handsomely cut stone for his bed, and the heartiest curses
of the commissariat for his supper. In short, too many officers went out
as if they were only going “to play at soldiery,” and when they
discovered the difference between mimic display and stern realities,
they were found wanting in the qualities of manly endurance which their
position so peremptorily required.