
Remarks on Bentham’s Philosophy

it is no light task to give an abridged view of the philosophical
opinions of one, who attempted to place the vast subjects of morals and
legislation upon a scientific basis: a mere outline is all that can be
attempted.

The first principles of Mr. Bentham’s philosophy are these;—that
happiness, meaning by that term pleasure and exemption from pain, is the
only thing desirable in itself; that all other things are desirable
solely as means to that end: that the production, therefore, of the
greatest possible happiness, is the only fit purpose of all human
thought and action, and consequently of all morality and government; and
moreover, that pleasure and pain are the sole agencies by which the
conduct of mankind is in fact governed, whatever circumstances the
individual may be placed in, and whether he is aware of it or not.

Mr. Bentham does not appear to have entered very deeply into the
metaphysical grounds of these doctrines; he seems to have taken those
grounds very much upon the showing of the metaphysicians who preceded
him. The principle of utility, or as he afterwards called it “the
greatest-happiness principle,”[*] stands no otherwise demonstrated in
his writings, than by an enumeration of the phrases of a different
description which have been commonly employed to denote the rule of
life, and the rejection of them all, as having no intelligible meaning,
further than as they may involve a tacit reference to considerations of
utility. Such are the phrases “law of nature,” “right reason,” “natural
rights,” “moral sense.” All these Mr. Bentham regarded as mere covers
for dogmatism; excuses for setting up one’s own ipse dixit as a rule to
bind other people. “They consist, all of them,” says he, “in so many
contrivances for avoiding the obligation of appealing to any external
standard, and for prevailing upon the reader to accept the author’s
sentiment or opinion as a reason for itself.”[†]

This, however, is not fair treatment of the believers in other moral
principles than that of utility. All modes of speech are employed in an
ignorant Edition: current; Page: [6] manner, by ignorant people; but no
one who had thought deeply and systematically enough to be entitled to
the name of a philosopher, ever supposed that his own private sentiments
of approbation and disapprobation must necessarily be well-founded, and
needed not to be compared with any external standard. The answer of such
persons to Mr. Bentham would be, that by an inductive and analytical
examination of the human mind, they had satisfied themselves, that what
we call our moral sentiments, (that is, the feelings of complacency and
aversion we experience when we compare actions of our own or of other
people with our standard of right and wrong,) are as much part of the
original constitution of man’s nature as the desire of happiness and the
fear of suffering: That those sentiments do not indeed attach themselves
to the same actions under all circumstances, but neither do they, in
attaching themselves to actions, follow the law of utility, but certain
other general laws, which are the same in all mankind naturally; though
education or external circumstances may counteract them, by creating
artificial associations stronger than they. No proof indeed can be given
that we ought to abide by these laws; but neither can any proof be
given, that we ought to regulate our conduct by utility. All that can be
said is, that the pursuit of happiness is natural to us; and so, it is
contended, is the reverence for, and the inclination to square our
actions by, certain general laws of morality.

Any one who is acquainted with the ethical doctrines either of the Reid
and Stewart school, or of the German metaphysicians (not to go further
back), knows that such would be the answer of those philosophers to Mr.
Bentham; and it is an answer of which Mr. Bentham’s writings furnish no
sufficient refutation. For it is evident, that these views of the origin
of moral distinctions are not, what he says all such views are,
destitute of any precise and tangible meaning; nor chargeable with
setting up as a standard the feelings of the particular person. They set
up as a standard what are assumed (on grounds which are considered
sufficient) to be the instincts of the species, or principles of our
common nature as universal and inexplicable as instincts.

To pass judgment on these doctrines, belongs to a profounder and subtler
metaphysics than Mr. Bentham possessed. I apprehend it will be the
judgment of posterity, that in his views of what, in the felicitous
expression of Hobbes, may be called the philosophia prima,[*] it has for
the most part, even when he was most completely in the right, been
reserved for others to prove him so. The greatest of Mr. Bentham’s
defects, his insufficient knowledge and appreciation of the thoughts of
other men, shows itself constantly in his grappling with some delusive
shadow of an adversary’s opinion, and leaving the actual substance
unharmed.

Edition: current; Page: [7]
After laying down the principle of Utility, Mr. Bentham is occupied
through the most voluminous and the most permanently valuable part of
his works, in constructing the outlines of practical ethics and
legislation, and filling up some portions of the latter science (or
rather art) in great detail; by the uniform and unflinching application
of his own greatest-happiness principle, from which the eminently
consistent and systematic character of his intellect prevented him from
ever swerving. In the writings of no philosopher, probably, are to be
detected so few contradictions—so few instances of even momentary
deviation from the principles he himself has laid down.

It is perhaps fortunate that Mr. Bentham devoted a much larger share of
his time and labour to the subject of legislation, than to that of
morals; for the mode in which he understood and applied the principle of
Utility, appears to me far more conducive to the attainment of true and
valuable results in the former, than in the latter of these two branches
of inquiry. The recognition of happiness as the only thing desirable in
itself, and of the production of the state of things most favourable to
happiness as the only rational end both of morals and policy, by no
means necessarily leads to the doctrine of expediency as professed by
Paley; the ethical canon which judges of the morality of an act or a
class of actions, solely by the probable consequences of that particular
kind of act, supposing it to be generally practised. This is a very
small part indeed of what a more enlarged understanding of the
“greatest-happiness principle” would require us to take into the
account. A certain kind of action, as for example, theft, or lying,
would, if commonly practised, occasion certain evil consequences to
society: but those evil consequences are far from constituting the
entire moral bearings of the vices of theft or lying. We shall have a
very imperfect view of the relation of those practices to the general
happiness, if we suppose them to exist singly, and insulated. All acts
suppose certain dispositions, and habits of mind and heart, which may be
in themselves states of enjoyment or of wretchedness, and which must be
fruitful in other consequences, besides those particular acts. No person
can be a thief or a liar without being much else: and if our moral
judgments and feelings with respect to a person convicted of either
vice, were grounded solely upon the pernicious tendency of thieving and
of lying, they would be partial and incomplete; many considerations
would be omitted, which are at least equally “germane to the matter;”[*]
many which, by leaving them out of our general views, we may indeed
teach ourselves a habit of overlooking, but which it is impossible for
any of us not to be influenced by, in particular cases, in proportion as
they are forced upon our attention.

Now, the great fault I have to find with Mr. Bentham as a moral
philosopher, and the source of the chief part of the temporary mischief
which in that character, along with a vastly greater amount of permanent
good, he must be Edition: current; Page: [8] allowed to have produced,
is this: that he has practically, to a very great extent, confounded the
principle of Utility with the principle of specific consequences, and
has habitually made up his estimate of the approbation or blame due to a
particular kind of action, from a calculation solely of the consequences
to which that very action, if practised generally, would itself lead. He
has largely exemplified, and contributed very widely to diffuse, a tone
of thinking, according to which any kind of action or any habit, which
in its own specific consequences cannot be proved to be necessarily or
probably productive of unhappiness to the agent himself or to others, is
supposed to be fully justified; and any disapprobation or aversion
entertained towards the individual by reason of it, is set down from
that time forward as prejudice and superstition. It is not considered
(at least, not habitually considered,) whether the act or habit in
question, though not in itself necessarily pernicious, may not form part
of a character essentially pernicious, or at least essentially deficient
in some quality eminently conducive to the “greatest happiness.” To
apply such a standard as this, would indeed often require a much deeper
insight into the formation of character, and knowledge of the internal
workings of human nature, than Mr. Bentham possessed. But, in a greater
or less degree, he, and every one else, judges by this standard: even
those who are warped, by some partial view, into the omission of all
such elements from their general speculations.

When the moralist thus overlooks the relation of an act to a certain
state of mind as its cause, and its connexion through that common cause
with large classes and groups of actions apparently very little
resembling itself, his estimation even of the consequences of the very
act itself, is rendered imperfect. For it may be affirmed with few
exceptions, that any act whatever has a tendency to fix and perpetuate
the state or character of mind in which itself has originated. And if
that important element in the moral relations of the action be not taken
into account by the moralist as a cause, neither probably will it be
taken into account as a consequence.

Mr. Bentham is far from having altogether overlooked this side of the
subject. Indeed, those most original and instructive, though, as I
conceive, in their spirit, partially erroneous chapters, on motives and
on dispositions, in his first great work, the Introduction to the
Principles of Morals and Legislation, open up a direct and broad path to
these most important topics. It is not the less true that Mr. Bentham,
and many others, following his example, when they came to discuss
particular questions of ethics, have commonly, in the superior stress
which they laid upon the specific consequences of a class of acts,
rejected all contemplation of the action in its general bearings upon
the entire moral being of the agent; or have, to say the least, thrown
those considerations so far into the background, as to be almost out of
sight. And Edition: current; Page: [9] by so doing they have not only
marred the value of many of their speculations, considered as mere
philosophical enquiries, but have always run the risk of incurring, and
in many cases have in my opinion actually incurred, serious practical
errors.

This incompleteness, however, in Mr. Bentham’s general views, was not of
a nature materially to diminish the value of his speculations through
the greater part of the field of legislation. Those of the bearings of
an action, upon which Mr. Bentham bestowed almost exclusive attention,
were also those with which almost alone legislation is conversant. The
legislator enjoins or prohibits an action, with very little regard to
the general moral excellence or turpitude which it implies; he looks to
the consequences to society of the particular kind of action; his object
is not to render people incapable of desiring a crime, but to deter them
from actually committing it. Taking human beings as he finds them, he
endeavours to supply such inducements as will constrain even persons of
the dispositions the most at variance with the general happiness, to
practise as great a degree of regard to it in their actual conduct, as
can be obtained from them by such means without preponderant
inconvenience. A theory, therefore, which considers little in an action
besides that action’s own consequences, will generally be sufficient to
serve the purposes of a philosophy of legislation. Such a philosophy
will be most apt to fail in the consideration of the greater social
questions—the theory of organic institutions and general forms of
polity; for those (unlike the details of legislation) to be duly
estimated, must be viewed as the great instruments of forming the
national character; of carrying forward the members of the community
towards perfection, or preserving them from degeneracy. This, as might
in some measure be expected, is a point of view in which, except for
some partial or limited purpose, Mr. Bentham seldom contemplates these
questions. And this signal omission is one of the greatest of the
deficiencies by which his speculations on the theory of government,
though full of valuable ideas, are rendered, in my judgment, altogether
inconclusive in their general results.

To these we shall advert more fully hereafter. As yet I have not
acquitted myself of the more agreeable task of setting forth some part
of the services which the philosophy of legislation owes to Mr. Bentham.

The greatest service of all, that for which posterity will award most
honour to his name, is one that is his exclusively, and can be shared by
no one present or to come; it is the service which can be performed only
once for any science, that of pointing out by what method of
investigation it may be made a science. What Bacon did for physical
knowledge, Mr. Bentham has done for philosophical legislation. Before
Bacon’s time, many physical facts had been ascertained; and previously
to Mr. Bentham, mankind were in possession of Edition: current; Page:
[10] many just and valuable detached observations on the making of laws.
But he was the first who attempted regularly to deduce all the secondary
and intermediate principles of law, by direct and systematic inference
from the one great axiom or principle of general utility. In all
existing systems of law, those secondary principles or dicta in which
the essence of the systems resided, had grown up in detail, and even
when founded in views of utility, were not the result of any scientific
and comprehensive course of enquiry; but more frequently were purely
technical; that is, they had grown out of circumstances purely
historical, and, not having been altered when those circumstances
changed, had nothing left to rest upon but fictions, and unmeaning
forms. Take for instance the law of real property; the whole of which
continues to this very day to be founded on the doctrine of feudal
tenures, when those tenures have long ceased to exist except in the
phraseology of West-minster Hall. Nor was the theory of law in a better
state than the practical systems; speculative jurists having dared
little more than to refine somewhat upon the technical maxims of the
particular body of jurisprudence which they happened to have studied.
Mr. Bentham was the first who had the genius and courage to conceive the
idea of bringing back the science to first principles. This could not be
done, could scarcely even be attempted, without, as a necessary
consequence, making obvious the utter worthlessness of many, and the
crudity and want of precision of almost all, the maxims which had
previously passed everywhere for principles of law.

Mr. Bentham, moreover, has warred against the errors of existing systems
of jurisprudence, in a more direct manner than by merely presenting the
contrary truths. The force of argument with which he rent asunder the
fantastic and illogical maxims on which the various technical systems
are founded, and exposed the flagrant evils which they practically
produce, is only equalled by the pungent sarcasm and exquisite humour
with which he has derided their absurdities, and the eloquent
declamation which he continually pours forth against them, sometimes in
the form of lamentation, and sometimes of invective.

This then was the first, and perhaps the grandest achievement of Mr.
Bentham; the entire discrediting of all technical systems; and the
example which he set of treating law as no peculiar mystery, but a
simple piece of practical business, wherein means were to be adapted to
ends, as in any of the other arts of life. To have accomplished this,
supposing him to have done nothing else, is to have equalled the glory
of the greatest scientific benefactors of the human race.

But Mr. Bentham, unlike Bacon, did not merely prophesy a science; he
made large strides towards the creation of one. He was the first who
conceived with anything approaching to precision, the idea of a Code, or
complete body of law; and the distinctive characters of its essential
parts,—the Edition: current; Page: [11] Civil Law, the Penal Law, and
the Law of Procedure. On the first two of these three departments he
rendered valuable service; the third he actually created. Conformably to
the habits of his mind, he set about investigating ab initio, a
philosophy or science for each of the three branches. He did with the
received principles of each, what a good code would do with the laws
themselves;—extirpated the bad, substituting others; re-enacted the
good, but in so much clearer and more methodical a form, that those who
were most familiar with them before, scarcely recognized them as the
same. Even upon old truths, when they pass through his hands, he leaves
so many of his marks, that often he almost seems to claim the discovery
of what he has only systematized.

In creating the philosophy of Civil Law, he proceeded not much beyond
establishing on the proper basis some of its most general principles,
and cursorily discussing some of the most interesting of its details.
Nearly the whole of what he has published on this branch of law, is
contained in the Traités de Législation, edited by M. Dumont.[*] To the
most difficult part, and that which most needed a master-hand to clear
away its difficulties, the nomenclature and arrangement of the Civil
Code, he contributed little, except detached observations, and
criticisms upon the errors of his predecessors. The “Vue Générale d’un
Corps Complet de Législation,” included in the work just cited, contains
almost all which he has given to us on this subject.

In the department of Penal Law, he is the author of the best attempt yet
made towards a philosophical classification of offences. The theory of
punishments (for which however more had been done by his predecessors,
than for any other part of the science of law) he left nearly complete.

The theory of Procedure (including that of the constitution of the
courts of justice) he found in a more utterly barbarous state than even
either of the other branches; and he left it incomparably the most
perfect. There is scarcely a question of practical importance in this
most important department, which he has not settled. He has left next to
nothing for his successors.

He has shown with the force of demonstration, and has enforced and
illustrated the truth in a hundred ways, that by sweeping away the
greater part of the artificial rules and forms which obtain in all the
countries called civilized, and adopting the simple and direct modes of
investigation, which all men employ in endeavouring to ascertain facts
for their own private knowledge, it is possible to get rid of at least
nine-tenths of the expense, and ninety-nine hundredths of the delay, of
law proceedings; not only with no increase, but with an almost
incredible diminution, of the chances of erroneous decision. He has also
established irrefragably the principles of a good judicial
establishment: a division of the country into districts, with one judge
in each, appointed only for a limited period, and deciding all sorts of
cases; Edition: current; Page: [12] with a deputy under him, appointed
and removable by himself: an appeal lying in all cases whatever, but by
the transmission of papers only, to a supreme court or courts,
consisting each of only one judge, and stationed in the metropolis.

It is impossible within the compass of this sketch, to attempt any
further statement of Mr. Bentham’s principles and views on the great
science which first became a science in his hands.

As an analyst of human nature (the faculty in which above all it is
necessary that an ethical philosopher should excel) I cannot rank Mr.
Bentham very high. He has done little in this department, beyond
introducing what appears to me a very deceptive phraseology, and
furnishing a catalogue of the “springs of action,”[*] from which some of
the most important are left out.

That the actions of sentient beings are wholly determined by pleasure
and pain, is the fundamental principle from which he starts; and
thereupon Mr. Bentham creates a motive, and an interest, corresponding
to each pleasure or pain, and affirms that our actions are determined by
our interests, by the preponderant interest, by the balance of motives.
Now if this only means what was before asserted, that our actions are
determined by pleasure and pain, that simple and unambiguous mode of
stating the proposition is preferable. But under cover of the obscurer
phrase a meaning creeps in, both to the author’s mind and the reader’s,
which goes much farther, and is entirely false: that all our acts are
determined by pains and pleasures in prospect, pains and pleasures to
which we look forward as the consequences of our acts. This, as a
universal truth, can in no way be maintained. The pain or pleasure which
determines our conduct is as frequently one which precedes the moment of
action as one which follows it. A man may, it is true, be deterred, in
circumstances of temptation, from perpetrating a crime, by his dread of
the punishment, or of the remorse, which he fears he may have to endure
after the guilty act; and in that case we may say with some kind of
propriety, that his conduct is swayed by the balance of motives; or, if
you will, of interests. But the case may be, and is to the full as
likely to be, that he recoils from the very thought of committing the
act; the idea of placing himself in such a situation is so painful, that
he cannot dwell upon it long enough to have even the physical power of
perpetrating the crime. His conduct is determined by pain; but by a pain
which precedes the act, not by one which is expected to follow it. Not
only may this be so, but unless it be so, the man is not really
virtuous. The fear of pain consequent upon the act, cannot arise, unless
there be deliberation; and the man as well as “the woman who
deliberates,” is in imminent danger of being lost.[†] With what
propriety shrinking from an action without deliberation, can be called
yielding to an Edition: current; Page: [13] interest, I cannot see.
Interest surely conveys, and is intended to convey, the idea of an end,
to which the conduct (whether it be act or forbearance) is designed as
the means. Nothing of this sort takes place in the above example. It
would be more correct to say that conduct is sometimes determined by an
interest, that is, by a deliberate and conscious aim; and sometimes by
an impulse, that is, by a feeling (call it an association if you think
fit) which has no ulterior end, the act or forbearance becoming an end
in itself.

The attempt, again, to enumerate motives, that is, human desires and
aversions, seems to me to be in its very conception an error. Motives
are innumerable: there is nothing whatever which may not become an
object of desire or of dislike by association. It may be desirable to
distinguish by peculiar notice the motives which are strongest and of
most frequent operation; but Mr. Bentham has not even done this. In his
list of motives, though he includes sympathy, he omits conscience, or
the feeling of duty: one would never imagine from reading him that any
human being ever did an act merely because it is right, or abstained
from it merely because it is wrong. In this Mr. Bentham differs widely
from Hartley, who, although he considers the moral sentiments to be
wholly the result of association, does not therefore deny them a place
in his system, but includes the feelings of “the moral sense” as one of
the six classes into which he divides pleasures and pains.[*] In Mr.
Bentham’s own mind, deeply imbued as it was with the “greatest-happiness
principle,” this motive was probably so blended with that of sympathy as
to be undistinguishable from it; but he should have recollected that
those who acknowledge another standard of right and wrong than
happiness, or who have never reflected on the subject at all, have often
very strong feelings of moral obligation; and whether a person’s
standard be happiness or anything else, his attachment to his standard
is not necessarily in proportion to his benevolence. Persons of weak
sympathies have often a strong feeling of justice; and others, again,
with the feelings of benevolence in considerable strength, have scarcely
any consciousness of moral obligation at all.

It is scarcely necessary to point out that the habitual omission of so
important a spring of action in an enumeration professing to be
complete, must tend to create a habit of overlooking the same
phenomenon, and consequently making no allowance for it, in other moral
speculations. It is difficult to imagine any more fruitful source of
gross error; though one would be apt to suppose the oversight an
impossible one, without this evidence of its having been committed by
one of the greatest thinkers our species has produced. How can we
suppose him to be alive to the existence and force of the motive in
particular cases, who omits it in a deliberate and comprehensive
enumeration of all the influences by which human conduct is governed?

In laying down as a philosophical axiom, that men’s actions are always
Edition: current; Page: [14] obedient to their interests, Mr. Bentham
did no more than dress up the very trivial proposition that all persons
do what they feel themselves most disposed to do, in terms which
appeared to him more precise, and better suited to the purposes of
philosophy, than those more familiar expressions. He by no means
intended by this assertion to impute universal selfishness to mankind,
for he reckoned the motive of sympathy as an interest, and would have
included conscience under the same appellation, if that motive had found
any place in his philosophy, as a distinct principle from benevolence.
He distinguished two kinds of interests, the self-regarding and the
social: in vulgar discourse, the name is restricted to the former kind
alone.

But there cannot be a greater mistake than to suppose that, because we
may ourselves be perfectly conscious of an ambiguity in our language,
that ambiguity therefore has no effect in perverting our modes of
thought. I am persuaded, from experience, that this habit of speaking of
all the feelings which govern mankind under the name of interests, is
almost always in point of fact connected with a tendency to consider
interest in the vulgar sense, that is, purely self-regarding interest,
as exercising, by the very constitution of human nature, a far more
exclusive and paramount control over human actions than it really does
exercise. Such, certainly, was the tendency of Mr. Bentham’s own
opinions. Habitually, and throughout his works, the moment he has shown
that a man’s selfish interest would prompt him to a particular course of
action, he lays it down without further parley that the man’s interest
lies that way; and, by sliding insensibly from the vulgar sense of the
word into the philosophical, and from the philosophical back into the
vulgar, the conclusion which is always brought out is, that the man will
act as the selfish interest prompts. The extent to which Mr. Bentham was
a believer in the predominance of the selfish principle in human nature,
may be seen from the sweeping terms in which, in his Book of
Fallacies,[*] he expressly lays down that predominance as a
philosophical axiom.

“In every human breast (rare and short-lived ebullitions, the result of
some extraordinarily strong stimulus or excitement, excepted)
self-regarding interest is predominant over social interest; each
person’s own individual interest over the interests of all other persons
taken together.” (Pp. 392-3.)

In another passage of the same work (p. 363) he says, “Taking the whole
of life together, there exists not, nor ever can exist, that human being
in whose instance any public interest he can have had will not, in so
far as depends upon himself, have been sacrificed to his own personal
interest. Towards the advancement of the public interest, all that the
most public-spirited (which is as much as to say the most virtuous) of
men can do, is to do what depends upon himself towards bringing the
public interest, that is, his own personal share in the public interest,
to a state as nearly approaching to coincidence, Edition: current; Page:
[15] and on as few occasions amounting to a state of repugnance, as
possible, with his private interests.”

By the promulgation of such views of human nature, and by a general tone
of thought and expression perfectly in harmony with them, I conceive Mr.
Bentham’s writings to have done and to be doing very serious evil. It is
by such things that the more enthusiastic and generous minds are
prejudiced against all his other speculations, and against the very
attempt to make ethics and politics a subject of precise and
philosophical thinking; which attempt, indeed, if it were necessarily
connected with such views, would be still more pernicious than the vague
and flashy declamation for which it is proposed as a substitute. The
effect is still worse on the minds of those who are not shocked and
repelled by this tone of thinking, for on them it must be perverting to
their whole moral nature. It is difficult to form the conception of a
tendency more inconsistent with all rational hope of good for the human
species, than that which must be impressed by such doctrines, upon any
mind in which they find acceptance.

There are, there have been, many human beings, in whom the motives of
patriotism or of benevolence have been permanent steady principles of
action, superior to any ordinary, and in not a few instances, to any
possible, temptations of personal interest. There are, and have been,
multitudes, in whom the motive of conscience or moral obligation has
been thus paramount. There is nothing in the constitution of human
nature to forbid its being so in all mankind. Until it is so, the race
will never enjoy one-tenth part of the happiness which our nature is
susceptible of. I regard any considerable increase of human happiness,
through mere changes in outward circumstances, unaccompanied by changes
in the state of the desires, as hopeless; not to mention that while the
desires are circumscribed in self, there can be no adequate motive for
exertions tending to modify to good ends even those external
circumstances. No man’s individual share of any public good which he can
hope to realize by his efforts, is an equivalent for the sacrifice of
his ease, and of the personal objects which he might attain by another
course of conduct. The balance can be turned in favour of virtuous
exertion, only by the interest of feeling or by that of conscience—those
“social interests,” the necessary subordination of which to
“self-regarding” is so lightly assumed.

But the power of any one to realize in himself the state of mind,
without which his own enjoyment of life can be but poor and scanty, and
on which all our hopes of happiness or moral perfection to the species
must rest, depends entirely upon his having faith in the actual
existence of such feelings and dispositions in others, and in their
possibility for himself. It is for those in whom the feelings of virtue
are weak, that ethical writing is chiefly needful, and its proper office
is to strengthen those feelings. But to be qualified for this task, it
is necessary, first to have, and next to show, in every sentence and in
every Edition: current; Page: [16] line, a firm unwavering confidence in
man’s capability of virtue. It is by a sort of sympathetic contagion, or
inspiration, that a noble mind assimilates other minds to itself; and no
one was ever inspired by one whose own inspiration was not sufficient to
give him faith in the possibility of making others feel what he feels.

Upon those who need to be strengthened and upheld by a really inspired
moralist—such a moralist as Socrates, or Plato, or (speaking humanly and
not theologically) as Christ; the effect of such writings as Mr.
Bentham’s, if they be read and believed and their spirit imbibed, must
either be hopeless despondency and gloom, or a reckless giving
themselves up to a life of that miserable self-seeking, which they are
there taught to regard as inherent in their original and unalterable
nature.

Mr. Bentham’s speculations on politics in the narrow sense, that is, on
the theory of government, are distinguished by his usual characteristic,
that of beginning at the beginning. He places before himself man in
society without a government, and, considering what sort of government
it would be advisable to construct, finds that the most expedient would
be a representative democracy. Whatever may be the value of this
conclusion, the mode in which it is arrived at appears to me to be
fallacious; for it assumes that mankind are alike in all times and all
places, that they have the same wants and are exposed to the same evils,
and that if the same institutions do not suit them, it is only because
in the more backward stages of improvement they have not wisdom to see
what institutions are most for their good. How to invest certain
servants of the people with the power necessary for the protection of
person and property, with the greatest possible facility to the people
of changing the depositaries of that power, when they think it is
abused; such is the only problem in social organization which Mr.
Bentham has proposed to himself. Yet this is but a part of the real
problem. It never seems to have occurred to him to regard political
institutions in a higher light, as the principal means of the social
education of a people. Had he done so, he would have seen that the same
institutions will no more suit two nations in different stages of
civilization, than the same lessons will suit children of different
ages. As the degree of civilization already attained varies, so does the
kind of social influence necessary for carrying the community forward to
the next stage of its progress. For a tribe of North American Indians,
improvement means, taming down their proud and solitary self-dependence;
for a body of emancipated negroes, it means accustoming them to be
self-dependent, instead of being merely obedient to orders: for our
semi-barbarous ancestors it would have meant, softening them; for a race
of enervated Asiatics it would mean hardening them. How can the same
social organization be fitted for producing so many contrary effects?

The prevailing error of Mr. Bentham’s views of human nature appears to
Edition: current; Page: [17] me to be this—he supposes mankind to be
swayed by only a part of the inducements which really actuate them; but
of that part he imagines them to be much cooler and more thoughtful
calculators than they really are. He has, I think, been, to a certain
extent, misled in the theory of politics, by supposing that the
submission of the mass of mankind to an established government is mainly
owing to a reasoning perception of the necessity of legal protection,
and of the common interest of all in a prompt and zealous obedience to
the law. He was not, I am persuaded, aware, how very much of the really
wonderful acquiescence of mankind in any government which they find
established, is the effect of mere habit and imagination, and,
therefore, depends upon the preservation of something like continuity of
existence in the institutions, and identity in their outward forms;
cannot transfer itself easily to new institutions, even though in
themselves preferable; and is greatly shaken when there occurs anything
like a break in the line of historical duration—anything which can be
termed the end of the old constitution and the beginning of a new one.

The constitutional writers of our own country, anterior to Mr. Bentham,
had carried feelings of this kind to the height of a superstition; they
never considered what was best adapted to their own times, but only what
had existed in former times, even in times that had long gone by. It is
not very many years since such were the principal grounds on which
parliamentary reform itself was defended. Mr. Bentham has done much
service in discrediting, as he has done completely, this school of
politicians, and exposing the absurd sacrifice of present ends to
antiquated means; but he has, I think, himself fallen into a contrary
error. The very fact that a certain set of political institutions
already exist, have long existed, and have become associated with all
the historical recollections of a people, is in itself, as far as it
goes, a property which adapts them to that people, and gives them a
great advantage over any new institutions in obtaining that ready and
willing resignation to what has once been decided by lawful authority,
which alone renders possible those innumerable compromises between
adverse interests and expectations, without which no government could be
carried on for a year, and with difficulty even for a week. Of the
perception of this important truth, scarcely a trace is visible in Mr.
Bentham’s writings.*

Edition: current; Page: [18]
It is impossible, however, to contest to Mr. Bentham, on this subject or
on any other which he has touched, the merit, and it is very great, of
having brought forward into notice one of the faces of the truth, and a
highly important one. Whether on government, on morals, or on any of the
other topics on which his speculations are comparatively imperfect, they
are still highly instructive and valuable to any one who is capable of
supplying the remainder of the truth; they are calculated to mislead
only by the pretension which they invariably set up of being the whole
truth, a complete theory and philosophy of the subject. Mr. Bentham was
more a thinker than a reader; he seldom compared his ideas with those of
other philosophers, and was by no means aware how many thoughts had
existed in other minds, which his doctrines did not afford the means
either to refute or to appreciate.

Edition: current; Page: [19]


BLAKEY’S HISTORY OF MORAL SCIENCE
 1833

Edition: current; Page: [20]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Monthly Repository, VII (Oct., 1833), 661-9. Unsigned; not republished.
The title is footnoted: “History of Moral Science. By Robert Blakey,
Author of an Essay on Moral Good and Evil. 2 vols. 8vo. [London:
Duncan,] 1833.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of
Blakey’s ‘History of Moral Science’ in the Monthly Repository for
October 1833” (MacMinn, 34). In the brief account in the Autobiography
(138) of his writings for the Monthly Repository, JSM does not mention
this article. The writing of it can be dated fairly precisely by JSM’s
letter (7/9/33) to W. J. Fox, editor of the Monthly Repository, in which
he says: “I am ashamed to say I can give no hope that Blakey will be
ready on Monday [9 Sept.]—though I think part of him will be.” Telling
Carlyle (5/10/33) which of the articles in the October number are his,
JSM writes: “one [is] a review of a foolish book by a man named Blakey,
of Morpeth, called a History of Moral Science; for writing which he is
utterly unfit, being a man who as you would say, has no eyes, only a
pair of glasses and I will add, almost opake ones.” (Earlier Letters,
XII, 177, 181.)

There are no corrections or alterations in the two Somerville College
copies.

Edition: current; Page: [21]


Blakey’s History of Moral Science

an ambitious title, and one which promises much; but the promises of
title-pages are so seldom followed by performances! “Moral science”
should naturally mean the science of morals. It were something to find
that there is a writer alive who believes that such a science exists;
and not only exists, but is in such a state of advancement that the time
is come to write its history; who, consequently, is not only able to
tell us the opinions of others, but has systematic ones of his own. For
how should he write the history of a science, who has not constructed a
consistent scheme of the science in its present state? The historian of
moral philosophy must himself have a philosophy of morals; must have
surveyed the field of ethics extensively enough, and with sufficient
power of concatenation, to have arranged its truths (or whatever present
themselves to his mind as such) into a connected series, following and
flowing out of one another: thus much, at least, is implied in the name
of science. But Mr. Blakey has no such thought. There are few ways in
which a mind of little depth or compass is more apt to betray itself
than by the use of big words to express small things; whoever does this
innocently and without quackery, shows himself to be unfurnished with
the larger idea for which he should have reserved his large phrase. By
giving the name “History of Moral Science” to a book, which should have
been called “Sketch of the Opinions of various Authors on the Foundation
of Moral Obligation, with critical Remarks,” Mr. Blakey demonstrates how
little meaning even the word “Science” has for him, since he considers
the whole history of a science to be summed up in the controversial
discussions concerning the first principle of it.

After a short preamble, and a few loose remarks about “the ancient
systems of morality,” Mr. Blakey presents us with what professes to be a
summary of the opinions of the following writers, concerning the first
principle of ethics:—Hobbes, Cudworth, Bishop Cumberland, Locke,
Archbishop King, Wollaston, Clarke, Shaftesbury, Mandeville, Bolingbroke
and Pope, Soame Jenyns, Hutcheson, a Mr. Thomas Rutherford, Hume,
Hartley and Priestley, Lord Kames, Bishop Butler, Dr. Ferguson, Dr.
Price, Adam Smith, Paley, Gisborne, Bentham, Godwin, Dugald Stewart,
Cogan, Dr. Thomas Brown, and a certain Dr. Dewar. All foreign authors
whatever are then disposed of in a single chapter; and two chapters more
are employed in promulgating Edition: current; Page: [22] such of the
author’s own opinions as have not been sufficiently manifested by his
strictures on other writers.

Mr. Blakey’s statement of the opinions of these various authors deserves
the praise of honesty. He never perversely distorts an opinion, in the
blindness of prejudice, or to serve a purpose. He generally treats the
intentions and talents, even of those from whom he differs most, with
justice and liberality. He does not insist upon fastening on them a
meaning or consequence which they never contemplated; and he employs but
sparingly the favourite weapon of the uncandid and the bigot, imputation
of immoral tendency. But our commendation cannot go much further. It is
not every man who can give an instructive view of other men’s opinions.

There are two modes of writing usefully concerning systems of
philosophy: the one, suitable to a mind which is qualified to judge; the
other, to one which can only describe. The intellect which can survey
the wanderings of imperfect thinkers from a higher eminence of thought,
commanding a view not only of the right track, but of all the by-ways of
error, and all the fallacious appearances which seduce the unguarded to
deviate into them—such a critic (we use the prostituted word only
because we have no other) can not only estimate more justly, but can
actually state more clearly and forcibly an author’s theory, than the
author himself; can really understand it better; because he sees (what
the author himself does not see) how the doctrine arose in the author’s
own mind; of what peculiar position in regard to opportunities of
observation, or of what peculiarity of intellect or of disposition, it
is the natural consequence. Any thing like this we were not entitled to
expect from Mr. Blakey; it supposes a philosopher, and such Mr. Blakey
is not. But if this was impossible, the next thing to it in usefulness,
though at a vast distance, would have been a condensed view of each
system, not as it appears to a higher intelligence, but as it appeared
to its author; such a statement of the author’s train of thought, of the
series of his premises and his conclusions, as would be conveyed by a
well-made abstract of his principal works, or as would be given by an
intelligent disciple thoroughly conversant with his master’s doctrines.
Mr. Blakey’s summaries by no means come up to this idea; they are vague
and sketchy, and not only do not, to those who knew the doctrines
before, exhibit them in any new light, but give no sufficiently distinct
conception of them to those who knew them not. Often the conclusions are
exhibited almost without the premises: and on the whole there is little
to be learnt even by the merest tyro in philosophy, from these volumes,
except a few generalities, and a few forms of expression. He is told in
what words philosophers have expressed the results of their
speculations, but though he may not be made positively to misunderstand,
he is not made thoroughly to feel, the meaning in the philosopher’s own
mind, to which the words are but an index, and often a most imperfect
one.

Edition: current; Page: [23]
An overweening self-confidence, and contemptuous assumption of
superiority, in judging of the intellects of others, would be peculiarly
unbecoming in a mind of Mr. Blakey’s calibre: and he cannot be accused
of those faults; he mostly treats with due respect all who by their
speculations have deserved any. To the liberal appreciation of merit
which he commonly evinces, there are indeed exceptions; and,
unfortunately, in the very cases in which there is most merit to
appreciate. But this is a very different thing from arrogance. It is not
because an author differs from Mr. Blakey, that Mr. Blakey deems
scornfully of him; but because, in addition to differing from Mr.
Blakey, he has been cried down by the world—that is to say, the English
world. Over-reliance on our own judgment is one thing, over-reliance on
the judgment of the world when in unison with our own, is another. The
latter is the failing of a weaker, but certainly of a more modest mind.
The misfortune is, that the contempt of those who have confidence enough
to be scornful only when they are backed by a crowd, is aptest to fall
upon those who are most in advance of their age. Mr. Blakey’s strongest
expressions of disdain are divided between the association-philosophy as
taught by Hartley, and the metaphysics of the German school. In other
words, the only metaphysical doctrines which he utterly despises, are
the two systems between which, and which only, almost every
metaphysician, deserving the name, in all Europe, is now beginning to be
convinced that it is necessary to choose: the two most perfect forms of
the only two theories of the human mind which are, strictly speaking,
possible. Both are alike worthless in Mr. Blakey’s eyes, because it has
been the fashion among English writers to treat both with disrespect,
and because he himself understands neither of them. The difference is,
he pronounces the one unintelligible, because it is so to him; the other
he flatters himself that he sees through and through, and can discern
that there is nothing in it.

So little does Mr. Blakey comprehend of the theory which resolves all
the phenomena of the mind into ideas of sensation connected together by
the law of association, that he does not even see any thing peculiar in
the doctrine. Association itself, he will not allow to be a distinct
principle or fact in human nature. It is nothing more, he says, than
remembrance; it has been known in all ages, as the faculty of memory.
Just so we may conceive, on the appearance of Newton’s Principia,[*]
some mind of the same character objecting to the theory of gravitation,
that there was nothing in it but the ancient and familiar fact of
weight.

If a person, [says Mr. Blakey,] will take the first volume of the
treatise On Man, and read it carefully over, and whenever he finds the
words association, associates, associating, &c. let him replace them
with the words memory, remembered, remembrance, connected in his mind,
and he will find that the sense of the Edition: current; Page: [24]
various passages in which the former class of words are used, will
remain as completely the same, when words descriptive of memory are thus
employed.

(Vol. II, p. 124.)

Not so, Mr. Blakey. Memory and remembrance only denote the fact that
somehow we do remember: association denotes that our remembrances
(pardon the expression) suggest and recall one another in an order,
determined by the order of succession of the facts remembered; or
rather, determined partly by the order of succession, and partly by the
more or less interesting nature, of those previous impressions. Cannot
Mr. Blakey understand the difference between a phenomenon, and the law
of the phenomenon? The reflexion of light, and of sound, is a fact; that
the angle of reflexion is equal to the angle of incidence, is the law of
that fact. And this law of nature may be something new to a person, even
although he may have heard an echo, and seen his face in a mirror. In
like manner a person may know that when we have seen an object or
experienced a feeling, we remember it, (which is all that is expressed
by the words faculty of memory,) and may, notwithstanding, have yet to
learn that when we have seen two objects or had two feelings together,
we think of them together, and not otherwise; and that the strength of
their connexion in our remembrance, depends jointly upon the number of
previous conjunctions in fact or in thought, and upon the intensity of
the original impressions. Once for all, association is not memory, but
the law of memory.

Now, the theory of the human mind of which Dr. Hartley was the principal
author, maintains that this same law, which is the law of memory,
namely, that the order of our thoughts follows the order of our
sensations, is not only the law of memory, but the law of imagination,
of belief, of reasoning, of the affections, of the will. This may not be
true; but it is at least very different from every other theory. But Mr.
Blakey knows so little about the Hartleian doctrine, that he propounds
as a complete summary of it, the following proposition: The advocates of
association state a simple fact, that there is a connexion amongst our
ideas. (Vol. II, p. 126.) We exhort him to read Hartley; or a more
recent work, which has done far more for Hartley’s theory, than Hartley
himself, Mr. Mill’s Analysis of the Human Mind.[*]

As a specimen of argumentation which Mr. Blakey considers to be
conclusive, we quote the following:

Association is the tendency of one idea to introduce another into the
mind. Very well, then; but how do we come to set it down as a general
fact, that one set of ideas has an invariable tendency to introduce
another set of ideas? By experience, it must be answered. But what is
experience? Why, it is the remembrance of that which is past.

[Vol. II, pp. 116-17.]

Therefore, association is nothing but memory.

Edition: current; Page: [25]
We will treat Mr. Blakey with a specimen in return. The pretended
science of chemistry is nothing but memory.

Chemistry is the properties of simple substances, and their various
compounds. But how do we come to set it down as a general fact, that two
substances, as oxygen and hydrogen, being compounded together, form a
third substance, water? By experience, it must be answered. But what is
experience? Why, it is the remembrance of that which is past. In what,
therefore, does this chemistry differ from memory?

Mr. Blakey continues—

But to put this matter in as clear a light as possible, let us suppose
that A is a present idea in the mind, and that it has a tendency to
introduce another idea which has never been in the mind before, and
which we will call B. To this tendency of A to introduce B into the
mind, is given the name of association. Now how can we assert or deny
any thing respecting the tendency of A to introduce B, till we have
witnessed A’s power over B, and have had B present to the understanding?
The very proposition that A has an influence over B implies that we have
seen this tendency, and that B must have previously been in the mind,
and consequently an object of memory. Thus we see then, when we speak
about connexions among our ideas, we must consider them as connexions
which have been known before; and therefore we ought to infer, that the
treating of them comes within the province of memory, and not within any
other intellectual power whatever.

(Vol. II, p. 117.)

What a paralogism; we might almost call it a bull. Yes, certainly, the
proposition that A has a tendency to introduce B, implies that we have
seen this tendency at some former time, because otherwise we should not
know it: but the fact itself implies nothing of the kind. When A for the
first time introduced B, “which had never been in the mind before,” B
was not an object of memory; although it is so when we have observed and
treasured up the occurrence. Because an event must be remembered before
it can be talked about, Mr. Blakey imagines that it was a subject of
memory when it first happened. It is upon the strength of such reasoning
that he assumes such a tone as this:

What a dull and paralyzing effect has the reading of a book in which the
principle of the association of ideas forms the philosophical dramatis
personæ in the piece. . . . There is no way of getting through the book,
without violating the rules of politeness by enjoying a smile at the
expense of the system.

(Vol. II, p. 127.)

With much more of the same sort.

Of foreign authors Mr. Blakey seems to be profoundly ignorant. He
affirms that in the majority of cases—

The continental philosophy of human nature presents to a
well-constituted mind a repulsive aspect, and is profusely saturated
with everything that is impure, ridiculous, profane, whimsical, and
pernicious.

(Vol. II, p. 300.)

Edition: current; Page: [26]
Meaning, we suppose, some French writers only, and those only in the
eighteenth century. The celebrated theory of Malebranche he states thus,
that “all things should be seen in God;” (Vol. II, p. 308) and he
imagines that Candide[*] was written to support the doctrines which are
put into the mouth of Pangloss! (Vol. II, p. 289.)

At the conclusion of his abstract of the opinions of previous authors,
which, it is but justice to say, is in general much fairer, and even
more intelligent, than might be supposed from the specimens which we
have given, Mr. Blakey sums up the result of the examination in the
following words:

All the systems we have examined may, I conceive, be referred to six
distinct heads. 1st. The eternal and immutable nature of all moral
distinctions. 2nd. That utility, public or private, is the foundation of
moral obligation. 3rd. That all morality is founded upon the will of
God. 4th. That a moral sense, feeling, or emotion, is the ground of
virtue. 5th. That it is by supposing ourselves in the situation of
others, or by a species of sympathetic mechanism, that we derive our
notions of good and evil. And 6th, the doctrine of vibrations,* and the
association of ideas.

(Vol. II, p. 317.)

After declaring that “there are none of these different systems that are
not in some degree founded on truth,” and that “we cannot resolve all
the moral feelings and habits of our nature into one general principle,”
he assigns, nevertheless, his reasons for preferring to all the other
theories the doctrine, “that virtue depends upon the will of God,” as
made known by revelation. [Vol. II, pp. 319, 320.]

Mr. Blakey’s enumeration is illogical: it confounds two distinct, though
nearly connected, questions; the standard or test of moral obligation,
and the origin of our moral sentiments. It is one question what rule we
ought to obey, and why; another question how our feelings of approbation
and disapprobation actually originate. The former is the fundamental
question of practical morals; the latter is a problem in mental
philosophy. Adam Smith’s doctrine of sympathy which stands fifth, and
the doctrine of association which stands sixth in Mr. Blakey’s list, are
theories respecting the nature and origin of our feelings of morality.
His second and third are theories respecting the rule or law by which we
ought to guide our conduct. His first and fourth involve, or may be so
understood as to involve, both considerations.

These several theories, therefore, are not exclusive of one another. It
is possible, for instance, to hold with Hartley, that our feelings of
morality originate in association, and with Bentham that our conduct, in
all things which depend on our will, and among the rest, in the
cultivation of those Edition: current; Page: [27] very feelings, should
be guided by utility; or with our author, that the will of God is itself
the foundation of the obligations of virtue. David Hume seems to have
combined the recognition of utility as the standard or test of morality,
with the belief of a moral sense, independent of association. Paley has
no theory respecting the nature of moral feelings, but his notion of the
moral law is compounded of the second and third of the theories
enumerated by our author.

But of all those theories, whether ethical or metaphysical, whether
declaring what our conduct should be, or what our feelings are, none
surely is so utterly destitute of plausibility as Mr. Blakey’s own
doctrine, that virtue is constituted by the will of God.

If we believe this, we believe that God does not declare what is good,
and command us to do it, but that God actually makes it good. Good is
whatever God makes it. What we call evil, is only evil because he has
arbitrarily prohibited it. The countless myriads to whom he has never
signified his will, are under no moral obligations. This doctrine takes
away all motives to yield obedience to God, except those which induce a
slave to obey his master. He must be obeyed because he is the stronger.
He is not to be obeyed because he is good, for that implies a good which
he could not have made bad by his mere will. If we had the misfortune to
believe that the world is ruled by an evil principle, that there is no
God, but only a devil, or that the devil has more power over us than
God, we ought by this rule to obey the devil. Mr. Blakey is evidently
quite unconscious of these consequences of his theory. But, that they
are legitimate consequences who can doubt?

And this theory Mr. Blakey believes to rest upon the authority of
scripture.

I venture to affirm, [says he,] that from Genesis to Revelation
inclusive, there is not a single passage, which, when fairly examined,
claims the attention and homage of mankind upon any other ground than
what is implied in the command which accompanies it.

(Vol. II, p. 326.)

The scriptures, as Mr. Blakey himself says elsewhere, do not enter into
speculative questions; they tell us what to do, not why. But do they not
say perpetually, God is good, God is just, God is righteous, God is
holy? And are we to understand by these affirmations nothing at all, but
the identical and unmeaning proposition God is himself, or a proposition
which has so little to do with morality as this, God is powerful? Has
God in short no moral attributes? no attributes but those which the
devil is conceived to possess in a smaller degree? and no title to our
obedience but such as the devil would have, if there were a devil, and
the universe were without God?

Mr. Blakey insists much upon the sublimity of the scriptures, and the
perfection of scripture morality; considerations which tell strongly
against his own doctrine; for if we are capable of recognising
excellence in the commands of the Omnipotent, they must possess
excellence independently of his Edition: current; Page: [28] command;
and excellence discoverable by us even without revelation; for whatever
reason can recognise when found, reason can find. If the morality of the
scriptures is admirable because it conduces to happiness, this implies
that the production of happiness is a legitimate purpose of morals: if
because it accords with our sympathies, that implies that morality may
be founded on sympathy. If the precepts of scripture have nothing
intrinsically good, but are good solely by reason of the power from
which they emanate, their character ought to be as mysterious and
incomprehensible to us as the ceremonies of magic: nor could there on
that supposition be any reason apparent to us, why we are not commanded
to hate our neighbour instead of to love him.

Not being of opinion, with Mr. Blakey, that our reception of a
philosophic doctrine ought to be determined, not solely by its truth,
but by what we imagine respecting the arguments it may afford for or
against our religious belief, we ought not, perhaps, to notice the claim
which Mr. Blakey sets up for his doctrine, of being peculiarly
favourable to the interests of revealed religion. But though such
arguments go for nothing with those who can trust themselves to judge of
the true and the false, who are resolved to believe the truth, whatever
may be its consequences, and are not afraid of finding one truth
irreconcilable with another; those who are diffident of their own
intellectual powers, naturally dread any doctrine which they can be led
to think tends to shake from under their feet, the foundation on which
they have built all their hopes and purposes. Mr. Blakey, therefore,
shall not be allowed the exclusive use of this argument. We tell him
that his doctrine is more destructive to the foundations of
Christianity, than any of the theories of moral obligation which he has
enumerated; by taking away altogether its internal evidences, the only
ones which are not common to it with a thousand superstitions. In Judea
itself, both before and after Christ appeared, numbers of false Christs
and charlatans of all descriptions had pretended to work miracles, and
had been believed; believed not only by their proselytes, but by those
who rejected them, and who ascribed their miraculous powers to the
agency of evil spirits. If these impostors sunk, and were heard of no
more, while Christianity spread itself over the earth, it was not that
greater credence was given to the Christian miracles than to theirs; it
was, that the simple-hearted men who gathered themselves round the
founder of Christianity, far from believing the doctrines to be
excellent because they came from God, believed them to come from God
because they felt them to be excellent. The fervour of their love and
admiration could not find fit utterance but in the phrase, “he spake as
never man spake.”[*] Christianity had perished with its founder if Mr.
Blakey’s theory had been true. The world has acknowledged him as sent of
God, has believed him to be God, because there was a standard of
Edition: current; Page: [29] morality by which man could test not the
word of man merely, but what was vouched for as the word of God; because
of that internal evidence, which according to the repeated declarations
of Christ himself, ought to have been sufficient. It was out of the
hardness of their hearts that they needed signs.[*] Had all been right
within, the precepts themselves would have sufficed to prove their own
origin.

We have expended more words than were perhaps necessary upon so
preposterous a doctrine. Our excuse must be, the infinitely mischievous
tendency of a theory of moral duty, according to which God is to be
obeyed, not because God is good, nor because it is good to obey him, but
from some motive or principle which might have dictated equally implicit
obedience to the powers of darkness. Such a philosophy, in proportion as
it is realized in men’s lives and characters, must extirpate from their
minds all reverence, all admiration, and all conscience, and leave them
only the abject feelings of a slave.

Such a theory cannot be combated too often; it should be warred against
wherever it rears its head. But with regard to most of the other
conflicting opinions respecting the primary grounds of moral obligation,
it appears to us that a degree of importance is often attached to them,
more than commensurate to the influence they really exercise for good or
for evil. Doubtless they are important, as all questions in morals are
important: a clear conception of the ultimate foundation of morality, is
essential to a systematic and scientific treatment of the subject, and
to the decision of some of its disputed practical problems. But the most
momentous of the differences of opinion on the details of morality, have
quite another origin. The real character of any man’s ethical system
depends not on his first and fundamental principle, which is of
necessity so general as to be rarely susceptible of an immediate
application to practice; but upon the nature of those secondary and
intermediate maxims, vera illa et media axiomata, in which, as Bacon
observes, real wisdom resides.[†] The grand consideration is, not what
any person regards as the ultimate end of human conduct, but through
what intermediate ends he holds that his ultimate end is attainable, and
should be pursued: and in these there is a nearer agreement between some
who differ, than between some who agree, in their conception of the
ultimate end. When disputes arise as to any of the secondary maxims,
they can be decided, it is true, only by an appeal to first principles;
but the necessity of this appeal may be avoided far oftener than is
commonly believed; it is surprising how few, in comparison, of the
disputed questions of practical morals, require for their determination
any premises but such as are common to all philosophic sects.

Edition: current; Page: [30] Edition: current; Page: [31]


SEDGWICK’S DISCOURSE
 1835

Edition: current; Page: [32]


EDITOR’S NOTE

“Professor Sedgwick’s Discourse on the Studies of the University of
Cambridge,” D&D, I (2nd ed., 1867), 95-159, with footnote to title:
“London Review, April 1835.” Reprinted from the London Review, I (Apr.,
1835), 94-135, signed “A”. Original heading: “Art. V. Professor
Sedgwick’s Discourse.—State of Philosophy in England. / A Discourse on
the Studies of the University. By Adam Sedgwick, M.A., F.R.S.;
Woodwardian Professor, and Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
[London: Parker,] 1834. 3d edit.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A
review of Sedgwick’s ‘Discourse on the Studies of the University,’
headed ‘Professor Sedgwick’s Discourse—State of Philosophy in England’,
in the first number of the London Review (April, 1835)” (MacMinn, 43).
The article, which he had begun writing by 14 October, 1834, was
finished, presumably in an unrevised state, by 26 November (see JSM’s
letters to J. P. Nichol on those dates, Earlier Letters, XII, 235 and
238). See also the footnote to 45 below, which describes a passage as
“Written in 1834.” For JSM’s attitude to this article, and its relation
to others in this volume, see the Textual Introduction, cxvii-cxx above.

The following text is collated with that in D&D (1st ed.), and that in
the London Review. In the footnoted variants, D&D (2nd ed.) is indicated
by “67”; D&D (1st ed.) by “59”; the London Review by “35”. There are no
corrections or alterations in the Somerville College copies of D&D and
the London Review.

Edition: current; Page: [33]


Sedgwick’s Discourse

if we were asked for what end, above all others, endowed universities
exist, or ought to exist, we should answer—To keep alive philosophy.
This, too, is the ground on which, of late years, our own national
endowments have chiefly been defended. To educate common minds for the
common business of life, a public provision may be useful, but is not
indispensable: nor are there wanting arguments,a not conclusive, yet of
considerable strength, to show that it is undesirable. Whatever
individual competition does at all, it commonly does best. All things in
which the public are adequate judges of excellence, are best supplied
where the stimulus of individual interest is the most active; and that
is where pay is in proportion to exertion: not where pay is made sure in
the first instance, and the only security for exertion is the
superintendence of government; far less where, as in the English
universities, even that security has been successfully excluded. But
there is an education of which it cannot be pretended that the public
are competent judges; the education by which great minds are formed. To
rear up minds with aspirations and faculties above the herd,b capable of
leading on their countrymen to greater achievements in virtue,
intelligence, and social well-being; to do this, and likewise so to
educate the leisured classes of the community generally, that they may
participate as far as possible in the qualities of these superior
spirits, and be prepared to appreciate them, and follow in their
steps—these are purposes, requiring institutions of education placed
above dependence on the immediate pleasure of that very multitude whom
they are designed to elevate. These are the ends for which endowed
universities are desirable; they are those which all endowed
universities profess to aim at; and great is their disgrace, if, having
undertaken this task, and claiming credit for fulfilling it, they leave
it unfulfilled.

In what manner are these purposes—the greatest which any human
institution can propose to itself—purposes which the English
Universities must be fit for, or they are fit for nothing—performed by
those universities?—Circumspice.

In the intellectual pursuits which form great minds, this country was
formerly pre-eminent. England once stood at the head of European
philosophy. Where stands she now? Consult the general opinion of Europe.
The Edition: current; Page: [34] celebrity of England, in the present
day, rests upon her docks, her canals, her railroads. In intellect she
is distinguished only for a kind of sober good sense, free from
extravagance, but also void of lofty aspirations; and for doing all
those things which are best done where man most resembles a machine,
with the precision of a machine. Valuable qualities, doubtless; but not
precisely those by which cmankind raise themselvesc to the perfection of
dtheird nature, or eachievee greater and greater conquests over the
difficulties which encumber ftheirf social arrangements. Ask any
reflecting person in France or Germany his opinion of England; whatever
may be his own tenets—however friendly his disposition to us—whatever
his admiration of our institutions, and gof some parts of our national
characterg; however alive to the faults and errors of his own
countrymen, the feature which always strikes him in the English mind is
the absence of enlarged and commanding views. Every question he finds
discussed and decided on its own basis, however narrow, without any
light thrown upon it from principles more extensive than itself; and no
question discussed at all, unless parliament, or some constituted
authority, is to be moved to-morrow or the day after to put it to the
vote. Instead of the ardour of research, the eagerness for large and
comprehensive inquiry, of the educated part of the French and German
youth, what find we? Out of the narrow bounds of mathematical and
physical science, not a vestige of a reading and thinking public engaged
in the investigation of truth as truth, in the prosecution of thought
for the sake of thought. Among hfewh except sectarian religionists—and
what they are we all know—is there any interest in the great problem of
man’s nature and life: among istill feweri is there any curiosity
respecting the nature and principles of human society, the history or
the philosophy of civilization; nor any belief that, from such
inquiries, a single important practical consequence can follow. Guizot,
the greatest admirer of England among the Continental philosophers,
nevertheless remarks that, in England, even great events do not, as they
do everywhere else, inspire great ideas.[*] Things, in England, are
greater than the men who accomplish them.j

But perhaps this degeneracy is the effect of some cause over which the
universities had no control, and against which they have been
ineffectually struggling. If so, those bodies are wonderfully patient of
being baffled. Not Edition: current; Page: [35] a word of complaint
escapes any of their leading dignitaries—not a hint that their highest
endeavours are thwarted, their best labours thrown away; not a symptom
of dissatisfaction with the intellectual state of the national mind,
save when it discards the boroughmongers, lacks zeal for the Church, or
calls for the admission of Dissenters within their precincts. On the
contrary, perpetual boasting how perfectly they succeed in accomplishing
all that they attempt; endless celebrations of the country’s glory and
happiness in possessing a youth so taught, so mindful of what they are
taught. When any one presumes to doubt whether the universities are all
that universities should be, he is not told that they do their best, but
that the tendencies of the age are too strong for them; no—he is, with
an air of triumph, referred to their fruits, and asked whether an
education which has made English gentlemen what we see them, can be
other than a good education? All is right so long as no one speaks of
taking away their endowments, or encroaching upon their monopoly.* While
they are thus eulogizing their own efforts, and the results of their
efforts; philosophy—not any particular school of philosophy, but
philosophy altogether—speculation of any comprehensive kind, and upon
any deep or extensive subject—has been falling more and more into
distastefulness and disrepute among the educated classes of England.
Have those classes meanwhile learned to slight and despise these
authorized teachers of philosophy, or ceased to frequent their schools?
Far from it. The universities then may flourish, though the pursuits
which are the end and justification of the existence of universities
decay. The teacher thrives and is in honour, while that which he affects
to teach vanishes from among mankind.

If the above reflections were to occur, as they well might, to an
intelligent foreigner, deeply interested in the condition and prospects
of English intellect, Edition: current; Page: [36] we may imagine with
what avidity he would seize upon the publication before us. It is a
discourse on the studies of Cambridge, by a Cambridge Professor,
delivered to a Cambridge audience, and published at their request. It
contains the opinion of one of the most liberal members of the
University on the studies of the place; or, as we should rather say, on
the studies which the place recommends, and which some few of its pupils
actually prosecute. Mr. Sedgwick is not a mere pedant of a college, who
defends the system because he has been formed by the system, and has
never learned to see anything but in the light in which the system
showed it to him. Though an intemperatek, he is not a bigoted, partisan
of the body to which he belongs; he can see faults as well as
excellences, not merely in their mode of teaching, but in some parts of
what they teach. His intellectual pretensions, too, are high. lNotl of
him can it be said that he aspires not to philosophy; he writes in the
character of one to whom its loftiest eminences are familiar. Curiosity,
therefore, cannot but be somewhat excited to know what he finds to say
respecting the Cambridge scheme of education, and what notion may be
formed of the place from the qualities he exhibits in himself, one of
itsm favourable specimens.

Whatever be the value of Professor Sedgwick’s Discourse in the former of
these two points of view, in the latter we have found it, on
examination, to be a document of considerable importance. The Professor
gives his opinion (for the benefit chiefly, he says, of the younger
members of the University, but in a manner, he hopes, “not altogether
unfitting to other ears”[*]) on the value of several great branches of
intellectual culture, and on the spirit in which they should be pursued.
Not satisfied with this, he proclaims in his preface another and a still
more ambitious purpose—the destruction of what nhas been termedn the
Utilitarian theory of morals. “He has attacked the utilitarian theory of
morals, not merely because he thinks it founded on false reasoning, but
because he also believes that it produces a degrading effect on the
temper and conduct of those who adopt it.”[†]

This is promising great things: to refute a theory of morals; and to
trace its influence on the character and actions of those who embrace
it. A better test of capacity for philosophy could not be desired. We
shall see how Professor Sedgwick acquits himself of his two-fold task,
and what were his qualifications for undertaking it.

From an author’s mode of introducing his subject, and laying the
outlines of it before the reader, some estimate may generally be formed
of his capacity Edition: current; Page: [37] for discussing it. In this
respect, the indications afforded by Mr. Sedgwick’s commencement are not
favourable. Before giving his opinion of the studies of the University,
he had to tell us what those studies are. They are, first, mathematical
and physical science; secondly, the classical languages and literature;
thirdly (if some small matter of Locke and Paley deserve so grand a
denomination), mental and moral science. For Mr. Sedgwick’s purpose,
this simple mode of designating these studies would have been
sufficiently precise; but if he was determined to hit off their
metaphysical characteristics, it should not have been in the following
style:—

The studies of this place, as far as they relate to mere human learning,
divide themselves into three branches: First, the study of the laws of
nature, comprehending all parts of inductive philosophy. Secondly, the
study of ancient literature, or, in other words, of those authentic
records which convey to us an account of the feelings, the sentiments,
and the actions of men prominent in the history of the most famous
empires of the ancient world: in these works we seek for examples and
maxims of prudence and models of taste. Thirdly, the study of ourselves,
considered as individuals and as social beings: under this head are
included ethics and metaphysics, moral and political philosophy, and
some other kindred subjects of great complexity, hardly touched on in
our academic system, and to be followed out in the more mature labours
of after life.

(P. 10.)

How many errors in expression and classification in one short passage!
The “study of the laws of nature” is spoken of as one thing, “the study
of ourselves” as another. In studying ourselves, are we not studying the
laws of our nature? “All parts of inductive philosophy” are placed under
one head; “ethics and metaphysics, moral and political philosophy,”
under another. Are these no part of inductive philosophy? Of what
philosophy, then, are they a part? Is not all philosophy, which is
founded upon experience and observation, inductive?* What, again can Mr.
Sedgwick mean by calling “ethics” one thing and “moral philosophy”
another? Moral philosophy must be either ethics or a branch of
metaphysics—either the knowledge of our duty, or the theory of the
feelings with which we regard our duty. What a loose description, too,
of ancient literature—where no description at all was Edition: current;
Page: [38] required. The writings of the ancients are spoken of as if
there were nothing in them but the biographies of eminent statesmen.

This want of power to express accurately what is conceived, almost
unerringly denotes inaccuracy in the conception itself: such verbal
criticism, therefore,o is far from unimportant. But the topics of a
graver kind, which Mr. Sedgwick’s Discourse suggests, are fully
sufficient to occupy us, and to them we shall henceforth confine
ourselves.

The Professor’s survey of the studies of the University commences with
“the study of the laws of nature,” or, to speak a more correct language,
the laws of the material universe. Here, to a mind stored with the
results of comprehensive thought, there lay open a boundless field of
remark, of the kind most useful to the young students of the University.
At the stage in education which they are supposed to have reached, the
time was come for disengaging their minds from the microscopic
contemplation of the details of the various sciences, and elevating them
to the idea of Science as a whole—to the idea of human culture as a
whole—of the place which those various sciences occupy in the former,
and the functions which they perform in the latter. Though an actual
analysis would have been impossible, there was room to present, in a
rapid sketch, the results of an analysis, of pthe methodsp of the
various physical sciences—q the processes by which they severally arrive
at truth: the peculiar logic of each science, and the light thrown
thereby upon universal logic: the various kinds and degrees of evidence
upon which the truths of those sciences rest; how to estimate them; how
to adapt our modes of investigation to them: how far the habits of
estimating evidence, which these sciences engender, are applicable to
other subjects, and to evidence of another kind; how far inapplicable.
Hence the transition was easy to the more extensive inquiry, what these
physical studies are capable of doing for the mind; which of the habits
and powers that constitute a fine intellect those pursuits tend to
cultivate; what are those which they do not cultivate those even (for
such there are) which they tend to impede; by what other studies and
intellectual exercises by what general reflections, or course of reading
or meditation, those deficiencies may be supplied. The Professor might
thus have shown (what it is usual only to declaim about) how highly a
familiarity with mathematics, with dynamics, with even experimental
physics and natural history, conduces both tor strength ands soundness
oft understanding; and yet how possible it is to be master of all these
sciences, and to be unable to put two ideas together with a useful
result, on any other topic. The youth of Edition: current; Page: [39]
the university might have been taught to set a just value on these
attainments, yet to see in them, as branches of general education, what
they really are—the early stages in the formation of a usuperioru mind;
thev instruments of a higher culture. Nor would it have been out of
place in such a discourse, though perhaps not peculiarly appropriate to
this part of it, to have added a few considerations on the tendency of
scientific pursuits in general; the influence of habits of analysis and
abstraction upon the character:—how, without those habits, the mind is
the slave of its own accidental associations, the dupe of every
superficial appearance, and fit only to receive its opinions from
authority:—on the other hand, how their exclusive wcultivationw, while
it strengthens the associations which connect means with ends, effects
with causes, tends to weaken many of those upon which our enjoyments and
our social feelings depend; and by accustoming the mind to consider, in
objects, chiefly the properties on account of which we refer them to
classes and give them general names, leaves our conceptions of them as
individuals, lame and meagre:—how, therefore, the corrective and
antagonist principle to the pursuits which deal with objects only in the
abstract, is to be sought in those which deal with them altogether in
the concrete, clothed in properties and circumstances: real life in its
most varied forms, poetry and art in all their branches.

These, and many kindred topics, a xtruex philosopher, standing in the
place of Professor Sedgwick, would, as far as space permitted, have
illustrated and insisted on. But the Professor’s resources supplied him
only with a few trite commonplaces, on the high privilege of
comprehending the mysteries of the natural world; the value of studies
which give a habit of abstraction, and a “power of concentration;” the
use of scientific pursuits in saving us from languor and vacuity; with
other truths of ythat small calibrey. To these he adds, that “the study
of the higher sciences is well suited to keep down a spirit of arrogance
and intellectual pride,” by convincing us of “the narrow limitation of
our faculties;”[*] and upon this peg he appends a dissertation on the
evidences of design in the universe—a subject on which much originality
was not to be hoped for, and the nature of which may be allowed to
protect feebleness from any severity of comment.

The Professor’s next topic is the classical languages and literature.
And here he begins by wondering. zIt is a common propensity of writers
on Edition: current; Page: [40] natural theologyz to erect everything
into a wonder. aTheya cannot consider theb greatness and wisdom of God,
once for all, as proved, but cthink themselvesc bound to be finding
fresh arguments for it in every chip or stone; and dthey thinkd nothing
a proof of greatness unless etheye can wonder at it; and to most minds a
wonder explained is a wonder no longer. Hence a sort of vague feeling,
as if, to ftheirf conceptions, God would not be so great if he had made
us capable of understanding more of the laws of his universe; and hence
a reluctance to admit even the most obvious explanation, lest it should
destroy the wonder.

The subject of Professor Sedgwick’s wonder is a very simple thing—the
manner in which a child acquires a language.

I may recall to your minds, [says he,] the wonderful ease with which a
child comprehends the conventional signs of thought formed between man
and man—not only learns the meaning of words descriptive of visible
things; but understands, by a kind of rational instinct, the meaning of
abstract terms, without ever thinking of the faculty by which he comes
to separate them from the names of mere objects of sense. The readiness
with which a child acquires a language may well be called a rational
instinct: for during the time that his knowledge is built up, and that
he learns to handle the implements of thought, he knows no more of what
passes within himself, that he does of the structure of the eye, or of
the properties of light, while he attends to the impressions on his
visual sense, and gives to each impression its appropriate name.

(P. 33.)

gIfg whatever we do without understanding the machinery by which we do
it, be done by a rational instinct, we learn to dance by instinct: since
few of the dancing-master’s pupils have ever heard of any one of the
muscles which his instructions and their own sedulous practice give them
the power to use. Do we grow wheat by “a rational instinct,” because we
know not how the seed germinates in the ground? We know by experience,
not by instinct, that it hdoes germinateh, and on that assurance we sow
it. A child learns a language by the ordinary laws of association; by
hearing the word spoken, on the various occasions on which the meaning
denoted by it has to be conveyed. This mode of acquisition is better
adapted for giving a loose and vague, than a precise, conception of the
meaning of an abstract term; accordingly, most people’s conceptions of
the meaning of many abstract terms in common use remain always loose and
vague. The rapidity with which ichildren learni a language is not more
wonderful than the rapidity with which jthey learnj so much else at an
early age. It is a common remark, that we gain more knowledge Edition:
current; Page: [41] in the first few years of life, without labour, than
we ever kafterwardsk acquire by the hardest toil, in double the time.
There are many causes to account for this; among which it is sufficient
to specify, that lmuch ofl the knowledge we then acquire concerns our
most pressing wants, and that our attention to outward impressions is
not yet deadened by familiarity, nor distracted, as in grown persons, by
a previously accumulated stock of inward mfeelings and ideasm.

Against the general tendency of the Professor’s remarks on the
cultivation of the ancient languages, nthere is little to be saidn. We
think with him, that “our fathers have done well in making classical
studies an early and prominent part of liberal education” (p. 36). We
fully coincide in his opinion, that “the philosophical and ethical works
of the ancients deserve a much larger portion of our time than we”
(meaning Cambridge) “have hitherto bestowed on them” (p. 39). We commend
the liberality (for, in a professor of an English University, the
liberality which admits the smallest fault in the university system of
tuition deserves to be accounted extraordinary) of the following
remarks:—

It is notorious, that during many past years, while verbal criticism has
been pursued with so much ardour, the works to which I now allude
(coming home, as they do, to the business of life; and pregnant, as they
are, with knowledge well fitted to fortify the reasoning powers) have,
by the greater number of us, hardly been thought of; and have in no
instance been made prominent subjects of academic training. (P. 39.)

I think it incontestably true, that for the last fifty years our
classical studies (with much to demand our undivided praise) have been
too critical and formal; and that we have sometimes been taught, while
straining after an accuracy beyond our reach, to value the husk more
than the fruit of ancient learning: and if of late years our younger
members have sometimes written prose Greek almost with the purity of
Xenophon, or composed iambics in the finished diction of the Attic
poets, we may well doubt whether time suffices for such
perfection—whether the imagination and the taste might not be more
wisely cultivated than by a long sacrifice to what, after all, ends but
in verbal imitations.—In short, whether such acquisitions, however
beautiful in themselves, are not gained at the expense of something
better. This at least is true, that he who forgets that language is but
the sign and vehicle of thought, and, while studying the word, knows
little of the sentiment—who learns the measure, the garb, and fashion of
ancient song, without looking to its living soul or feeling its
inspiration—is not one jot better than a traveller in classic land, who
sees its crumbling temples, and numbers, with arithmetical precision,
their steps and pillars, but thinks not of their beauty, their design,
or the living sculptures on their walls—or who counts the stones in the
Appian way instead of gazing on the monuments of the ‘eternal city.’

(Pp. 37-8.)

The illustration which closes the above passage (though, as is often the
case with illustrations, it does not illustrate) is rather pretty: a
circumstance Edition: current; Page: [42] which we should be sorry not
to notice, as, amid much straining, and many elaborate flights of
imagination, we have not met with any other instance in which the
Professor makes so near an approach to actual eloquence.

We have said that we go all lengths with our author in claiming for
classical literature a place in education, at least equal to that
commonly assigned to it. But though we think his opinion right, we think
most of his reasons wrong. As, for example, the following:—

With individuals as with nations, the powers of imagination reach their
maturity sooner than the powers of reason; and this is another proof
that the severer investigations of science ought to be preceded by the
study of languages; and especially of those great works of imagination
which have become a pattern for the literature of every civilized
tongue.

(P. 34.)

This dictum respecting Imagination and Reason is only not a truism,
because it is, as Coleridge would say, a falsism. Does the Professor
mean that oany “greato work of imagination”—the Paradise Lost, for
instance—could have been produced at an earlier age, or by a less
matured or less accomplished mind, than the Mécanique Céleste?[*] Does
he mean that a learner can appreciate Æschylus or Sophocles before he is
old enough to understand Euclid or Lacroix? In nations, again, the
assertion, that imagination, in any but the vulgarest sense of the word,
attains maturity sooner than reason, is so far from being pcorrectp,
that throughout all history the two have invariably flourished together;
have, and necessarily must. Does Mr. Sedgwick think that any great work
of imagination ever was, or can be, produced, without great powers of
reason? Be the country Greece or Rome, Italy, France, or England, the
age of her greatest eminence in poetry and the fine arts hasq been that
of her greatest statesmen, generals, orators, historians, navigators—in
one word, thinkers, in every department of active life; not, indeed, of
her greatest philosophers, but only because Philosophy is the tardiest
product of Reason itself.*

rOf the true reasons, and there are most substantial and cogent ones,
for Edition: current; Page: [43] assigning to classical studies a high
place in general educationr, we find not a word in Mr. Sedgwick’s tract;
but, instead of them, much harping on the value of the writings of
antiquity as “patterns” and “models.” This is lauding the abuse of
classical knowledge as the use; and is a very bad lesson to sthe
“youngers members” of the University. The study of the ancient writers
has been of unspeakable benefit to the moderns; from which benefit, the
attempts at direct imitation of those writers have been no trifling
drawback. The necessary effect of imitating “models” is, to set manner
above matter. The imitation of the classics has perverted the whole
taste of modern Europe on the subject of composition: it has made style
a subject of cultivation and of praise, independently of ideas; whereas,
by the ancients, style was never thought of but in complete
subordination to matter. The ancients t(in the good times of their
literature)t would as soon have thought of a coat in the abstract, as of
style in the abstract: the merit of a style, in their eyes, was, that it
exactly fitted the thought. Their first aim was, by the assiduous study
of their subject, to secure to themselves thoughts worth expressing;
their next was, to find words which would convey those thoughts with the
utmost degree of nicety; and only when this was made sure, did they
think of ornament. Their style, therefore, whether ornamented or plain,
grows out of their turn of thought; and may be admired, but cannot be
imitated, by any one Edition: current; Page: [44] whose turn of thought
is different. The instruction which Professor Sedgwick should have given
to his pupils, was to follow no models; to attempt no style, but let
their thoughts shape out the style best suited to them; to resemble the
ancients, not by copying their manner, but by understanding their own
subject as well, cultivating their faculties as highly, and taking as
much trouble with their work, as the ancients did. All imitation of an
author’s style, except that which arises from making his thoughts uouru
own, is mere affectation and vicious mannerism.

In discussing the value of the ancient languages, Mr. Sedgwick touches
upon the importance of ancient history. On this topic, on which so much,
and of the most interesting kind, might have been said, he delivers
nothing but questionable commonplaces. “History,” says he, “is, to our
knowledge of man in his social capacity, what physical experiments are
to our knowledge of the laws of nature” (p. 42). Common as this notion
is, it is a strange one to be held by a professor of physical science;
for assuredly no person is satisfied with such evidence in studying the
laws of the natural world, as history affords with respect to the laws
of political society. The evidence of history, instead of being
analogous to that of experiment, leaves the philosophy of society in
exactly the state in which physical science was, before the method of
experiment was introduced. The Professor should reflect, that we cannot
make experiments in history. We are obliged, therefore, as the ancients
did in physics, to content ourselves with such experiments as we find
made to our hands; and these are so few, and so complicated, that little
or nothing can be inferred from them.v There is not a fact in history
which is not susceptible of as many different explanations as there are
possible theories of human affairs.w Not only is history not the
xsourcex of political philosophy, but the profoundest political
philosophy is requisite to explain history; without it all in history
which is worth understanding remains mysterious. Can Mr. Sedgwicky
explain why the Greeks, in their brief career, so far surpassed their
zcotemporariesz, or why the Romans conquered the world? aMr. Sedgwick
Edition: current; Page: [45] mistakes the functions of history in
political speculation. History is not the foundation, but the
verification, of the social science; it corroborates, and often
suggests, political truths, but cannot prove them. The proof of them is
drawn from the laws of human nature; ascertaineda through the study of
ourselves by reflection, and of mankind by actual intercourse with them.
That what we know of former ages, like what we know of foreign nations,
is, with all its bimperfectionsb, of much use, by correcting the
narrowness incident to personal experience, cis undeniablec; but the
usefulness of history depends upon its being kept in the second place.

The Professor dseemsd wholly unaware of the importance of accuracy,
either in thought or in expression. “In ancient history,” says he (p.
42), “we can trace the fortunes of mankind under almost every condition
of political and social life.” So far is this from being true, that
ancient history does not so much as furnish an example of a civilized
people in which the bulk of the inhabitants were not slaves. Again, “all
the successive actions we contemplate are at such a distance from us,
that we can see their true bearings on each other undistorted by that
mist of prejudice with which every modern political question is
surrounded.” We appeal to all who are conversant with the modern
writings on ancient history, whether even this is true. The most
elaborate Grecian history which we possess* is impregnated with the
anti-Jacobin spirit in every line; and the Quarterly Reviewe laboured as
diligently for many years to vilify the Athenian republic as the
American.

Thus far, the faults which we have discovered in Mr. Sedgwick aref of
omission rather than of commission: or at worst, amount only to this,
that he has gcontented himself with repeatingg the trivialities he found
currenth. Had there been nothing ibut thisi to be said of the remainder
of the Discourse, we should not have disturbed its peaceful progress to
oblivion.

We have now, however, arrived at the opening of that part of Professor
Sedgwick’s Discourse which is most laboured, and for the sake of which
all the rest may be surmised to have been written,—his strictures on
Locke’s Essay on the Human Understanding, and Paley’s Principles of
Moral Philosophy. These works comprise what little of ethical and
metaphysical instruction is given, or professed to be given, at
Cambridge. The remainder of Mr. Sedgwick’s Discourse is devoted to an
attack upon them.

Edition: current; Page: [46]
We assuredly have no thought of defending either work as a text-book,
still less as the sole text-book, on their respective subjects, in any
school of philosophy. Of Paley’s work, though it possesses in a high
degree some minor merits, we think, on the whole, meanly. Of Locke’s
Essay, the beginning and foundation of the modern analytical psychology,
we cannot speak but with the deepest reverence; whether we consider the
era which it constitutes in philosophy, the intrinsic value, even at the
present day, of its thoughts, or the noble devotion to truth, the
beautiful and touching earnestness and simplicity, which he not only
manifests in himself, but has the power beyond almost all other
philosophical writers of infusing into his reader. His Essay should be
familiar to every student. But no work, a hundred and fifty years old,
can be fit to be the sole, or even the principal work for the
instruction of youth in a science like that of Mind. In metaphysics,
every new truth sets aside or modifies much of what was previously
received as truth.j Berkeley’s refutation of the doctrine of abstract
ideas would of itself necessitate a complete revision of the phraseology
of the most valuable parts of Locke’s book. And the important
speculations originated by Hume and kimprovedk by Brown, concerning the
nature of our experience, are acknowledged, even by the philosophers who
do not adopt in their full extent the conclusions of those writers, to
have carriedl the analysis of our knowledge and of the process of
acquiring it, so much beyond the point where Locke left it, as to
require that his work should be entirely recast.

Moreover, the book which has changed the face of a science, even when
not superseded in its doctrines, is seldom suitable for didactic
purposes. It is adapted to the state of mind, not of those who are
ignorant of every doctrine, but of those who are instructed in an
erroneous doctrine. So far as it is taken up mwithm directly combating
the errors which prevailed before it was written, the more completely it
has done its work, the more certain it is of becoming superfluous, not
to say unintelligible, without a commentary. And even its positive
truths are defended against such objections only as were current in its
own times, and guarded only against such misunderstandings as the people
of those times were likely to fall into. Questions of morals and
metaphysics differ from physical questions in this, that their aspect
changes with every change ninn the human mind. At no two periods is the
same question embarrassed by the same difficulties, or the same truth in
need of the same explanatory comment. The fallacy which is
satisfactorily refuted in one age, re-appears in another, in a shape
which the arguments formerly used do not precisely meet; and seems to
triumph, until some one, with weapons suitable to the altered form of
the error, arises and repeats its overthrow.

These remarks are peculiarly applicable to Locke’s Essay. His doctrines
Edition: current; Page: [47] were new, and had to make their way: he
therefore wrote not for learners, but for the learned; for omeno who
were trained in the systems pantecedentp to his—qin thoseq of the
Schoolmen or of the Cartesians. He said what he thought necessary to
establish his own opinions, andr answered the objections of such
objectors as the age afforded; but he could not anticipate all the
objections which might be made by a subsequent age: least of all could
he anticipate those which would be made now, when his philosophy has
long been the prevalent one; when the arguments of objectors have been
rendered as far as possible consistent with his principles, and are
often such as could not have been thought of until he had cleared the
ground by demolishing some received opinion, which no one before him had
thought of disputing.*

To attack Locke, therefore, because other arguments than it was
necessary Edition: current; Page: [48] for him to use have become
requisite to the support of some of his conclusions, is like reproaching
the Evangelists because they did not write Evidences of Christianity.
The question is, not what Locke has said, but what would he have said if
he had heard all that has since been said against him? sUnreasonables,
however, as is a criticism on Locke conceived in this spirit, Mr.
Sedgwick indulges in another strain of criticism even more
tunreasonablet.

The “greatest fault,” he says, of Locke’s Essay, “is the contracted view
it takes of the capacities of man—allowing him, indeed, the faculty of
reflecting, and following out trains of thought according to the rules
of abstract reasoning; but depriving him both of his powers of
imagination and of his moral sense” (p. 57). Several pages are thereupon
employed in celebrating “the imaginative powers.” And a metaphysician
who “discards these powers from his system” (which, according to Mr.
Sedgwick, Locke does), is accused of “shutting his eyes to the loftiest
qualities of the soul” (p. 49).

Has the Professor so far forgotten the book which he must have read
once, and on which he passes judgment with so much authority, as to
fancy that it claims to be a treatise on all “the capacities of man?”
uCan heu write in the manner we have just quoted about Locke’s book,
with the fact looking him in the face from his own pages, that it is
entitled An Essay on the Human Understanding? Who besides Mr. Sedgwick
would look for a treatise on the imagination under such a title? What
place, what concern could it have had there?

The one object of Locke’s speculations was to ascertain the limits of
our knowledge; what questions we may hope to solve, what are beyond our
reach. This purpose is vannouncedv in the Preface, and manifested in
every chapter of the book. He wdeclaresw that he commenced his inquiries
because “in discoursing on a subject very remote from this,” it came
into his thoughts that “before we set ourselves upon inquiries of that
nature, it was necessary to examine our own abilities, and see what
objects our understandings were, or were not, fitted to deal with.”* The
following, from the first chapter of the first book, are a few of the
passages in which he describes the scope of his speculations:—

“To inquire into the original, certainty, and extent of human knowledge,
Edition: current; Page: [49] together with the grounds and degrees of
belief, opinion, and assent.” “To consider the discerning faculties of
man, as they are employed about the objects which they have to do with.”
“To give an account of the ways whereby our understandings come to
attain those notions of things we have,” and “set down” some “measures
of the certainty of our knowledge, or the grounds of those persuasions
which are to be found amongst men.” “To search out the bounds between
opinion and knowledge, and to examine by what measures, in things
whereof we have no certain knowledge, we ought to regulate our assent,
and moderate our persuasions.” And “by this inquiry into the nature of
the understanding,” to “discover the powers thereof, how far they reach,
to what things they are in any degree proportionate, and where they fail
us;” and thereby to “prevail with the busy mind of man to be more
cautious in meddling with things exceeding its comprehension, to stop
when it is at the utmost extent of its tether, and to sit down in a
quiet ignorance of those things which, upon examination, are found to be
beyond the reach of our capacities.”[*]

xAnd because a philosopher, having placed before himself an undertaking
of this magnitude, and of this strictly scientific character, and having
his mind full of thoughts which were destined to effect a revolution in
the philosophy of the human intellect, does not quit his subject to
panegyrize the imagination, he is accused of saying that there is no
such thing; or of saying that it is a pernicious thing; or rather (for
to this pitch of ingenuity Mr. Sedgwick’s criticism reaches) of saying
ybothy that there is no such thing, and zalsoz that it is a pernicious
thing. He “deprives man of his powers of imagination;” he “discards
these powers from his system;” and at the same time he “speaks of those
powers only to condemn them;” he “denounces the exercise of the
imagination as a fraud upon the reason.”[†] As well might it be
asserted, that Locke denies that man has a body, or condemns the
exercise of the body, because he is not constantly proclaiming what a
beautiful and glorious thing the body is. Mr. Sedgwick cannot conceive
the state of mind of such a man as Locke, who is too entirely absorbed
in his subject to be able to turn aside from it every time that an
opportunity offers for a flight of rhetoric. With the imagination in its
own province, as a source of enjoyment, and a means of educating the
feelings, Locke had nothing to do; nor was the subject suited to the
character of his mind. He was concerned with imagination, only in the
province of pure intellect; and all he had to do with it there, was to
warn it off the ground. This Mr. Sedgwick calls “denouncing the exercise
of the imagination as a fraud upon the reason,” and “regarding men who
appeal to the powers of imagination in their proofs and mingle them in
their exhortations Edition: current; Page: [50] as no better than
downright cheats” (p. 50). Locke certainly says that imagination is not
proof. Does the Professor then mean—and by his rhapsody about the
imagination does he intend us to understand—that imagination is proof?
But how can we expect clearness of ideas on metaphysical subjects, from
a writer who cannot discriminate between the Understanding and the Will?
Locke’s Essay is on the Understanding; Mr. Sedgwick tells us, awitha
much finery bof languageb, that the imagination is a powerful engine for
acting on the will. So is a cat-o’-nine-tails. Is a cat-o’-nine-tails,
therefore, one of the sources of human knowledge? “In trying
circumstances,” says the Professor, “the determination of the will is
often more by feeling than by reason” (p. 51). In all circumstances,
trying or otherwise, the determination of the will is wholly by feeling.
Reason is not an end in itself: it teaches us to know the right ends,
and the way to them; but if we desire those ends, this desire is not
Reason, but a feeling. Hence the importance of the question, how to give
to the imagination that direction which will exercise the most
beneficial influence upon the feelings. But the Professor probably meant
that “in trying circumstances, the determination” not “of the will,” but
of the understanding, “is often more by feeling than by reason.”
Unhappily it is; this is the tendency in human nature, against which
Locke warns his readers; and by so warning them, incurs the censure of
Mr. Sedgwick.*

The other accusation which the Professor urges against Locke—that of
overlooking “the faculties of moral judgment,” and “depriving” man of
his “moral sense”[*]—will best be considered along with his strictures
on Paley’s Moral Philosophy; for against Paley, also, the principal
charge is that he denies the moral sense.

It is a fact in human nature, that we have moral judgments and moral
feelings. We judge certain actions and dispositions to be right, others
wrong: this we call approving and disapproving them. We have also
feelings of pleasure in the contemplation of the former class of actions
and dispositions—feelings of dislike and aversion to the latter; which
feelings, as everybody must be Edition: current; Page: [51] conscious,
do not exactly resemble any other of our feelings of pain or pleasure.

Such are the phenomena. Concerning their reality there is no dispute.
But there are two theories respecting the origin of these phenomena,
which have divided philosophers from the earliest ages of philosophy.
One is, that the distinction between right and wrong is an ultimate and
inexplicable fact; that we perceive this distinction, as we perceive the
distinction of colours, by a peculiar faculty; and that the pleasures
and pains, the desires and aversions, consequent upon this perception,
are all ultimate facts in our nature; as much so as the pleasures and
pains, or the desires and aversions, of which sweet or bitter tastes,
pleasing or grating sounds, are the object. This is called the theory of
the moral sense—or of moral instincts—or of eternal and immutable
morality—or of intuitive principles of morality—or by many other names;
to the differences between which, those who adopt the theory often
attach great importance, but which, for our present purpose, may all be
considered as cequivalentc.

The other theory is, that the ideas of right and wrong, and the feelings
which attach themselves to those ideas, are not ultimate facts, but may
be explained and accounted for; are not the result of any peculiar law
of our nature, but of the same laws on which all our other complex ideas
and feelings depend: that the distinction between moral and immoral acts
is not a peculiar and inscrutable property in the acts themselves, which
we perceive by a sense, as we perceive colours by our sense of sight;
but flows from the ordinary properties of those actions, for the
recognition of which we need no other faculty than our intellects and
our bodily senses. And the particular property in actions, which
constitutes them moral or immoral, in the opinion of those who hold this
theory (all of them, at least, who need dhered be noticed), is the
influence of those actions, and of the dispositions from which they
emanate, upon human happiness.

This theory is sometimes called the theory of Utility; and is what Mr.
Sedgwick means by “the utilitarian theory of morals.”[*]

Maintaining this second theory, Mr. Sedgwick calls “denying the
existence of moral feelings” (p. 32). This is, in the first place,
misstating the question. Nobody denies the existence of moral feelings.
The feelings exist, manifestly exist, ande cannot be denied. The
questions on which there is a difference are—first, whether they are
simple or complex feelings, and if complex, of what elementary feelings
they are fcomposed:f which is a question of metaphysics; and secondly,
what kind of acts and dispositions are the proper Edition: current;
Page: [52] objects of those gfeelings;g in other words, what is the
principle of hmorals.h These questions, and more peculiarly the last,
the theory which ihas been termed utilitariani professes to solve.

Paley adopted this theory. Mr. Sedgwick, who professes the other theory,
treats Paley, and all who take Paley’s side of the question, with
extreme contumely.

We shall show that Mr. Sedgwick has no right to represent Paley as a
type of the theory of utility; that he has failed in refuting even
Paley; and that the tone of jhigh moral reprobationj which he has
kassumedk towards all who adopt that theory is altogether unmerited on
their part, and on his, from his extreme ignorance of the subject,
peculiarly unbecoming.

Those who maintain that human happiness is the end and test of morality
are bound to prove that the principle is true; but not that Paley
understood it. lNo one isl entitled to found an argument against a
principle, upon the faults or blunders of a particular writer who
professed to build his system upon it, without taking notice that the
principle may be understood differently, and has in fact been understood
differently by other mwriters.m What would be thought of an assailant of
Christianity, who should judge of its truth or beneficial tendency from
the nviewn taken of it by the Jesuits, or by the Shakers? A doctrine is
not judged at all until it is judged in its obesto form. The principle
of utility may be viewed in as many different lights as every other rule
or principle may. If it be liable to mischievous misinterpretations,
this is true of all very general, and therefore of all first,
principles. Whether the ethical creed of a follower of utility will lead
him to moral or immoral consequences, depends on what he thinks
useful;—just as, with a partizan of the opposite doctrine—that of
pinnatep conscience—it depends on what he thinks his conscience enjoins.
But either the one theory or the other must be true. Instead, therefore,
of cavilling about the abuses and perversions of either, real manliness
would consist in accepting the true, with all its liabilities to abuse
and perversion; and then bending the whole force of our intellects to
the establishment of such secondary and intermediate maxims, as may be
guides to the bonâ fide inquirer in the application of the principle,
and salutary checks to the sophist and the dishonest casuist.

There are faults in Paley’s conception of the philosophy of morals, both
in its foundations and its subsequent stages, which prevent his book
from being an example of the conclusions justly deducible from the
doctrine of Edition: current; Page: [53] utility, or of the influences
of that doctrine, when properly understood, upon the intellect and
character.

In the first place, he does not consider utility as itself the source of
moral obligation, but as a mere index to the will of God, which he
regards as the ultimate groundwork of all morality, and the origin of
its binding force. This doctrine (not that utility is an index to the
will of God, but that it is an index and nothing else) we consider as
highly exceptionable; and having really many of those bad effects on the
mind, erroneously ascribed to the principle of utility.

The only view of the connexion between religion and morality which does
not annihilate the very idea of the latter, is that which considers the
Deity as not qmaking, but recognising and sanctioningq, moral
obligation. In the minds of most English rthinkersr down to the middle
of the last century, the idea of duty, and that of obedience to God,
were so indissolubly united, as to be inseparable even in thought: and
when we consider how in those days religious motives and ideas stood in
the front of all speculations, it is not wonderful that religion should
have been thought to constitute the sessences of all obligations to
which it annexed its tsanctiont. To have inquired, Why am I bound to
obey God’s will? would, to a Christian of that age, have appeared
irreverent. It is a question, however, which, as much as any other,
requires an answer from a Christian philosopher. “Because he is my
Maker” is no answer. Why should I obey my Maker? From gratitude? Then
gratitude is in itself obligatory, independently of my Maker’s will.
From reverence and love? But why is he a proper object of love and
reverence? Not because he is my Maker. If I had been made by an evil
spirit, for evil purposes, my love and reverence (supposing me to be
capable of such feelings) would have been due, not to the evil, but to
the good Being. Is it because he is just, righteous, merciful? Then
these attributes are in themselves good, independently of his pleasure.
If any person has the misfortune to believe that his Creator commands
wickedness, more respect is due to him for disobeying such imaginary
commands, than for obeying them. If virtue would not be virtue unless
the Creatoru commanded it—if it derive all its obligatory force from his
will—there remains no ground for obeying him except his power; no motive
for morality except the selfish one of the hope of heaven, or the
selfish and slavish one of the fear of hell.

Accordingly, in strict consistency with this view of the nature of
morality, Paley not only represents the proposition that we ought to do
good and not harm to mankind, as a mere corollary from the proposition
that God wills their good, and not their harm—but represents the motive
to virtue, and the Edition: current; Page: [54] motive which constitutes
it virtue, as consisting solely in the hope of heaven and the fear of
hell.

It does not, however, follow that Paley believed mankind to have no
feelings except selfish ones. He doubtless would have admitted that they
are acted upon by other motives, or, in the language of Bentham and
Helvetius, that they have other interests, than merely self-regarding
ones. But he chose to say that actions done from those other motives are
not virtuous. The happiness of mankind, according to him, was the end
for which morality was enjoined; yet he would not admit anything to be
morality, when the happiness of mankind, or of any of mankind except
ourselves, is the inducement of it. He annexed an arbitrary meaning to
the word virtue. How he came to think this arbitrary meaning the right
one may be a question. vPartly, perhaps,v by the habit of thinking and
talking of morality under the metaphor of a law. In the notion of a law,
the idea of the command of a superior, enforced by penalties, is of
course the main element.

If Paley’s ethical system is thus unsound in its foundations, the spirit
which runs through the details is no less exceptionable. It is, indeed,
such as to prove, that neither the character nor the objects of the
writer were those of a philosopher. There is none of the single-minded
earnestness for truth, whatever it may be—the intrepid defiance of
prejudice, the firm resolve to look all consequences in the face, which
the word philosopher supposes, and without which nothing worthy of note
was ever accomplished in moral or political philosophy. One sees
throughout that he has a particular set of conclusions to come to, and
will not, perhaps cannot, allow himself to let in any premises which
would interfere with them. His bookw is one of a class which has since
become very numerous, and is likely to become still more so—an apology
for commonplace. Not to lay a solid foundation, and erect an edifice
over it suited to the professed ends, but to construct pillars, and
insert them xunderx the existing structure, was Paley’s object. He took
the doctrines of practical morals which he found current. Mankind were,
about that time, ceasing to consider mere use and wont, or even the
ordinary special pleading from texts of scripture, as sufficient
warrants for ythosey common opinions, and were demanding something like
a philosophic basis for them. This philosophic basis, Paley, consciously
or unconsciously, made it his endeavour to supply. The skill with which
his book was adapted to satisfy this want of the time, accounts for the
popularity which attended it, notwithstanding the absence of that
generous and inspiring tone, which gives so much of their usefulness as
well as of their charm to the writings of Plato, and Locke, and Fenelon,
and which mankind are accustomed to pretend to admire, whether they
really respond to it or not.

Edition: current; Page: [55]
When an author starts with such an object, it is of little consequence
whatz premises he sets out from. In adopting the principle of utility,
Paley, athere isa no doubt, followed the convictions of his bintellectb;
but if he had started from any other principle, we have as little doubt
that he would have arrived at the very same conclusions. These
conclusions, namely, the received maxims of his time, were (it would
have been strange if they were not) accordant in manyc points with those
which philosophy would have dictated. But had they been accordant on all
points, that was not the way in which a philosopher would have dealt
with them.

The only deviation from commonplace which hasd been made an accusation
(for all departures from commonplace are made accusations) against
Paley’s moral system, is that of too readily allowing exceptions to
important rules; and this Mr. Sedgwick does not fail to lay hold of, and
endeavour, as others have done before him, to fix eite upon the
principle of utility as fan immoral consequencef. It is, however,
imputable to the very same cause which we have already pointed out.
Along with the prevailing maxims, Paley borrowed the prevailing laxity
in their application. He had not only to maintain existing doctrines,
but to save the credit of existing practices also. He found in his
country’s morality (especiallyg its political morality), modes of
conduct universally prevalent, and applauded by all persons of station
and consideration, but which, being acknowledged violations of great
hmoral principlesh, could only be defended as cases of exception,
resting on special grounds of expediency; and the only expediency which
it was possible to ascribe to them was political expediency—that is,
conduciveness to the iinteresti of the jruling powersj. To this, and not
to the tendencies of the principle of utility, is to be ascribed the lax
morality taught by Paley, and justly objected to by Mr. Sedgwick, on the
subject of lies, of ksubscriptionk to articles, of the abuses of
influence in the British constitution, and various other topics. The
principle of utility leads to no such conclusions. Let us be permitted
to add that, if it did, we should not of late years have heard so much
in reprobation of it from all manner of persons, and from none more than
from the sworn defenders of those very malpractices.

When an inquirer knows beforehand the conclusions which he is to come
to, he is not likely to seek far for grounds to rest them upon.
Accordingly, the considerations of expediency upon which Paley founds
his moral rules, are almost all of the most obvious and vulgar kind. In
estimating the consequences of actions, in order to obtain a measure of
their morality, there are Edition: current; Page: [56] always two sets
of considerations involved: the consequences to the outward interests of
the parties concerned (including the agent himself); and the
consequences to the characters of the same persons, and to their outward
interests so far as dependent on their characters. In the estimation of
the first of these two classes of considerations, there is in general
not much difficulty, nor much room for difference of opinion. The
actions which are directly hurtful, or directly useful, to the outward
interests of oneself or of other people, are easily distinguished,
sufficiently at least for the guidance of a private individual. The
rights of individuals, which other individuals ought to respect, over
external things, are lin generall sufficiently pointed out by a few
plain rules, and by the laws of one’s country. But it often happens that
an essential part of the morality or immorality of an action or a rule
of action consists in its influence upon the agent’s own mind: upon his
susceptibilities of pleasure or pain, upon the general direction of his
thoughts, feelings, and imagination, or upon some particular
association. Many actions, moreover, produce effects upon the character
of other persons besides the agent. In all these cases there will
naturally be as much difference in the moral judgments of different
persons, as there is in their views of human nature, and of the
formation of character. Clear and comprehensive views of education and
human culture must therefore precede, and form the basis of, a
philosophy of morals; nor can the latter subject ever be understood, but
in proportion as the former is so. For this, much yet remains to be
done. Even the materials, though abundant, are not complete. Of those
which exist, a large proportion have never yet found their way into the
writings of philosophers; but are to be gathered, on the one hand, from
actual observers of mankind; on the other, from those autobiographers,
and from those poets or novelists, who have spoken out unreservedly,
from their own experience, any true human feeling. To collect together
these materials, and to add to them, will be a labour for successive
generations. But Paley, instead of having brought from the philosophy of
education and character any new light to illuminate the subject of
morals, has not even availed himself of the lights which had already
been thrown upon it from that source. He, in fact, had meditated little
on this branch of the subject, and had no ideas in relation to it, but
the commonest and most superficial.m

Thus much we have been induced to say, rather from the importance of the
subject, than for the sake of a just estimate of Paley, which is a
matter of Edition: current; Page: [57] inferior consequence; still less
for the nsake of repelling Mr. Sedgwick’s onslaught, whichn, as we shall
soon see, might have been more summarily disposed of.

Mr. Sedgwick’s objections to the principle of utility are of two
kinds—first, that it is not true; secondly, that it is dangerous,
degrading, and so forth. What he says against its truth, when picked out
from a hundred different places, and brought together, would fill about
three pages, leaving about twenty consisting of attacks upon its
tendency. This already lookso ill; for, after all, the truth or
falsehood of the principle is the main point. When, of a dissertation on
any controverted question, a small part only is employed in proving the
author’s own opinion, a large part in ascribing odious consequences to
the opposite opinion, we are apt to think peitherp that, on the former
point, there was not very much to be saidq; or, if there was, that the
author is not very well qualified to say itq. One thing is certain; that
if an opinion have ever such mischievous consequences, that cannot
prevent any thinking person from believing it, if the evidence is in its
favour. Unthinking persons, indeed, if they are very solemnly assured
that an opinion has mischievous consequences, may be frightened from
examining the evidence. When, therefore, we find that this mode of
dealing with an opinion is the favourite one—is resorted to in
preference to the other, and with greater vehemence, and at greater
length—we conclude that it is upon unthinking rather than upon thinking
persons that the author calculates upon making an impression; or else,
that he himself is one of the former class of persons—that his own
judgment is determined, less by evidence presented to his understanding,
than by the repugnancy of the opposite opinion to his partialities and
affections; and that, perceiving clearly the opinion to be one which it
would be painful to him to adopt, he has been easily satisfied with
reasons for rejecting it.

All that the Professor says to disprove the principle of utility, and to
prove the existence of a moral sense, is found in the following
paragraph:—

Let it not be said that our moral sentiments are superinduced by seeing
and tracing the consequences of crime. The assertion is not true. The
early sense of shame comes before such trains of thought, and is not,
therefore, caused by them; and millions, in all ages of the world, have
grown up as social beings and moral agents, amenable to the laws of God
and man, who never traced or thought of tracing the consequences of
their actions, nor ever referred them to any standard of utility. Nor
let it be said that the moral sense comes of mere teaching—that right
and wrong pass as mere words, first from the lips of the mother to the
child, and then from man to man; and that we grow up with moral
judgments gradually ingrafted in us from without, by the long-heard
lessons of praise and blame, by Edition: current; Page: [58] the
experience of fitness, or the sanction of the law. I repeat that the
statement is not true—that our moral perceptions show themselves not in
any such order as this. The question is one of feeling; and the moral
feelings are often strongest in very early life, before moral rules or
legal sanctions have once been thought of. Again, what are we to
understand by teaching? Teaching implies capacity: one can be of no use
without the other. A faculty of the soul may be called forth, brought to
light, and matured; but cannot be created, any more than we can create a
new particle of matter, or invent a new law of nature.

(Pp. 52-3.)

The substance of the last three sentences is repeated at somewhat
greater length shortly after (pp. 54-5), in a passage from which we
rneedr only quote the following words:—“No training (however greatly it
may change an individual mind) can create a new faculty, any more than
it can give a new organ of sense.” In many other parts of the Discourse,
the same arguments are alluded to, but no new ones are introduced.

Let us, then, examine these arguments.

First, the Professor says, or seems to say, that our moral sentiments
cannot be generated by experience of consequences, because a child feels
the sense of shame before he has any experience of consequences; and
likewise because millions of persons grow up, have moral feelings, and
live morally, “who never traced, or thought of tracing, the consequences
of their actions,” but who yet, it seems, are suffered to go at large,
which we thought was not usually the case with persons who never think
of the consequences of their actions. The Professor continues—“who never
traced, or thought of tracing, the consequences of their actions, nor
ever referred them to any standard of utility.”

Secondly;s that our moral feelings cannot arise from teaching, because
those feelings are often strongest in very early life.

Thirdly; that our moral feelings cannot arise from teaching, because
teaching can only call forth a faculty, but cannot create one.

Let us first consider the singular allegation, that the sense of shame
in a child precedes all experience of the consequences of actions. Is it
not astounding that such an assertion should be ventured upon by any
person of sane mind? At what period in a child’s life, after it is
capable of forming the idea of an action at all, can it be without
experience of the consequences of actions? As soon as it has the idea of
one person striking another, is it not aware that striking produces
pain? As soon as it has the idea of being commanded by its parent, has
it not the notion that, by not doing what is commanded, it will excite
the parent’s displeasure?t A child’s knowledge of the simple fact (one
of the earliest he becomes acquainted with), that some acts Edition:
current; Page: [59] produce pain and others pleasure, is called by
pompous names, “seeing and tracing the consequences of crime,” “trains
of thought,” “referring actions to a standard,” terms which imply
continued reflection and large abstractions; and because these terms are
absurd when used of a child or an uneducated person, we are to conclude
that a child or an uneducated person has no notion that one thing is
caused by another. As well might it be said that a child requires an
instinct to tell him that he has ten fingers, because he knows it before
he has ever thought of “ucarrying onu arithmetical computations.”[*]
Though a child is not a jurist or a moral philosopher (to whom alone the
Professor’s phrases would be properly applicable), he has the idea of
himself hurting or offending some one, or of some one hurting or
annoying him. These are ideas which precede any sense of shame in doing
wrong; and it is out of these elements, and not out of abstractions,
that the supporters of the theory of utility contend that the idea of
wrong, and our feelings of disapprobation vofv it, are originally
formed. Mr. Sedgwick’s argument resembles one we often hear, that the
principle of utility must be false, because it supposes morality to be
founded on the good of society, an idea too complex for the majority of
mankind, who look only to the particular persons concerned. Why, none
but those who mingle in public transactions, or whose example is likely
to have extensive influence, have any occasion to look beyond the
particular persons concerned. Morality, for all other people, consists
in doing good and refraining from harm, to themselves and to those who
immediately surround them. As soon as a child has the idea of
voluntarily producing pleasure or pain to any one person, he has an
accurate notion of utility. When he afterwards gradually rises to the
very complex idea of “society,” and learns in what manner his actions
may affect the interests of other persons than those who are present to
his sight, his conceptions of utility, and of right and wrong founded on
utility, undergo a corresponding enlargement, but receive no new
element.

Again, if it were ever to true that the sense of shame in a child
precedes all knowledge of consequences, what is that to the question
respecting a moral sense? wIs the sense of shame the same thingw with a
moral sense? A child is ashamed of doing what he is told is wrong; but
so is he also ashamed of doing what he knows is right, if he expects to
be laughed at for doing it; he is ashamed of being duller than another
child, of being ugly, of being poor, of not having fine clothes, of not
being able to run, or wrestle, or box so well as another. He is ashamed
of whatever causes him to be thought less of by the persons who surround
him. This feeling of shame is accounted for by Edition: current; Page:
[60] obvious associations; but suppose it to be innate, what would that
prove in favour of a moral sense? If all that Mr. Sedgwick can show for
a moral sense is the sense of shame, xit might well be supposedx that
all our moral sentiments are the result of opinions which come to us
from without; since the sense of shame so obviously follows the opinion
of others, and, at least iny early years, is wholly determined by it.

On the Professor’s first argument no more needs zherez be said. His
second is the following: that moral feelings cannot “come of mere
teaching,” because they do not grow up gradually, but are often
strongest in very early life.

Now, this is, in the first place, a mistaking of the matter in dispute.
aThe Professor is not arguing with Mandeville, or with the rhetoricians
in Plato.a Nobodyb, with whom he is concerned,b says that moral feelings
“come of mere teaching.” It is not pretended that they are factitious
and artificial associations, inculcated by parents and teachers
purposely to further certain social ends, and no more congenial to our
natural feelings than the contrary associations. The idea of the pain of
another is naturally painful; the idea of the pleasure of another is
naturally pleasurable. From this cfactc in our natural constitution,d
all our affections both of love and aversion towards human beings, in so
far as they are different from those wee entertain towards mere
inanimate objects which are pleasant or disagreeable to usf, are held,
by the best teachers of the theory of utility, to originatef. In this,
the unselfish part of our nature, lies a foundation, even independently
of inculcation from without, for the generation of moral feelings.

But if, because it is not inconsistent with the constitution of our
nature that moral feelings should grow up independently of teaching, Mr.
Sedgwick would infer that they generally do so, or that teaching is not
the source of almost all the moral feeling which exists in the world,
his assertion is a piece of sentimentality completely at variance with
the facts. If by saying that “moral feelings are often strongest in very
early life,” Mr. Sedgwick means that they are strongest in children, he
only proves hisg ignorance of children. Young children have affections,
but hnoth moral feelings; and children whose will is never resisted,
never acquire them. There is no selfishness equal to ithati of children,
as every one who is acquainted with children well knows. It is notj the
hard, cold selfishness of a grown person, for the most affectionate
children have itk, where their affection is not supplying a
counter-impulsek; Edition: current; Page: [61] but the most selfish of
grown persons does not come up to a child in the reckless seizing of any
pleasure to himself, regardless of the consequences to others. The pains
of others, though naturally painful to us, are not so until we have
realized them by an act of imagination, implying voluntary attention;
and that no lvery youngl child ever pays, while under the impulse of a
present desire. If a child restrains the indulgence of any wish, it is
either from affection or sympathy, which are quite other feelings than
those of morality; or else (whatever Mr. Sedgwick may think) because he
has been mtaughtm to do so. And he only learns the habit gradually, and
in proportion to the assiduity and skill of the teaching.

The assertion that “moral feelings are often strongest in very early
life,” is true in no sense but one which confirms what it is brought to
refute. The time of life at which moral feelings are apt to be
strongest, is the age when we cease to be merely members of our own
families, and begin to have intercourse with the world; that is, when
the teaching has continued longest in one direction, and has not
commenced in any other direction. When we go forth into the world, and
meet with teaching, both by precept and example, of an opposite tendency
to that which we have been used to, the feeling begins to weaken. Is
this a sign of its being wholly independent of teaching? Has a boy
quietly educated in na well-regulated homen, or one who has been at a
public school, the strongest moral feelings?

oEnough has probably been saido on the Professor’s second argument. pHis
thirdp is, that teaching may strengthen our natural faculties, and call
forth those which are powerless because untried; but cannot create a
faculty which does not exist; cannot, therefore, have created the moral
faculty.

It is surprising that Mr. Sedgwick should not see that his argument begs
the question in dispute. To prove that our moral judgments are innate,
he assumes that they proceed from a distinct faculty. But this is
precisely what the adherents of the principle of utility deny. They
contend that the morality of actions is perceived by the same faculties
by which we perceive any other of the qualities of actions, namely, our
intellects and our senses. They qholdq the capacity of perceiving moral
distinctions rto ber no more a sdistincts faculty than the capacity of
trying causes, or of making a speech to a jury. This last is a very
peculiar power, yet no one says that it must have preexisted in Sir
James Scarlett before he was called to the bar, because teaching and
practice cannot create a new faculty. They can create a new power; and a
faculty is but a finer name for a power. tMr. Sedgwick loses sight of
the very Edition: current; Page: [62] meaning of the word
faculty—facultas. He talks of a faculty “powerless because untried.”[*]
A power powerless!t*

The only colour for representing our moral judgments as the result of a
peculiar part of our nature, is that our feelings of moral approbation
and disapprobation are really peculiar feelings. But is it not notorious
that peculiar feelings, unlike any others which we have experience of,
are created by association every day? What does the Professor think of
the feelings of ambition; the desire of power over our fellow-creatures,
and the pleasure of its possession and exercise? These are peculiar
feelings. But they are obviously generated by the law of association,
from the connexion between power over our fellow-creatures and the
gratification of almost all our other inclinations. What will the
Professor say of the chivalrous point of honour? What of the feelings of
envy and jealousy? What of the feelings of utheu miser to his gold? Who
ever looked upon these last as the subject of a distinct natural
faculty? Their origin in association is obvious to all the world. Yet
they are feelings as peculiar, as unlike any other part of our nature,
as the feelings of conscience.

It will hardly be believed that what we have now answered is all that
Mr. Sedgwick advances, to prove the principle of utility untrue; yet
such is the fact. Let us now see whether he is more successful in
proving the pernicious consequences of the principle, and the “degrading
effect” which it produces “on the temper and conduct of those who adopt
it.”[†]

The Professor’s talk is more indefinite, and the few ideas he has are
more overlaid with declamatory phrases, on this point, than even on the
preceding one. We can, however,v descry through the mist some faint
semblance of two tangible objections: one, that the principle of utility
is not suited to man’s capacity—that if we were ever so desirous of
applying it correctly, we should not be capable; the other, that it
debases the moral practice of those who Edition: current; Page: [63]
adopt it—which seems to imply (strange as the assertion is) that wthew
adoption of it as a principle xis not consistent with an attemptx to
apply it correctly.

We must quote Mr. Sedgwick’s very words, or it would hardly be believed
that we quote him fairly:—

Independently of the bad effects produced on the moral character of man,
by a system which makes expediency (in whatever sense the word be used)
the test of right and wrong, we may affirm, on a more general view, that
the rule itself is utterly unfitted to his capacity. Feeble as man may
be, he forms a link in a chain of moral causes, ascending to the throne
of God; and trifling as his individual acts may seem, he tries in vain
to follow out their consequences as they go down into the countless ages
of coming time. Viewed in this light, every act of man is woven into a
moral system, ascending through the past—descending to the future—and
preconceived in the mind of the Almighty. Nor does this notion, as far
as regards ourselves, end in mere quietism and necessity. For we know
right from wrong, and have that liberty of action which implies
responsibility; and, as far as we are allowed to look into the ways of
Providence, it seems compatible with his attributes to use the voluntary
acts of created beings, as second causes in working out the ends of his
own will. Leaving, however, out of question that stumbling-block which
the prescience of God has often thrown in the way of feeble and doubting
minds, we are, at least, certain, that man has not foreknowledge to
trace the consequences of a single action of his own; and hence that
utility (in the highest sense of which the word is capable) is, as a
test of right and wrong, unfitted to his understanding, and therefore
worthless in its application. (Pp.

63-4.)

Mr. Sedgwick appears to be one of that numerous class who never take the
trouble to set before themselves fairly yany opinion which they have an
aversion to. Who ever said that it was necessary to foresee all the
consequences of each individual action, “as they go down into the
countless ages of coming time?” Some of the consequences of an action
are accidental; others are its natural result, according to the known
laws of the universe. The former, for the most part, cannot be foreseen;
but the whole course of human life is founded upon the fact that the
latter can. In what reliance do we ply our several trades—in what
reliance do we buy or sell, eat or drink, write books or read them,
walk, ride, speak, think, except on our foresight of the consequences of
those actions? The commonest person lives according to maxims of
prudence wholly founded on foresight of consequences; and we are told by
a wise man from Cambridge, that the foresight of consequences, as a rule
to guide ourselves by, is impossible! Our foresight of consequences is
not perfect. Is anything else in our constitution perfect? Est quodam
prodire tenus, si non datur ultra: Non possis oculo quantum contendere
Lynceus; Non tamen idcirco contemnas lippus Edition: current; Page: [64]
inungi.[*] If the Professor quarrels with such means of guiding our
conduct as zwe are gifted withz, it is incumbent on him to show that, in
point of fact, awe have been provideda with better. Does the moral
sense, allowing its existence, point out any surer practical rules? If
so, let us have them in black and white. If nature has given us rules
which suffice for our conduct, without any consideration of the probable
consequences of our actions, produce them. But no; for two thousand
years, nature’s moral code has been a topic for declamation, and no one
has yet produced a single chapter of it: nothing but a few elementary
generalities, which are the mere alphabet of a morality founded upon
utility. Hear Bishop Butler, the oracle of the moral-sense school, and
whom our author quotes:—

However much men may have disputed about the nature of virtue, and
whatever ground for doubt there may be about particulars, yet in general
there is an universally acknowledged standard of it. It is that which
all ages and all countries have made a profession of in public; it is
that which every man you meet puts on the show of; it is that which the
primary and fundamental laws of all civil constitutions over the face of
the earth make it their business and endeavour to enforce the practice
of upon mankind: namely, justice, veracity, and regard to the common
good. (P. 130.)[†]

Mr. Sedgwick praises Butler for not being more explanatory.* Did Butler,
then, or does Mr. Sedgwick, seriously believe that mankind have not
sufficient foresight of consequences to perceive the advantage of
“justice, veracity, and regard to the common good?” That, without a
peculiar faculty, they would not be able to see that these qualities are
useful to them?

When, indeed, the question arises, what is justice?—that is, what are
those claims of others which we are bound to respect? and what is the
conduct required by “regard to the common good?” the solutions which we
can deduce from our foresight of consequences are not infallible. But
let any one try those which he can deduce from the moral sense. Can bheb
deduce any? Show us, written in the human heart, any answer to these
Edition: current; Page: [65] questions. Bishop Butler gives up the
point; and Mr. Sedgwick praises him for doing so. When Mr. Sedgwick
wants something definite, to oppose to the indefiniteness of a morality
founded on utility, he has recourse not to the moral sense, but to
Christianity. With such fairness as this does he hold the cbalancec
between the two principles: he supposes his moral-sense man provided
with all the guidance which can be derived from a revelation from
heaven, and his dutilitariand destitute of any such help. When one sees
the question so stated, one cannot wonder at any conclusion. Need we say
that Revelation, as a means of supplying the uncertainty of human
ejudgmente, is as open to one of the two parties as to the other? Need
we say that Paley, the very author who, in this Discourse, is treated as
the representative of fthe utilitarian systemf, appeals to Revelation
throughout? and gobtainsg no credit from Mr. Sedgwick for it, but the
contrary; for Revelation, it seems, may be referred to in aid of the
moral sense, but not to assist or rectify our judgments of utility.

The truth, however, is, that Revelation h(if by Revelation be meant the
New Testament)h, as Paleyi justly observed, jenters little intoj the
details of ethics. Christianity does not deliver a code of morals, any
more than a code of laws. Its practical morality is altogether
indefinite, and was meant to be so. This indefiniteness has been
considered by some of the ablest defenders of Christianity as one of its
most signal merits, and among the strongest proofs of its divine origin:
being the quality which fits it to be an universal religion, and
distinguishes it both from the Jewish dispensation, and from all other
religions, which as they invariably enjoin, under their most awful
sanctions, acts which are only locally or temporarily useful, are in
their own nature local and temporary. Christianity, on the contrary,
influences kthe conductk by shaping the character itself: it aims at so
elevating and purifying the desires, that there shall be no hindrance to
the fulfilment of our duties when recognised; but of what our duties
are, at least in regard to outward acts, it says very little but what
lmoralists in generall have said. If, therefore, we would have any
definite morality at all, we must perforce resort to that “foresight of
consequences,” of the difficulties of which the Professor has so
formidable an idea.

But this talk about uncertainty is mere exaggeration. There mwould be
greatm uncertainty if each individual had all to do for himself, and
only his own experience to guide him. But we are not so situated. Every
one directs himself in morality, as in all his conduct, not by his own
unaided Edition: current; Page: [66] foresight, but by the accumulated
wisdom of all former ages, nembodied inn traditional aphorisms. So
strong is the disposition to submit to the authority of such traditions,
and so little danger is thereo, in most conditions of mankind,o of
erring on the other side, that the absurdest customs are perpetuated
through a lapse of ages from no other cause. A hundred millions of human
beings think it the most exalted virtue to swing by a hook before an
idol, and the most dreadful pollution to drink cow-broth—only because
their forefathers thought so. A Turk thinks it the height of indecency
for women to pbe seenp in the streets unveiled; and when qhe is toldq
that in some countries rthis happensr without any evil result, he shakes
his head and says, “If you hold butter to the fire it will melt.” Did
not many generations of the most educated men in Europe believe every
line of Aristotle to be infallible? So difficult is it to break loose
from a received opinion. The progress of experience, and the growth of
the human intellect, succeed but too slowly in correcting and improving
traditional opinions. There is little fear, truly, that the mass of
mankind should insist upon “tracing the consequences of actions” by
their own unaided lights;—they are but too ready to let it be done for
them once for all, and to think they have nothing to do with rules of
morality (as sTory writerss say they have with the laws) but to obey
them.

Mr. Sedgwick is master of tthe stockt phrases of those who know nothing
of the principle of utility but the name. To act upon rules of conduct,
of which utility is recognised as the basis, he calls “waiting for the
calculations of utility”—a thing, according to him, in itself immoral,
since “to hesitate is to rebel.”[*] On the same principle, navigating by
rule instead of by instinct might be called waiting for the calculations
of astronomy. uThere seems no absolute necessity for putting off the
calculations until the shipu is in the middle of the South vSea.v
Because a sailor has not verified all the computations in the Nautical
Almanac, does he therefore “hesitate” to use it?

Thus far Mr. Sedgwick on the difficulties of the principle of utility,
when we mean to apply it honestly.w But he further charges the principle
with having a “debasing” and “degrading” effect.[†]

A word like “debasing,” applied to anything which acts upon the mind,
may mean several things. It may mean, making us unprincipled; regardless
of the rights and feelings of other people. It may mean, making us
slavish; Edition: current; Page: [67] spiritless, submissive to injury
or insult; incapable of asserting our own rights, and vindicating the
just independence of our minds and actions. It may mean, making us
cowardly; slothful; incapable of bearing pain, or nerving ourselves to
exertion for a worthy object. It may mean, making us narrow-minded;
pusillanimous, in Hobbes’s sense of the word:[*] too intent upon little
things to feel rightly about great ones: incapable of having our
imagination fired by a grand object of contemplation; incapable of
thinking, feeling, aspiring, or acting, on any but a small scale. An
opinion which produced any of these effects upon the mind would be
rightly called debasing. But when, without proving, or even in plain
terms asserting, that it produces these effects, or any effects which he
can make distinctly understood, a man merely says of an opinion that it
is debasing,—all he really says is, that he has a xfeeling, which he
cannot exactly describe, but upon which he values himself, and to which
the opinion is in some way or other offensivex. What definite
proposition concerning the effect of any doctrine on the mind can be
extracted from such a passage as this?—

If expediency be the measure of right, and every one claim the liberty
of judgment, virtue and vice have no longer any fixed relations to the
moral condition of man, but change with the fluctuations of opinion. Not
only are his actions tainted by prejudice and passion, but his rule of
life, under this system, must be tainted in like degree—must be brought
down to yitsy own level: for he will no longer be able, compatibly with
his principles, to separate the rule from its application. No high and
unvarying standard of morality, which his heart approves, however infirm
his practice, will be offered to his thoughts. But his bad passions will
continue to do their work in bending him to the earth; and unless he be
held upright by the strong power of religion (an extrinsic power which I
am not now considering), he will inevitably be carried down, by a
degrading standard of action, to a sordid and grovelling life. It may
perhaps be said, that we are arguing against a rule, only from its
misapprehension and abuse. But we reply, that every precept is
practically bad when its abuse is natural and inevitable—that the system
of utility brings down virtue from a heavenly throne, and places her on
an earthly tribunal, where her decisions, no longer supported by any
holy sanction, are distorted by judicial ignorance, and tainted by base
passion.

(P. 63.)

What does this tell us? First, that if utility be the standard,
different persons may have different opinions on morality. This is the
talk about uncertainty, which zhas beenz already disposed of. Next,a
that where there is uncertainty, men’s passions will bias their
judgment. Granted; this is one of the evils of our condition, and must
be borne with. We do not diminish it by pretending that nature tells us
what is right, when nobody ever ventures to set down what Edition:
current; Page: [68] nature tells us, nor affects to expound her laws in
any way but by an appeal to utility. All that the remainder of the
passage does, is to repeat, in various phrases, that Mr. Sedgwick feels
such a “standard of action” to be “degrading;” that Mr. Sedgwick feels
it to be “sordid” and “grovelling.” If so, nobody can compel Mr.
Sedgwick to adopt it. If he feels it debasing, no doubt it would be so
to him. But until he is able to show some reason why it must be so to
others, may we be permitted to suggest, that perhaps the cause of its
being so to himself, is only that he does not understand it?

Read this:—

Christianity considers every act grounded on mere worldly consequences
as built on a false foundation. The mainspring of every virtue is placed
by it in the affections, called into renewed strength by a feeling of
self-abasement—by gratitude for an immortal benefit—by communion with
God—and by the hopes of everlasting life. Humility is the foundation of
the Christian’s honour—distrust of self is the ground of his
strength—and his religion tells him that every work of man is counted
worthless in the sight of heaven, as the means of his pardon or the
price of his redemption. Yet it gives him a pure and perfect rule of
life; and does not for an instant exempt him from the duty of obedience
to his rule: for it ever aims at a purgation of the moral faculties, and
a renewal of the defaced image of God; and its moral precepts have an
everlasting sanction. And thus does Christian love become an efficient
and abiding principle—not tested by the world, but above the world; yet
reaching the life-spring of every virtuous deed, and producing in its
season a harvest of good and noble works incomparably more abundant than
ever rose from any other soil.

The utilitarian scheme starts, on the contrary, with an abrogation of
the authority of conscience—a rejection of the moral feelings as the
test of right and wrong. From first to last, it is in bondage to the
world, measuring every act by a worldly standard, and estimating its
value by worldly consequences. Virtue becomes a question of
calculation—a matter of profit or loss; and if man gain heaven at all on
such a system, it must be by arithmetical details—the computation of his
daily work—the balance of his moral ledger. A conclusion such as this
offends against the spirit breathing in every page of the book of life;
yet is it fairly drawn from the principle of utility. It appears,
indeed, not only to have been foreseen by Paley, but to have been
accepted by him—a striking instance of the tenacity with which man ever
clings to system, and is ready to embrace even its monstrous
consequences rather than believe that he has himself been building on a
wrong foundation.

(Pp. 66-7.)

In a note, he adds,—

The following are the passages here referred to:—

‘The Christian religion hath not ascertained the precise quantity of
virtue necessary to salvation.’

‘It has been said, that it can never be a just economy of Providence to
admit one part of mankind into heaven, and condemn the other to hell;
since there must be very little to choose between the worst man who is
received into heaven, and the best who is excluded. And how know we, it
might be answered, but that there may be as little to choose in their
conditions?’ (Moral Philosophy, Bk. I, Chap. vii [London: Tegg, 1824,
29, 30].)

Edition: current; Page: [69]
In the latter years of his life, Paley would, I believe, have been
incapable of uttering or conceiving sentiments such as these.

So that a “purgation of the moral faculties” is necessary: the moral
feelings require to be corrected. Yet the moral feelings are “the test
of right and wrong;” and whoever “rejects” them as a test, must be
called hard names. But we do not want to convict Mr. Sedgwick of
inconsistency; we want to get at his meaning. Have we come to it at
last? The gravamen of the charge against the principle of utility seems
to lie in a word. Utility is a worldly standard; and estimates every act
by worldly consequences.

bLike most persons who are speaking from their feelings only, on a
subject on which they have never seriously thought, the Professor is
imposed upon by words. He is carried away by an ambiguity.b To make his
assertion about the worldliness of the standard of utility, true, it
must be understood in one sense; to make it have the invidious effect
which is intended, it must be understood in another. By “worldly,” does
he mean to cimplyc what is commonly meant when dthe word is usedd as a
reproach—an undue regard to interest in the vulgar sense, our wealth,
power, social position, and the like, our command over agreeable outward
objects, and over the opinion and good offices of other people? If so,
to call utility a worldly standard is eto misrepresent the doctrinee. It
is not true that utility estimates actions by this sort of consequences;
it estimates them by fallf their consequences. If he means that the
principle of utility regards only (to use a scholastic distinction) the
objective consequences of actions, and omits the subjective; attends to
the effects on our outward condition, and that of other people, too
much—to those on our internal sources of happiness or unhappiness, too
little; this criticism is, as we have already remarked, in some degree
applicable to Paley; but to charge this blunder upon the principle of
utility, would be to say, that if git is your rule tog judge of a thing
byh its consequences, you will judge only by ia portion of themi. Again,
if Mr. Sedgwick meant to speak of a “worldly standard” in
contradistinction to a religious standard, and to say that if we adopt
the principle of utility, we cannot admit religion as a sanction for it,
or cannot attachj importance to religious motives or feelings, the
assertion would be simply false, and a gross kinjustice even tok Paley.
What, therefore, can Mr. Sedgwick mean? lMerelyl this: that our actions
take place in the world; that Edition: current; Page: [70] their
consequences are produced in the world; that mwe have been placedm in
the world; and that there, if anywhere, we must earn a place in heaven.
The morality founded on utility allows this, certainly: does Mr.
Sedgwick’s system of morality deny it?

Mark the nconfusion of ideasn involved in this sentence: “Christianity
considers every act grounded on mere worldly consequences as built on a
false foundation.” What is saving a father from death, but saving him
from a worldly consequence? What are healing the sick, clothing the
naked, sheltering the houseless, but acts which wholly consist in
producing a worldly consequence? Confine Mr. Sedgwick to unambiguous
words, and he is already answered. What is really true is, that
Christianity considers no act as meritorious which is done from mere
worldly motives; that is, which is in no degree prompted by the desire
of our own moral perfection, or of the oapprobationo of a perfect being.
These motives, we need scarcely observe, may be equally powerful,
whatever be our standard of morality, provided we believe that the Deity
approves it.

Mr. Sedgwick is scandalized at the supposition that the place awarded to
each of us in the next world will depend on the balance of the good and
evil of our lives. According to his notions of justice, we presume, it
ought to depend wholly upon one of the two. As usual, Mr. Sedgwick
begins by a misapprehension; he neither understands Paley, nor the
conclusion which, he says, is “fairly drawn from the principles of
utility.” Paley held, with potherp Christians, that our place hereafter
would be determined by our degree of moral perfection; that is, by the
balance, not of our good and evil qdeedsq, which depend upon opportunity
and temptation, but of our good and evil rdispositionsr; by the
intensity and continuity of our will to do good; by the strength with
which we have struggled to be virtuous; not by our accidental lapses, or
by the unintended good or evil which has followed from our actions. When
Paley said that Christianity has not ascertained “the precise quantity
of virtue necessary to salvation,” he did not mean the number or kind of
beneficial actions; he meant, that Christianity has not decided what
positive strength of virtuous inclinations, and what capacity of
resisting temptations, will procure acquittal at the tribunal of God.
And most swiselys is this left undecided. Nor can there be a solution
more consistent with the attributes which Christianity ascribes to the
Deity, than Paley’s own—that every step tof advancet in uthe direction
ofu moral perfection, will be something gained towardsv everlasting
welfare.

The remainder of Mr. Sedgwick’s argument—if argument it can be called—is
Edition: current; Page: [71] a perpetual ignoratio elenchi. He lumps up
the principle of utility—which is a theory of right and wrong—with the
theory, if there be such a theory, of the universal selfishness of
mankind. We never know, for many sentences together, which of the two he
is arguing against; he never seems to know it himself. He begins a
sentence on the one, and ends it on the other. In his mind they seem to
be one and the same. Read this:—

Utilitarian philosophy and Christian ethics have in their principles and
motives no common bond of union, and ought never to have been linked
together in one system: for, palliate and disguise the difference as we
may, we shall find at last that they rest on separate foundations; one
deriving all its strength from the moral feelings, and the other from
the selfish passions of our nature.

(P. 67.)

Or this:—

If we suppress the authority of conscience, reject the moral feelings,
rid ourselves of the sentiments of honour, and sink (as men too often
do) below the influence of religion; and if, at the same time, we are
taught to think that utility is the universal test of right and wrong;
what is there left within us as an antagonist power to the craving of
passion, or the base appetite of worldly gain? In such a condition of
the soul, all motive not terminating in mere passion becomes utterly
devoid of meaning. On this system, the sinner is no longer abhorred as a
rebel against his better nature—as one who profanely mutilates the image
of God: he acts only on the principles of other men, but he blunders in
calculating the chances of his personal advantage: and thus we deprive
virtue of its holiness, and vice of its deformity; humanity of its
honour, and language of its meaning; we shut out, as no better than
madness or folly, the loftiest sentiments of the heathen as well as of
the Christian world; and all that is great or generous in our nature
droops under the influence of a cold and withering selfishness.

(Pp. 76-7.)

wEvery line of this passage convicts Mr. Sedgwick of never having taken
the trouble to know the meaning of the terms in which the doctrine he so
eagerly vilifies is conveyed.w What has “calculating the chances of
personal advantage” to do with the principle of utility? The object of
Mr. Sedgwick is, to represent that principle as leading to the
conclusion, that a vicious man is no more a subject of disapprobation
than a person who blunders in a question of prudence. If Mr. Sedgwick
did but know what the principle of utility is, he would see that it
leads to no such conclusion. Some people have been led to that
conclusion, not by the principle of utility, but xeither by the doctrine
of philosophical necessity, incorrectly understood, orx by a theory of
motives, which has been called the selfish theory; and even from that it
does not justly follow.

The finery about shutting out “lofty sentiments” scarcely deserves
notice. Edition: current; Page: [72] It resembles what yis saidy in the
next page [77] about “suppressing all the kindly emotions which minister
to virtue.” zWe are far from charging Mr. Sedgwick withz wilful
misrepresentation, but athisa is the very next thing to
it—misrepresentation in voluntary ignorance. Who proposes to suppress
bany “kindly emotion?”b Human beings, the Professor may be assured, will
always love and honour every sentiment, whether “lofty” or otherwise,
which is either directly pointed to their good, or tends to raise the
mind above the influence of the petty objects for the sake of which
mankind injure one another. The Professor is afraid that the sinner will
be “no longer abhorred.” We imagined that it was not the sinner who
should be abhorred, but sin. Mankind, however, are sufficiently ready to
abhor whatever is obviously noxious to them. A human being filled with
malevolent dispositions, or coldly indifferent to the feelings of his
fellow-creatures, will never, the Professor may assure himself, be
amiable in their eyes. Whether they will speak of him as “a rebel
against his better nature,”—“one who profanely mutilates the image of
God,” and so on, will depend upon whether they are proficients in
commonplace rhetoric. But whatever words they use, rely on it that,
while men dread and abhor a wolf or a serpent, which have no better
nature, and no image of God to mutilate, they will abhor with infinitely
greater intensity a human being who, outwardly resembling themselves, is
inwardly their enemy, and, being far more powerful than “toad or
asp,”[*] voluntarily cherishes the same cdisposition to mischiefc.

If utility be the standard, “the end,” in the Professor’s opinion, “will
be made to sanctify the means” (p. 78). We answer—just so far as in any
other system, and no dfartherd. In every system of morality, the end,
when good, justifies all means which do not conflict with some more
important good. On Mr. Sedgwick’s own scheme, are there not ends which
sanctify actions, in other cases deserving the utmost abhorrence—such,
for instance, as taking the life of a fellow-creature in cold blood, in
the face of the whole people? According to the principle of utility, the
end justifies all means necessary to its attainment, except those which
are more mischievous than the end is usefule; an exception amply
sufficient.e

We have now concluded our fexaminationf of Mr. Sedgwick: first, as a
commentator on the studies which form part of a liberal education; and
Edition: current; Page: [73] next, as an assailant of the “utilitarian
theory of morals.” We have shown that, on the former subject, he has
omitted almost everything which ought to have been said; that almost all
which he has said is trivial, and much of it gerroneousg. With regard to
the other part of his design, we have shown that he has not only failedh
to refute the doctrine that human happiness is the foundation of
morality, but has, in the attempt, proved himself not to understand what
the doctrine is;i and to be capable of jbringing the most serious
charges againstj other men’s opinions, and themselves, kwhich even a
smattering of the knowledge appropriate to the subject, would have shown
to be groundlessk.

lWe by no means affect to consider Mr. Sedgwick as (what he would not
himself claim to be) a sufficient advocate of the cause he has espoused,
nor pretend that his pages contain the best that can be said, or even
the best that has been said, against the theory of utility. That theory
numbers among its enemies, minds of almost every degree of power and
intellectual accomplishments; among whom many are capable of making out
a much better apparent case for their opinion. But Mr. Sedgwick’s is a
fair enough sample of the popular arguments against the theory; his book
has had more readers and more applauders than a better book would have
had, because it is level with a lower class of capacities: and though,
by pointing out its imperfections, we do little to establish our own
opinion, it is something to have shown on how light grounds, in some
cases, men of gravity and reputation arraign the opinion, and are
admired and applauded for so arraigning it.l

The question is not one of pure speculation. Not to mention the
importance, to those who are entrusted with the education of the moral
sentiments, of just views respecting their origin and nature; we may
remark that, upon the truth or falseness of the doctrine of a moral
sense, it depends whether morality is a fixed or a progressive body of
doctrine. If it be true that man Edition: current; Page: [74] has a
sense given him to determine what is right and wrong, it follows that
his moral judgments and feelings cannot be susceptible of any
improvement; such as they are they ought to remain. The question, what
mankind in general moughtm to think and feel on the subject of their
duty, must be determined by observing what, when no interest or passion
can be seen to bias them, they think and feel already.n According to the
theory of utility, on the contrary, the question, what is our duty, is
as open to discussion as any other question. Moral doctrines are no more
to be received without evidence, onoro to be sifted less carefully, than
any other doctrines. An appeal lies, as on all other subjects, from a
received opinion, however generally entertained, to the decisions of
cultivated reason. The weakness of human intellect, and all the other
infirmities of our nature, are considered to interfere as much with the
rectitude of our judgments on morality, as on any other of our concerns;
and changes as great are anticipated in our opinions on that subject, as
on every other, both from the progress of intelligence, from more
authentic and enlarged experience, and from alterations in the condition
of the human race, requiring altered rules of conduct.

pItp deeply concerns the greatest interests of our race, that the only
mode of treating ethical questions which qaimsq at correcting existing
maxims, and rectifying any of the perversions of existing feeling,
should not be borne down by clamour.r The contemners of analysis have
long enough had all the pretension to themselves. They have had the
monopoly of the claim to pure, and lofty, and sublime principles; and
those who gave reasons to justify their feelings have submitted to be
cried down as low, and cold, and degraded. We hope they will submit no
longers; and not content with meeting the metaphysics of their more
powerful adversaries by profounder metaphysics, will join battle in the
field of popular controversy with every antagonist of name and
reputation, even when, as in the present case, his name and reputation
are his only claims to be heard on such a subject.s

Edition: current; Page: [75]


BENTHAM
 1838

Edition: current; Page: [76]


EDITOR’S NOTE

D&D, I (1867), 330-92, with footnote to title: “London and Westminster
Review, August 1938.” Reprinted from London and Westminster Review, 7 &
29 (Aug., 1838), 467-506, signed “A” and headed: “Art. XI.—The Works of
Jeremy Bentham: now first collected, under the supervision of his
Executor, John Bowring. Parts I to IV. Tait, Edinburgh. 1838.” (These
Parts appeared in the full edition in Vols. I and IV; for full details
of the contents, see under Bentham, Works, in the Bibliographic
Appendix, 512 below.) This number of the London and Westminster went
into a second edition (probably because of this article); in the
reprinting JSM added the final footnote (115n), but made no other
changes. The second version appeared as an offprint, An Estimate of
Bentham’s Philosophy (London: printed by C. Reynell, 1838), with a title
page, new pagination, and the running titles removed, but no other
changes (it is still signed “A”). Described in JSM’s bibliography as “An
article on Bentham, in the London and Westminster Review for August 1838
(No. 6)” (MacMinn, 50).

There are no corrections or alterations in the Somerville College copies
of the article, the offprint, and D&D. The following text is collated
with that in D&D (1st ed.); those in the London and Westminster, 1st and
2nd eds.; and that of the offprint. In the footnoted variants, D&D (2nd
ed.) is indicated by “67”; D&D (1st ed.) by “59”; and the London and
Westminster by “38” (in the final footnote, “382” indicates the 2nd ed.
of the London and Westminster).

Edition: current; Page: [77]


Bentham

there are two men, recently deceased, to whom their country is indebted
not only for the greater part of the important ideas which have been
thrown into circulation among its thinking men in their time, but for a
revolution in its general modes of thought and investigation. These men,
dissimilar in almost all else, agreed in being closet-students—secluded
in a peculiar degree, by circumstances and character, from the business
and intercourse of the world: and both were, through a large portion of
their lives, regarded by those who took the lead in opinion (when they
happened to hear of them) with feelings akin to contempt. But they were
destined to renew a lesson given to mankind by every age, and always
disregarded—to show that speculative philosophy, which to the
superficial appears a thing so remote from the business of life and the
outward interests of men, is in reality the thing on earth which most
influences them, and in the long run overbears every other influence
save those which it must itself obey. The writers of whom we speak have
never been read by the multitude; except for the more slight of their
works, their readers have been few: but they have been the teachers of
the teachers; there is hardly to be found in England an individual of
any importance in the world of mind, who (whatever opinions he may have
afterwards adopted) did not first learn to think from one of these two;
and though their influences have but begun to diffuse themselves through
these intermediate channels over society at large, there is already
scarcely a publication of any consequence addressed to the educated
classes, which, if these persons had not existed, would not have beena
different from what it is. These men are, Jeremy Bentham and Samuel
Taylor Coleridge—the two great seminal minds of England in their age.

No comparison is intended here between the minds or influences of these
remarkable men: this were impossible unless there were first formed a
complete judgment of each, considered apart. It is our intention to
attempt, on the present occasion, an estimate of one of them; the only
one, a complete edition of whose works is yet in progress, and who, in
the classification which may be made of all writers into bProgressiveb
and Conservative, Edition: current; Page: [78] belongs to the same
division with ourselves. For although theyc were far too great men to be
correctly designated by either appellation exclusively, yet in the main,
Bentham was a dProgressived philosopher, Coleridge a Conservative one.
The influence of the former has made itself felt chiefly eon minds of
the Progressive class;e of the latter, on fthose of the Conservative:f
and the two systems of concentric circles which the shock given by them
is spreading over the ocean of mind, have only just begun to meet and
intersect. The writings of both contain severe lessons to their own
side, on many of the errors and faults they areg addicted to: but to
Bentham it was given to discern more particularly those truths with
which existing doctrines and institutions were at variance; to
Coleridge, the neglected truths which lay in them.

A man of great knowledge of the world, and of the highest reputation for
practical talent and sagacity among the official men of his time
(himself no follower of Bentham, nor of any partial or exclusive school
whatever) once said to us, as the result of his observation, that to
Bentham more than to any other source might be traced the questioning
spirit, the disposition to demand the why of everything, which had
gained so much ground and was producing such important consequences in
these htimesh. The more this assertion is examined, the more true it
will be found. Bentham has been in this age and country the great
questioner of things established. It is by the influence of the modes of
thought with which his writings inoculated a considerable number of
thinking men, that the yoke of authority has been broken, and
innumerable opinions, formerly received on tradition as incontestable,
are put upon their defence, and required to give an account of
themselves. Who, before Bentham, (whatever controversies might exist on
points of detail) dared to speak disrespectfully, in express terms, of
the British Constitution, or the English Law? He did so; and his
arguments and his example together encouraged others. We do not mean
that his writings caused the Reform Bill,[*] or that the Appropriation
Clause[†] owns him as its parent: the changes which have been made, and
the greater changes which will be made, in our institutions, are not the
work of philosophers, but of the interests and instincts of large
portions of society recently grown into strength. But Bentham gave voice
to those interests and instincts: until he spoke out, those who found
our institutions unsuited to them did not dare to say so, did not
Edition: current; Page: [79] dare consciously to think so; they had
never heard ithe excellence ofi those institutions questioned by
cultivated men, by men of acknowledged intellect; and it is not in the
nature of uninstructed minds to resist the united authority of the
instructed. Bentham broke the spell. It was not Bentham by his own
writings; it was Bentham through the minds and pens which those writings
fed—through the men in more direct contact with the world, into whom his
spirit passed. If the superstition about ancestorial wisdom has fallen
into decay; if the public are grown familiar with the idea that their
laws and institutions are jin great partj not the product of intellect
and virtue, but of modern corruption grafted upon ancient barbarism; if
the hardiest innovation is no longer scouted kbecausek it is an
innovation—establishments no longer considered sacred because they are
establishments—it will be found that those who have accustomed the
public mind to these ideas have learnt them in Bentham’s school, and
that the assault on ancient institutions has been, and is, carried on
for the most part with his weapons. It matters not although these
thinkers, or indeed thinkers of any description, have been but scantily
found among the persons prominently and ostensibly at the head of the
Reform movement. All movements, except ldirectlyl revolutionary ones,
are headed, not by those who originate them, but by those who know best
how to compromise between the old opinions and the new. The father of
English innovation, both in doctrines and in institutions, is Bentham:
he is the great subversive, or, in the language of continental
philosophers, the great critical, thinker of his age and country.

We consider this, however, to be not his highest title to fame. Were
this all, he were monlym to be ranked among the lowest order of the
potentates of mind—the negative, or destructive philosophers; those who
can perceive what is false, but not what is true; who awaken the human
mind to the inconsistencies and absurdities of time-sanctioned opinions
and institutions, but substitute nothing in the place of what they take
away. We have no desire to undervalue the services of such persons:
mankind have been deeply indebted to them; nor will there ever be a lack
of work for them, in a world in which so many false things are believed,
in which so many which have been true, are believed long after they have
ceased to be true. The qualities, however, which fit men for perceiving
anomalies, without perceiving the truths which would rectify them, are
not among the rarest of endowments. Courage, verbal acuteness, command
over the forms of argumentation, and a popular style, will make, out of
the shallowest man, with a sufficient lack of reverence, a
nconsiderablen negative philosopher. Such men have never been wanting in
Edition: current; Page: [80] periods of culture; and the period in which
Bentham formed his early impressions was emphatically their reign, in
proportion to its barrenness in the more noble products of the human
mind. An age of formalism in the Church and corruption in the State,
when the most valuable part of the meaning of otraditional doctrineso
had faded from the minds even of those who retained from habit a
mechanical belief in them, was the time to raise up all kinds of
sceptical philosophy. Accordingly, France had Voltaire, and his school
of negative thinkers, and England p(or rather Scotland)p had the
profoundest negative thinker on record, David Hume: a man, the
peculiarities of whose mind qualified him to detect failure of proof,
and want of logical consistency, at a depth which French sceptics, with
their comparatively feeble powers of analysis and abstraction, stopt far
short ofq, and which German subtlety alone could thoroughly appreciate,
or hope to rival.q

If Bentham had merely continued the work of Hume, he would scarcely have
been heard of in philosophy; for he was far inferior to Hume in Hume’s
qualities, and was in no respect fitted to excel as a metaphysician. We
must not look for subtlety, or the power of recondite analysis, among
his intellectual characteristics. In the former quality, few great
thinkers have ever been so deficient; and to find the latter, in any
considerable measure, in a mind acknowledging any kindred with his, we
must have recourse to the late Mr. Mill—a man who unitedr the great
qualities of the metaphysicians of the eighteenth century, with others
of a different complexion, admirably qualifying him to complete and
correct their work. Bentham had not these peculiar gifts; but he
possessed others, not inferior, which were not possessed by any of his
precursors; which have made him a source of light to a generation which
has far outgrown their influence, and, as we called him, the chief
subversive thinker of an age which has long lost all that stheys could
subvert.

To speak of him first as a merely negative philosopher—as one who
refutes illogical arguments, exposes sophistry, detects contradiction
and absurdity; even in that capacity there was a wide field left vacant
for him by Hume, Edition: current; Page: [81] and which he has occupied
to an unprecedented extent; the field of practical abuses. This was
Bentham’s peculiar province: to this he was called by the whole bent of
his disposition: to carry the warfare against absurdity into things
practical. His was an essentially practical mind. It was by practical
abuses that his mind was first turned to speculation—by the abuses of
the profession which was chosen for him, that of the law. He has himself
stated what particular abuse first gave that shock to his mind, the
recoil of which has made the whole mountain of abuse totter; it was the
custom of making the client pay for three attendances in the office of a
Master in Chancery, when only one was given. The law, he found, on
examination, was full of such things. But were these discoveries of his?
No; they were known to every lawyer whot practised, to every judge whou
sat on the bench, and neither before nor for long after did they cause
any apparent uneasiness to the consciences of these learned persons, nor
hinder them from asserting, whenever occasion offered, in books, in
parliament, or on the bench, that the law was the perfection of reason.
During so many generations, in each of which thousands ofv educated
young men were successively placed in Bentham’s position and with
Bentham’s opportunities, he alone was found with sufficient moral
sensibility and self-reliance to say wto himselfw that these things,
however profitable they might be, were frauds, and that between them and
himself there should be a gulf fixed. To this rare union of
self-reliance and moral sensibility we are indebted for all that Bentham
has done. Sent to Oxford by his father at the unusually early age of
fifteen—required, on admission, to declare his belief in the Thirty-nine
Articles—he felt it necessary to examine them; and the examination
suggested scruples, which he sought to get removed, but instead of the
satisfaction he expected, was told that it was not for boys like him to
set up their judgment against the great men of the Church. After a
struggle, he signed; but the impression that he had done an immoral act,
never left him; he considered himself to have xcommittedx a falsehood,
and throughout life he never relaxed in his indignant denunciations of
all laws which command such falsehoods, all institutions which attach
rewards toy them.

By thus carrying the war of criticism and refutation, the conflict with
falsehood and absurdity, into the field of practical evils, Bentham,
even if he had done nothing else, would have earned an important place
in the history of intellect. He carried on the warfare without
intermission. To this, not only many of his most piquant chapters, but
some of the most finished of his entire works, are entirely devoted: the
Defence of Usury; the Book of Fallacies; Edition: current; Page: [82]
and the onslaught upon Blackstone, published anonymously under the title
of A Fragment on Government,[*] which, though a first production, and of
a writer afterwards so much ridiculed for his style, excited the highest
admiration no less for its composition than for its thoughts, and was
attributed by turns to Lord Mansfield, to Lord Camden, and (by Dr.
Johnson) to Dunning, one of the greatest masters of style among the
lawyers of his day. These writings are altogether original; though of
the negative school, they resemble nothing previously produced by
negative philosophers; and would have sufficed to create for Bentham,
among the subversive thinkers of modern Europe, a place peculiarly his
own. But it is not these writings that constitute the real distinction
between him and them. There was a deeper difference. It was that they
were purely negative thinkers, he was positive: they only assailed
error, he made it a point of conscience not to do so until he thought he
could plant instead the corresponding truth. Their character was
exclusively analytic, his was synthetic. They took for their
starting-point the received opinion on any subject, dug round it with
their logical implements, pronounced its foundations defective, and
condemned it: he began de novo, laid his own foundations deeply and
firmly, built up his own structure, and zbadez mankind compare the two;
it was when he had solved the problem himself, or thought he had done
so, that he declared all other solutions to be erroneous. Hence, what
they aproduceda will not last; it must perish, much of it has already
perished, with the errors which it exploded: what he did has its own
value, by which it must outlast all errors to which it is opposed.
Though we may reject, as we often must, his practical conclusions, yet
his premises, the collections of facts and observations from which his
conclusions were drawn, remain for ever, a part of the materials of
philosophy.

A place, therefore, must be assigned to Bentham among the masters of
wisdom, the great teachers and permanent intellectual ornaments of the
human race. He is among those who have enriched mankind with
imperishable gifts; and although these do not transcend all other gifts,
nor entitle him to those honours “above all Greek, above all Roman
fame,”[†] which by a natural reaction against the neglect and contempt
of the bignorant, manyb of his admirers were once disposed to accumulate
upon him, yet to refuse an admiring recognition of what he was, on
account of what he was not, is a much worse error, and one which,
pardonable in the vulgar, is no longer permitted to any cultivated and
instructed mind.

Edition: current; Page: [83]
If we were asked to say, in the fewest possible words, cwhatc we
conceive to be Bentham’s place among these great intellectual
benefactors of humanity; what he was, and what he was not; what kind of
service he did and did not render to truth; we should say—he was not a
great philosopher, but he was a great reformer in philosophy. He brought
into philosophy something which it greatly needed, and for want of which
it was at a stand. It was not his doctrines which did this, it was his
mode of arriving at them. He introduced into morals and politics those
habits of thought and modes of investigation, which are essential to the
idea of science; and the absence of which made those departments of
inquiry, as physics had been before Bacon, a field of interminable
discussion, leading to no result. It was not his dopinionsd, in short,
but his emethode, that constituted the novelty and the value of what he
did; a value beyond all price, even though we should reject the whole,
as we unquestionably must a large part, of the opinions themselves.

Bentham’s method may be shortly described as the method of fdetailf; of
treating wholes by separating them into their parts, abstractions by
resolving them into Things,—classes and generalities by distinguishing
them into the individuals of which they are made up; and breaking every
question into pieces before attempting to solve it. The precise amount
of originality of this process, considered as a logical conception—its
degree of connexion with the methods of physical science, or with the
previous labours of Bacon, Hobbes, or Locke—is not an essential
consideration in this place. Whatever originality there was in the
method—in the subjects he applied it to, and in the rigidity with which
he adhered to it, there was the greatest. Hence his interminable
classifications. Hence his elaborate demonstrations of the most
acknowledged truths. That murder, incendiarism, robbery, are mischievous
actions, he will not take for granted without proof; let the thing
appear ever so self-evident, he will know the why and the how of it with
the last degree of precision; he will distinguish all the different
mischiefs of a crime, whether of the first, the second, or the third
order, namely, 1. the evil to the sufferer, and to his personal
connexions; 2. the danger from example, and the alarm or painful feeling
of insecurity; and 3. the discouragement to industry and useful pursuits
arising from the alarm, and the trouble and resources which must be
expended in warding off the danger. After this enumeration, he will
proveg from the laws of human feeling, that even the first of these
evils, the sufferings of the immediate victim, will on the average
greatly outweigh the pleasure reaped by the offender; much more when all
the other evils are taken into account. Unless this could be proved, he
would account the infliction of punishment unwarrantable; and for taking
the trouble to prove it formally, Edition: current; Page: [84] his
defence is, “there are truths which it is necessary to prove, not for
their own sakes, because they are acknowledged, but that an opening may
be made for the reception of other truths which depend upon them. It is
in this manner we provide for the reception of first principles, which,
once received, prepare the way for admission of all other truths.”* To
which may be added, that in this manner alsoh we discipline the mind for
practising the same sort of dissection upon questions more complicated
and of more doubtful issue.

It is a sound maxim, and one which all close thinkers have felt, but
which no one before Bentham ever so consistently applied, that error
lurks in generalities: that the human mind is not capable of embracing a
complex whole, until it has surveyed and catalogued the parts of which
that whole is made up; that abstractions are not irealities per sei, but
an abridged mode of expressing facts, and that the only practical mode
of dealing with them is to trace them back to the facts (whether of
experience or of consciousness) of which they are the expression.
Proceeding on this principle, Bentham makes short work with the ordinary
modes of moral and political reasoning. These, it appeared to him, when
hunted to their source, for the most part terminated in phrases. In
politics, liberty, social order, constitution, law of nature, social
compact, &c., were the catch-words: ethics had its analogous ones. Such
were the arguments on which the gravest questions of morality and policy
were made to turn; not reasons, but allusions to reasons; sacramental
expressions, by which a summary appeal was made to some general
sentiment of mankind, or to some maxim in familiar use, which might be
true or not, but the limitations of which no one had ever critically
examined. And this satisfied other people; but not Bentham. He required
something more than opinion as a reason for opinion. Whenever he found a
phrase used as an argument for or against anything, he insisted upon
knowing what it meant; whether it appealed to any standard, or gavej
intimation of any matter of fact relevant to the question; and if he
could not find that it did either, he treated it as an attempt on the
part of the disputant to impose his own individual sentiment on other
people, without giving them a reason for it; a “contrivance for avoiding
the obligation of appealing to any external standard, and for prevailing
upon the reader to accept of the author’s sentiment and opinion as a
reason, and that a sufficient one, for itself.”[*] Bentham shall speak
for himself on this subject: the passage is from his first systematic
Edition: current; Page: [85] work, Introduction to the Principles of
Morals and Legislationk, and we could scarcely quote anything more
strongly exemplifying both the strength and weakness of his lmode of
philosophizingl.

It is curious enough to observe the variety of inventions men have hit
upon, and the variety of phrases they have brought forward, in order to
conceal from the world, and, if possible, from themselves, this very
general and therefore very pardonable self-sufficiency.

1. One man says, he has a thing made on purpose to tell him what is
right and what is wrong; and that is called a ‘moral sense:’ and then he
goes to work at his ease, and says, such a thing is right, and such a
thing is wrong—why? ‘Because my moral sense tells me it is.’

2. Another man comes and alters the phrase: leaving out moral, and
putting in common in the room of it. He then tells you that his common
sense tells him what is right and wrong, as surely as the other’s moral
sense did: meaning by common sense a sense of some kind or other, which,
he says, is possessed by all mankind: the sense of those whose sense is
not the same as the author’s being struck out as not worth taking. This
contrivance does better than the other; for a moral sense being a new
thing, a man may feel about him a good while without being able to find
it out: but common sense is as old as the creation; and there is no man
but would be ashamed to be thought not to have as much of it as his
neighbours. It has another great advantage: by appearing to share power,
it lessens envy; for when a man gets up upon this ground, in order to
anathematize those who differ from him, it is not by a sic volo sic
jubeo, but by a velitis jubeatis.

3. Another man comes, and says, that as to a moral sense indeed, he
cannot find that he has any such thing: that, however, he has an
understanding, which will do quite as well. This understanding, he says,
is the standard of right and wrong: it tells him so and so. All good and
wise men understand as he does: if other men’s understandings differ in
any part from his, so much the worse for them: it is a sure sign they
are either defective or corrupt.

4. Another man says, that there is an eternal and immutable Rule of
Right: that that rule of right dictates so and so: and then he begins
giving you his sentiments upon anything that comes uppermost: and these
sentiments (you are to take for granted) are so many branches of the
eternal rule of right.

5. Another man, or perhaps the same man (it is no matter), says that
there are certain practices conformable, and others repugnant, to the
Fitness of Things; and then he tells you, at his leisure, what practices
are conformable, and what repugnant: just as he happens to like a
practice or dislike it.

6. A great multitude of people are continually talking of the Law of
Nature; and then they go on giving you their sentiments about what is
right and what is wrong: and these sentiments, you are to understand,
are so many chapters and sections of the Law of Nature.

7. Instead of the phrase, Law of Nature, you have sometimes Law of
Reason, Right Reason, Natural Justice, Natural Equity, Good Order. Any
of them will do equally well. This latter is most used in politics. The
three last are much more tolerable than the others, because they do not
very explicitly claim to be anything more than phrases: they insist but
feebly upon the being looked upon as so many positive standards of
themselves, and seem content to be taken, upon occasion, Edition:
current; Page: [86] for phrases expressive of the conformity of the
thing in question to the proper standard, whatever that may be. On most
occasions, however, it will be better to say utility: utility is
clearer, as referring more explicitly to pain and pleasure.

8. We have one philosopher, who says, there is no harm in anything in
the world but in telling a lie; and that if, for example, you were to
murder your own father, this would only be a particular way of saying,
he was not your father. Of course when this philosopher sees anything
that he does not like, he says, it is a particular way of telling a lie.
It is saying, that the act ought to be done, or may be done, when, in
truth, it ought not to be done.

9. The fairest and openest of them all is that sort of man who speaks
out, and says, I am of the number of the Elect: now God himself takes
care to inform the Elect what is right: and that with so good effect,
that let them strive ever so, they cannot help not only knowing it but
practising it. If therefore a man wants to know what is right and what
is wrong, he has nothing to do but to come to me.[*]

Few mwill contend that this is a perfectly fair representation of the
animus of those who employ the various phrases so amusingly animadverted
on; but that the phrases contain no argument, save what is grounded on
the very feelings they are adduced to justify, is a truth which Bentham
had the eminent merit of first pointingm out.

It is the introduction into the philosophy of human conduct, of this
method of detail—of this practice of never reasoning about wholes until
they have been resolved into their parts, nor about abstractions until
they have been translated into realities—that constitutes the
originality of Bentham in philosophy, and makes him the great reformer
of the moral and political branch of it. To what he terms the
“exhaustive method of classification,” which is but one branch of this
more general method, he himself ascribes everything original in the
systematic and elaborate work from which we have quoted.[†] The
generalities of his philosophy itself have little or no novelty: to
ascribe any to the doctrine that general utility is the foundation of
morality, would imply great ignorance of the history of philosophy, of
general literature, and of Bentham’s own writings. He derived the idea,
as he says himself, fromn Helvetius; and it was the doctrine no less, of
theo religious philosophers of that age, prior to Reid and Beattie. We
never saw an abler defence of the doctrine of utility than in a book
written in refutation of Shaftesbury, Edition: current; Page: [87] and
now little read—Brown’s* Essays on the Characteristics;[*] and in
Johnson’s celebrated review of Soame Jenyns,[†] the same doctrine is set
forth as that both of the author and of the reviewer. In all ages of
philosophy one of its schools has been utilitarian—not only from the
time of Epicurus, but long before. It was by mere accident that this
opinion became connected in Bentham with his peculiar method. The
utilitarian philosophers antecedent to him had no more claims to the
method than their antagonists. To refer, for instance, to the Epicurean
philosophy, according to the most complete view we have of the moral
part of it, by the most accomplished scholar of antiquity, Cicero; we
ask any one who has read his philosophical writings, the De Finibus for
instance, whether the arguments of the Epicureans pdo not, just as much
as those of the Stoics or Platonists, consist of merep rhetorical
appeals to common notions, to ἐικότα and σημεῖα instead of τεκμήρια,
notions qpicked up as it were casually, and when true at all, never so
narrowly looked into as to ascertain in what sense and under what
limitations they are true. The application of a real inductive
philosophy to the problems of ethics, is as unknown to the Epicurean
moralists as toq any of the other schools; they never take a question to
pieces, and join issue on a definite point. Bentham certainly did not
learn his sifting and anatomizing method from them.

This method Bentham has finally installed in philosophy; has made it
henceforth imperative on philosophers of all schools. By it he has
formed the intellects of many thinkers, who either never adopted, or
have abandonedr, manyr of his peculiar opinions. He has taught the
method to men of the most opposite schools to his; he has made them
perceive that if they do not test their doctrines by the method of
detail, their adversaries will. He has thus, it is not too much to say,
for the first time introduced precision of thought into moral and
political philosophy. Instead of taking up their opinions by intuition,
or by ratiocination from premises adopted on a mere Edition: current;
Page: [88] rough view, and couched in language so vague that it is
impossible to say exactly whether they are true or false, philosophers
are now forced to understand one another, to break down the generality
of their propositions, and join a precise issue in every dispute. This
is nothing less than a revolution in philosophy. Its effect is gradually
becoming evident in the writings of English thinkers of every variety of
opinion, and will be felt more and more in proportion as Bentham’s
writings are diffused, and as the number of minds to whose formation
they contribute is multiplied.

It will naturally be presumed that of the fruits of this great
philosophical improvement some portion at least will have been reaped by
its author. Armed with such a potent instrument, and wielding it with
such singleness of aim; cultivating the field of practical philosophy
with such unwearied and such consistent use of a method right in itself,
and not adopted by his predecessors; it cannot be but that Bentham by
his own inquiries must have accomplished something considerable. And so,
it will be found, he has; something not only considerable, but
extraordinary; though but little compared with what he has left undone,
and far short of what his sanguine and almost boyish fancy made him
flatter himself that he had accomplished. His peculiar method, admirably
calculated to make clear thinkers, and sure ones to the extent of their
materials, has not equal efficacy for making those materials complete.
It is a security for accuracy, but not for comprehensiveness; or rather,
it is a security for one sort of comprehensiveness, but not for another.

sBentham’s method of laying out his subject is admirable as a
preservative against one kind of narrow and partial views. He begins by
placing before himself the whole of the field of inquiry to which the
particular question belongs, and divides down till he arrives at the
thing he is in search of; and thus by successively rejecting all which
is tnott the thing, he gradually works out a definition of what it uisu.
This, which he calls the exhaustive method, is as old as philosophy
itself. Plato owes everything to it, and does everything by it; and the
use made of it by that great man in his Dialogues, Bacon, in one of
those pregnant logical hints scattered through his writings, and so much
neglected by most of his pretended followers, pronounces to be the
nearest approach to a true inductive method in the ancient
philosophy.[*] Bentham was vprobably notv aware that Plato had
anticipated him in the process to which he too declared that he owed
everything. By the practice of it, his speculations are rendered
eminently systematic and consistent; no question, with him, is ever an
insulated one; he sees every subject in connexion with Edition: current;
Page: [89] all the other subjects with which in his view it is related,
and from which it requires to be distinguished; and as all that he
knows, in the least degree allied to the subject, has been marshalled in
an orderly manner before him, he does not, like people who use a looser
method, forget and overlook a thing on one occasion to remember it on
another. Hence there is probably no philosopher of so wide a range, in
whom there are so few inconsistencies. If any of the truths which he did
not see, had come to be seen by him, he would have remembered it
everywhere and at all times, and would have adjusted his whole system to
it. And this is another admirable quality which he has impressed upon
the best of the minds trained in his habits of thought: when wthose
mindsw open to admit new truths, they digest them as fast as they
receive them.

But this system, excellent for keeping before the mind of the thinker
all that he knows, does not make him know enough; it does not make a
knowledge of xsomex of the properties of a thing suffice for the whole
of it, nor render a rooted habit of surveying a complex object (though
ever so carefully) in only one of its aspects, tantamount to the power
of contemplating it in all. To give this last power, other qualities are
required: whether Bentham possessed those other qualities we now have to
see.

Bentham’s mind, as we have already said, was eminently synthetical. He
begins all his inquiries by supposing nothing to be known on the
subject, and reconstructs all philosophy ab initio, without reference to
the opinions of his predecessors. But to build either a philosophy or
anything else, there must be materials. For the philosophy of matter,
the materials are the properties of matter; for moral and political
philosophy, the properties of man, and of man’s position in the world.
The knowledge which any inquirer possesses of these properties,
constitutes a limit beyond which, as a moralist or a political
philosopher, whatever be his powers of mind, he cannot yreachy. Nobody’s
synthesis can be more complete than his analysis. If in his survey of
human nature andz life he has left any element out, then, wheresoever
that element exerts any influence, his conclusions will fail, more or
less, in their application. If he has left out many elements, and those
very important, his labours may be highly valuable; he may have largely
contributed to that body of partial truths which, when completed and
corrected by one another, constitute practical truth; but the
applicability of his system to practice in its own proper shape will be
of an exceedingly limited range.

Human nature and human life are awide subjectsa, and whoever would
embark in an enterprise requiring a thorough knowledge of them, has need
both of large stores of his own, and of all aids and appliances from
elsewhere. Edition: current; Page: [90] His qualifications for success
will be proportional to two things: the degree in which his own nature
and circumstances furnish him with a correct and complete picture of
man’s nature and circumstances; and his capacity of deriving light from
other minds.

Bentham failed in deriving light from other minds. His writings contain
few traces of the accurate knowledge of any bschoolsb of thinking but
his own; and many proofs of his entire conviction that they could teach
him nothing worth knowing. For some of the most illustrious of previous
thinkers, his contempt was unmeasured. In almost the only passage of
cthec Deontology which, from its style, and from its having before
appeared in print, may be known to be Bentham’s, Socrates, and Plato are
spoken of in terms distressing to his greatest admirers;[*] and the
incapacity to appreciate such men, is a fact perfectly in unison with
the general habits of Bentham’s mind. He had a phrase, expressive of the
view he took of all moral speculations to which his method had not been
applied, or (which he considered as the same thing) not founded on a
recognition of utility as the moral standard; this phrase was “vague
generalities.[†] Whatever presented itself to him in such a shape, he
dismissed as unworthy of notice, or dwelt upon only to denounce as
absurd. He did not heed, or rather the nature of his mind prevented it
from occurring to him, that these generalities contained the whole
unanalysed experience of the human race.

Unless it can be asserted that mankind did not know anything until
logicians taught it dtod them—that until the last hand has been put to a
moral truth by giving it a metaphysically precise expression, all the
previous rough-hewing which it has undergone by the common intellect at
the suggestion of common wants and common experience is to go for
nothing; it must be allowed, that even the originality which can, and
the courage which dares, think for itself, is not a more necessary part
of the philosophical character than ea thoughtful regarde for previous
thinkers, and for the collective mind of the human race. What has been
the opinion of mankind, has been the opinion of persons of all tempers
and dispositions, of all partialities and prepossessions, of all
varieties in position, in education, in opportunities of observation and
inquiry. No one inquirer is all this; every inquirer is either young or
old, rich or poor, sickly or healthy, married or funmarriedf, meditative
or active, a poet or a logician, an ancient or a modern, a man or a
woman; and if a thinking person, has, in addition, the accidental
peculiarities Edition: current; Page: [91] of his individual modes of
thought. Every circumstance which gives a character to the life of a
human being, carries with it is peculiar biases; its peculiar facilities
for perceiving some things, and for missing or forgetting others. But,
from points of view different from his, different things are
perceptible; and none are gmoreg likely to have seen what he does not
see, hthanh those who do not see what he sees. The general opinion of
mankind is the average of the conclusions of all minds, stripped indeed
of their choicest and most recondite thoughts, but freed from their
twists and partialities: a net result, in which everybody’s particular
point of view is represented, nobody’s predominant. The collective mind
does not penetrate below the surface, but it sees all the surface; which
profound thinkers, even by reason of their profundity, ioften fail toi
do: their intenser view of a thing in some of its aspects diverting
their attention from others.

The hardiest assertor, therefore, of the freedom of private judgment—the
keenest detector of the errors of his predecessors, and of the
inaccuracies of current modes of thought—is the very person who most
needs to fortify the weak side of his own intellect, byj study of the
opinions of mankind in all ages and nations, and of the speculations of
philosophers of the modes of thought most opposite to his own. It is
there that he will find the experiences denied to himself—the remainder
of the truth of which he sees but half—the truths, of which the errors
he detects are commonly but the exaggerations. If, like Bentham, he
brings with him an improved instrument of investigation, the greater is
the probability that he will find ready prepared a rich abundance of
rough ore, which was merely waiting for that instrument. A man of clear
ideas errs grievously if he imagines that whatever is seen confusedly
does not exist: it belongs to him, when he meets with such a thing, to
dispel the mist, and fix the outlines of thek vague form which is
looming through it.

Bentham’s contempt, then, of all other schools of thinkers; his
determination to create a philosophy wholly out of the materials
furnished by his own mind, and by minds like his own; was his first
disqualification as a philosopher. His second, was the incompleteness of
his own mind as a representative of universal human nature. In many of
the most natural and strongest feelings of human nature he had no
sympathy; from many of its graver experiences he was altogether cut off;
and the faculty by which one mind understands a mind different from
itself, and throws itself into the feelings of that other mind, was
denied him by his deficiency of Imagination.

With Imagination in the popular sense, command of imagery and
metaphorical expression, Bentham was, to a certain degree, endowed. For
want, Edition: current; Page: [92] indeed, of poetical culture, the
images with which his fancy supplied him were seldom beautiful, but they
were quaint and humorous, or bold, forcible, and intense: passages might
be quoted from him both of playful irony, and of declamatory eloquence,
seldom surpassed in the writings of philosophers. The Imagination which
he had not, was that to which the name is generally appropriated by the
best writers of the present day; that which enables us, by a voluntary
effort, to conceive the absent as if it were present, the imaginary as
if it were real, and to clothe it in the feelings which, if it were
indeed real, it would bring along with it. This is the power by which
one human being enters into the mind and circumstances of another. This
power constitutes the poet, in so far as he does anything but
melodiously utter his own actual feelings. It constitutes the dramatist
entirely. It is one of the constituents of the historian; by it we
understand other times; by it Guizot interprets to us the middle ages;
Nisard, in his beautiful Studies on the later Latin poets,[*] places us
in the Rome of the Cæsars; Michelet disengages the distinctive
characters of the different races and lgenerationsl of mankind from the
facts of their history. Without it nobody knows even his own nature,
further than circumstances have actually tried it and called it out; nor
the nature of his fellow-creatures, beyond such generalizations as he
may have been enabled to make from his observation of their outward
conduct.

By these limits, accordingly, Bentham’s knowledge of human nature is
bounded. It is wholly empirical; and the empiricism of one who has had
little experience. He had neither internal experience nor external; the
quiet, even tenor of his life, and his healthiness of mind, conspired to
exclude him from both. He never knew prosperity and adversity, passion
nor satiety: he never had even the experiences which sickness gives; he
lived from childhood to the age of eighty-five in boyish health. He knew
no dejection, no heaviness of heart. He never felt life a sore and a
weary burthen. He was a boy to the last. Self-consciousness, that dæmon
of the men of genius of our time, from Wordsworth to Byron, from Goethe
to Chateaubriand, and to which this age owes mso muchm both of its
cheerful and its mournful wisdom, never was awakened in him. How much of
human nature slumbered in him he knew not, neither can we know. He had
never been made alive to the unseen influences which were acting on
himself, nor consequently on his fellow-creatures. Other ages and other
nations were a blank to him for purposes of instruction. He measured
them but by one standard; their knowledge of facts, and their capability
to take correct views of utility, and merge all other objects in it. His
own lot was cast in a generation of the leanest and barrenest Edition:
current; Page: [93] men whom nEnglandn had yet produced, and he was an
old man when a better race came in with the present century. He saw
accordingly in man little but what the vulgarest eye can see; recognised
no diversities of character but osuch aso he who runs may read. Knowing
so little of human feelings, he knew still less of the influences by
which those feelings are formed: all the more subtle workings both of
the mind upon itself, and of external things upon the mind, escaped him;
and no one, probably, who, in a highly instructed age, ever attempted to
give a rule to all human conduct, set out with a more limited
pconceptionp either of the qagenciesq by which human conduct is, or of
those by which it should be, influenced.

This, then, is our idea of Bentham. He was a man both of remarkable
endowments for philosophy, and of remarkable deficiencies for it:
fitted, beyond almost any man, for drawing from his premises,
conclusions not only correct, but sufficiently precise and specific to
be practical: but whose general conception of human nature and life,
furnished him with an unusually slender stock of premises. It is obvious
what would be likely to be achieved by such a man; what a thinker, thus
gifted and thus disqualified, could rdor in philosophy. He coulds, with
close and accurate logic, hunts half-truths to their consequences and
practical applications, on a scale both of greatness and of minuteness
not previously exemplified; and this is the character which posterity
will probably assign to Bentham.

We express our sincere and well-considered conviction when we say, that
there is hardly anything tpositivet in Bentham’s philosophy which is not
true: that when his practical conclusions are erroneous, which in our
opinion they are very often, it is not because the considerations which
he urges are not rational and valid in themselves, but because some more
important principle, which he did not perceive, supersedes those
considerations, and turns the scale. The bad part of his writings is his
resolute denial of all that he does not see, of all truths but those
which he recognises. By that alone has he exercised any bad influence
upon his age; by that he has, not created a school of deniers, for this
is an ignorant prejudice, but put himself at the head of the school
which exists always, though it does not always find a great man to give
it the sanction of philosophy: thrown the mantle of intellect over the
natural tendency of men in all ages to deny uor disparage all feelings
and mental statesu of which they have no consciousness in themselves.

The truths which are not Bentham’s, which his philosophy takes no
account of, are many and important; but his non-recognition of them does
Edition: current; Page: [94] not put them out of existence; they are
still with us, and it is a comparatively easy task that is reserved for
us, to harmonize vthosev truths with his. To reject his half of the
truth because he overlooked the other half, would be to fall into his
error without having his excuse. For our own part, we have a large
tolerance for one-eyed men, provided their one eye is a penetrating one:
if they saw more, they probably would not see so keenly, nor so eagerly
pursue one course of inquiry. Almost all rich veins of original and
striking speculation have been opened by systematic whalf-thinkersw:
though whether these new thoughts drive out others as good, or are
peacefully superadded to them, depends on whether these xhalf-thinkersx
are or are not followed in the same track by complete ythinkersy. The
field of man’s nature and life cannot be too much worked, or in too many
directions; until every clod is turned up the work is imperfect; no
whole truth is possible but by combining the points of view of all the
fractional truths, nor, therefore, until it has been fully seen what
each fractional truth can do by itself.

What Bentham’s fractional truths could do, there is no such good means
of showing as by a review of his philosophy: and such a review, though
inevitably a most brief and general one, it is now necessary to attempt.

The first question in regard to any man of speculation is, what is his
theory of human life? In the minds of many philosophers, whatever theory
they have of this sort is latent, and it would be a revelation to
themselves to have it pointed out to them in their writings as others
can see it, unconsciously moulding everything to its own likeness. But
Bentham always knew his own premises, and made his reader know them: it
was not his custom to leave the theoretic grounds of his practical
conclusions to conjecture. Few great thinkers have afforded the means of
assigning with so much certainty the exact conception which they had
formed of man and of man’s life.

Man is conceived by Bentham as a being susceptible of pleasures and
pains, and governed in all his conduct partly by the different
modifications of self-interest, and the passions commonly classed as
selfish, partly by sympathies, or occasionally antipathies, towards
other beings. And here Bentham’s conception of human nature stops. He
does notz exclude religion; the prospect of divine rewards and
punishments he includes under the head of “self-regarding interest,” and
the devotional feeling under that of sympathy awitha God.[*] But the
whole of the impelling or restraining principles, Edition: current;
Page: [95] whether of this bor of another worldb, which he recognises,
are either self-love, or love or hatred towards other csentientc beings.
That there might be no doubt of what he thought on the subject, he has
not left us to the general evidence of his writings, but has drawn out a
Table of the Springs of Action, an express enumeration and
classification of human motives, with their various names, laudatory,
vituperative, and neutral: and this table, to be found in Part I of dhis
collected worksd,[*] we recommend to the study of those who would
understand his philosophy.

Man is never recognised by him as a being capable of pursuing spiritual
perfection as an end; of desiring, for its own sake, the conformity of
his own character to his standard of excellence, without hope of good or
fear of evil from other source than his own inward consciousness. Even
in the more limited form of Conscience, this great fact in human nature
escapes him. Nothing is more curious than the absence of recognition in
any of his writings of the existence of conscience, as a thing distinct
from philanthropy, from affection for God or man, and from self-interest
in this world or in the next. There is a studied abstinence from any of
the phrases which, in the mouths of others, import the acknowledgment of
such a fact.* If we find the words “Conscience,” “Principle,” “Moral
Rectitude,” “Moral Duty,” in his Table of the Springs of Action, it is
among the synonymes of the “love of reputation;” with an intimation as
to the two former phrases, that they are also sometimes synonymous with
the religious motive, or the motive of sympathy. The feeling of moral
approbation or disapprobation properly so called, either towards
ourselves or our fellow-creatures, he seems unaware of the existence of;
and neither the word self-respect, nor the idea to which that word is
appropriated, occurs even once, so far as our recollection serves us, in
his whole writings.

Nor is it only the moral part of man’s nature, in the strict sense of
the term—the desire of perfection, or the feeling of an approving or of
an accusing conscience—that he overlooks; he but faintly recognises, as
a fact in human nature, the pursuit of any other ideal end for its own
sake. The sense of honour, and personal dignity—that feeling of personal
exaltation and Edition: current; Page: [96] degradation which acts
independently of other people’s opinion, or even in defiance of it; the
love of beauty, the passion of the artist; the love of order, of
congruity, of consistency in all things, and conformity to their end;
the love of power, not in the limited form of power over other human
beings, but abstract power, the power of making our volitions effectual;
the love of action, the thirst for movement and activity, a principle
scarcely of less influence in human life than its opposite, the love of
ease:—None of these powerful constituents of human nature are thought
worthy of a place among the “Springs of Action;” and though there is
possibly no one of them of the existence of which an acknowledgment
might not be found in some corner of Bentham’s writings, no conclusions
are ever founded on the acknowledgment. Man, that most complex being, is
a very simple one in his eyes. Even under the head of sympathy, his
recognition does not extend to the more complex forms of the feeling—the
love of loving, the need of a sympathising support, or of eobjectse of
admiration and reverence. If he thought at all of any of the deeper
feelings of human nature, it was but as idiosyncrasies of taste, with
which fthe moralist no more thanf the legislator had any concern,
further than to prohibit such as were mischievous among the actions to
which they might chance to lead. To say either that man should, or that
he should not, take pleasure in one thing, displeasure in another,
appeared to him as much an act of despotism in the moralist as in the
political ruler.

It would be most unjust to Bentham to surmise (as narrow-minded and
passionate adversaries are apt in such cases to do) that this picture of
human nature was copied from himself; that all those constituents of
humanity which he rejected from his table of motives, were wanting in
his own breast. The unusual strength of his early feelings of virtue,
was, as we have seen, the original cause of all his speculations; and a
noble sense of morality, and especially of justice, guides and pervades
them all. But having been early accustomed to keep before his mind’s eye
the happiness of mankind (or rather of the whole sentient world), as the
only thing desirable in itself, or which rendered anything else
desirable, he confounded all disinterested feelings which he found in
himself, with the desire of ggeneralg happiness: just as some religious
writers, who loved virtue for its own sake as much perhaps as men could
do, habitually confounded their love of virtue with their fear of hell.
It would have required greater subtlety than Bentham possessed, to
distinguish from each other, feelings which, from long habit, always
acted in the same direction; and his want of imagination prevented him
from reading the distinction, where it is legible enough, in the hearts
of others.

Edition: current; Page: [97]
Accordingly, he has not been followed in this grand oversight by any of
the able men who, from the extent of their intellectual obligations to
him, have been regarded as his disciples. They may have followed him in
his doctrine of utility, and in his rejection of hah moral sense as
ithei test of right and wrong: but while repudiating it as such, they
have, with Hartley, acknowledged it as a fact in human nature; they have
endeavoured to account for it, to assign its laws: nor are they justly
chargeable either with undervaluing this part of our nature, or with any
disposition to throw it into the background of their speculations. If
janyj part of the influence of this cardinal error has extended itself
to them, it is circuitously, and through the effect on their minds of
other parts of Bentham’s doctrines.

Sympathy, the only disinterested motive which Bentham recognised, he
felt the inadequacy of, except in certain limited cases, as a security
for virtuous action. Personal affection, he well knew, is as liable to
operate to the injury of third parties, and requires as much to be kept
kunder governmentk, as any other feeling whatever: and general
philanthropy, considered as a motive influencing mankind in general, he
estimated at its true value when divorced from the feeling of duty—as
the very weakest and most unsteady of all feelings. There remained, as a
motive by which mankind are influenced, and by which they may be guided
to their good, only personal interest. Accordingly, Bentham’s idea of
the world is that of a collection of persons pursuing each his separate
interest or pleasure, and the prevention of whom from jostling one
another more than lis unavoidable, mayl be attempted by hopes and fears
derived from three sources—the law, religion, and public opinion. To
these three powers, considered as binding human conduct, he gave the
name of sanctions: the political sanction, operating by the rewards and
penalties of the law; the religious sanction, by those expected from the
Ruler of the Universe; and the popular, which he characteristically
calls also the moral sanction, operating through the pains and pleasures
arising from the favour or disfavour of our fellow-creatures.[*]

Such is Bentham’s theory of the world. And now, in a spirit neither of
apology nor of censure, but of calm appreciation, we are to inquire how
far this view of human nature and life will carry any one:—how much it
will accomplish in morals, and how much in political and social
philosophy: what it will do for the individual, and what for society.

It will do nothing for the conduct of the individual, beyond prescribing
some of the mmorem obvious dictates of worldly prudence, and outward
Edition: current; Page: [98] probity and beneficence. There is no need
to expatiate on the deficiencies of a system of ethics which does not
pretend to aid individuals in the formation of their own character;
which recognises no such wish as that of self-culture, we may even say
no such power, as existing in human nature; and if it did recognise,
could furnish little assistance to that ngreat dutyn, because it
overlooks the existence of about half of the whole number of mental
feelings which human beings are capable of, including all those of which
the direct objects are states of their own mind.

Morality consists of two parts. One of these is self-education; the
training, by the human being himself, of his affections and will. That
department is a blank in Bentham’s system. The other and coequal part,
the regulation of his outward actions, must be altogether halting and
imperfect without the first; for how can we judge in what manner many an
action will affect oeveno the worldly interests of ourselves or others,
unless we take in, as part of the question, its influence on the
regulation of our, or their, affections and desires? A moralist on
Bentham’s principles may get as far as this, that phep ought not to
slay, burn, or steal; but what will be his qualifications for regulating
the nicer shades of human behaviour, or for laying down even the greater
moralities as to those facts in human life qwhich tend toq influence the
depths of the character quite independently of any influence on worldly
circumstances—such, for instance, as the sexual relations, or those of
family in general, or any other social and sympathetic connexions of an
intimate kind? The moralities of these questions depend ressentiallyr on
considerations swhich Bentham never so much as took into the account;
and when he happened to be in the right, it was always, and necessarily,
on wrong or insufficient groundss.

It is fortunate for the world that Bentham’s taste lay rather in the
direction of jurisprudential than of properly ethical inquiry. Nothing
expressly of the latter kind has been published under his name, except
the Deontology—a book scarcely evert, in our experience,t alluded to by
any admirer of Bentham without deep regret that it ever saw the light.
We did not expect from Bentham correct systematic views of ethics, or a
sound treatment of any question the moralities of which require a
profound knowledge of the human heart; but we did uanticipateu that the
greater moral questions would have been boldly plunged into, and at
least a searching criticism produced of the received opinions; we did
not expect that the petite morale almost alone Edition: current; Page:
[99] would have been treated, and that with the most pedantic
minuteness, and on the quid pro quo principles which regulate vtradev.
The book has not even the value which would belong to an authentic
exhibition of the legitimate consequences of an erroneous line of
thought; for the style proves it to have been so entirely rewritten,
that it is impossible to tell how much or how little of it is Bentham’s.
The collected edition, now in progress, will not, it is said, include
Bentham’s religious writings; these, although we think wmost ofw them of
exceedingly small value, are at least his, and the world has a right to
whatever light they throw upon the constitution of his mind. But the
omission of the Deontology would be an act of editorial discretion which
we should deem entirely justifiable.

If Bentham’s theory of life can do so little for the individual, what
can it do for society?

It will enable a society which has attained a certain state of spiritual
development, and the maintenance of which in that state is otherwise
provided for, to prescribe the rules by which it may protect its
material interests. It will do nothing (except sometimes as an
instrument in the hands of a higher xdoctrinex) for the spiritual
interests of society; nor does it suffice of itself even for the
material interests. That which alone causes any material interests to
exist, which alone enables any body of human beings to exist as a
society, is national character: that it is, which causes one nation to
succeed in ywhaty it attempts, another to fail; one nation to understand
and aspire to elevated things, another to grovel in mean ones; which
makes the greatness of one nation lasting, and dooms another to early
and rapid decay. The true teacher of the fitting social arrangements for
England, France, or America, is the one who can point out how the
English, French, or American character can be improved, and how it has
been made what it is. A philosophy of laws and institutions, not founded
on a philosophy of national character, is an absurdity. But what could
Bentham’s opinion be worth on national character? How could he, whose
mind contained so few and so poor types of individual character, rise to
that higher generalization? All he can do is but to indicate means by
which, in any given state of the national mind, the material interests
of society can be protected; saving the question, of which others must
judge,z whether the use of those means would have, on the national
character, any injurious influence.

We have arrived, then, at a sort of estimate of what a philosophy like
Bentham’s can do. It can teach the means of organizing and regulating
the merely business part of the social arrangements. Whatever can be
understood or whatever done without reference to moral influences, his
philosophy is equal to; where those influences require to be taken into
account, it is at Edition: current; Page: [100] fault. He committed the
mistake of supposing that the abusinessa part of human affairs was the
whole of them; all at least that the legislator and the moralist had to
do with. Not that he disregarded moral influences when he perceived
them; but his want of imagination, small experience of human feelings,
and ignorance of the filiation and connexion of feelings with one
another, made this rarely the case.

The bbusinessb part is accordingly the only province of human affairs
which Bentham has cultivated with any success; into which he has
introduced any considerable number of comprehensive and luminous
practical principles. That is the field of his greatness; and there he
is indeed great. He has swept away the accumulated cobwebs of
centuries—he has untied knots which the efforts of the ablest thinkers,
age after age, had only drawn tighter; and it is no exaggeration to say
of him that over a great part of the field he was the first to shed the
light of reason.

We turn with pleasure from what Bentham could not do, to what he did. It
is an ungracious task to call a great benefactor of mankind to account
for not being a greater—to insist upon the errors of a man who has
originated more new truths, has given to the world more sound practical
lessons, than it ever received, except in a few glorious instances, from
any other individual. The unpleasing part of our work is ended. We are
now to show the greatness of the man; the grasp which his intellect took
of the subjects with which it was fitted to deal; the giant’s task which
was before him, and the hero’s courage andc strength with which he
achieved it. Nor let that which he did be deemed of small account
because its province was limited: man has but the choice to go a little
way in many paths, or a great way in only one. The field of Bentham’s
labours was like the space between two parallel lines; narrow to excess
in one direction, in another it reached to infinity.

Bentham’s speculations, as we are already aware, began with law; and in
that department he accomplished his greatest triumphs. He found the
philosophy of law a chaos, he left it a science: he found the practice
of the law an Augean stable, he turned the river into it which is mining
and sweeping away mound after mound of its rubbish.

Without djoining ind the exaggerated invectives against lawyers, which
Bentham sometimes permitted etoe himself, or making one portion of
society alone accountable for the fault of all, we may say that
circumstances had made English lawyers in a peculiar degree liable to
the reproach of Voltaire, who defines lawyers the “conservators of
ancient barbarous usages.”[*] The Edition: current; Page: [101] basis of
the English law was, and still is, the feudal system. That system, like
all those which existed as custom before they were established as law,
possessed a certain degree of suitableness to the wants of the society
among whom it grew up—that is to say, of a tribe of rude soldiers,
holding a conquered people in subjection, and dividing its fspoilsf
among themselves. Advancing civilization had, however, converted this
armed encampment of barbarous warriors in the midst of enemies reduced
to slavery, into an industrious, commercial, rich, and free people. The
laws which were suitable to the first of these states of society, could
have no manner of relation to the circumstances of the second; which
could not even have come into existence unless something had been done
to adapt those laws to it. But the adaptation was not the result of
thought and design; it arose not from any comprehensive consideration of
the new state of society and its exigencies. What was done, was done by
a struggle of centuries between the old barbarism and the new
civilization; between the feudal aristocracy of conquerors, holding fast
to the rude system they had established, and the conquered effecting
their emancipation. The last was the growing power, but was never strong
enough to break its bonds, though ever and anon some weak point gave
way. Hence the law came to be like the costume of a full-grown man who
had never put off the clothes made for him when he first went to school.
Band after band had burst, and, as the rent widened, then, without
removing anything except what might drop off of itself, the hole was
darned, or patches of fresh law were brought from the nearest shop and
stuck on. Hence all ages of English history have given one another
grendezvousg in English law; their several products may be seen all
together, not interfused, but heaped one upon another, as hmany
differenth ages of the earth may be read in some perpendicular section
of its surface—the deposits of each successive period not substituted
but superimposed on those of the preceding. And in the world of law no
less than in the physical world, every commotion and conflict of the
elements has left its mark behind in some break or irregularity of the
strata: every struggle which ever rent the bosom of society is apparent
in the disjointed condition of the part of the field of law which covers
the spot: nay, the very traps and pitfalls which one contending party
set for another are still standing, and the teeth not of hyenas only,
but of foxes and all cunning animals, are imprinted on the curious
remains found in these antediluvian caves.

In the English law, as in the Roman before it, the adaptations of
barbarous laws to the growth of civilized society were made chiefly by
stealth. They were generally made by the courts of justice, who could
not help reading the new wants of mankind in the cases between man and
man which came before them; but who, having no authority to make new
laws for those new wants, Edition: current; Page: [102] were obliged to
do the work covertly, and evade the jealousy and opposition of an
ignorant, prejudiced, and for the most part brutal and tyrannical
legislature. Some of the most necessary of these improvements, such as
the giving force of law to itrustsi, and the breaking up of jentailsj,
were effected in actual opposition to the strongly-declared will of
Parliament, whose clumsy hands, no match for the astuteness of judges,
could not, after repeated trials, manage to make any law which the
judges could not find a trick for rendering inoperative. The whole
history of the contest about trusts may still be read in the words of a
conveyance, as could the contest about entails, till the abolition of
fine and recovery by a bill of the present Attorney-General;[*] but
dearly did the client pay for the cabinet of historical curiosities
which he was obliged to purchase every time that he made a settlement of
his estate. The result of this mode of improving social institutions
was, that whatever new things were done had to be done in consistency
with old forms and names; and the laws were improved with much the same
effect as if, in the improvement of agriculture, the plough could only
have been introduced by making it look like a spade; or as if, when the
primeval practice of ploughing by the horse’s tail gave way to the
innovation of harness, the tail, for form’s sake, had still remained
attached to the plough.

When the conflicts were over, and the mixed mass settled down into
something like a fixed state, and that state a very profitable and
therefore a very agreeable one to lawyers, they, following the natural
tendency of the human mind, began to theorize upon it, and, in obedience
to necessity, had to digest it and give it a systematic form. It was
from this thing of shreds and patches, in which the only part that
approached to order or system was the early barbarous part, kalreadyk
more than half superseded, that English lawyers had to construct, by
induction and abstraction, their philosophy of law; and without the
logical habits and general intellectual cultivation which the lawyers of
the Roman empire brought to a similar task. Bentham found the philosophy
of law what English practising lawyers had made it; a ljumblel, in which
real and personal property, law and equity, felony, præmunire,
misprision, and misdemeanour, words without a vestige of meaning when
detached from the history of English institutions—mere tide-marks to
point out the line which the sea and the shore, in their secular
struggles, had adjusted as their mutual boundary—all passed for
distinctions inherent in the nature of things; in which every absurdity,
every lucrative abuse, had a reason found for it—a reason which only now
and then even pretended to be drawn from expediency; most commonly a
technical reason, one of mere Edition: current; Page: [103] form,
derived from the old barbarous system. While the theory of the law was
in this state, to describe what the practice of it was would require the
pen of a Swift, or of Bentham himself. The whole progress of a suit at
law seemed like a series of contrivances for lawyers’ profit, in which
the suitors were regarded as the prey; and if the poor were not the
helpless victims of every Sir Giles Overreach[*] who could pay the
price, they might thank opinion and manners for it, not the law.

It may be fancied by some people that Bentham did an easy thing in
merely calling all this absurd, and proving it to be so. But he began
the contest a young man, and he had grown old before he had any
followers. History will one day refuse to give credit to the intensity
of the superstition which, till very lately, protected this mischievous
mess from examination or doubt—mpassedm off the charming representations
of Blackstone for a just estimate of the English law, and nproclaimedn
the shame of human reason to be the perfection of it. Glory to Bentham
that he has dealt to this superstition its deathblow—that he has been
the Hercules of this hydra, the St. George of this pestilent dragon! The
honour is all his—nothing but his peculiar qualities could have done it.
There were owantedo his indefatigable perseverance, his firm
self-reliance, needing no support from other men’s opinion; his
intensely practical turn of mind, his synthetical habits—above all, his
peculiar method. Metaphysicians, armed with vague generalities, had
often tried their hands at the subject, and left it no more advanced
than they found it. Law is a matter of business; means and ends are the
things to be considered in it, not abstractions: vagueness was not to be
met by vagueness, but by definiteness and precision: details were not to
be encountered with generalities, but with details. Nor could any
progress be made, on such a subject, by merely showing that existing
things were bad; it was necessary also to show how they might be made
better. No great man whom we read of was qualified to do this thing
except Bentham. He has done it, once and for everp.

Into the qparticularsq of what Bentham has done we cannot enter: many
hundred pages would be required to give a tolerable abstract of it. To
sum up our estimate under a few heads. First: he has expelled mysticism
from the philosophy of law, and set the example of viewing laws in a
practical light, as means to certain definite and precise ends.
Secondly: he has cleared up the confusion and vagueness attaching to the
idea of law in general, to the idea of a body of laws, and rthe variousr
general ideas therein involved. Thirdly: he demonstrated the necessity
and practicability of codification, or Edition: current; Page: [104] the
conversion of all law into a written and systematically arranged code:
not like the Code Napoleon, a code without a single definition,
requiring a constant reference to anterior precedent for the meaning ofs
its technical terms; but tonet containing within itself all that is
necessary for its own interpretation, together with a perpetual
provision for its own emendation and improvement. He has shown of what
parts such a code would consist; the relation of those parts to one
another; and by his distinctions and classifications has done very much
towards showing what should be, or might be, its nomenclature and
arrangement. What he has left undone, he has made it comparatively easy
for others to do. Fourthly: he has taken a systematic view* of the
exigencies of society for which the civil code is intended to provide,
and of the principles of human nature by which its provisions are to be
tested: and this view, defective (as we have already intimated) wherever
spiritual interests require to be taken into account, is excellent for
that large portion of the laws of any country which are designed for the
protection of material interests. Fifthly: (to say nothing of the
subject of punishment, for which something considerable had been done
before) he found the philosophy of judicial procedure, including that of
judicial establishments and of evidence, in a more wretched state than
even any other part of the philosophy of law; he carried it at once
almost to perfection. He left it with every one of its principles
established, and little remaining to be done even in the suggestion of
practical arrangements.

These assertions in behalf of Bentham may be left,u without fear for the
result, in the hands of those who are competent to judge of them. There
are vnowv even in the highest seats of justice,w men to whom the claims
made for him will notx appear extravagant. Principle after principle of
those propounded by him is moreover making its way by infiltration into
the understandings most shut against his influence, and driving nonsense
and prejudice from one corner of them to another. The reform of the laws
of any country according to his principles, can only be gradual, and may
be long ere it is accomplished; but the work is in progress, and both
parliament and the judges are every year doing something, and often
something not inconsiderable, towards the forwarding of it.

It seems proper here to take notice of an accusation sometimes made both
against Bentham and against the principle of codification—as if they
required one uniform suit of ready-made laws for all times and all
states of society. Edition: current; Page: [105] The doctrine of
codification, as the word imports, relates to the form only of the laws,
not their substance; it does not concern itself with what the laws
should be, but declares that whatever they are, they ought to be
systematically arranged, and fixed down to a determinate form of words.
To the accusation, so far as it affects Bentham, one of the essays in
the ycollection of his works (theny for the first time published in
English) is a complete answer: that “On the Influence of Time and Place
in Matters of Legislation.”[*] It may there be seen that the different
exigencies of different nations with respect to law, occupied his
attention as systematically as any other portion of the wants which
render laws necessary: with the limitations, it is true, which were set
to all his speculations by the imperfections of his theory of human
nature. For, taking, as we have seen, next to no account of national
character and the causes which form and maintain it, he was precluded
from considering, except to a very limited extent, the laws of a country
as an instrument of national culture: one of their most important
aspects, and in which they must of course vary according to the degree
and kind of culture already attained; as a tutor gives his pupil
different lessons according to the progress already made in his
education. The same laws would not have suited our wild ancestors,
accustomed to rude independence, and a people of Asiatics bowed down by
military despotism: the slave needs to be trained to govern himself, the
savage to submit to the government of others. The same laws will not
suit the English, who zdistrust everything which emanates from general
principles, and the French, who distrust whatever does not so emanatez.
Very different institutions are needed to train to the perfection of
their nature, or to constitute into a united nation and social polity,
an essentially subjective people like thea Germans, and an essentially
objective people like those of Northern and Central Italy; the one
affectionate and dreamy, the other passionate and worldly; the one
trustful and loyal, the other calculating and suspicious; the one not
practical enough, the other overmuch; the one wanting individuality, the
other fellow-feeling; the one failing for want of exacting enough for
itself, the other for want of conceding enough to others. Bentham was
little accustomed to look at institutions in their relation to these
topics. The effects of this oversight must of course be perceptible
throughout his speculations, but we do not think the errors into which
it led him very material in the greater part of civil and penal law: it
is in the department of constitutional legislation that they were
fundamental.

The Benthamic theory of government has made so much noise in the
Edition: current; Page: [106] world of late years; it has held such a
conspicuous place among Radical philosophies, and Radical modes of
thinking have participated so much more largely than any others in its
spirit, that many worthy persons imagine there is no other Radical
philosophy extant. Leaving such bpeopleb to discover their cmistakec as
they may, we shall expend a few words in attempting to discriminate
between the truth and error of this celebrated theory.

There are three great questions in government. First, to what authority
is it for the good of the people that they should be subject? Secondly,
how are they to be induced to obey that authority? The answers to these
two questions vary indefinitely, according to the degree and kind of
civilization and cultivation already attained by a people, and their
peculiar aptitudes for receiving more. Comes next a third question, not
liable to so much variation, namely, by what means are the abuses of
this authority to be checked? This third question is the only one of the
three to which Bentham seriously applies himself, and he gives it the
only answer it admits of—Responsibility: responsibility to persons whose
interest, whose obvious and recognisable interest, accords with the end
in view—good government. This being granted, it is next to be asked, in
what body of persons this identity of interest with good government,
that is, with the interest of the whole community, is to be found? In
nothing less, says Bentham, than the numerical majority: nor, say we,
even in the numerical majority itself; of no portion of the community
less than all, will the interest coincide, at all times and in all
respects, with the interest of all. But, since power given to all, by a
representative government, is in fact given to a majority; we are
obliged to fall back upon the first of our three questions, namely,
under what authority is it for the good of the people that they be
placed? And if to this the answer be, under that of a majority among
themselves, Bentham’s system cannot be questioned. This one assumption
being made, his Constitutional Code[*] is admirable. That extraordinary
power which he possessed, of at once seizing comprehensive principles,
and scheming out minute details, is brought into play with surpassing
vigour in devising means for preventing rulers from escaping from the
control of the majority; for enabling and inducing the majority to
exercise that control unremittingly; and for providing them with
servants of every desirable endowment, moral and intellectual,
compatible with entire subservience to their will.

But is this fundamental doctrine of Bentham’s political philosophy an
universal truth? Is it, at all times and places, good for mankind to be
under the absolute authority of the majority of themselves? We say the
dauthorityd, Edition: current; Page: [107] not the epoliticale authority
merely, because it is chimerical to suppose that whatever has absolute
power over men’s bodies will not arrogate it over their minds—will not
seek to control (not perhaps by legal penalties, but by the persecutions
of society) opinions and feelings which depart from its standard; will
not attempt to shape the education of the young by itsf model, and to
extinguish all books, all schools, all combinations of individuals for
joint action upon society, which may be attempted for the purpose of
keeping alive a spirit at variance with its own. Is it, we say, the
proper condition of man, in all ages and nations, to be under the
despotism of Public Opinion?

It is very conceivable that such a doctrine should find acceptance from
some of the noblest spirits, in a time of reaction against the
aristocratic governments of modern Europe; governments founded on the
entire sacrifice (except so far as prudence, and sometimes humane
feeling interfere) of the community generally, to the self-interest and
ease of a few. European reformers have been accustomed to see the
numerical majority everywhere unjustly depressed, everywhere trampled
upon, or at the best overlooked, by governments; nowhere possessing
power enough to extort redress of their most positive grievances,
provision for their mental culture, or even to prevent themselves from
being taxed avowedly for the pecuniary profit of the ruling classes. To
see these things, and to seek to put an end to them, by means (among
other things) of giving more political power to the majority,
constitutes Radicalism; and it is because so many in this age have felt
this wish, and have felt that the realization of it was an object worthy
of men’s devoting their lives to it, that such a theory of government as
Bentham’s has found favour with them. But, though to pass from one form
of bad government to another be the ordinary fate of mankind,
philosophers ought not to make themselves parties to it, by sacrificing
one portion of important truth to another.

The numerical majority of any society whatever, must consist of persons
all standing in the same social position, and having, in the main, the
same pursuits, namely, unskilled manual labourers; and we mean no
disparagement to them: whatever we say to their disadvantage, we say
equally of a numerical majority of shopkeepers, or of squires. Where
there is identity of position and pursuits, there also will be identity
of partialities, passions, and prejudices; and to give to any goneg set
of partialities, passions, and prejudices, absolute power, without
counter-balance from partialities, passions, and prejudices of a
different sort, is the way to render the correction of any of those
imperfections hopeless; to make one narrow, mean type of human nature
universal and perpetual, and to crush every influence which tends to the
further improvement of man’s intellectual and moral nature. There must,
we know, be some paramount power in society; and that the majority
should Edition: current; Page: [108] be that power, is on the whole
right, not as being just in itself, but as being less unjust than any
other footing on which the matter can be placed. But it is necessary
that the institutions of society should make provision for keeping up,
in some form or other, as a corrective to partial views, and a shelter
for freedom of thought and individuality of character, a perpetual and
standing Opposition to the will of the majority. All countries which
have long continued progressive, or been durably great, have been so
because there has been an organized opposition to the ruling power, of
whatever kind that power was: plebeians to patricians, clergy to kings,
freethinkers to clergy, kings to barons, commons to king and
aristocracy. Almost all the greatest men who ever lived have formed part
of such an Opposition. Wherever some such quarrel has not been going
on—wherever it has been terminated by the complete victory of one of the
contending principles, and no new contest has taken the place of the
old—society has eitherh hardened into Chinese stationariness, or fallen
into dissolution. A centre of resistance, round which all the moral and
social elements which the ruling power views with disfavour may cluster
themselves, and behind whose bulwarks they may find shelter from the
attempts of that power to hunt them out of existence, is as necessary
where the opinion of the majority is sovereign, as where the ruling
power is a hierarchy or an aristocracy. Where no such point d’appui
exists, there the human race will inevitably degenerate; and the
question, whether the United States, for instance, will in time sink
into another China (also a most commercial and industrious nation),
resolves itself, to us, into the question, whether such a centre of
resistance will gradually evolve itself or not.

These things being considered, we cannot think that Bentham made the
most useful employment which might have been made of his great powers,
when, not content with enthroning the majority as sovereign, by means of
universal suffrage without king or house of lords, he exhausted all the
resources of ingenuity in devising means for riveting the yoke of public
opinion closer and closer round the necks of all public functionaries,
and excluding every possibility of the exercise of the slightest or most
temporary influence either by a minority, or by the functionary’s own
notions of right. Surely when iany power has been made the strongest
power, enough has been done for it;i care is thenceforth wanted rather
to prevent that strongest power from swallowing up all others. Wherever
all the forces of society act in one single direction, jthe just claimsj
of the individual human being are in extreme peril. The power of the
majority is salutary so far as it is used kdefensively, not
offensivelyk—as its exertion is tempered by respect for the personality
of the Edition: current; Page: [109] individual, and ldeference tol
superiority of cultivated intelligence. If Bentham had employed himself
in pointing out the means by which institutions fundamentally democratic
might be best adapted to the preservation and strengthening of those two
sentiments, he would have done something more permanently valuable, and
more worthy of his great intellect. Montesquieu, with the lights of the
present age, would have done it; and we are possibly destined to receive
this benefit from the Montesquieu of our own times, M. de Tocqueville.

Do we then consider Bentham’s political speculations useless? Far from
it. We consider them only one-sided. He has brought out into a strong
light, has cleared from a thousand confusions and misconceptions, and
pointed out with admirable skill the best means of promoting, one of the
ideal qualities of a perfect government—identity of interest between the
trustees and the community for whom they hold their power in trust. This
quality is not attainable in its ideal perfection, and must moreover be
striven for with a perpetual eye to all other requisites; but those
other requisites must still more be striven for without losing sight of
this: and when the slightest postponement is made of it to any other
end, the sacrifice, often necessary, is never unattended with evil.*
Bentham has pointed out how complete this sacrifice is in modern
European societies: how exclusively, partial and sinister interests are
the ruling power there, with only such check as is imposed by public
opinion—which being thus, in the existing order of things, perpetually
apparent as a source of good, he was led by natural partiality to
exaggerate its intrinsic excellence. This sinister interest of rulers
Bentham hunted through all its disguises, and especially through those
which hide it from the men themselves who are influenced by it. The
greatest service rendered by him to the philosophy of universal human
nature, is, perhaps, his millustrationm of what he terms
“interest-begotten prejudice”—the ncommonn tendency of man to make a
duty and a virtue of following his self-interest.[*] The idea, it is
true, was far from being peculiarly Bentham’s: the artifices by which we
persuade ourselves that we are not yielding to our selfish inclinations
when we are, had attracted the notice of all moralists, and had been
probed by religious writers to a depth as much below Bentham’s, as their
knowledge of the profundities and windings of the human heart was
superior to his. But it is selfish interest in the form of
class-interest, and the class morality founded thereon, which Bentham
has illustrated: the Edition: current; Page: [110] manner in which any
set of persons who mix much together, and have a common interest, are
apt to make that common interest their standard of virtue, and the
social feelings of the members of the class are made to play into the
hands of their selfish ones; whence the union so often exemplified in
history, between the most heroic personal disinterestedness and the most
odious class-selfishness. This was one of Bentham’s leading ideas, and
almost the only one by which he contributed to the elucidation of
history: much of which, except so far as this explained it, must have
been entirely inexplicable to him. The idea was given him by Helvetius,
whose book, De l’Esprit,[*] is one continued and most acute commentary
on it; and, together with the other great idea of Helvetius, the
influence of circumstances on character, it will make his name live by
the side of Rousseau, when omost ofo the other French pmetaphysiciansp
of the eighteenth century qwillq be extant as such only in literary
history.

In the brief view which we have been able to give of Bentham’s
philosophy, it may surprise the reader that we have said so little about
the first principle of it, with which his name is more identified than
with anything else; the “principle of utility,” or, as he afterwards
named it, “the greatest-happiness principle.”[†] It is a topic on which
much were to be said, if there were room, or if it were in reality
necessary for the just estimation of Bentham. On an occasion more
suitable for a discussion of the metaphysics of morality, or on which
the relucidationsr necessary to make an opinion on so abstract a subject
intelligible could be conveniently given, we should be fully prepared to
state what we think on this subject. sAt present we shall only say, that
while, under proper explanations, we entirely agree with Bentham in his
principle, we do not hold with him that all right thinking on the
details of morals depends on its express assertion.s We think utility,
or happiness, much too complex and indefinite an end to be sought except
through the medium of various secondary ends, concerning which there may
be, and often is, agreement among persons who differ in their ultimate
standard; and about which there does in fact prevail a much greater
unanimity among thinking persons, than might be supposed from their
diametrical divergence on the great questions of moral metaphysics. As
mankind are much more nearly of one nature, than of one opinion about
their own nature, they Edition: current; Page: [111] aret more easily
brought to agree in their intermediate principles, vera illa et media
axiomata, as Bacon says,[*] than in their first principles: and the
attempt to make the bearings of actions upon the ultimate end more
evident than they can be made by referring them to the intermediate
ends, and to estimate their value by a direct reference to human
happiness, generally terminates in attaching most importance, not to
those effects which are really the greatest, but to those which can most
easily be pointed to and individually identified. Those who adopt
utility as a standard can seldom apply it truly except through the
secondary principles; those who reject it, generally do no more than
erect those secondary principles into first principles. uIt is when two
or more of the secondary principles conflict, that a direct appeal to
some first principle becomes necessary; and then commences the practical
importance of the utilitarian controversy; which is, in other respects,u
a question of arrangement and logical subordination rather than of
practice; important principally in a purely scientific point of view,
for the sake of the systematic unity and coherency of ethical
philosophy.v It is probable, however, that to the principle of utility
we owe all that Bentham did; that it was necessary to him to find a
first principle which he could receive as self-evident, and to which he
could attach all his other doctrines as logical consequences: that to
him systematic unity was an indispensable condition of his confidence in
his own intellect. And there is something further to be remarkedw.
Whetherw happiness be or be not the end to which morality should be
referred—that it be referred to an end of some sort, and not left in the
dominion of vague feeling or inexplicable internal conviction, that it
be made a matter of reason and calculation, and not merely of sentiment,
is essential to the very idea of moral philosophy; is, in fact, what
renders argument or discussion on moral questions possible. That the
morality of actions depends on the consequences which they tend to
produce, is the doctrine of rational persons of all schools; that the
good or evil of those consequences is measured solely by pleasure or
pain, is all of the doctrine of the school of utility, which is peculiar
to it.

In so far as Bentham’s adoption of the principle of utility induced him
to fix his attention upon the xconsequencesx of actions as the
consideration determining their morality, so far yhe was indisputablyy
in the right path: Edition: current; Page: [112] though to go far in it
without wandering, there was needed a greater knowledge of the formation
of character, and of the consequences of actions upon the agent’s own
frame of mind, than Bentham possessed. His want of power to estimate
this class of consequences, together with his want of the degree of
modest zdeference which, from those who have not competent experience of
their own, is due to the experience of others on that part of the
subject, greatly limit the value of his speculationsz on questions of
practical ethics.

He is chargeable also with another error, which it would be improper to
pass over, because nothing has tended more to place him in opposition to
the common feelings of mankind, and to give to his philosophy that cold,
mechanical, and ungenial air which characterizes the popular idea of a
Benthamite. This error, or rather one-sidedness, belongs to him not as a
utilitarian, but as a moralist by profession, and in common with almost
all professed moralists, whether religious or philosophical: it is that
of treating the moral view of actions and characters, which is
unquestionably the first and most important mode of looking at them, as
if it were the asolea one: whereas it is only one of three, by all of
which our sentiments towards the human being may be, ought to be, and
without entirely crushing our own nature cannot but be, materially
influenced. Every human action has three aspects: its moral aspect, or
that of its right and wrong; its æsthetic aspect, or that of its beauty;
its sympathetic aspect, or that of its loveableness. The first addresses
itself to our reason and conscience; the second to our imagination; the
third to our human fellow-feeling. According to the first, we approve or
disapprove; according to the second, we admire or despise; according to
the third, we love, pity, or dislike. The bmoralityb of an action
depends on its foreseeable consequences; its beauty, and its
loveableness, or the reverse, depend on the qualities which it is
evidence of. Thus, a lie is wrong, because its effect is to mislead, and
because it tends to destroy the confidence of man in man; it is also
mean, because it is cowardly—because it proceeds from not daring to face
the consequences of telling the truth—or at best is evidence of want of
that power to compass our ends by straightforward means, which is
conceived as properly belonging to every person not deficient in energy
or in understanding. The action of Brutus in sentencing his sons was
right, because it was executing a law essential to the freedom of his
country, against persons of whose guilt there was no doubt: it was
admirable, because it evinced a rare degree of patriotism, courage, and
self-control; but there was nothing loveable in it; it affords ceitherc
no presumption in regard to loveable qualities, dord a presumption of
their deficiency. If one of the sons had engaged in the conspiracy from
affection for the other, ehise action would Edition: current; Page:
[113] have been loveable, though neither moral nor admirable. It is not
possible for any sophistry to confound these three modes of viewing an
action; but it is very possible to adhere to one of them exclusively,
and lose sight of the rest. Sentimentality consists in setting the last
two of the three above the first; the error of moralists in general, and
of Bentham, is to sink the two latter entirely. This is pre-eminently
the case with Bentham: he both wrote and felt as if the moral standard
ought not only to be paramount (which it ought), but to be alone; as if
it ought to be the sole master of all our actions, and even of all our
sentiments; as if either to admire or like, or despise or dislike a
person for any action which neither does good nor harm, or which does
not do a good or a harm proportioned to the sentiment entertained, were
an injustice and a prejudice. He carried this so far, that there were
certain phrases which, being expressive of what he considered to be this
groundless liking or aversion, he could not bear to hear pronounced in
his presence. Among these phrases were those of good and bad taste. He
thought it an insolent piece of dogmatism in one person to praise or
condemn another finf a matter of taste: as if men’s likings and
dislikings, on things in themselves indifferent, were not gfull ofg the
most important inferences as to every point of their character; as if a
person’s tastes did not show him to be wise or a fool, cultivated or
ignorant, gentle or rough,h sensitive or callous, generous or sordid,
benevolent or selfish, conscientious or depraved.

Connected with the same topic are Bentham’s peculiar opinions on poetry.
Much imore has been said than there is any foundation fori, about his
contempt for the pleasures of imagination, and for the fine arts. Music
was throughout life his favourite amusement; painting, sculpture, and
the other arts addressed to the eye, he was so far from holding in any
contempt, that he occasionally recognises them as means employable for
important social ends; though his ignorance of the deeper springs of
human character prevented him j(as it prevents most Englishmen)j from
suspecting how profoundly such things enter into the moral nature of
man, and into the education both of the individual and of the race. But
towards poetry in the narrower sense, that which employs the language of
words, he entertained no favour. Words, he thought, were perverted from
their proper office when they were employed in uttering anything but
precise logical truth. He says, somewhere in his works, that, “quantity
of pleasure being equal, push-pin is as good as poetry:”[*] but this is
only a paradoxical way of stating what he would equally have said of the
things which he most valued and admired. Another aphorism is attributed
to him, which is much more characteristic Edition: current; Page: [114]
of his view of this subject: “All poetry is misrepresentation.”[*]
Poetry, he thought, consisted essentially in exaggeration for effect: in
proclaiming some one view of a thing very emphatically, and suppressing
all the limitations and qualifications. This trait of character seems to
us a curious example of what Mr. Carlyle strikingly calls “the
completeness of limited men.” Here is a philosopher who is happy within
his narrow boundary as no man of indefinite range ever was; who flatters
himself that he is so completely emancipated from the essential law of
poor human intellect, by which it can only see one thing at a time well,
that he can even turn round upon the imperfection and lay a solemn
interdict upon it. Did Bentham really suppose that it is in kpoetryk
only that propositions cannot be exactly true, cannot contain in
themselves all the limitations and qualifications with which they
require to be taken when applied to practice? We have seen how far his
own prose propositions are from realizing this Utopia: and even the
attempt to approachl it would be incompatible not with poetry merely,
but with oratory, andm popular writing of every kind. Bentham’s charge
is true to the fullest extent; all writing which undertakes to make men
nfeeln truths as well as oseeo them, does take up one point at a time,
does seek to impress that, to drive that home, to make it sink into and
colour the whole mind of the reader or hearer. It is justified in doing
so, if the portion of truth which it thus enforces be that which is
called for by the occasion. All writing addressed to the feelings has a
natural tendency to exaggeration; but Bentham should have remembered
that in this, as in many things, we must aim at too much, to be assured
of doing enough.

From the same principle in Bentham came the intricate and involved
style, which makes his later writings books for the student only, not
the general reader. It was from his perpetually aiming at impracticable
precision. Nearly all his earlier, and many parts of his later writings,
are models, as we have already observed, of light, playful, and popular
style: a Benthamiana might be made of passages worthy of Addison or
Goldsmith. But in his later years and more advanced studies, he fell
into a Latin or German structure of sentence, foreign to the genius of
the English language. He could not bear, for the sake of clearness and
the reader’s ease, to say, as ordinary men are content to do, a little
more than the truth in one sentence, and correct it in the next. The
whole of the qualifying remarks which phe intended to makep, he insisted
upon imbedding as parentheses in the very middle of the sentence itself.
And thus the sense being so long suspended, and attention being required
to the accessory ideas before the principal idea had been properly
seized, it became difficult, without some practice, to make out the
train of Edition: current; Page: [115] thought. It is fortunate that so
many of the most important parts of his writings are free from this
defect. We regard it as a reductio ad absurdum of his objection to
poetry. In trying to write in a manner against which the same objection
should not lie, he could stop nowhere short of utter unreadableness, and
after all attained no more accuracy than is compatible with opinions as
imperfect and one-sided as those of any poet orq sentimentalist
breathing. Judge then in what state literature and philosophy would be,
and what chance they would have of influencing the multitude, if his
objection were allowed, and all styles of writing banished which would
not stand his test.

We must here close this brief and imperfect view of Bentham and his
doctrines; in which many parts of the subject have been entirely
untouched, and no part done justice to, but which at least proceeds from
an intimate familiarity with his writings, and is rnearlyr the first
attempt at an impartial estimate of his character as a philosopher, and
of the result of his labours to the world.

After every abatement, and it has been seen whether we have made our
abatements sparingly—there remains to Bentham an indisputable place
among the great intellectual benefactors of mankind. His writings will
long form an indispensable part of the education of the highest order of
practical thinkers; and the scollected editions of them ought to be in
the hands of every one who would either understand his age, or take any
beneficial part in the great business of it.*

Edition: current; Page: [116] Edition: current; Page: [117]


COLERIDGE
 1840

Edition: current; Page: [118]


EDITOR’S NOTE

D&D, I (1867), 393-466, with footnote to title: “London and Westminster
Review, March 1840.” Reprinted from the London and Westminster Review,
XXXIII (March, 1840), 257-302, signed “A” and headed: “Art. I.—1. The
Literary Remains of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Collected and edited by
Henry Nelson Coleridge, Esq., M.A. 8vo. [London:] Pickering. 4 vols
published. 1836-9. / 2. Specimens of the Table Talk of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge. Second Edition. 12mo. [London:] Murray, 1836. / 3. I.—On the
Constitution of the Church and State, according to the Idea of Each.
Third Edition. II.—Lay Sermons: 1. The Statesman’s Manual. 2. “Blessed
are ye that sow beside all waters.” Second Edition. By Samuel Taylor
Coleridge. Edited from the Author’s Corrected Copies; with Notes by
Henry Nelson Coleridge, Esq., M.A. 12mo. [London:] Pickering, 1839. / 4.
Aids to Reflection in the Formation of a Manly Character, on the several
grounds of Prudence, Morality, and Religion. Illustrated by Extracts
from our Elder Divines, especially from Archbishop Leighton. By S. T.
Coleridge. Third Edition. 8vo. [London:] Pickering, 1836. / 5. The
Friend: a Series of Essays, to aid in the Formation of Fixed Principles
in Politics, Morals, and Religion; with Literary Amusements
interspersed. By S. T. Coleridge. A new Edition, with the Author’s last
Corrections, and an Appendix, with a Synoptical Table of the Contents of
the Work, by Henry Nelson Coleridge, Esq., M.A. 8vo. 3 vols. [London:
Rest Fenner, 1818.] / 6. Biographia Literaria; or, Biographical Sketches
of my Literary Life and Opinions. By S. T. Coleridge, Esq. 2 vols. 8vo.
[London: Rest Fenner, 1817.] / 7. Memoirs of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. By
James Gillman, Esq. Vol. I. 8vo. [London: Pickering,] 1839.”

Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article on Coleridge, in the
London and Westminster Review for March 1840 (No. 65)” (MacMinn, 52).
There are no corrections or alterations in the Somerville College copies
of the article and D&D. The following text is collated with that in D&D
(1st ed.), and that in the London and Westminster. In the footnoted
variants, D&D (2nd ed.) is indicated by “67”; D&D (1st ed.) by “59”; and
the London and Westminster by “40”.

Edition: current; Page: [119]


Coleridge

the name of Coleridge is one of the few English names of oura time which
are likely to be oftener pronounced, and to become symbolical of more
important things, in proportion as the inward workings of the age
manifest themselves more and more in outward facts. Bentham excepted, no
Englishman of recent date has left his impress so deeply in the opinions
and mental tendencies of those among us who attempt to enlighten their
practice by philosophical meditation. If it be true, as Lord Bacon
affirms, that a knowledge of the speculative opinions of the men between
twenty and thirty years of age is the great source of political
prophecy,[*] the existence of Coleridge will show itself by no slight or
ambiguous traces in the coming history of our country; for no one has
contributed more to shape the opinions of those among its younger men,
who can be said to have opinions at all.

The influence of Coleridge, like that of Bentham, extends far beyond
those who share in the peculiarities of his religious or philosophical
creed. He has been the great awakener in this country of the spirit of
philosophy, within the bounds of traditional opinions. He has been,
almost as truly as Bentham, “the great questioner of things
established;”[†] for a questioner needs not necessarily be an enemy. By
Bentham, beyond all others, men have been led to ask themselves, in
regard to any ancient or received opinion, Is it true? and by Coleridge,
What is the meaning of it? The one took his stand boutsideb the received
opinion, and surveyed it as an entire stranger to it: the other looked
at it from within, and endeavoured to see it with the eyes of a believer
in it; to discover by what apparent facts it was at first suggested, and
by what appearances it has ever since been rendered continually
credible—has seemed, to a succession of persons, to be a faithful
interpretation of their experience. Bentham judged a proposition true or
false as it accorded Edition: current; Page: [120] or not with the
result of his own inquiries; and did not search very curiously into what
might be meant by the proposition, when it obviously did not mean what
he thought true. With Coleridge, on the contrary, the very fact that any
doctrine had been believed by thoughtful men, and received by whole
nations or generations of mankind, wasc part of the problem to be
solved, was one of the phenomena to be accounted for. And as Bentham’s
short and easy method of referring all to the selfish interests of
aristocracies, or priests, or lawyers, or some other species of
impostors, could not satisfy a man who saw so much farther into the
complexities of the human intellect and feelings—he considered the long
or extensive prevalence of any opinion as a presumption that it was not
altogether a fallacy; that, to its first authors at least, it was the
result of a struggle to express in words something which had a reality
to them, though perhaps not to many of those who have since received the
doctrine by mere tradition. The long duration of a belief, he thought,
is at least proofd of an adaptation in it to some portion or other of
the human mind; and if, on digging down to the root, we do not find, as
is generally the case, some truth, we shall find some natural want or
requirement of human nature which the doctrine in question is fitted to
satisfy: among which wants the instincts of selfishness and of credulity
have a place, but by no means an exclusive one. From this difference in
the points of view of the two philosophers, and from the too rigid
adherence of each of his own, it was to be expected that Bentham should
continually miss the truth which is in the traditional opinions, and
Coleridge that which is out of them, and at variance with them. But it
was also likely that each would find, or show the way to finding, much
of what the other missed.

It is hardly possible to speak of Coleridge, and his position among his
ecotemporariese, without reverting to Bentham: they are connected by two
of the closest bonds of association—resemblance and contrast. It would
be difficult to find two persons of philosophic eminence more exactly
the contrary of one another. Compare their modes of treatment of any
subject, and you might fancy them inhabitants of different worlds. They
seem to have scarcely a principle or a premise in common. Each of them
sees scarcely anything but what the other does not see. Bentham would
have regarded Coleridge with a peculiar measure of the good-humoured
contempt with which he was accustomed to regard all modes of
philosophizing different from his own. Coleridge would probably have
made Bentham one of the exceptions to the enlarged and liberal
appreciation which (to the credit of his mode of philosophizing) he
extended to most thinkers of any eminence, from whom he differed. But
contraries, as logicians say, are but quœ in eodem genere maxime
distant, the things which are farthest from one another fin the same
kindf. These two agreed in being the men who, in their age and country,
Edition: current; Page: [121] did most to enforce, by precept and
example, the necessity of a philosophy. They agreed in making it their
occupation to recal opinions to first principles; taking no proposition
for granted without examining into the grounds of it, and ascertaining
that it possessed the kind and degree of evidence suitable to its
nature. They agreed in recognising that sound theory is the only
foundation for sound practice, and that whoever despises theory, let him
give himself what airs of wisdom he may, is self-convicted of being a
quack. If a book were to be compiled containing all the best things ever
said on the rule-of-thumb school of political craftsmanship, and on the
insufficiency for practical purposes of what the mere practical man
calls experience, it is difficult to say whether the collection would be
more indebted to the writings of Bentham or of Coleridge. They agreed,
too, in perceiving that the groundwork of all other philosophy must be
laid in the philosophy of the mind. To lay this foundation deeply and
strongly, and to raise a superstructure in accordance with it, were the
objects to which their lives were devoted. They employed, indeed, for
the most part, different materials; but as the materials of both were
real observations, the genuine product of experience—the results will in
the end be found not hostile, but supplementary, to one another. Of
their methods of philosophizing, the same thing may be said: they were
different, yet both were legitimate logical processes. In every respect
the two men are each other’s “completing counterpart:” the strong points
of each correspond to the weak points of the other. Whoever could master
the premises and combine the methods of both, would possess the entire
English philosophy of gtheirg age. Coleridge used to say that every one
is born either a Platonist or an Aristotelian:[*] it may be similarly
affirmed, that every Englishman of the present day is by implication
either a Benthamite or a Coleridgian; holds views of human affairs which
can only be proved true on the principles either of Bentham or of
Coleridge. In one respect, indeed, the parallel fails, Bentham so
improved and added to the system of philosophy he adopted, that for his
successors he may almost be accounted its founder; while Coleridge,
though he has left on the system he inculcated, such traces of himself
as cannot fail to be left by any mind of original powers, was
anticipated in all the essentials of his doctrine by the great Germans
of the latter half of the last century, and was accompanied in it by the
remarkable series of their French expositors and followers. Hence,
although Coleridge is to Englishmen the type and the main source of that
doctrine, he is the creator rather of the shape in which it has appeared
among us, than of the doctrine itself.

The time is yet far distant when, in the estimation of Coleridge, and of
his influence upon the intellect of our time, anything like unanimity
can be Edition: current; Page: [122] looked for. As a poet, Coleridge
has taken his place. The healthier taste, and more intelligent canons of
poetic criticism, which he was himself mainly instrumental in diffusing,
have at length assigned to him his proper rank, as one among the great,
and (if we look to the powers shown rather than to the amount of actual
achievement) among the greatest, names in our literature. But as a
philosopher, the class of thinkers has scarcely yet arisen by whom he is
to be judged. The limited philosophical public of this country is as yet
too exclusively divided between those to whom Coleridge and the views
which he promulgated or defended are heverythingh, and those to whom
they are inothingi. A jtruej thinker can only be justly estimated when
his thoughts have worked their way into minds formed in a different
school; have been wrought and moulded into consistency with all other
true and relevant thoughts; when the noisy conflict of half-truths,
angrily denying one another, has subsided, and ideas which seemed
mutually incompatible, have been found only to require mutual
limitations. This time has not yet come for Coleridge. The spirit of
philosophy in England, like that of religion, is still rootedly
sectarian. Conservative thinkers and Liberals, transcendentalists and
admirers of Hobbes and Locke, regard each other as out of the pale of
philosophical intercourse; look upon each other’s speculations as
vitiated by an original taint, which makes all study of them, except for
purposes of attack, useless if not mischievous. An error much the same
as if Kepler had refused to profit by Ptolemy’s or Tycho’s observations,
because those astronomers believed that the sun moved round the earth;
or as if Priestley and Lavoisier, because they differed on the doctrine
of phlogiston, had rejected keach other’sk chemical experiments. lIt is
evenl a still greater error than either of these. For, among them truths
long recognised byn Continental philosophers, but which very few
Englishmen have yet oarrived ato, one is, the importance, in the present
imperfect state of mental and social science, of antagonist modes of
thought: which, it will one day be felt, are as necessary to one another
in speculation, as mutually checking powers are in a political
constitution. A clear insight, indeed, into this necessity is the only
rational or enduring basis of philosophical tolerance; the only
condition under which liberality in matters of opinion can be anything
better than a polite synonym for indifference between one opinion and
another.

All students of man and society who possess that first requisite for so
difficult a study, a due sense of its difficulties, are aware that the
besetting danger is not so much of embracing falsehood for truth, as of
mistaking part of the truth for the whole. It might be plausibly
maintained that in palmostp Edition: current; Page: [123] every one of
the leading controversies, past or present, in social philosophy, both
sides were in the right in what they affirmed, though wrong in what they
denied; and that if either could have been made to take the other’s
views in addition to its own, little more would have been needed to make
its doctrine qcorrectq. Take for instance the question how far mankind
have gained by civilization. One robserverr is forcibly stuck by the
multiplication of physical comforts; the advancement and diffusion of
knowledge; the decay of superstition; the facilities of mutual
intercourse; the softening of manners; the decline of war and personal
conflict; the progressive limitation of the tyranny of the strong over
the weak; the great works accomplished throughout the globe by the
co-operation of multitudes: and he becomes that very common character,
the worshipper of “our enlightened age.” Another fixes his attention,
not upon the value of these advantages, but upon the high price which is
paid for them; the relaxation of individual energy and courage; the loss
of proud and self-relying independence; the slavery of so large a
portion of mankind to artificial wants; their effeminate shrinking from
sevens the shadow of pain; the dull unexciting monotony of their lives,
and the passionless insipidity, and absence of any marked individuality,
in their characters; the contrast between the narrow mechanical
understanding, produced by a life spent in executing by fixed rules a
fixed task, and the varied powers of the man of the woods, whose
subsistence and safety depend at each instant upon his capacity of
extemporarily adapting means to ends; the demoralizing effect of great
inequalities in wealth and social rank; and the sufferings of the great
mass of the people of civilized countries, whose wants are scarcely
better provided for than those of the savage, while they are bound by a
thousand fetters in lieu of the freedom and excitement which are his
compensations. tOnet who attends to these things, and to these
exclusively, will ube apt tou infer thatv savage life is wpreferable to
civilizedw; that the work of civilization should as far as possible be
undone; and from the premises of Rousseau, he will not improbably be led
to the practical conclusions of Rousseau’s disciple, Robespierre. No two
thinkers can be more entirely at variance than the two we have
supposed—the worshippers of Civilization and of Independence, of the
present and of the remote past. Yet all that is positive in the opinions
of either of them is true; and we see how easy it would be to choose
one’s path, if either half of the truth were the whole of it, and how
great may be the difficulty of framing, as it is necessary to do, a set
of practical maxims which combine both.

So again, one xpersonx sees in a very strong light the need which the
great Edition: current; Page: [124] mass of mankind have of being ruled
over by a degree of intelligence and virtue superior to their own. He is
deeply impressed with the mischief done to the uneducated and
uncultivated by weaning them of all habits of reverence, appealing to
them as a competent tribunal to decide the most yintricatey questions,
and making them think themselves capable, not only of being a light to
themselves, but of giving the law to their superiors in culture. He
sees, zfurtherz, that cultivation, to be carried beyond a certain point,
requires leisure; that leisure is the natural attribute of a hereditary
aristocracy; that such a body has all the means of acquiring
intellectual and moral superiority; and he needs be at no loss to endow
them with abundant motives to it. An aristocracy indeed, being human,
are, as he cannot but see, not exempt, any more than their inferiors,
from the common need of being controlled and enlightened by a still
greater wisdom and goodness than their own. For this, however, his
reliance is upon reverence for a Higher above them, sedulously
inculcated and fostered by thea course of their education. We thus see
brought together all the elements of a conscientious zealot for an
aristocratic government, supporting and supported by an established
Christian church. There is truth, and important truth, in this
bthinker’sb premises. But there is a cthinkerc of a very different
description, in whose premises there is an equal portion of truth. This
is he who says, that an average man, even an average member of an
aristocracy, if he dcand postpone the interests of other people to his
own calculations or instincts of self-interest, will do so; that all
governments ein all ages havee done so, as far as they were permitted,
and generally to a ruinous extent; and that the only possible remedy is
a pure democracy, in which the people are their own governors, and can
have no selfish interest in oppressing themselves.

Thus it is in regard to every important partial truth; there are always
two conflicting modes of thought, one tending to give to that truth too
large, the other to give it too small, a place: and the history of
opinion is generally an oscillation between these extremes. From the
imperfection foff the human faculties, it seldom happens that, even in
the minds of geminentg thinkers, each partial view of their subject
passes for its worth, and none for more than its worth. But even if this
just balance exist in the mind of the wiser teacher, it will not exist
in his disciples, still less in the general mind. He cannot prevent that
which is new in his doctrine, and on which, being new, he is forced to
insist the most strongly, from making a disproportionate impression. The
impetus necessary to overcome the obstacles which resist all novelties
of opinion, seldom fails to carry the public mind almost as far on the
contrary Edition: current; Page: [125] side of the perpendicular. Thus
every excess in either direction determines a corresponding reaction;
improvement consisting only in this, that the oscillation, each time,
departs rather less widely from the centre, and an ever-increasing
tendency is manifested to settle finally in it.

Now the Germano-Coleridgian doctrine is, in our view of the matter, the
result of such a reaction. It expresses the revolt of the human mind
against the philosophy of the eighteenth century. It is ontological,
because that was experimental; conservative, because that was
innovative; religious, because so much of that was infidel; concrete and
historical, because that was abstract and metaphysical; poetical,
because that was matter-of-fact and prosaic. In every respect it flies
off in the contrary direction to its predecessor; yet faithful to the
general law of improvement last noticed, it is less extreme in its
opposition, it denies less of what is true in the doctrine it wars
against, than hhadh been the case in any previous philosophic reaction;
and in particular, far less than when the philosophy of the eighteenth
century triumphed, and so memorably abused its victory, over that which
preceded it.

We may begin our consideration of the two systems either at one extreme
or the other; with their highest philosophical generalizations, or with
their practical conclusions. iThe former seems preferablei, because it
is jinj their highest generalities that the difference between the two
systems is most familiarly known.

Every consistent scheme of philosophy requires as its starting-point, a
theory respecting the sources of human knowledge, and the objects which
the human faculties are capable of taking cognizance of. The prevailing
theory in the eighteenth century, on this most comprehensive of
questions, was that proclaimed by Locke,[*] and kcommonlyk attributed to
Aristotle—that alll knowledge consists of generalizations from
experience. Of nature, or anything whatever external to ourselves, we
know, according to this theory, nothing, except the facts which present
themselves to our senses, and such other facts as may, by analogy, be
inferred from these. There is no knowledge à priori; no truths
cognizable by the mind’s inward light, and grounded on intuitive
evidence. Sensation, and the mind’s consciousness of its own acts, are
not only the exclusive sources, but the sole materials of our knowledge.
From this doctrine, Coleridge, with the German philosophers since Kant
(not to go farther back) and most of the English since Reid, strongly
dissents. He claims for the human mind a capacity, within certain
limits, of perceiving the nature and properties of “Things in
themselves.” He Edition: current; Page: [126] distinguishes in the human
intellect two faculties, which, in the technical language common to him
with the Germans, he calls Understanding and Reason. The former faculty
judges of phenomena, or the appearances of things, and forms
generalizations from these: to the latter it belongs, by direct
intuition, to perceive things, and recognise truths, not cognizable by
our senses. These perceptions are not indeed innate, nor could ever have
been awakened in us without experience; but they are not copies of it:
experience is not their prototype, it is only the occasion by which they
are irresistibly suggested. The appearances in nature excite in us, by
an inherent law, ideas of those invisible things which are the causes of
the visible appearances, and on whose laws those appearances depend: and
we then perceive that these things must have pre-existed to render the
appearances possible; just as (to use a frequent illustration of
Coleridge’s) we see, before we know that we have eyes;[*] but when once
this is known to us, we perceive that eyes must have pre-existed to
enable us to see. Among the truths which are thus known à priori, by
occasion of experience, but not themselves the subjects of experience,
Coleridge includes the fundamental doctrines of religion and mmoralsm,
the principles of mathematics, and the ultimate laws even of physical
nature; which he contends cannot be proved by experience, though they
must necessarily be consistent with it, and would, if we knew them
perfectly, enable us to account for all observed facts, and to predict
all those which are as yet unobserved.

It is not necessary to remind any one who concerns himself with such
subjects, that between the partisans of these two opposite doctrines
there reigns a bellum internecinum. Neither side is sparing in the
imputation of intellectual and moral obliquity to the perceptions, and
of pernicious consequences to the creed, of its antagonists. Sensualism
is the common term of abuse for the one philosophy, mysticism for the
other. The one doctrine is accused of making men beasts, the other
lunatics. It is the unaffected belief of numbers onn one side of the
controversy, that their adversaries are actuated by a desire to break
loose from moral and religious obligation; and ofo numbers on the other
that their opponents are either men fit for Bedlam, or who cunningly
pander to the interests of hierarchies and aristocracies, by
manufacturing superfine new arguments in favour of old prejudices. It is
almost needless to say that those who are freest with these mutual
accusations, are seldom those who are most at home in the real
intricacies of the question, or who are best acquainted with the
argumentative strength of the opposite side, or even of their own. But
without going to these extreme lengths, even sober men on both sides
take no charitable view of the tendencies of each other’s opinions.

Edition: current; Page: [127]
It is affirmed that the doctrine of Locke and his followers, that all
knowledge is experience generalized, leads by strict logical consequence
to atheism: that Hume and other sceptics were right when they contended
that it is impossible to prove a God on grounds of experience; and
Coleridge p(like Kant)p maintains positively, that the ordinary argument
for a Deity, from marks of design in the universe, or, in other words,
from the resemblance of the order in nature to the effects of human
skill and contrivance, is not tenable. It is further said that the same
doctrine annihilates moral obligation; reducing morality either to the
blind impulses of animal sensibility, or to a calculation of prudential
consequences, both equally fatal to its essence. Even science, it is
affirmed, loses qtheq character of science in this view of it, and
becomes empiricism; a mere enumeration and arrangement of facts, not
explaining nor accounting for them: since a fact is only then accounted
for when we are made to see in it the manifestation of laws, which, as
soon as they are perceived at all, are perceived to be necessary. These
are the charges brought by the transcendental philosophers against the
school of Locke, Hartley, and Bentham. They in their turn allege that
the transcendentalists make imagination, and not observation, the
criterion of truth; that they lay down principles under which a man may
enthrone his wildest dreams in the chair of philosophy, and impose them
on mankind as intuitions of the pure reason: which has, in fact, been
done in all ages, by all manner of mystical enthusiasts. And even if,
with gross inconsistency, the private revelations of any individual
rBöhmer or Swedenborg be disowned, or, in other words, outvoted (the
only means of discrimination which, it is contended, the theory admits
of), this is still only substituting, as the test of truth, the dreams
of the majority for the dreams of each individual. Whoever form a strong
enough party, may at any time set up the immediate perceptions of their
reason, that is to say, any reigning prejudice, as a truth independent
of experience; a truth not only requiring no proof, but to be believed
in opposition to all that appears proof to the mere understanding; nay,
the more to be believed, because it cannot be put into words and into
the logical form of a proposition without a contradiction in terms: for
no less authority than this is claimed by some transcendentalists for
their à priori truths. And thus a ready mode is provided, by which
whoever is on the strongest side may dogmatize at his ease, and instead
of proving his propositions, may rail at all who deny them, as bereft of
“the vision and the faculty divine,”[*] or blinded to its plainest
revelations by a corrupt heart.

Edition: current; Page: [128]
This is a very temperate statement of what is charged by these two
classes of thinkers against each others. How much of either
representation is correct, cannot conveniently be discussed in this
place.s In truth, a system of consequences from an opinion, drawn by an
adversary, is seldom of much worth. Disputants are rarely sufficiently
masters of each other’s doctrines, to be good judgest what is fairly
deducible from them, or how a consequence which seems to flow from one
part of the theory may or may not be defeated by another part. To
combine the different parts of a doctrine with one another, and with all
admitted truths, is not indeed a small trouble, unoru one which a
vpersonv is often inclined to take for other people’s opinions. Enough
if each does it for his own, which he has a greater interest in, and is
more disposed to be just to. Were we to search among men’s recorded
thoughts for the choicest manifestations of human imbecility and
prejudice, our specimens would be mostly taken from their opinions of
the opinions of one another. Imputations of horrid consequences ought
notw to bias the judgment of any person capable of independent thought.
Coleridge himself says (in the 25th Aphorism of his Aids to Reflection),
“He who begins by loving Christianity better than truth, will proceed by
loving his own sect or church better than Christianity, and end in
loving himself better than all.”[*]

As to the fundamental difference of opinion respecting the sources of
our knowledge (apart from the corollaries which either party may have
drawn from its own principle, or imputed to its opponent’s), the
question lies far too deep in the recesses of psychology for us to
discuss it here. The lists having been open ever since the dawn of
philosophy, it is not wonderful that the two parties should have been
forced to put on their strongest armour, both of attack and of defence.
The question would not so long have remained a question, if the more
obvious arguments on either side had been unanswerable. Each xpartyx has
been able to urge in its own favour numerous and striking facts, to
yreconcile which withy the opposite theory has required all the
metaphysical resources which that theory could command. It will not be
wondered at, then, that we here content ourselves with a bare statement
of our opinion. It is, that the truth, on this much-debated question,
lies with the school of Locke and of Bentham. The nature and laws of
Things in themselves, or of the hidden causes of the phenomena which are
the objects of experience, appear to us radically inaccessible to the
human faculties. We see no ground for believing that anything can be the
object of our knowledge Edition: current; Page: [129] except our
experience, and what can be inferred from our experience by the
analogies of experience itself; nor that there is any idea, feeling, or
power in the human mind, which, in order to account for it, requires
that its origin should be referred to any other source. We are therefore
at issue with Coleridge on the central idea of his philosophy; and we
find no need of, and no use for, the zpeculiarz technical terminology
which he and his masters the Germans have introduced into philosophy,
for the double purpose of giving logical precision to doctrines which we
do not admit, and of marking a relation between those abstract doctrines
and many concrete experimental truths, which this language, in our
judgment, serves not to elucidate, but to disguise and obscure. Indeed,
but for these peculiarities of language, it would be difficult to
understand how the reproach of amysticisma (by which nothing is meant in
common parlance but bunintelligiblenessb) has been fixed upon Coleridge
and the Germans in the minds of many, to whom doctrines substantially
the same, when taught in a manner more superficial and less fenced round
against objections, by Reid and Dugald Stewart, have appeared the plain
dictates of “common sense,” successfully asserted against the subtleties
of metaphysics.

Yet, though we think the doctrines of Coleridge and the Germans, in the
pure science of mind, erroneous, and have no taste for their peculiar
terminology, we are far from thinking that even in respect of this, the
least valuable part of their intellectual exertions, those philosophers
have lived in vain. The doctrines of the school of Locke stood in need
of an entire renovation: to borrow a physiological illustration from
Coleridge, they required, like certain secretions of the human body, to
be reabsorbed into the system and secreted afresh.[*] In what form did
that philosophy generally prevail throughout Europe? In that of the
shallowest set of doctrines which perhaps were ever passed off upon a
cultivated age as a complete psychological system—the ideology of
Condillac and his school; a system which affected to resolve all the
phenomena of the human mind into sensation, by a process which
essentially consisted in merely calling all states of mind, however
heterogeneous, by that name; a philosophy now acknowledged to consist
solely of a set of verbal generalizations, explaining nothing,
distinguishing nothing, leading to nothing. That men should begin by
sweeping this caway,c was the first sign that the age of real psychology
was about to commence. In England the case, though different, was
scarcely better. The philosophy of Locke, as a popular doctrine, had
remained dnearlyd as it stood in his own book; which, as its title
implies, did not pretend to give an account of any Edition: current;
Page: [130] but the intellectual part of our nature; which, even within
that limited sphere, was but the commencement of a system, and though
its errors and defects as such have been exaggerated beyond all just
bounds, it did expose many vulnerable points to the searching criticism
of the new school. The least imperfect part of it, the purely logical
part, had almost dropped out of sight. With respect to those of Locke’s
doctrines which are properly metaphysical; however the sceptical part of
them may have been followed up by others, and carried beyond the point
at which he stopped; the only one of his successors who attempted, and
achieved, any considerable improvement and extension of the analytical
part, and thereby added anything to the explanation of the human mind on
Locke’s principles, was Hartley. But Hartley’s edoctrinese, so far as
they are true, were so much in advance of the age, and the way had been
so little prepared for them by the general tone of thinking which yet
prevailed, even under the influence of Locke’s writings, that the
philosophic world did not deem them worthy of being attended to. Reid
and Stewart were allowed to run them down uncontradicted: Brown, though
a man of a kindred genius, had evidently never read them; and but for
the accident of their being taken up by Priestley, who transmitted them
as a kind of heirloom to his Unitarian followers, the name of Hartley
might have perished, or survived only as that of a visionary physician,
the author of an exploded physiological hypothesis. It perhaps required
all the violence of the assaults made by Reid and the German school upon
Locke’s system, to recall men’s minds to Hartley’s principles, as alone
adequate to the solution, upon that system, of the peculiar difficulties
which those assailants pressed upon men’s attention as altogether
insoluble by it.f We may here notice that Coleridge, before he adopted
his later philosophical views, was an enthusiastic Hartleian; so that
his abandonment of the philosophy of Locke cannot be imputed to
unacquaintance with the highest form of that philosophy which had yet
appeared. That he should pass through that highest form without stopping
at it, is itself a strong presumption that there were more difficulties
in the question than Hartley had solved. That anything has since been
done to solve them we probably owe to the revolution in opinion, of
which Coleridge was one of the organs; and even in abstract metaphysics
his writings, and those of his school of thinkers, are gone of the
richest minesg from whence the opposite school can draw the materials
for what has yet to be done to perfect their own theory.

If we now pass from the purely abstract to the concrete and practical
doctrines of the two schools, we shall see still more clearly the
necessity of the Edition: current; Page: [131] reaction, and the great
service rendered to philosophy by its authors. This will be best
manifested by a survey of the state of practical philosophy in Europe,
as Coleridge and his compeers found it, towards the close of the last
century.

The state of opinion in the latter half of the eighteenth century was by
no means the same on the Continent of Europe and in our own island; and
the difference was still greater in appearance than it was in reality.
In the more advanced nations of the Continent, the prevailing philosophy
had done its work completely: it had spread itself over every department
of human knowledge; it had taken possession of the whole Continental
mind: and scarcely one educated person was left who retained any
allegiance to the opinions or the institutions of ancient times. In
England, the native country of compromise, things had stopped far short
of this; the philosophical movement had been brought to a halt in an
early stage, and a peace had been patched up by concessions on both
sides, between the philosophy of the time and its traditional
institutions and creeds. Hence the aberrations of the age were
generally, on the Continent, at that period, the extravagances of new
opinions; in England, the corruptions of old ones.

To insist upon the deficiencies of the Continental philosophy of the
last century, or, as it is commonly termed, the French philosophy, is
almost superfluous. That philosophy is indeed as unpopular in this
country as its bitterest enemy could desire. If its faults were as well
understood as they are much railed at, criticism might be considered to
have finished its work. But that this is not yet the case, the nature of
the imputations currently made upon the French philosophers,
sufficiently proves; many of these being as inconsistent with a just
philosophic comprehension of their system of opinions, as with charity
towards the men themselves. It is not true, for example, that any of
them denied moral obligation, or sought to weaken its force. So far were
they from meriting this accusation, that they could not even tolerate
the writers who, like Helvetius, ascribed a selfish origin to the
feelings of morality, resolving them into a sense of interest. Those
writers were as much cried down among the philosophes themselves, and
what was true and good in them (and there is much that is so) met with
as little appreciation, then as now. The error of the philosophers was
rather that they trusted too much to those feelings; believed them to be
more deeply rooted in human nature than they are; to be not so
dependent, as in fact they are, upon collateral influences. They thought
them the natural and spontaneous growth of the human heart; so firmly
fixed in it, that they would subsist unimpaired, nay invigorated, when
the whole system of opinions and observances with which they were
habitually intertwined was violently torn away.

To tear away was, indeed, all that these philosophers, for the most
part, Edition: current; Page: [132] aimed at: they had no conception
that anything else was needful. At their millennium, superstition,
priestcraft, error and prejudice of every kind, were to be annihilated;
some of them gradually added that despotism and hereditary privileges
must share the same fate; and, this accomplished, they never for a
moment suspected that all the virtues and graces of humanity could fail
to flourish, or that when the noxious weeds were once rooted out, the
soil would stand in any need of tillage.

In this they committed the very common error, of mistaking the state of
things with which they had always been familiar, for the universal and
natural condition of mankind. They were accustomed to see the human race
agglomerated in large nations, all (except here and there a madman or a
malefactor) yielding obedience more or less strict to a set of laws
prescribed by a few of their own number, and to a set of moral rules
prescribed by each other’s opinion; renouncing the exercise of
individual will and judgment, except within the limits imposed by these
laws and rules; and acquiescing in the sacrifice of their individual
wishes when the point was decided against them by lawful authority; or
persevering only in hopes of altering the opinion of the ruling powers.
Finding matters to be so generally in this condition, the philosophers
apparently concluded that they could not possibly be in any other; and
were ignorant, by what a host of civilizing and restraining influences a
state of things so repugnant to man’s self-will and love of independence
has been brought about, and how imperatively it demands the continuance
of those influences as the condition of its own existence. The very
first element of the social union, obedience to a government of some
sort, has not been found so easy a thing to establish in the world.
Among a timid and spiritless race, like the inhabitants of the vast
plains of tropical countries, passive obedience may be of natural
growth; though even there we doubt whether it has ever been found among
any people with whom fatalism, or in other words, submission to the
pressure of circumstances as the decree of God, did not prevail as a
religious doctrine. But the difficulty of inducing a brave and warlike
race to submit their individual arbitrium to any common umpire, has
always been felt to be so great, that nothing short of supernatural
power has been deemed adequate to overcome it; and such tribes have
always assigned to the first institution of civil society a divine
origin. So differently did those judge who knew savage man by actual
experience, from those who had no acquaintance with him except in the
civilized state. In modern Europe itself, after the fall of the Roman
empire, to subdue the feudal anarchy and bring the whole people of any
European nation into subjection to government (although Christianity in
htheh most concentrated form iof its influencei was co-operatingj in the
work) required thrice as many centuries as have elapsed since that time.

Edition: current; Page: [133]
Now if these philosophers had known human nature under any other type
than that of their own age, and of the particular classes of society
among whom they klivedk, it would have occurred to them, that wherever
this habitual submission to law and government has been firmly and
durably established, and yet the vigour and manliness of character which
resisted its establishment have been in any degree preserved, certain
requisites have existed, certain conditions have been fulfilled, of
which the following may be regarded as the principal.

First: There has existed, for all who were accounted citizens,—for all
who were not slaves, kept down by brute force,—a system of education,
beginning with infancy and continued through life, of which, whatever
else it might include, one main and incessant ingredient was restraining
discipline. To train the human being in the habit, and thence the power,
of subordinating his personal impulses and aims, to what were considered
the ends of society; of adhering, against all temptation, to the course
of conduct which those ends prescribed; of controlling in himself all
the feelings which were liable to militate against those ends, and
encouraging all such as tended towards them; this was the purpose, to
which every outward motive that the authority directing the system could
command, and every inward power or principle which its knowledge of
human nature enabled it to evoke, were endeavoured to be rendered
instrumental. lThe entire civil and military policy of the ancient
commonwealths was such a system of training: in modern nations its place
has been attempted to be supplied principally by religious teaching.l
And whenever and in proportion as the strictness of mthe restrainingm
discipline was relaxed, the natural tendency of mankind to anarchy
reasserted itself; the State became disorganized from within; mutual
conflict for selfish ends, neutralized the energies which were required
to keep up the contest against natural causes of evil; and the nation,
after a longer or briefer interval of progressive decline, became either
the slave of a despotism, or the prey of a foreign invader.

The second condition of permanent political society has been found to
be, the existence, in some form or other, of the feeling of allegiance,
or loyalty. This feeling may vary in its objects, and is not confined to
any particular form of government; but whether in a democracy or in a
monarchy, its essence is always the same; viz. that there be in the
constitution of the State something which is settled, something
permanent, and not to be called in question; something which, by general
agreement, has a right to be Edition: current; Page: [134] where it is,
and to be secure against disturbance, whatever else may change. This
feeling may attach itself, as among the Jews (and indeed in most of the
commonwealths of antiquity), to a common God or gods, the protectors and
guardians of their State. Or it may attach itself to certain persons,
who are deemed to be, whether by divine appointment, by long
prescription, or by the general recognition of their superior capacity
and worthiness, the rightful guides and guardians of the rest. Or it may
attach itself to laws; to ancient liberties, or ordinancesn. Or finally
(and this is the only shape in which the feeling is likely to exist
hereafter) it may attach itself to the principles of individual freedom
and political and social equality, as realized in institutions which as
yet exist nowhere, or exist only in a rudimentary state.n But in all
political societies which have had a durable existence, there has been
some fixed point; something which men agreed in holding sacred; whicho,
wherever freedom of discussion was a recognised principle, it was of
courseo lawful to contest in theory, but which no one could either fear
or hope to see shaken in practice; which, in short (except perhaps
during some temporary crisis), was in the common estimation placed
pbeyondp discussion. And the necessity of this may easily be made
evident. A State never is, nor, until mankind are vastly improved, can
hope to be, for any long time exempt from internal dissension; for there
neither is, nor has ever been, any state of society in which collisions
did not occur between the immediate interests and passions of powerful
sections of the people. What, then, enables society to weather these
storms, and pass through turbulent times without any permanent weakening
of the qsecurities for peaceable existenceq? Precisely this—that however
important the interests about which men rfellr out, the conflict sdids
not affect the fundamental principles of the system of social union
which thappenedt to exist; nor threaten large portions of the community
with the subversion of that on which they uhadu built their
calculations, and with which their hopes and aims vhadv become
identified. But when the questioning of these fundamental principles is
(not wthew occasional disease, xor salutary medicine,x but) the habitual
condition of the body politic, and when all the violent animosities are
called forth, which spring naturally from such a situation, the State is
virtually in a position of civil war; and can never long remain free
from it in act and fact.

The third essential condition yof stability in political societyy, is a
strong Edition: current; Page: [135] and active principle of zcohesion
among the members of the same community or statez. We need scarcely say
that we do not mean anationality in the vulgar sense of the term;a a
senseless antipathy to foreigners; ban indifference to the general
welfare of the human race, or an unjust preference of the supposed
interests of our own country;bc a cherishing of dbadd peculiarities
because they are national; or a refusal to adopt what has been found
good by other countries.e We mean a principle of sympathy, not of
hostility; of union, not of separation. We mean a feeling of common
interest among those who live under the same government, and are
contained within the same natural or historical boundaries. We mean,
that one part of the community fdof not consider themselves as
foreigners with regard to another part; that they gset a value on their
connexion;g feel that they are one people, that their lot is cast
together, that evil to any of their fellow-countrymen is evil to
themselves; and hdo not desire selfishly toh free themselves from their
share of any common inconvenience by severing the connexion. How strong
this feeling was in ithosei ancient commonwealths jwhich attained any
durable greatness,j every one knows. How happily Rome, in spite of all
her tyranny, succeeded in establishing the feeling of a common country
amoung the provinces of her vast and divided empire, will appear when
any one who has given due attention to the subject shall take the
trouble to point it out.* In modern times Edition: current; Page: [136]
the countries which have had that feeling in the strongest degree have
been the most powerful countries; England, France, and, in proportion to
their territory and resources, Holland and Switzerland; while England in
her connexion with Ireland, is one of the most signal examples of the
consequences of its absence. Every Italian knows why Italy is under a
foreign yoke; every German knows what maintains despotism in the
Austrian empire; the kevilsk of Spain flow as much from the absence of
nationality among the Spaniards themselves, as from the presence of it
in their relations with foreigners; while the completest illustration of
all is afforded by the republics of South America, where the parts of
one and the same state adhere so slightly together, that no sooner does
any province think itself aggrieved by the general government, than it
proclaims itself a separate nation.

These essential requisites of civil society the French philosophers of
the eighteenth century unfortunately overlooked. They found, indeed, all
three—at Edition: current; Page: [137] least the first and second, and
most of what nourishes and invigorates the third—already undermined by
the vices of the institutions, and of the men, that were set up as the
guardians and bulwarks of them. If innovators, in their theories,
disregarded the elementary principles of the social union,
Conservatives, in their practice, had set the first example. The
existing order of things had ceased to realize those first principles:
from the force of circumstances, and from the short-sighted selfishness
of its administrators, it had ceased to possess the essential conditions
of permanent society, and was therefore tottering to its fall. But the
philosophers did not see this. Bad as the existing system was in the
days of its decrepitude, according to them it was still worse when it
actually did what it now only pretended to do. Instead of feeling that
the effect of a bad social order in sapping the necessary foundations of
society itself, is lone of thel worst of its many mischiefs, the
philosophers saw only, and saw with joy, that it was sapping its own
foundations. In the weakening of all government they saw only the
weakening of bad government; and thought they could not better employ
themselves than in finishing the task so well begun—in mdiscrediting all
that still remained of restraining discipline, because it rested on the
ancient and decayed creeds against which they made warm; in unsettling
everything which was still considered settled, making men doubtful of
the few things of which they still felt certain; and in uprooting what
little remained in the people’s minds of reverence for anything above
them, of respect to any of the limits which custom and prescription had
set to the indulgence of each man’s fancies or inclinations, or of
attachment to any of the things which belonged to them as a nation, and
which made them feel their unity as such.

Much of all this was, no doubt, unavoidable, andn not justly matter of
blame. When the vices of all constituted authorities, added to natural
causes of decay, have eaten the heart out of old institutions and
beliefs, while at the same time the growth of knowledge, and the altered
circumstances of the age, would have required institutions and creeds
different from these even if they had remained uncorrupt, we are far
from saying that any degree of wisdom on the part of speculative
thinkers could avert the political catastrophes, and the subsequent
moral anarchy and unsettledness, which we have witnessed and are
witnessing. Still less do we pretend that those principles and
influences which we have spoken of as the conditions of the permanent
existence of the social union, once lost, can ever be, or should be
attempted to be, revived in connexion with the same institutions or the
same doctrines as before. When society requires to be rebuilt, there is
no use in attempting to Edition: current; Page: [138] rebuild it on the
old plan. By the union of the enlarged views and analytic powers of
speculative men with the observation and contriving sagacity of men of
practice, better institutions and better doctrines must be elaborated;
and until this is done we cannot hope for much improvement in our
present condition. The effort to do it in the eighteenth century would
have beeno premature, as the attempts of the Economistes (who, of all
persons then living, came nearest to it, and who were the first to form
pclearlyp the idea of a Social Science), sufficiently testify. The time
was not ripe for doing effectually any other work than that of
destruction. But the work of the day should have been so performed as
not to impede that of the morrow. No one can calculate what struggles,
which the cause of improvement has yet to undergo, might have been
spared if the philosophers of the eighteenth century had done anything
like justice to the Past. Their mistake was, that they did not
acknowledge the historical value of much which had ceased to be useful,
nor saw that institutions and creeds, now effete, had rendered essential
services to civilization, and still filled a place in the human mind,
and in the arrangements of society, which could not without qgreatq
peril, be left vacant. Their mistake was, that they did not recognise in
many of the errors which they assailed, corruptions of important truths,
and in many of the institutions most cankered with abuse, necessary
elements of civilized society, though in a form and vesture no longer
suited to the age; and hence they involved, as far as in them lay, many
great truths, in a common discredit with the errors which had grown up
around them. rTheyr threw away the shell without preserving the kernel;
and attempting to new-model society without the binding forces which
hold society together, met with such success as might have been
anticipated.

Now we claim, in behalf of the philosophers of the reactionary school—of
the school to which Coleridge belongs—that exactly what we blame the
philosophers of the eighteenth century for not doing, they have done.

Every reaction in opinion, of course brings into view that portion of
the truth which was overlooked before. It was natural that a philosophy
which anathematized all that had been going on in Europe from
Constantine to Luther, or even to Voltaire, should be succeeded by
another, at once a severe critic of the new tendencies of society, and
an impassioned vindicator of what was good in the past. This is the easy
merit of all Tory and Royalist writers. But the peculiarity of the
Germano-Coleridgian school is, that they saw beyond the immediate
controversy, to the fundamental principles involved in all such
controversies. They were the first s(except a solitary thinker here and
there)s who inquired twith any comprehensiveness or deptht into the
Edition: current; Page: [139] inductive laws of the existence and growth
of human society. They were the first to bring prominently forward the
three requisites which we have enumerated, as essential principles of
all permanent forms of social existence, as principles, we say, and not
as mere accidental advantages inherent in the particular polity or
religion which the writer happened to patronize. They were the first who
pursued, philosophically and in the spirit of Baconian investigation,
not only this inquiry, but others ulterior and collateral to it. They
thus produced, not a piece of party advocacy, but a philosophy of
society, in the only form in which it is yet possible, that of a
philosophy of history; not a defence of particular ethical or religious
doctrines, but a contribution, the largest uyetu made by any class of
thinkers, towards the philosophy of human culture.

The brilliant light which has been thrown upon history during the last
half century, has proceeded almost wholly from this school. The
disrespect in which history was held by the philosophes is notorious;
one of the soberest of them, D’Alembert we believe, was the author of
the wish that all record whatever of past events could be blotted out.
And indeed the ordinary mode of writing history, and the ordinary mode
of drawing lessons from it, were almost sufficient to excuse this
contempt. But the philosophes saw, as usual, what was not true, not what
was. It is no wonder that vthey who looked onv the greater part of what
had been handed down from the past, wasw sheer hindrances to man’s
attaining a well-being which would otherwise be of easy attainment,
should content themselves with a very superficial study of history. But
the case was otherwise with those who regarded the maintenance of
society at all, and especially its maintenance in a state of progressive
advancement, as a very difficult task, actually achieved, in however
imperfect a manner, for a number of centuries, against the strongest
obstacles. It was natural that they should feel a deep interest in
ascertaining how this had been effected; and should be led to inquire,
both what were the requisites of the permanent existence of the body
politic, and what were the conditions which had rendered the
preservation of these permanent requisites compatible with perpetual and
progressive improvement. And hence that series of great writers and
thinkers, from Herder to Michelet, by whom history, which was till then
“a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying
nothing,”[*] has been made a science of causes and effects; who, by
making the facts and events of the past have a meaning and an
intelligible place in the gradual evolution of humanity, have at once
given history, even to the imagination, an interest like romance, and
afforded the only means of predicting and Edition: current; Page: [140]
guiding the future, by unfolding the agencies which have produced and
still maintain the Present.*

The same causes have naturally led the same class of thinkers to do what
their predecessors never could have done, for the philosophy of human
culture. For the tendency of their speculations compelled them to see in
the character of the national education existing in any political
society, at once the principal cause of its permanence as a society, and
the chief source of its progressiveness: the former by the extent to
which that education operated as a system of restraining discipline; the
latter by the degree in which it called forth and invigorated the active
faculties. Besides, not to have looked upon the culture of the inward
man as the problem of problems, would have been incompatible with the
belief which xmanyx of these philosophers entertained in Christianity,
and the recognition by all of them of its historical value, and the
prime part which it has acted in the progress of mankind. But here, too,
let us not fail to observe, they rose to principles, and did not stick
in the particular case. The culture of the human being had been carried
to no ordinary height, and human nature had exhibited many of its
noblest manifestations, not in Christian countries only, but in the
ancient world, in Athens, Edition: current; Page: [141] Sparta, Rome;
nay, even barbarians, as the Germans, or still more unmitigated savages,
the wild Indians, and again the Chinese, the Egyptians, the Arabs, all
had their own education, their own culture; a culture which, whatever
might be its tendency upon the whole, had been successful in some
respect or other. Every form of polity, every condition of society,
whatever else it had done, had formed its type of national character.
What that type was, and how it had been made what it was, were questions
which the metaphysician might overlook, the historical philosopher could
not. Accordingly, the views respecting the various elements of human
culture and the causes influencing the formation of national character,
which pervade the writings of the Germano-Coleridgian school, throw into
the shade everything which had been effected before, or which has been
attempted simultaneously by any other school. Such views are, more than
anything else, the characteristic feature of the Goethian period of
German literature; and are richly diffused through the historical and
critical writings of the new French school, as well as of Coleridge and
his followers.

In this long, though most compressed, dissertation on the Continental
philosophy preceding the reaction, and on the nature of the reaction, so
far as directed against that philosophy, we have unavoidably been led to
speak rather of the movement itself, than of Coleridge’s particular
share in it; which, from his posteriority in date, was necessarily a
subordinate one. And it would be useless, even did our limits permit, to
bring together from the scattered writings of a man who produced no
systematic work, any of the fragments which he may have contributed to
an edifice still incomplete, and even the general character of which, we
can have rendered very imperfectly intelligible to those who are not
acquainted with the ythingy itself. Our object is to invitez to the
study of the original sources, not to supply the place of such a study.
What was peculiar to Coleridge will be better manifested, when we now
proceed to review the state of popular philosophy immediately preceding
him in our own island;a which was different, in some material respects,
from the contemporaneous Continental philosophy.

In England, the philosophical speculations of the age had not, except in
a few highly metaphysical minds (whose example rather served to deter
than to invite others), taken so audacious a flight, nor achieved
anything like so complete a victory over the counteracting influences,
as on the Continent. There is in the English mind, both in speculation
and in practice, a highly salutary shrinking from all extremes. But as
this shrinking is rather an instinct of caution than a result of
insight, it is too ready to satisfy itself with any medium, merely
because it is a medium, and to acquiesce in a union of Edition: current;
Page: [142] the disadvantages of both extremes instead of their
advantages. The circumstances of the age, too, were unfavourable to
decided opinions. The repose which followed the great struggles of the
Reformation and the Commonwealth; the final victory over Popery and
Puritanism, Jacobitism and Republicanism, and the lulling of the
controversies which kept speculation and spiritual consciousness alive;
the lethargy which came upon all governors and teachers, after their
position in society became fixed; and the growing absorption of all
classes in material interests—caused a bcharacterb of mind to diffuse
itself, with less of deep inward workings, and less capable of
interpreting those it had, than had existed for centuries. The age
seemed smitten with an incapacity of producing deep or strong feeling,
such cas at leastc could ally itself with meditative habits. There were
few poets, and none of a high order; and philosophy fell mostly into the
hands of men of a dry prosaic nature, who had not enough of the
materials of human feeling in them to be able to imagine any of its more
complex and mysterious manifestations; all of which they either left out
of their theories, or introduced them with such explanations as no one
who had experienced the feelings could receive as adequate. An age like
this, an age without earnestness, was the natural era of dcompromises
and half-convictionsd.

To make out a case for the feudal and ecclesiastical institutions of
modern Europe was by no means impossible: they had a meaning, had
existed for honest ends, and an honest theory of them might be made. But
the administration of those institutions had long ceased to accord with
any honest theory. It was impossible to justify them in principle,
except on grounds which condemned them in practice; and grounds of which
there was at any rate little or no recognition in the philosophy of the
eighteenth century. The natural tendency, therefore, of that philosophy,
everywhere but in England, was to seek the extinction of those
institutions. In England it would doubtless have done the same, had it
been strong enough: but as this was beyond its strength, an adjustment
was come to between the rival powers. What neither party cared about,
the ends of existing institutions, the work that was to be done by
teachers and governors, wase flung overboard. The wages of that work the
teachers and governors did care about, and those wages were secured to
them. The existing institutions in Church and State were to be preserved
inviolate, in outward semblance at least, but were required to be,
practically, as much a nullity as possible. The Church continued to
“rear her mitred front in courts and palaces,”[*] but not as in the days
of Hildebrand or Becket, as the champion of arts against arms, of the
serf against the seigneur, peace Edition: current; Page: [143] against
war, or spiritual principles and powers against the domination of animal
force. Nor even (as in the days of Latimer and John Knox) as a body
divinely commissioned to trainf the nation in a knowledge of God and
obedience to his laws, whatever became of temporal principalities and
powers, and whether this end might most effectually be compassed by
their assistance or by trampling them under foot. No; but the people of
England liked old things, and nobody knew how the place might be filled
which the doing away with so conspicuous an institution would leave
vacant, and quieta ne movere was the favourite doctrine of those times;
therefore, on condition of not making too much noise about religion, or
taking it too much in earnest, the church was supported, even by
philosophers—as a “bulwark against fanaticism,” a sedative to the
religious spirit, to prevent it from disturbing the harmony of society
or the tranquillity of states. The clergy of the establishment thought
they had a good bargain on these terms, and kept its conditions very
faithfully.

The State, again, was no longer considered, according to the old
gidealg, as a concentration of the force of all the individuals of the
nation in the hands of certain of its members, in order to the
accomplishment of whatever could be best accomplished by systematic
co-operation. It was found that the State was a bad judge of the wants
of society; that it in reality cared very little for them; and when it
attempted anything beyond that police against crime, and arbitration of
disputes, which are indispensable to social existence, the private
sinister interest of some class or individual was usually the prompter
of its proceedings. The natural inference would have been that the
constitution of the State was somehow not suited to the existing wants
of society; having indeed descended, with hscarcely anyh modifications
that could be avoided, from a time when the most prominent exigencies of
society were quite different. This conclusion, however, was shrunk from;
and it required the peculiarities of very recent times, and the
speculations of the Bentham school, to produce even any considerable
tendency that way. The existing Constitution, and all the arrangements
of existing society, continued to be applauded as the best possible. The
celebrated theory of the three powers was got up, which made the
excellence of our Constitution consist in doing less harm than would be
done by any other form of government. Government altogether was regarded
as a necessary evil, and was required to hide itself, to make itself as
little felt as possible. The cry of the people was not “help us,” “guide
us,” “do for us the things we cannot do, and iinstruct us, that we may
do welli those which we can”—and truly such requirements from such
rulers would have been a bitter jest: the cry was “let us alone.”
jPowerj to decide Edition: current; Page: [144] questions of meum and
tuum, to protect society from open violence, and from some of the most
dangerous modes of fraud, could not be withheld; these kfunctionsk the
Government was left in possession of, and to these it became the
expectation of the public that it should confine itself.

Such was the prevailing tone of English belief in temporals; what was it
in spirituals? Here too a similar system of compromise had been at work.
Those who pushed their philosophical speculations to the denial of the
received religious belief, whether they went to the exent of infidelity
or only of heterodoxy, met with little encouragement; neither religion
itself, nor the received forms of it, were at all shaken by the few
attacks which were made upon them from without. The philosophy, however,
of the time, made itself felt as effectually in another fashion; it
pushed its way into religion. The à priori arguments for a God were
first dismissed. This was indeed inevitable. The internal evidences of
Christianity shared nearly the same fate; if not absolutely thrown
aside, they fell into the background, and were little thought of. The
doctrine of Locke, that we have no innate moral sense, perverted into
the doctrine that we have no moral sense at all, made it appear that we
had not any capacity of judging from the doctrine itself, whether it was
worthy to have come from a righteous Being. In forgetfulness of the most
solemn warnings of the Author of Christianity, as well as of the Apostle
who was the main diffuser of it through the world, belief in his
religion was left to stand upon miracles—a species of evidence which,
according to the universal belief of the early Christians themselves,
was by no means peculiar to true religion: and it is melancholy to see
on what frail reeds able defenders of Christianity preferred to rest,
rather than upon that better evidence which alone gave to their
so-called evidences any value as a collateral confirmation. In the
interpretation of Christianity, the palpablest bibliolatry prevailed: if
(with Coleridge)[*] we may so term that superstitious worship of
particular texts, which persecuted Galileo, and, in our own day,
anathematized the discoveries of geology. Men whose faith in
Christianity rested on the literal infallibility of the sacred volume,
lshrankl in terror from the idea that it could have been included in the
scheme of Providence that the human opinions and mental habits of the
particular writers should be allowed to mix with and colour their mode
of conceiving and of narrating the divine transactions. Yet this slavery
to the letter has not only raised every difficulty which envelopes the
most unimportant passage in the Bible, into an objection to revelation,
but has paralysed many a well-meant effort to bring Christianity home,
as a consistent scheme, to human experience and capacities of
apprehension; Edition: current; Page: [145] as if there mwasm much of it
which it was more prudent to leave in nubibus, lest, in the attempt to
make the mind seize hold of it as a reality, some text might be found to
stand in the way. It might have been expected that this idolatry of the
words of Scripture would at least have saved its doctrines from being
tampered with by human notions: but the contrary proved to be the
effect; for the vague and sophistical mode of interpreting texts, which
was necessary in order to reconcile what was manifestly irreconcilable,
engendered a habit of playing fast and loose with Scripture, and finding
inn, or leaving out of it, whatever one pleased. Hence, while
Christianity was, in theory and in intention, received and submitted to,
with even “prostration of the understanding” before it, much alacrity
was in fact displayed in accommodating it to the received philosophy,
and even to the popular notions of the time. To take only one example,
but so signal a one as to be instar omnium.[*] If there is any one
requirement of Christianity less doubtful than another, it is that of
being spiritually-minded; of loving and practising good from a pure
love, simply because it is good. But one of the crotchets of the
philosophy of the age was, that all virtue is self-interest; and
accordingly, in the text-book adopted by the Church (in one of its
universities) for instruction in moral philosophy, the reason for doing
good is declared to be, that God is stronger than we are, and is able to
damn us if we do not. This is no exaggeration of the sentiments of
Paley, and hardly even of the crudity of his language.[†]

Thus, on the whole, England had neither the benefits, such as they were,
of the new ideas nor of the old. We were just sufficiently under the
influences of each, to render the other powerless. We had a Government,
which we respected too much to attempt to change it, but not enough to
trust it with any power, or look to it for any services that were not
compelled. We had a Church, which had ceased to fulfil the honest
purposes of a church, but which we made a great point of keeping up as
the pretence or simulacrum of one. We had a highly spiritual religion
(which we were instructed to obey from selfish motives), and the most
mechanical and worldly notions on every other subject; and we were so
much afraid of being wanting in reverence to each particular syllable of
the book which contained our religion, that we let its most important
meanings slip through our fingers, and entertained the most grovelling
conceptions of its spirit and general purposes. This was not a state of
things which could recommend itself to any earnest mind. It was sure in
no great length of time to call forth two sorts of men—the one demanding
the extinction of the institutions and creeds which had hitherto
Edition: current; Page: [146] existed; the other that they be made a
reality: the one pressing the new doctrines to their utmost
consequences; the other reasserting the obesto meaning and purposes of
the old. The first type attained its greatest pheightp in Bentham; the
last in Coleridge.

We hold that these two sorts of men, who seem to be, and believe
themselves to be, enemies, are in reality allies. The powers they wield
are opposite poles of one great force of progression. What was really
hateful and contemptible was the state which preceded them, and which
each, in its way, has been striving now for many years to improve. Each
ought to hail with rejoicing the advent of the other. But most of all
ought an enlightened Radical or Liberal to rejoice over such a
Conservative as Coleridge. For such a Radical must know, that the
Constitution and Church of England, and the religious opinions and
political maxims professed by their supporters, are not mere frauds, nor
sheer nonsense—have not been got up originally, and all along
maintained, for the sole purpose of picking people’s pockets; without
aiming at, or being found conducive to, any honest end during the whole
process. Nothing, of which this is a sufficient account, would have
lasted a tithe of five, eight, or ten centuries, in the most improving
period and q(during much of that period)q the most improving nation rinr
the world. These things, we may depend upon it, were not always without
much good in them, however little of it may now be left: and Reformers
ought to hail the man as a brother Reformer who points out what this
good is; what it is swhichs we have a right to expect from things
established—which they are bound to do for us, as the justification of
their being established: so that they may be recalled to it and
compelled to do it, or the impossibility of their any longer doing it
may be conclusively manifested. What is any case for reform good for,
until it has passed this test? What mode is there of determining whether
a thing is fit to exist, twithout firstt considering what purposes it
exists for, and whether it be still capable of fulfilling them?

We have not room here to consider Coleridge’s Conservative philosophy in
all its aspects, or in relation to all the quarters from which
objections might be raised against it. We shall consider it with
relation to Reformers, and especially to Benthamites. We would assist
them to determine whether they would have to do with Conservative
philosophers or with Conservative uduncesu; and whether, since there are
Tories, it be better that they should learn their Toryism from Lord
vEldonv, or even Sir Robert Peel, or from Coleridge.

Take, for instance, Coleridge’s view of the grounds of a Church
Establishment. Edition: current; Page: [147] His mode of treating any
institution is to investigate what he terms the Idea of it, or what in
common parlance would be called the principle involved in it. The idea
or principle of a national church, and of the Church of England in that
character, is, according to him, the reservation of a portion of the
land, or of a right to a portion of its produce, as a fund—for what
purpose? For the worship of God? For the performance of religious
ceremonies? No; for the advancement of knowledge, and the civilization
and cultivation of the community. This fund he does not term
Church-property, but “the nationality,” or national property. He
considers it as destined for

the support and maintenance of a permanent class or order, with the
following duties. A certain smaller number were to remain at the
fountain-heads of the humanities, in cultivating and enlarging the
knowledge already possessed, and in watching over the interests of
physical and moral science; being likewise the instructors of such as
constituted, or were to constitute, the remaining more numerous classes
of the order. The members of this latter and far more numerous body were
to be distributed throughout the country, so as not to leave even the
smallest integral part or division without a resident guide, guardian,
and instructor; the objects and final intention of the whole order being
these—to preserve the stores and to guard the treasures of past
civilization, and thus to bind the present with the past; to perfect and
add to the same, and thus to connect the present with the future; but
especially to diffuse through the whole community, and to every native
entitled to its laws and rights, that quantity and quality of knowledge
which was indispensable both for the understanding of those rights, and
for the performance of the duties correspondent; finally, to secure for
the nation, if not a superiority over the neighbouring states, yet an
equality at least, in that character of general civilization, which
equally with, or rather more than, fleets, armies, and revenue, forms
the ground of its defensive and offensive power.[*]

This organized body, set apart and endowed for the cultivation and
diffusion of knowledge, is not, in Coleridge’s view, necessarily a
religious corporation.

Religion may be an indispensable ally, but is not the essential
constitutive end, of that national institute, which is unfortunately, at
least improperly, styled the Church; a name which, in its best sense, is
exclusively appropriate to the Church of Christ. . . . . The clerisy of
the nation, or national church in its primary acceptation and original
intention, comprehended the learned of all denominations, the sages and
professors of the law and jurisprudence, of medicine and physiology, of
music, of military and civil architecture, with the mathematical as the
common organ of the preceding; in short, all the so-called liberal arts
and sciences, the possession and application of which constitute the
civilization of a country, as well as the theological. The last was,
indeed, placed at the head of all; and of good right did it claim the
precedence. But why? Because under the name of theology or divinity were
contained the interpretation of languages, the conservation and
tradition of past events, the momentous epochs and revolutions of
Edition: current; Page: [148] the race and nation, the continuation of
the records, logic, ethics, and the determination of ethical science, in
application to the rights and duties of men in all their various
relations, social and civil; and lastly, the ground-knowledge, the prima
scientia, as it was named,—philosophy, or the doctrine and discipline of
ideas.

Theology formed only a part of the objects, the theologians formed only
a portion of the clerks or clergy, of the national Church. The
theological order had precedency indeed, and deservedly; but not because
its members were priests, whose office was to conciliate the invisible
powers, and to superintend the interests that survive the grave; nor as
being exclusively, or even principally, sacerdotal or templar, which,
when it did occur, is to be considered as an accident of the age, a
misgrowth of ignorance and oppression, a falsification of the
constitutive principle, not a constituent part of the same. No; the
theologians took the lead, because the science of theology was the root
and the trunk of the knowledge of civilized man: because it gave unity
and the circulating sap of life to all other sciences, by virtue of
which alone they could be contemplated as forming collectively the
living tree of knowledge. It had the precedency because, under the name
theology, were comprised all the main aids, instruments, and materials
of national education, the nisus formativus of the body politic, the
shaping and informing spirit, which, educing or eliciting the latent man
in all the natives of the soil, trains them up to be citizens of the
country, free subjects of the realm. And, lastly, because to divinity
belong those fundamental truths which are the common groundwork of our
civil and our religious duties, not less indispensable to a right view
of our temporal concerns than to a rational faith respecting our
immortal well-being. Not without celestial observations can even
terrestrial charts be accurately construtced. (Church and State, Chap. v
[pp. 48-52].)

The wnationaltyw, or national property, according to Coleridge, “cannot
rightfully, and without foul wrong to the nation never has been,
alienated from its original purposes,” from the promotion of “a
continuing and progressive civilization,”[*] to the benefit of
individuals, or any public purpose of merely economical or material
interest. But the State may withdraw the fund from its actual holders,
for the better execution of itsx purposes. There is no sanctity attached
to the means, but only to the ends. The fund is not dedicated to any
particular scheme of religion, nor even to religion at all; religion has
only to do with it yin the character of any instrument of civilization,
and in common with all the other instruments.

I do not assert that the proceeds from the znationaltyz cannot be
rightfully vested, except in what we now mean by clergymen and the
established clergy. I have everywhere implied the contrary. . . . . In
relation to the national church, Christianity, or the Church of Christ,
is a blessed accident, a providential boon, a grace of God. . . . . As
the olive tree is said in its growth to fertilize the surrounding
Edition: current; Page: [149] soil, to invigorate the roots of the vines
in its immediate neighbourhood, and to improve the strength and flavour
of the wines; such is the relation of the Christian and the national
Church. But as the olive is not the same plant with the vine, or with
the elm or poplar (that is, the State) with which the vine is wedded;
and as the vine, with its prop, may exist, though in less perfection,
without the olive, or previously to its implantation; even so is
Christianity, and à fortiori any particular scheme of theology derived,
and supposed by its partisans to be deduced, from Christianity, no
essential part of the being of the national Church, however conducive or
even indispensable it may be to its well-being.

(Chap. vi [pp. 53-4, 59-60].)

What awoulda Sir Robert Inglis, or Sir Robert Peel, or Mr. bSpooner sayb
to such a doctrine as this? Will they thank Coleridge for this advocacy
of Toryism? What would become of the three years’ debates on the
Appropriation Clause,[*] which so disgraced this country before the face
of Europe? Will the ends of practical Toryism be much served by a theory
under which the Royal Society might claim a part of the Church property
with as good right as the bench of bishops, if, by endowing that body
like the French Institute, science could be better promoted? a theory by
which the State, in the conscientious exercise of its judgment, having
decided that the Church of England does not fulfil the object for which
the nationalty was intended, might transfer its endowments to any other
ecclesiastical body, or to any other body not ecclesiastical, which it
deemed more competent to fulfil those objects; might establish any other
sect, or all sects, or no sect at all, ifc it should deem that in the
divided condition of religious opinion in this country, the State can no
longer with advantage attempt the complete religious instruction of its
people, but must for the present content itself with providing secular
instruction, and such religious teachingd, if any,d as all can take part
in; leaving each sect to apply to its own communion that which they all
agree in considering as the keystone of the arch? We believe this to be
the true state of affairs in Great Britain at the present time. We are
far from thinking it other than a serious evil. We entirely acknowledge,
that in any person fit to be a teacher, the view he takes of religion
will be intimately connected with the view he will take of all the
greatest things which he has to teach.e Unless the same teachers who
give instruction on those other subjects, are at liberty Edition:
current; Page: [150] to enter freely on religion, the scheme of
education will be, to a certain degree, fragmentary and incoherent. But
the State at present has only the option of such an imperfect scheme, or
of entrusting the whole business to perhaps the most unfit body ffor the
exclusive charge of it that could be foundf among persons of any
intellectual attainments, namely, the established clergy as at present
trained and composed. Such a body would have no chance of being selected
as the exclusive administrators of the nationalty, on any foundation but
that of divine right; the ground avowedly taken by the only other school
of Conservative philosophy which is attempting to raise its head in this
country—that of the new Oxford theologiansg.

Coleridge’s merit in this matter consists, as it seems to us, in two
things. First, that by setting in a clear light what a national church
establishment ought to be, and what, by the very fact of its existence,
it must be held to pretend to be, he has pronounced the severest satire
upon what in fact it is. There is some difference, truly, between
Coleridge’s church, in which the schoolmaster forms the first step in
the hierarchy, “who, in due time, and under condition of a faithful
performance of his arduous duties, should succeed to the pastorate,”*
and the Church of England such as we now see. But to say the Church, and
mean only the clergy, “constituted,” according to Coleridge’s
conviction, “the first and fundamental apostasy.”† He, and the thoughts
which have proceeded from him, have done more than would have been
effected in thrice the time by Dissenters and Radicals, to make the
Church ashamed of the evil of her ways, and to determine that movement
of improvement from within, which has begun where it ought to begin, at
the Universities and among the younger clergy, and which, if this
sect-ridden country is ever to be really taught, must proceed pari passu
with the assault carried on from without.

Secondly, we honour Coleridge for having rescued from the discredit in
which the corruptions of the English Church had involved everything
connected with it, and for having vindicated against Bentham and Adam
Smith and the whole eighteenth century, the principle of an endowed
class, for the cultivation of learning, and for diffusing its results
among the community. That such a class is likely to be behind, instead
of before, the progress of knowledge, is an induction erroneously drawn
from the peculiar circumstances of the last two centuries, and in
contradiction to all the rest of modern history. If we have seen hmuchh
of the abuses of endowments, we have not seen what this country might be
made by a proper administration of them, as we trust we shall not see
what it would be without them. On this subject wei Edition: current;
Page: [151] are entirely jatj one with Coleridge, and with the other
great defender of endowed establishments, Dr. Chalmers; and we consider
the definitive establishment of this fundamental principle, to be one of
the permanent benefits which political science owes to the Conservative
philosophers.

Coleridge’s theory of the Constitution is not less worthy of notice than
his theory of the Church. The Delolme and Blackstone doctrine, the
balance of the three powers, he declares he never could elicit one ray
of common sense from, no more than from the balance of trade.* There is,
however, according to him, an Idea of the Constitution, of which he
says—

Because our whole history, from Alfred onwards, demonstrates the
continued influence of such an idea, or ultimate aim, in the minds of
our forefathers, in their characters and functions as public men, alike
in what they resisted and what they claimed; in the institutions and
forms of polity which they established, and with regard to those against
which they more or less successfully contended; and because the result
has been a progressive, though not always a direct or equable, advance
in the gradual realization of the idea; and because it is actually,
though (even because it is an idea) not adequately, represented in a
correspondent scheme of means really existing; we speak, and have a
right to speak, of the idea itself as actually existing, that is, as a
principle existing in the only way in which a principle can exist—in the
minds and consciences of the persons whose duties it prescribes, and
whose rights it determines.†

This fundamental idea

is at the same time the final criterion by which all particular frames
of government must be tried: for here only can we find the great
constructive principles of our representative system: those principles
in the light of which it can alone be ascertained what are excrescences,
symptoms of distemperature, and marks of degeneration, and what are
native growths, or changes naturally attendant on the progressive
development of the original germ, symptoms of immaturity, perhaps, but
not of disease; or, at worst, modifications of the growth by the
defective or faulty, but remediless or only gradually remediable,
qualities of the soil and surrounding elements‡

Of these principles he gives the following account:—

It is the chief of many blessings derived from the insular character and
circumstances of our country, that our social institutions have formed
themselves out of our proper needs and interests; that long and fierce
as the birth-struggle and growing pains have been, the antagonist powers
have been of our own system, and have been allowed to work out their
final balance with less disturbance from external forces than was
possible in the Continental States. . . Now, in every country of
civilized men, or acknowledging the rights of property, and by means of
determined boundaries and common laws united into one people or nation,
the two Edition: current; Page: [152] antagonist powers or opposite
interests of the State, under which all other State interests are
comprised, are those of permanence and of progression.[*]

The interest of permanence, or the Conservative interest, he considers
to be naturally connected with the land, and with landed property. This
doctrine, false in our opinion as an universal principle, is true of
England, and of all countries where landed property is accumulated in
large masses.

“On the other hand,” he says, “the progression of a State, in the arts
and comforts of life, in the diffusion of the information and knowledge
useful or necessary for all; in short, all advances in civilization, and
the rights and privileges of citizens, are especially connected with,
and derived from, the four classes,—the mercantile, the manufacturing,
the distributive, and the professional.”* (We must omit the interesting
historical illustrations of this maxim.) “These four last-mentioned
classes I will designate by the name of the Personal Interest, as the
exponent of all moveable and personal possessions, including skill and
acquired knowledge, the moral and intellectual stock in trade of the
professional man and the artist, no less than the raw materials, and the
means of elaborating, transporting, and distributing them.”†

The interest of permanence, then, is provided for by a representation of
the landed proprietors; that of progression, by a representation of
personal property and of intellectual acquirement: and while one branch
of the Legislature, the Peerage, is essentially given over to the
former, he considers it a part both of the general theory and of the
actual English constitution, that the representatives of the latter
should form “the clear and effectual majority of the Lower House;” or if
not, that at least, by the added influence of public opinion, they
should exercise an effective preponderance there. That “the very weight
intended for the effectual counterpoise of the great landholders” has
“in the course of events, been shifted into the opposite scale;” that
the members for the towns “now constitute a large proportion of the
political power and influence of the very class of men whose personal
cupidity and whose partial views of the landed interest at large they
were meant to keep in check;”—these things he acknowledges: and only
suggests a doubt, whether roads, canals, machinery, the press, and other
influences favourable to the popular side, do not constitute an
equivalent force to supply the deficiency.‡k

Edition: current; Page: [153]
How much better a Parliamentary Reformer, then, is Coleridge, than Lord
John Russell, or any Whig who stickles for maintaining this
unconstitutional omnipotence of the landed interest. If these became the
principles of Tories, we should not wait long for further reform, even
in our organic institutions. It is true Coleridge disapproved of the
Reform Bill, or rather of the principle, or the no-principle, on which
it was supported. He saw in it l(as we may surmise)l the dangers of a
change amounting almost to a revolution, without any real tendency to
remove those defects in the machine, which alone could justify a change
so extensive. And that this ism nearly a true view of the matter, all
parties seem to be now agreed. The Reform Bill was not calculated
ngreatlyn to improve the general composition of the Legislature. The
good it has done, which is considerable, consists chiefly in this, that
being so great a change, it ohaso weakened the superstitious feeling
against great changes. Any good, which is contrary to the selfish
interest of the dominant class, is pstill only to be effected by a long
and arduous struggle: butp improvements which threaten no powerful body
in their social importance or in their pecuniary emoluments, are no
longer resisted, as they once were, because of their greatness—because
of the very benefit which they promised. Witness the speedy passing of
the Poor Law Amendment and the Penny Postage Acts.[*]

Meanwhile, though Coleridge’s theory is but a mere commencement, not
amounting to the first lines of a political philosophy, has the age
produced any other theory of government which can stand a comparison
with it as to its first principles? Let us take, for example, the
Benthamic theory. The principle of this may be said to be, that since
the general interest is the object of government, a complete control
over the government ought to be given to those whose interest is
identical with the general interest. The authors and propounders of this
theory were men of extraordinary intellectual powers, and the greater
part of what they meant by it is true and important. But qwhenq
considered as the foundation of a science, it would be difficult to find
among theories proceeding from philosophers oner less like a
philosophical theory, or, in the works of analytical smindss, anything
more entirely unanalytical. What can a philosopher tmake oft such
complex notions as “interest” and “general interest,” without breaking
them down into the elements of which they are composed? If by men’s
interest be meant what would appear such to a calculating bystander,
judging what would be good for a man Edition: current; Page: [154]
during his whole life, and making no account, or but little, of the
gratification of his present passions, his pride, his envy, his vanity,
his cupidity, his love of pleasure, his love of ease—it may be
questioned whether, in this sense, the interest of an aristocracy, and
still more that of a monarch, would not be as accordant with the general
interest as that of either the middle or the poorer classes; and if
men’s interest, in this understanding of it, usually governed their
conduct, absolute monarchy would probably be the best form of
government. But since men usually do what they like, often being
perfectly aware that it is not for their ultimate interest, still more
often that it is not for the interest of their posterity; and uwhen they
do believe that the object they are seeking is permanently good for
them,u almost always overrating its value; it is necessary to consider,
not who are they whose permanent interest, but who are they whose
immediate interests and habitual feelings, are likely to be most in
accordance with the end we seek to obtain. And as that end (the general
good) is a very complex state of things, comprising as its component
elements many requisites which are neither of one and the same nature,
nor attainable by one and the same means—political philosophy must begin
by a classification of these elements, in order to distinguish those of
them which go naturally together (so that the provision made for one
will suffice for the rest), from those which are ordinarily in a state
of antagonism, or at least of separation, and require to be provided for
apart. This preliminary classification being supposed, things would, in
a perfect government, be so ordered, that corresponding to each of the
great interests of society, there would be some branch or some integral
part of the governing body, so constituted that it should not be merely
deemed by philosophers, but vshouldv actually and constantly deem
itself, to have its strongest interests involved in the maintenance of
that one of the ends of society which it is intended to be the guardian
of. This, we say, is the thing to be aimed at, the type of perfection in
a political constitution. Not that there is a possibility of making more
than a limited approach to it in practice. A government must be composed
out of the elements already existing in society, and the distribution of
power in the constitution cannot vary much or long from the distribution
of it in society itself. But wherever the circumstances of society allow
any choice, wherever wisdom and contrivance are at all available, this,
we conceive, is the principle of guidance; and whatever anywhere exists
is imperfect and a failure, just so far as it recedes from this type.

Such a philosophy of government, we need hardly say, is in its infancy:
the first step to it, the classification of the exigencies of society,
has not been made. Bentham, in his Principles of Civil Law,[*] has given
a specimen, very useful for many other purposes, but not available, nor
intended to be Edition: current; Page: [155] so, for founding a theory
of representation upon it. For that particular purpose we have seen
nothing comparable as far as it goes, notwithstanding its manifest
insufficiency, to Coleridge’s division of the interests of society into
the two antagonist interests of Permanence and Progression. The
Continental philosophers have, by a different path, arrived at the same
division; and this is about as far, probably, as the science of
political institutions has yet reached.

In the details of Coleridge’s political opinions there is much good, and
much that is questionable, or worse. In political economy especially he
writes like an arrant driveller, and it would have been well for his
reputation had he never meddled with the subject.* But this department
of knowledge can now take care of itself. On other points we meet with
far-reaching remarks, and a tone of general feeling sufficient to make a
Tory’s hair stand on end. Thus, in the work from which we have most
quoted, he calls the State policy of the last half-century “a Cyclops
with one eye, and that in the back of the head”—its measures “either a
series of anachronisms, or a truckling to events instead of the science
that should command them.”† He styles the great Commonwealthsmen “the
stars of that narrow interspace of blue sky between the black clouds of
the First and Second Charles’s reigns.”‡ The Literary Remains are full
of disparaging remarks on many of the heroes of Toryism and
Church-of-Englandism. He sees, for instance, no difference between
Whitgift and Bancroft, and Bonner and Gardiner, except that the last
were the most consistent—that the former sinned against better
knowledge;§ and one of the most poignant of his writings is a character
of Pitt, the very reverse of panegyrical.∥ As a specimen of his
practical views, we have mentioned his recommendation that the parochial
clergy should begin by being schoolmasters. He urges “a different
division and subdivision of the kingdom” instead of “the present
barbarism, which forms an obstacle to the improvement of the country of
much greater magnitude than men are generally aware.”# But we must
confine ourselves to instances in which he Edition: current; Page: [156]
has helped to bring forward great principles, either implied in the old
English opinions and institutions, or at least opposed to the new
tendencies.

For example, he is at issue with the let alone doctrine, or the theory
that governments can do wnow better than to do nothing; a doctrine
generated by the manifest selfishness and incompetence of modern
European governments, but of which, as a general theory, we may now be
permitted to say, that one half of it is true, and the other half false.
All who are on a level with their age now readily admit that government
ought not to interdict men from publishing their opinions, pursuing
their employments, or buying and selling their goods, in whatever place
or manner they deem the most advantageous. Beyond suppressing force and
fraud, governments can seldom, without doing more harm than good,
attempt to chain up the free agency of individuals. But does it follow
from this that government cannot exercise a free agency of its own?—that
it cannot beneficially employ its powers, its means of information, and
its pecuniary resources (so far surpassing those of any other
association, or of any individual), in promoting the public welfare by a
thousand means which individuals would never think of, would have no
sufficient motives to attempt, or no sufficient xpowerx to accomplish?
To confine ourselves to one, and that a limited view of the subject: a
State ought to be considered as a great benefit society, or mutual
insurance company, for helping (under the necessary regulations for
preventing abuse) that large proportion of its members who cannot help
themselves.

Let us suppose, [says Coleridge,] the negative ends of a State already
attained, namely, its own safety by means of its own strength, and the
protection of person and property for all its members; there will then
remain its positive ends:—1. To make the means of subsistence more easy
to each individual: 2. To secure to each of its members the hope of
bettering his own condition or that of his children: 3. The development
of those faculties which are essential to his humanity, that is to his
rational and moral being.*

In regard to the two former ends, he of course does not mean that they
can be accomplished merely by making laws to that effect; or that,
according to the wild doctrines now afloat, it is the fault of the
government if every one has not enough to eat and drink. But he means
that government can do something directly, and very much indirectly, to
promote even the physical comfort of the people; and that if, besides
making a proper use of its own powers, it would exert itself to teach
the people what is in theirs, indigence would soon disappear from the
face of the earth.

Perhaps, however, the greatest service which Coleridge has rendered to
politics in his capacity of a Conservative philosopher, though its
fruits are Edition: current; Page: [157] mostly yet to come, is in
reviving the idea of a trust inherent in landed property. The land, the
gift of nature, the source of subsistence to all, and the foundation of
everything that influences our physical well-being, cannot be considered
a subject of yproperty,y in the same absolute sense in which men are
deemed proprietors of that zin which no one has any interestz but
themselves—that which they have actually called into existence by their
own bodily exertion. As Coleridge points out, such a notion is
altogether of modern growth.

The very idea of individual or private property in our present
acceptation of the term, and according to the current notion of the
right to it, was originally confined to moveable things; and the more
moveable, the more susceptible of the nature of property.*

By the early institutions of Europe, property in land was a public
function, created for certain public purposes, and held under condition
of their fulfilment; and as such, we predict, under the modifications
suited to modern society, it will again come to be considered. In this
age, when everything is called in question, and when the foundation of
private property itself needs to be argumentatively maintained againsta
plausible and persuasive sophisms, one may easily see the danger of
mixing up what is not really tenable with what is—and the impossibility
of maintaining an absolute right in an individual to an unrestricted
control, a jus utendi et abutendi, over an unlimited quantity of the
mere raw material of the globe, to which every other person could
originally make out as good a natural title as himself. It will
certainly not be much longer tolerated that agriculture should be
carried on (as Coleridge expresses it) on the same principles as those
of trade; “that a gentleman should regard his estate as a merchant his
cargo, or a shopkeeper his stock;”† that he should be allowed to deal
with it as if it only existed to yield rent to him, not food to the
numbers whose hands till it; and should have a right, and a right
possessing all the sacredness of property, to turn them out by hundreds
and make them perish on the high road, as has been done before now by
Irish landlords. We believe it will soon be thought, that a mode of
property in land which has brought things to this pass, has existed long
enough.

We shall not be suspected (we hope) of recommending a general resumption
of landed possessions, or the depriving any one, without compensation,
of anything which the law gives him. But we say that when the State
allows any one to exercise ownership over more land than suffices to
raise by his Edition: current; Page: [158] own labour his subsistence
and that of his family, it confers on him power over other human
beings—power affecting them in their most vital interests; and that no
notion of private property can bar the right which the State inherently
possesses, to require that the power which it has so given shall not be
abused. We say, also, that, by giving this bdirectb power over so large
a portion of the community, cindirectc power is necessarily conferred
over all the remaining portion; and this, too, it is the duty of the
State to place under proper control. Further, the tenure of land, the
various rights connected with it, and the system on which its
cultivation is carried on, are points of the utmost importance both to
the economical and to the moral well-being of the whole community. And
the State fails in one of its highest obligations, unless it takes these
points under its particular superintendence; unless, to the full extent
of its power, it takes means of providing that the manner in which land
is held, the mode and degree of its division, and every other
peculiarity which influences the mode of its cultivation, shall be the
most favourable possible for making the best use of the land: for
drawing the greatest benefit from its productive resources, for securing
the happiest existence to those employed on it, and for setting the
greatest number of hands free to employ their labour for the benefit of
the community in other ways. We believe that these opinions will become,
in no very long period, universal throughout Europe. And we gratefully
beard testimony to the fact, that the first among us who has given the
sanction of philosophy to so great a reform in the popular and current
notions, is a Conservative philosopher.

Of Coleridge as a moral and religious philosopher (the character which
he presents most prominently in his principal works), there is neither
room, nor would it be expedient for us to speak more than generally. On
both subjects, few men have ever combined so much earnestness with so
catholic and unsectarian a spirit. “We have imprisoned,” says he, “our
own conceptions by the lines which we have drawn in order to exclude the
conceptions of others. J’ai trouvé que la plupart des sectes ont raison
dans une bonne partie de ce qu’elles avancent, mais non pas tant en ce
qu’elles nient.”* That almost all sects, both in philosophy and
religion, are right in the positive part of their tenets, though
commonly wrong in the negative, is a doctrine which he professes as
strongly as the eclectic school in France. Almost all errors he holds to
be “truths misunderstood,” “half-truths taken as the whole,” though not
the less, but the more dangerous on that account.† Both the theory ande
practice Edition: current; Page: [159] of enlightened tolerance in
matters of opinion, might be exhibited in extracts from his writings
more copiously than in those of falmostf any other writer we know;
though there are a few (and but a few) exceptions to his own practice of
it. In the theory of ethics, he contends against the doctrine of general
consequences, and holds that, for man, “to obey the simple unconditional
commandment of eschewing every act that implies a self-contradiction”—so
to act as to “be able, without involving any contradiction, to will that
the maxim of thy conduct should be the law of all intelligent beings,—is
the one universal and sufficient principle and guide of morality.”* Yet
even a utilitarian can have little complaint to make of a philosopher
who lays it down that “the outward object of virtue” is “the greatest
producible sum of happiness of all men,” and that “happiness in its
proper sense is but the continuity and sum-total of the pleasure which
is allotted or happens to a man.”†

But his greatest object was to bring into harmony Religion and
Philosophy. He laboured incessantly to establish that “the Christian
faith—in which,” says he, “I include every article of belief and
doctrine professed by the first reformers in common”—is not only divine
truth, but also “the perfection of Human Intelligence.”‡ All that
Christianity has revealed, philosophy, according to him, can prove,
though there is much which it could never have discovered; human reason,
once strengthened by Christianity, can evolve all the Christian
doctrines from its own sources.§ Moreover, “if infidelity is not to
overspread England as well as France,”∥ the Scripture, and every passage
of Scripture, must be submitted to this test; inasmuch as “the
compatibility of a document with the conclusions of self-evident reason,
and with the laws of conscience, is a condition à priori of any evidence
adequate to the proof of its having been revealed by God;” and this, he
says, is no gphilosophicg novelty, but a principle “clearly laid down
both by Moses andh St. Paul.”# He thus goes quite as far as the
Unitarians in making man’s reason and moral feelings a test of
revelation; but differs toto cælo from them in their rejection of its
mysteries, which he regards as the highest philosophic truths, and says
that “the Christian to whom, after a long profession of Christianity,
the mysteries remain as much mysteries as before, is in the same state
as a schoolboy with regard to his arithmetic, to whom the facit at the
end of the examples in his cyphering-book is the whole ground for his
assuming that such and such figures amount to so and so.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [160]
These opinions are not likely to be popular in the religious world, and
Coleridge knew it: “I quite calculate,”* said he once, “on my being one
day or other holden in worse repute by many Christians than the
iUnitarians” and even Infidels. “Iti must be undergone by every one who
loves the truth for its own sake beyond all other things.” For our part,
we are not bound to defend him; and we must admit that, in his attempt
to arrive at theology by way of philosophy, we see much straining, and
jmost frequentlyj, as it appears to us, total failure. The question,
however, is not whether Coleridge’s attempts arek successful, but
whether it is desirable or not that such attempts should be made.
Whatever some religious people may think, philosophy will and must go
on, ever seeking to understand whatever can be made understandable; and,
whatever some philosophers may think, there is little prospect at
present that philosophy will take the place of religion, or that any
philosophy will be lspeedilyl received in this country, unless supposed
not only to be consistent with, but even to yield collateral support to,
Christianity. What is the use, then, of treating with contempt the idea
of a religious philosophy? mReligious philosophies are among the things
to be looked form, and our main hope ought to be that nthey may be such
as fulfiln the conditions of a philosophy—the very foremost of which is,
unrestricted freedom of thought. There is no philosophy possible where
fear of consequences is a stronger principle than love of truth; where
speculation is paralyzed, either by the belief that conclusions honestly
arrived at will be punished by a just and good Being owitho eternal
damnation, or by seeing in every text of Scripture a foregone
conclusion, with which the results of inquiry must, at any expense of
sophistry and self-deception, be made to quadrate.

From both these withering influences, that have so often made the
acutest intellects exhibit specimens of obliquity and imbecility in
their theological speculations which have pexcitedp the pity of
subsequent generations, Coleridge’s mind was perfectly free. Faith—the
faith which is qplaced among religious dutiesq—was, in his view, a state
of the will and of the affections, not of the understanding. Heresy, in
“the literal sense and scriptural import of the word,” is, according to
him, “wilful error, or belief originating in Edition: current; Page:
[161] some perversion of the will;” he says, therefore, that there may
be orthodox heretics, since indifference to truth may as well be shown
on the right side of the question as on the wrong; and denounces, in
strong language, the contrary doctrine of the “pseudo-Athanasius,” who
“interprets Catholic faith by belief,”* an act of the understanding
alone. The “true Lutheran doctrine,” he says, is, that “neither will
truth, as a mere conviction of the understanding, save, nor error
condemn. To love truth sincerely is spiritually to have truth; and an
error becomes a personal error, not by its aberration from logic or
history, but so far as the causes of such error are in the heart, or may
be traced back to some antecedent unchristian wish or habit.”† “The
unmistakable passions of a factionary and a schismatic, the ostentatious
display, the ambitious and dishonest arts of a sect-founder, must be
superinduced on the false doctrine before the heresy makes the man a
heretic.”‡

Against the other terror, so fatal to the unshackled exercise of reason
on the greatest questions, the view which Coleridge took of the
authority of the Scriptures was a preservative. He drew the strongest
distinction between the inspiration which he owned in the various
writers, and an express dictation by the Almighty of every word they
wrote. “The notion of the absolute truth and divinity of every syllable
of the text of the books of the Old and New Testament as we have it,”[*]
he again and again asserts to be unsupported by the Scripture itself; to
be one of those superstitions in which “there is a heart of unbelief;”§
to be, “if possible, still more extravagant” than the Papal
infallibility; and declares that the very same arguments are used for
both doctrines.∥ God, he believes, informed the minds of the writers
with the truths he meant to reveal, and left the rest to their human
faculties. He pleaded most earnestly, says his nephew and editor, for
this liberty of criticism with respect to the Scriptures, as

the only middle path of safety and peace between a godless disregard of
the unique and transcendent character of the Bible, taken generally, and
that scheme of interpretation, scarcely less adverse to the pure spirit
of Christian wisdom, which wildly arrays our faith in opposition to our
reason, and inculcates the sacrifice of the latter to the former; for he
threw up his hands in dismay at the language of some of our modern
divinity on this point, as if a faith not founded on insight were aught
else than a specious name for wilful positiveness; as if the Father of
Lights could require, or would accept, from the only one of his
creatures whom he had endowed with reason, the sacrifice of fools! . . .
. Of the aweless doctrine that God might, if he had so pleased, have
given to man a Edition: current; Page: [162] religion which to human
intelligence should not be rational, and exacted his faith in it,
Coleridge’s whole middle and later life was one deep and solemn denial.*

He bewails “bibliolatry” as the pervading error of modern Protestant
divinity, and the great stumbling-block of Christianity, and exclaims,†
“O might I live but to utter all my meditations on this most concerning
point . . . in what sense the Bible may be called the word of God, and
how and under what conditions the unity of the Spirit is translucent
through the letter, which, read as the letter merely, is the word of
this and that pious, but fallible and imperfect, man.” It is known that
he did live to write down these meditations; and speculations so
important will one day, it is devoutly to be hoped, be given to the
world.‡

Theological discussion is beyond our province, and it is not for us,r in
this place, to judge these sentiments of Coleridge; but it is sclear
enoughs that they are not the sentiments of a bigot, or of one who is to
be dreaded by Liberals, lest he should illiberalize the minds of the
rising generation of Tories and High-Churchmen. We think the danger is
rather lest they should find him vastly too liberal. And yet, now when
the most orthodox divines, both in the Church and out of it, find it
necessary to explain away the tobvioust sense of the whole first chapter
of Genesis, uor failing to do that, consent to disbelieve it
provisionally, on the speculation that there may hereafter be discovered
a sense in which it can be believed,u one would think the time gone by
for expecting to learn from the Bible what it never could have been
intended to communicate, and to find in all its statements a literal
truth neither necessary nor conducive to what the volume itself declares
to be the ends of revelation. Such at least was Coleridge’s opinion: and
whatever influence such an opinion may have over Conservatives, it
cannot do other than make them less bigots, and better philosophers.

But we must close this long essay: long in itself, vthoughv short in its
relation to its subject, and to the multitude of topics involved in it.
We do not pretend to have given any sufficient account of Coleridge; but
we hope we may have proved to some, not previously aware of it, that
there is something both in him, and in the school to which he belongs,
not unworthy of their better knowledge. We may have done something to
show that a Tory philosopher cannot be wholly a Tory, but must often be
a better Liberal than Edition: current; Page: [163] Liberals themselves;
while he is the natural means of rescuing from oblivion truths which
Tories have forgotten, and which the prevailing schools of Liberalism
never knew.

And even ifw a Conservative philosophy were an absurdity, it is well
calculated to drive out a hundred absurdities worse than itself. Let no
one think that it is nothing, to accustom xpeoplex to give a reason for
their opinion, be the opinion ever so untenable, the reason ever so
insufficient. A ypersony accustomed to submit his fundamental tenets to
the test of reason, will be more open to the dictates of reason on every
other point. Not from him shall we have to apprehend the owl-like dread
of light, the drudge-like aversion to change, which were the
characteristics of the old unreasoning race of bigots. A man accustomed
to contemplate the fair side of Toryism (the side that every attempt at
a philosophy of it must bring to view), and to defend the existing
system by the display of its capabilities as an engine of public
good,—such a man, when he comes to administer the system, will be more
anxious than another zpersonz to realize those capabilities, to bring
thea fact a little nearer to the specious theory. “Lord, enlighten thou
our enemies,” should be the prayer of every true Reformer; sharpen their
wits, give acuteness to their perceptions, and consecutiveness and
clearness to their reasoning powers: we are in danger from their folly,
not from their wisdom; their weakness is what fills us with
apprehension, not their strength.

For ourselves, we are not so blinded by our particular opinions as to be
ignorant that in this and in every other country bof Europeb, the great
mass of the owners of clargec property, and of all the classes
intimately connected with the owners of dlarged property, are, and must
be eexpected to bee, in the main, Conservative. To suppose that so
mighty a body canf be without immense influence in the commonwealth, or
to lay plans for effecting great changes, either spiritual or temporal,
in which they are left out of the question, would be gthe height of
absurdityg. Let those who desire such changes, ask themselves if they
are content that these classes should be, and remain, to a man, banded
against them; and what progress they expect to make, or by what means,
unless a process of preparation shall be going on in the minds of these
very classes; not by the himpracticableh method of converting them from
Conservatives into Liberals, but by their being led to adopt one liberal
opinion after another, as a part of Conservatism itself. The first step
to this, is to inspire them with the desire to systematize and
rationalize their own actual creed: and the feeblest attempt to do this
has an intrinsic value; far more, then, one which has so much in it,
both of moral goodness and true insight, as the philosophy of Coleridge.

Edition: current; Page: [164] Edition: current; Page: [165]


WHEWELL ON MORAL PHILOSOPHY
 1852

Edition: current; Page: [166]


EDITOR’S NOTE

D&D, II (1867), 450-509, with footnote to title: “Westminster Review,
October 1852.—1. ‘Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy in
England.’ By William Whewell, D.D., Master of Trinity College, and
Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Cambridge. 1 vols.
8vo. [London: Parker,] 1852. 2. ‘Elements of Morality, including
Polity.’ By the same Author. 2 vols. 8vo. [London: Parker,] 1845.”
Reprinted from the Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review, LVIII [n.s.
II] (Oct., 1852), 349-85 and headed: “Art. II.—Whewell’s Moral
Philosophy” with the same bibliographic information as in D&D.
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of Whewell’s Lectures on
the History of Moral Philosophy in England, & his Elements of Morality,
in the Westminster Review new series No. 4 for October 1852” (MacMinn,
77). For a discussion of the relation between this article and some
others in this volume, see the Textual Introduction, cxxii above, and
the Preface to D&D, 493-4 below. JSM requested offprints of the article
from John Chapman, the editor of the Westminster, but when only
tear-sheets were sent, he refused the further offer of reprinting,
saying that he did “not think it worth the expense” as he merely wished
to give copies to friends (7 & 9/10/52; A.l.s. at Indiana University).
In the one copy he retained he corrected the running-title on 359 from
“Association” to “Asceticism” (Somerville College).

The following text is collated with that in D&D (2nd ed.), and that in
the Westminster. In the footnoted variants, D&D (2nd ed.) is indicated
by “67”; D&D (1st ed.) by “59”; and the Westminster by “52”.

Edition: current; Page: [167]


Whewell on Moral Philosophy

if the worth of Dr. Whewell’s writings could be measured by the
importance and amplitude of their subjects, no writer of the age could
vie with him in merit or usefulness. He has aspired to be not only the
historian, but the philosopher and legislator, of almost all the great
departments of human knowledge; reducing each to its first principles,
and showing how it might be scientifically evolved from these as a
connected whole. After endeavouring, in his History and Philosophy of
the Inductive Sciences,[*] to place physics, and incidentally
metaphysics, on a philosophic foundation, he has made an almost equally
ambitious attempt on the subjects of morals and government, of which the
two works before us are the results. He is thus entitled to the praise
of having done his best to wipe off from the two endowed universities,
in one of which he holds a high place, the reproach to which they have
so long been justly liable, of neglecting the higher regions of
philosophy. By his writings and influence, he has been an agent in that
revival of speculation on the most difficult and highest subjects, which
has been noticeable for some years past within as well as without the
pale of Oxford and Cambridge. And inasmuch as mental activity of any
kind is better than torpidity, and bad solutions of the great questions
of philosophy are preferable to a lazy ignoring of their existence,
whoever has taken so active a part as Dr. Whewell in this intellectual
movement, may lay claim to considerable merit.

Unfortunately it is not in the nature of bodies constituted like the
English Universities, even when stirred up into something like mental
activity, to send forth thought of any but one description. There have
been universities (those of France and Germany have at some periods been
practically conducted on this principle) which brought together into a
body the most vigorous thinkers and the ablest teachers, whatever the
conclusions to which their thinking might have led them. But in the
English Universities no thought can find place, except that which can
reconcile itself with orthodoxy. Edition: current; Page: [168] They are
ecclesiastical institutions; and it is the essence of all churches to
vow adherence to a set of opinions made up and prescribed, it matters
little whether three or thirteen centuries ago. Men will some day open
their eyes, and perceive how fatal a thing it is that the instruction of
those who are intended to be the guides and governors of mankind should
be confided to a collection of persons thus pledged. If the opinions
they are pledged to were every one as true as any fact in physical
science, and had been adopted, not as they almost always are, on trust
and authority, but as the result of the most diligent and impartial
examination of which the mind of the recipient was capable; even then,
the engagement under penalties always to adhere to the opinions once
assented to, would debilitate and lame the mind, and unfit it for
progress, still more for assisting the progress of others. The person
who has to think more of what an opinion leads to, than of what is the
evidence of it, cannot be a philosopher, or a teacher of philosophers.
Of what value is the opinion on any subject, of a man of whom every one
knows that by his profession he must hold that opinion? and how can
intellectual vigour be fostered by the teaching of those who, even as a
matter of duty, would rather that their pupils were weak and orthodox,
than strong with freedom of thought? Whoever thinks that persons thus
tied are fitting depositaries of the trust of educating a people, must
think that the proper object of intellectual education is not to
strengthen and cultivate the intellect, but to make sure of its adopting
certain conclusions: that, in short, in the exercise of the thinking
faculty, there is something, either religion, or conservatism, or peace,
or whatever it be, more important than truth. Not to dilate further on
this topic, it is nearly inevitable, that when persons bound by the vows
and placed in the circumstances of an established clergy, enter into the
paths of higher speculation, and endeavour to make a philosophy, either
purpose or instinct will direct them to the kind of philosophy best
fitted to prop up the doctrines to which they are pledged. And when
these doctrines are so prodigiously in arrear of the general progress of
thought, as the doctrines of the Church of England now are, the
philosophy resulting will have a tendency not to promote, but to arrest
progress.

Without the slightest wish to speak in disparagement of Dr. Whewell’s
labours, and with no ground for questioning his sincerity of purpose, we
think the preceding aremarka thoroughly applicable to his philosophical
speculations. We do not say the intention, but certainly the tendency,
of his efforts, is to shape the whole of philosophy, physical as well as
moral, into a form adapted to serve as a support and a justification to
any opinions which happen to be established. A writer who has gone
beyond all his predecessors in the manufacture of necessary truths, that
is, of propositions which, according to him, may be known to be true
independently of proof; who ascribes Edition: current; Page: [169] this
self-evidence to the larger generalities of all sciences (however little
obvious at first) as soon as they have become familiar—was still more
certain to regard all moral propositions familiar to him from his early
years as self-evident truths. His Elements of Morality could be nothing
better than a classification and systematizing of the opinions which he
found prevailing among those who had been educated according to the
approved methods of his own country; or, let us rather say, an apparatus
for converting those prevailing opinions, on matters of morality, into
reasons for themselves.

This, accordingly, is what we find in Dr. Whewell’s volumes: while we
have sought in vain for the numerous minor merits, which bgiveb a real
scientific value to his previous works. If the Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences was, as we think, an erroneous philosophy, it
contained much that was not unfit to find place in a better, and was
often calculated to suggest deeper thoughts than it possessed of its
own. But in the Elements of Morality he leaves the subject so exactly as
he found it,—the book is so mere a catalogue of received opinions,
containing nothing to correct any of them, and little which can work
with any potency even to confirm them,—that it can scarcely be counted
as anything more than one of the thousand waves on the dead sea of
commonplace, affording nothing to invite or to reward a separate
examination. We should not, therefore, have felt called upon to concern
ourselves specially about it, if Dr. Whewell had not, in his more recent
publication, Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy in England,
undertaken to characterize and criticise, from his own point of view,
all other English writers on moral philosophy; and particularly those
who derive their ethical conclusions, not from internal intuition, but
from an external standard. So long as he contented himself with giving
what we think bad reasons for common opinions, there was not much
inducement to interfere with them; but assaults on the only methods of
philosophising from which any improvement in ethical opinions can be
looked for, ought to be repelled. And in doing this it is necessary to
extend our comments to some of Dr. Whewell’s substantive opinions also.
When he argues in condemnation of any external standard, and especially
of utility, or tendency to happiness, as the principle or test of
morality, it is material to examine how he gets on without it; how he
fares in the attempt to construct a coherent theory of morals on any
other basis. We shall make use of his larger work in so far only as it
is evidence on this point.

Even with the Lectures, considered as giving an account of English
speculations on moral philosophy previous to the age of Bentham and
Paley, it is not cour purposec to meddle: Hobbes, therefore, and Locke,
must be left in the hands of Dr. Whewell, without any attempt either to
correct his estimate of their opinions, or to offer any judgment of our
own. This historical sketch Edition: current; Page: [170] suggests,
however, one remark of an historical character, not new to any one who
is conversant with the writings of English thinkers on ethical subjects.
During the greater part of the eighteenth century, the received opinions
in religion and ethics were chiefly attacked, as by Shaftesbury, and
even by Hume, on the ground of instinctive feelings of virtue, and the
theory of a moral taste or sense. As a consequence of this, the
defenders of established opinions, both lay and clerical, commonly
professed utilitarianism. To the many writers on the side of orthodoxy,
of the utilitarian school, mentioned by Dr. Whewell, might be added
several, of at least equal note, whom he has omitted; as John Brown, the
author of Essays on the Characteristics; Soame Jenyns, and his more
celebrated reviewer, Dr. Johnson; all of whom, as explicitly as Bentham,
laid down the doctrine that utility is the foundation of morals. This
series of writers attained its culmination in Paley, whose treatise,
proclaiming without evasion or circumlocution, not only expediency as
the end, but (a very different doctrine) simple self-interest as the
motive, of virtue, and deducing from these premises all the orthodox
conclusions, became the text-book of moral philosophy in one of the two
Universities of the Church of England. But a change ensued, and the
utilitarian doctrine, which had been the favourite theory of the
defenders of orthodoxy, began to be used by its assailants. In the hands
of the French philosophers, and in those of Godwin and of Bentham,—who,
though earlier than Godwin in date, was later in acquiring popular
influence,—a moral philosophy founded on utility led to many conclusions
very unacceptable to the orthodox. For a whole generation, so effectual
a fight was kept up against those conclusions, by bayonets in the field,
and prosecutions in the courts of justice, that there seemed no
necessity for taking much concern about the premises: but when those
carnal weapons fell into disuse, and the spirit dwhichd had wielded them
was laid—when the battle of established opinions in Church and State had
again to be fought by argument, a demand arose for metaphysics and moral
philosophy, of the kind most remote from that which appeared so full of
danger to received opinions. Utility was now abjured as a deadly heresy,
and the doctrine of à priori or self-evident morality, an end in itself,
independent of all consequences, became the orthodox theory. Having once
entered into this course, and gone in search of a philosophical system
to be extracted from the mind itself, without any external evidence, the
defenders of orthodoxy were insensibly led to seek their system where it
exists in the most elaborate shape—in the German metaphysicians. It was
not without reluctance that they found themselves engaged in this path;
for German metaphysics in Germany lay under as grave a suspicion of
religious scepticism, as the rival philosophy in England or France. But
it was found on trial, that philosophy of this cast admitted of easy
adaptation, and would Edition: current; Page: [171] bend to the very
Thirty-nine Articles; as it is the essence of a philosophy which seeks
its evidence in internal conviction, that it bears its testimony with
equal ease for any conclusions in favour of which there is a
predisposition, and is sceptical with the sceptical, and mystical with
the mystical. Accordingly, the tone of religious metaphysics, and of the
ethical speculations connected with religion, is now altogether
Germanized; and Dr. Whewell, by his writings, has done no little to
impress upon the metaphysics of orthodoxy this change of character.

It has always been indistinctly felt that the doctrine of à priori
principles is one and the same doctrine, whether applied to the ὂν or
the δέον—to the knowledge of truth or to that of duty; that it belongs
to the same general tendency of thought, to extract from the mind
itself, without any outward standard, principles and rules of morality,
and to deem it possible to discover, by mere introspection into oure
minds, the laws of external nature. Both forms of this mode of thought
attained a brilliant development in Descartes, the real founder of the
modern anti-inductive school of philosophy. The Cartesian tradition was
never lost, being kept alive by direct descent through Spinoza,
Leibnitz, and Kant, to Schelling and Hegel; but the speculations of
Bacon and Locke, and the progress of the experimental sciences, gave a
long period of predominance to the philosophy of experience; and though
many followed out that philosophy into its natural alliances, and
acknowledged not only observation and experiment as rulers of the
speculative world, but utility of the practical, others thought that it
was scientifically possible to separate the two opinions, and professed
themselves Baconians in the physical department, remaining Cartesians in
the moral. It will probably be thought by posterity to be the principal
merit of the German metaphysicians of the last and present age, that
they have proved the impossibility of resting on this middle ground of
compromise; and have convinced all thinkers of any force, that if they
adhere to the doctrine of à priori principles of morals, they must
follow Descartes and Hegel in ascribing the same character to the
principles of physics.

On the present occasion, it is only with the moral branch of the subject
that we have to deal; and we shall begin by showing in what manner Dr.
Whewell states the question between us.

Schemes of morality, that is, modes of deducing the rules of human
action, are of two kinds:—those which assert it to be the law of human
action to aim at some external object, (external, that is, to the mind
which aims,) as, for example, those which in ancient or modern times
have asserted pleasure, or utility, or the greatest happiness of the
greatest number, to be the true end of human action; and those which
would regulate human action by an internal principle or relation, as
conscience or a moral faculty, or duty, or rectitude, or the superiority
of Edition: current; Page: [172] reason to desire. These two kinds of
schemes may be described respectively as dependent and independent
morality. Now, it is here held that independent morality is the true
scheme. We maintain, with Plato, that reason has a natural and rightful
authority over desire and affection; with Butler, that there is a
difference of kind in our principles of action; with the general voice
of mankind, that we must do what is right, at whatever cost of pain and
loss. We deny the doctrine of the ancient Epicureans, that pleasure is
the supreme good; of Hobbes, that moral rules are only the work of men’s
mutual fear; of Paley, that what is expedient is right, and that there
is no difference among pleasures except their intensity and duration;
and of Bentham, that the rules of human action are to be obtained by
casting up the pleasures which actions produce. But though we thus take
our stand upon the ground of independent morality, as held by previous
writers, we hope that we are (by their aid mainly) able to present it in
a more systematic and connected form than has yet been done.
(“Introductory Lecture,” [Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy in
England,] pp. ix-x.)

There is in this mode of stating the question, great unfairness to the
doctrine of “dependent morality,” as Dr. Whewell terms it, though the
word independent is ffullyf as applicable to it as to the intuition
doctrine. He appropriates to his own side of the question all the
expressions, such as conscience, duty, rectitude, with which the
reverential feelings of mankind towards moral ideas are associated, and
cries goutg, I am for these noble things, you are for pleasure, or
utility. We cannot accept this as a description of the matter in issue.
Dr. Whewell is assuming to himself what belongs quite as rightfully to
his antagonists. We are as much for conscience, duty, rectitude, as Dr.
Whewell. The terms, and all the feelings connected with them, are as
much a part of the ethics of utility as of hthat ofh intuition. The
point in dispute is, what acts are the proper objects of those
ifeelings; iwhether we ought to take the feelings as we find them, as
accident or design has made them, or whether the tendency of actions to
promote happiness affords a test to which the feelings of morality
should jconform.j In the same spirit, Dr. Whewell announces it as his
opinion, as the side he takes in this great controversy, “that we must
do what is right, at whatever cost of pain and loss.” As if this was not
everybody’s opinion: as if it was not the very meaning of the word
right. The matter in debate is, what is right, not whether what is right
ought to be done. Dr. Whewell represents his opponents as denying an
identical proposition, in order that he may claim a monopoly of high
principle for his own opinions. The same unfairness pervades the whole
phraseology. It is not only Dr. Whewell who “maintains, with Plato, that
reason has a rightful authority over desire and affection.” Everybody
maintains it; only, what is reason? and by what rule is it to guide and
govern the desires and affections? The description of Bentham, as
obtaining his rule of Edition: current; Page: [173] conduct by “casting
up the pleasures which actions produce,” ought to be “casting up the
pleasures and pains which actions produce:” a very different thing.

As might be expected from the historical character of the Lectures, the
discussion of opinions mostly assumes the form of criticism on writers.
Dr. Whewell’s objections to utility, or the “greatest happiness,” as the
standard of morals, are chiefly contained in his animadversions on Paley
and on Bentham. It would be quite open to a defender of the principle of
utility, to refuse encumbering himself with a defence of either of those
authors. The principle is not bound up with what they have said in its
behalf, nor with the degree of felicity which they may have shown in
applying it. As for Paley, we resign him without compunction to the
tender mercies of Dr. Whewell. It concerns Dr. Whewell more than
ourselves to uphold the reputation of a writer, who, whatever principle
of morals he professed, seems to have had no object but to insert it as
a foundation underneath the existing set of opinions, ethical and
political; who, when he had laid down utility as the fundamental axiom,
and the recognition of general rules as the condition of its
application, took his leave of scientific analysis, and betook himself
to picking up utilitarian reasons by the wayside, in proof of all
accredited doctrines, and in defence of most tolerated practices.
Bentham was a moralist of another stamp. With him, the first use to be
made of his ultimate principle, was to erect on it, as a foundation,
secondary or middle principles, capable of serving as premises for a
body of ethical doctrine not derived from existing opinions, but fitted
to be their test. Without such middle principles, an universal
principle, either in science or in morals, serves for little but a
thesaurus of commonplaces for the discussion of questions, instead of a
means of deciding them. If Bentham has been regarded by subsequent
adherents of a morality grounded on the “greatest happiness,” as in a
peculiar sense the founder of that system of ethics, it is not because,
as Dr. Whewell imagines (p. 190), he either thought himself, or was
thought by others, to be the “discoverer of the principle,” but because
he was the first who, keeping clear of the direct and indirect
influences of all doctrines inconsistent with it, deduced a set of
subordinate generalities from utility alone, and by these consistently
tested all particular questions. This great service, previously to which
a scientific doctrine of ethics on the foundation of utility was
impossible, has been performed by Bentham (though with a view to the
exigencies of legislation more than to those of morals) in a manner, as
far as it goes, eminently meritorious, and so as to indicate clearly the
way to complete the scheme. We must at the same time qualify our
approbation by adding, not that his practical conclusions kin moralsk
were often wrong, for we think that as far as they went they were mostly
right; but that there Edition: current; Page: [174] were large
deficiencies and hiatuses in his scheme of human nature and life, and a
consequent want of breadth and comprehension in his secondary
principles, which led him often to deduce just conclusions from premises
so narrow as to provoke many minds to a rejection of what was
nevertheless truth. It is by his method chiefly that Bentham, as we
think, justly earned a position in moral science analogous to that of
Bacon in physical. It is because he was the first to enter into the
right mode of working ethical problems, though he worked many of them,
as Bacon did physical, on insufficient data. Dr. Whewell’s shafts,
however, seldom touch Bentham where he is really vulnerable; they are
mostly aimed at his strong points.

Before commencing his attack on Bentham’s opinions, Dr. Whewell gives a
sketch of his life. In this there is an apparent desire to be just to
Bentham, as far as the writer’s opinions allow. But there is in some of
the strictures a looseness of expression, lscarcelyl excusable in an
extemporaneous lecture, and still less in a printed book. “He [Bentham]
showed very early that peculiar one-sidedness in his mode of asserting
and urging his opinions, which made him think all moderation with regard
to his opponents superfluous and absurd” (p. 189). What is here called
“one-sidedness in his mode of asserting and urging his opinions,” must
mean one-sidedness in the opinions themselves. It could not be Bentham’s
“mode of asserting his opinions,” that “made him think” whatever he did
think. This is as if any one should say, “his speaking only English made
him unable to understand French,” or “his peculiar habit of fighting
made him think it superfluous and absurd to keep the peace.” Again (pp.
190-1), “Bentham appears to have been one of those persons to whom
everything which passes through their own thoughts assumes quite a
different character and value from that which the same thing had when it
passed through the thoughts of other persons.” If a thought in a
person’s own mind did not assume a different character from what the
same thought had in other minds, people might as well think by deputy.

A more serious injustice to Bentham is that of citing, as is constantly
done in this volume, the book called Deontology, as the authentic
exposition of Bentham’s philosophy of morals. Dr. Whewell would, no
doubt, justify this by saying that the book in question is the only
treatise expressly and exclusively on morals, which we have from
Bentham. It is true that we have no other; but the Deontology was not,
and does not profess to be written by Bentham.m Still less ought that
book to be represented as the embodiment of the opinions and mental
characteristics of all who share Bentham’s general conception of ethics.
After charging the compiler of the Deontology with Edition: current;
Page: [175] profound ignorance, and saying that it is almost
“superfluous to notice misstatements so gross and partiality so blind,”
Dr. Whewell adds that “such misrepresentations and such unfairness are
the usual style of controversy of him [Bentham] and his disciples; and
it is fit that we, in entering upon the consideration of their writings,
should be aware of this.”[*] Who are the persons here included under the
name of Bentham’s “disciples,” we are not enabled to judge; nor are we
aware that Bentham ever had any disciples, in Dr. Whewell’s sense of the
term. As far as our means of observation have gone, which nin this
mattern are considerably greater than Dr. Whewell’s, those who, from the
amount of their intellectual obligations to Bentham, would be the most
likely to be classed by Dr. Whewell as Benthamites, were and are persons
in an unusual degree addicted to judging and thinking for themselves;
persons remarkable for learning willingly from all masters, but swearing
blind fealty to none. It is also a fact, with which Dr. Whewell cannot
be altogether unacquainted, that among them there have been men of the
widest and most accurate acquirements in history and philosophy, against
whom the accusation of ignorance of the opinions which they controverted
would be as unfounded as the imputation of blind partiality. We protest
against including them and Bentham in an imaginary sect, of which the
Deontology is to be considered the gospel. Bentham’s merits or demerits
must stand on what is contained in the books written by himself.

Among these, the one in which the doctrine of utility is expressly
discussed, and contrasted with the various ethical doctrines opposed to
it, is the Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation,
published in 1789. On this Dr. Whewell comments as follows:—

The first chapter of this work is ‘On the Principle of Utility:’ the
second ‘On Principles adverse to that of Utility.’ These adverse
principles are stated to be two: The Principle of Asceticism, and the
Principle of Sympathy. [Bentham calls it the Principle of Sympathy and
Antipathy, which is already a considerable difference.] The principle of
asceticism is that principle which approves of actions in proportion as
they tend to diminish human happiness, and, conversely, disapproves of
them as they tend to augment it. The principle of sympathy is that which
approves or disapproves of certain actions ‘merely because a man finds
himself disposed to approve or disapprove of them, holding up that
approbation or disapprobation as a sufficient reason for itself, and
disclaiming the necessity of looking out for any extrinsic ground.’ And
these two principles are, it seems, according to Bentham’s view, the
only principles which are, or which can be, opposed to the principle of
utility!

Now it is plain that these are not only not fair representations of any
principles ever held by moralists, or by any persons speaking gravely
and deliberately, but that they are too extravagant and fantastical to
be accepted even as caricatures of any such principles. For who ever
approved of actions because they tend to Edition: current; Page: [176]
make mankind miserable? or who ever said anything which could, even in
an intelligible way of exaggeration, be so represented? . . . But who
then are the ascetic school who are thus ridiculed? We could not, I
think, guess from the general description thus given; but from a note,
it appears that he had the Stoical philosophers and the religious
ascetics in his mind. With regard to the Stoics, it would of course be
waste of time and thought to defend them from such coarse buffoonery as
this, which does not touch their defects, whatever these may be, [&c.]

(Pp. 202-3.)

Not solely for the due estimation of Bentham, but for the right
understanding of the utilitarian controversy, it is important to know
what the truth is, respecting the points here in issue between Bentham
and Dr. Whewell.

Undoubtedly no one has set up, in opposition to the “greatest happiness”
principle, a “greatest unhappiness” principle, as the standard of
virtue. But it was Bentham’s business not merely to discuss the avowed
principles of his opponents, but to draw out those which, without being
professed as principles, were implied in detail, or were essential to
support the judgments passed in particular cases. His own doctrine being
that the increase of pleasure and the prevention of pain were the proper
ends of all moral rules, he had for his opponents all who contended that
pleasure could ever be an evil or pain a good in itself, apart from its
consequences. Now this, whatever Dr. Whewell may say, the religious
ascetics really did. They held that self-mortification, or even
self-torture, practised for its own sake, and not for the sake of any
useful end, was meritorious. It matters not that they may have expected
to be rewarded for these merits by consideration in this world, or by
the favour of an invisible tyrant in a world to come. So far as this
life was concerned, their doctrine required it to be supposed that pain
was a thing to be sought, and pleasure to be avoided. Bentham
generalized this into a maxim, which he called the principle of
asceticism. The Stoics did not go so far as the ascetics; they stopped
half-way. They did not say that pain is a good, and pleasure an evil.
But they said, and boasted of saying, that pain is no evil, and pleasure
no good: and this is all, and more than all, that Bentham imputes to
them, as may be seen by any one who reads that chapter of his book.
This, however, was enough to place them, equally with the ascetics, in
direct opposition to Bentham, since they denied his supreme end to be an
end at all. And hence he classed them and the ascetics together, as
professing the direct negation of the utilitarian standard.

In the other division of his opponents he placed those who, though they
did not deny pleasure to be a good and pain an evil, refused to consider
the pain or the pleasure which an action or a class of actions tends to
produce, as the criterion of its morality. As the former category of
opponents were described by Bentham as followers of the “principle of
asceticism,” so he described these as followers of “the principle of
sympathy and antipathy;” not because they had themselves generalized
their principle of judgment, or Edition: current; Page: [177] would have
acknowledged it when placed undisguised before them; but because, at the
bottom of what they imposed on themselves and others as reasons, he
could find nothing else; because they all, in one phrase or another,
placed the test of right and wrong in a feeling of approbation or
disapprobation, thus making the feeling its own reason and its own
justification. This portion of Bentham’s doctrine can only be fairly
exhibited in his own words.

It is manifest that this [the principle of sympathy and antipathy] is
rather a principle in name than in reality; it is not a positive
principle of itself, so much as a term employed to signify the negation
of all principle. What one expects to find in a principle is something
that points out some external consideration as a means of warranting and
guiding the internal sentiments of approbation and disapprobation: this
expectation is but ill fulfilled by a proposition which does neither
more nor less than hold up each of these sentiments as a ground and
standard for itself.

In looking over the catalogue of human actions (says a partisan of this
principle) in order to determine which of them are to be marked with the
seal of disapprobation, you need but to take counsel of your own
feelings; whatever you find in yourself a propensity to condemn, is
wrong for that very reason. For the same reason it is also meet for
punishment: in what proportion it is adverse to utility, or whether it
be adverse to utility at all, is a matter that makes no difference. In
that same proportion also is it meet for punishment: if you hate much,
punish much; if you hate little, punish little: punish as you hate. If
you hate not at all, punish not at all: the fine feelings of the soul
are not to be overborne and tyrannized by the harsh and rugged dictates
of political utility.

The various systems that have been formed concerning the standard of
right and wrong, may all be reduced to the principle of sympathy and
antipathy. One account may serve for all of them. They consist, all of
them, in so many contrivances for avoiding the obligation of appealing
to any external standard, and for prevailing upon the reader to accept
of the author’s sentiment or opinion as a reason for itself. The phrase
is different, but the principle the same.

It is curious enough to observe the variety of inventions men have hit
upon, and the variety of phrases they have brought forward, in order to
conceal from the world, and if possible from themselves, this very
general, and therefore very pardonable self-sufficiency.

One man says, he has a thing made on purpose to tell him what is right
and what is wrong, and that it is called a moral sense; and then he goes
to work at his ease, and says, such a thing is right, and such a thing
is wrong—why? ‘because my moral sense tells me it is.’

Another man comes and alters the phrase; leaving out moral, and putting
in common in the room of it. He then tells you, that his common sense
teaches him what is right and wrong, as much as the other’s moral sense
did: meaning, by common sense, a sense of some kind or other, which, he
says, is possessed by all mankind; the sense of those, whose sense is
not the same as the author’s, being struck out of the account as not
worth taking. This contrivance does better than the other; for a moral
sense being a new thing, a man may feel about him a good while without
being able to find it out; but common sense is as old as the creation;
and there is no man but would be ashamed to be thought not to have as
much of it as his neighbours. It has another great advantage; by
appearing to share power, it lessens envy: for when a man gets up upon
this ground, in order to anathematize those who differ from him, it is
not by a sic volo sic jubeo, but by a velitis jubeatis.

Edition: current; Page: [178]
Another man comes, and says, that as to a moral sense indeed, he cannot
find that he has any such thing; that, however, he has an understanding,
which will do quite as well. This understanding, he says, is the
standard of right and wrong: it tells him so and so. All good and wise
men understand as he does: if other men’s understandings differ in any
point from his, so much the worse for them; it is a sure sign they are
either defective or corrupt.

Another man says, that there is an eternal and immutable rule of right;
that that rule of right dictates so and so; and then he begins giving
you his sentiments upon anything that comes uppermost; and these
sentiments (you are to take for granted) are so many branches of the
eternal rule of right.

Another man, or perhaps the same man (it’s no matter), says, that there
are certain practices conformable, and others repugnant, to the fitness
of things; and then he tells you, at his leisure, what practices are
conformable and what repugnant; just as he happens to like a practice or
dislike it.

A great multitude of people are continually talking of the law of
nature; and then they go on giving you their sentiments about what is
right and what is wrong; and these sentiments, you are to understand,
are so many chapters and sections of the law of nature.

We have one philosopher who says, there is no harm in anything in the
world but in telling a lie; and that if, for example, you were to murder
your own father, this would only be a particular way of saying, he was
not your father. Of course, when this philosopher sees anything that he
does not like, he says, it is a particular way of telling a lie. It is
saying, that the act ought to be done, or may be done, when, in truth,
it ought not to be done. (Chap. ii.)[*]

To this Dr. Whewell thinks it a sufficient answer to call it extravagant
ridicule, and to ask, “Who ever asserted that he approved or disapproved
of actions merely because he found himself disposed to do so, and that
this was reason sufficient in itself for his moral judgments?”[†] Dr.
Whewell will find that this by no means disposes of Bentham’s doctrine.
Bentham did not mean that people “ever asserted” that they approved or
condemned actions only because they felt disposed to do so. He meant
that they do it without asserting it; that they find certain feelings of
approbation and disapprobation in themselves, take for granted that
these feelings are the right ones, and when called on to say anything in
justification of their approbation or disapprobation, produce phrases
which mean nothing but the fact of the approbation or disapprobation
itself. If the hearer or reader feels in the same way, the phrases pass
muster; and a great part of all the ethical reasoning in books and in
the world is of this sort. All this is not only true, but cannot
consistently be denied by those who, like Dr. Whewell, consider the
moral feelings as their own justification. Dr. Whewell will doubtless
say that the feelings they appeal to are not their own individually, but
a part of universal human nature. Nobody denies that they say so: a
feeling of liking or aversion to an action, confined to an individual,
would have no chance of being accepted as a Edition: current; Page:
[179] reason. The appeal is always to something which is assumed to
belong to all mankind. But it is not of much consequence whether the
feeling which is set up as its own standard is the feeling of an
individual human being, or of a multitude. A feeling is not proved to be
right, and exempted from the necessity of justifying itself, because the
writer or speaker is not only conscious of it in himself, but expects to
find it in other people; because instead of saying “I,” he says “you and
I.” If it is alleged that the intuitive school require, as an authority
for the feeling, that it should in fact be universal, we deny it. They
assume the utmost latitude of arbitrarily determining whose votes
deserve to be counted. They either ignore the existence of dissentients,
or leave them out of the account, on the pretext that they have the
feeling which they deny having, or if not, that they ought to have it.
This falsification of the universal suffrage which is ostensibly
appealed to, is not confined, as is often asserted, to cases in which
the only dissentients are barbarous tribes. The same measure is dealt
out to whole ages and nations, the most conspicuous for the cultivation
and development of their mental faculties; and to individuals among the
best and wisest of their respective countries. The explanation of the
matter is, the inability of persons in general to conceive that feelings
of right and wrong, which have been deeply implanted in their minds by
the teaching they have from infancy received from all around them, can
be sincerely thought by any one else to be mistaken or misplaced. This
is the mental infirmity which Bentham’s philosophy tends especially to
correct, and Dr. Whewell’s to perpetuate. Things which were really
believed by all mankind, and for which all were convinced that they had
the unequivocal evidence of their senses, have been proved to be false:
as that the sun rises and sets. Can immunity from similar error be
claimed for the moral feelings? when all experience shows that those
feelings are eminently artificial, and the product of culture; that even
when reasonable, they are no more spontaneous than the growth of corn
and wine (which are quite as natural), and that the most senseless and
pernicious feelings can as easily be raised to the utmost intensity by
inculcation, as hemlock and thistles could be reared to luxuriant growth
by sowing them instead of wheat. Bentham, therefore, did not judge too
severely a kind of ethics whereby any implanted sentiment which is
tolerably general may be erected into a moral law, binding, under
penalties, on all mankind. The contest between the morality which
appeals to an external standard, and that which grounds itself on
internal conviction, is the contest of progressive morality against
stationary—of reason and argument against the deification of mere
opinion and habit. The doctrine that the existing order of things is the
natural order, and that, being natural, all innovation upon it is
criminal, is as vicious in morals, as it is now at last admitted to be
in physics, and in society and government.

Edition: current; Page: [180]
Let us now consider Dr. Whewell’s objections to utility as the
foundation of ethics.

Let it be taken for granted, as a proposition which is true, if the
terms which it involves be duly understood, that actions are right and
virtuous in proportion as they promote the happiness of mankind; the
actions being considered upon the whole, and with regard to all their
consequences. Still, I say, we cannot make this truth the basis of
morality, for two reasons: first, we cannot calculate all the
consequences of any action, and thus cannot estimate the degree in which
it promotes human happiness; second, happiness is derived from moral
elements, and therefore we cannot properly derive morality from
happiness. The calculable happiness resulting from actions cannot
determine their virtue: first, because the resulting happiness is not
calculable; and secondly, because the virtue is one of the things which
determine the resulting happiness.

(P. 210.)

The first of these arguments is an irrelevant truism. “We cannot
calculate all the consequences of any action.” If Dr. Whewell can point
out any department of human affairs in which we can do all that would be
desirable, he will have found something new. But because we cannot
foresee everything, is there no such thing as foresight? Does Dr.
Whewell mean to say that no estimate can be formed of consequences,
which can be any guide for our conduct, unless we can calculate all
consequences? that because we cannot predict every effect which may
follow from a person’s death, we cannot know that the liberty of murder
would be destructive to human happiness? Dr. Whewell, in his zeal
against the morality of consequences, commits the error of proving too
much. Whether morality is or is not a question of consequences, he
cannot deny that prudence is; and if there is such a thing as prudence,
it is because the consequences of actions can be calculated. Prudence,
indeed, depends on a calculation of the consequences of individual
actions, while for the establishment of moral rules it is only necessary
to calculate the consequences of classes of actions—a much easier
matter. It is certainly a very effectual way of proving that morality
does not depend on expediency, to maintain that there is no such thing
as expediency—that we have no means of knowing whether anything is
expedient or not. Unless Dr. Whewell goes this length, to what purpose
is what he says about the uncertainty of consequences? Uncertain or
certain, we are able to guide ourselves by them, otherwise human life
could not exist. And there is hardly any one concerned in the business
of life, who has not daily to decide questions of expediency far more
knotty than those which Dr. Whewell so coolly pronounces to be
insoluble.

But let us examine more closely what Dr. Whewell finds to say for the
proposition, that “if we ask whether a given action will increase or
diminish the total amount of human happiness, it is impossible to answer
with any degree of certainty.”

Take ordinary cases. I am tempted to utter a flattering falsehood: to
gratify some sensual desire contrary to ordinary moral rules. How shall
I determine, on Edition: current; Page: [181] the greatest happiness
principle, whether the act is virtuous, or the contrary? In the first
place, the direct effect of each act is to give pleasure, to another by
flattery, to myself by sensual gratification; and pleasure is the
material of happiness, in the scheme we are now considering. But by the
flattering lie I promote falsehood, which is destructive of confidence,
and so, of human comfort. Granted that I do this in some degree—although
I may easily say that I shall never allow myself to speak falsely,
except when it will give pleasure; and thus I may maintain that I shall
not shake confidence in any case in which it is of any value. But
granted that I do, in some degree, shake the general fabric of mutual
human confidence by my flattering lie,—still the question remains, how
much I do this: whether in such a degree as to overbalance the pleasure,
which is the primary and direct consequence of the act. How small must
be the effect of my solitary act upon the whole scheme of human action
and habit! how clear and decided is the direct effect of increasing the
happiness of my hearer! And in the same way we may reason concerning the
sensual gratification. Who will know it? Who will be influenced by it of
those who do know it? What appreciable amount of pain will it produce in
its consequences, to balance the palpable pleasure, which, according to
our teachers, is the only real good? It appears to me that it is
impossible to answer these questions in any way which will prove, on
these principles, mendacious flattery, and illegitimate sensuality, to
be vicious and immoral. They may possibly produce, take in all their
effects, a balance of evil; but if they do, it is by some process which
we cannot trace with any clearness, and the result is one which we
cannot calculate with any certainty, or even probability; and therefore,
on this account, because the resulting evil of such falsehood and
sensuality is not calculable or appreciable, we cannot, by calculation
of resulting evil, show falsehood and sensuality to be vices. And the
like is true of other vices; and, on this ground, the construction of a
scheme of morality on Mr. Bentham’s plan is plainly impossible.

(Pp. 210-12.)

Dr. Whewell supposes his self-deceiving utilitarian to be very little
master of his own principles. If the effect of a “solitary act upon the
whole scheme of human action and habit” is small, the addition which the
accompanying pleasure makes to the general mass of human happiness is
small likewise. So small, in the great majority of cases, are both, that
we have no scales to weigh them against each other, taken singly. We
must look at them multiplied, and in large masses. The portion of the
tendencies of an action which belong to it not individually, but as a
violation of a general rule, are as certain and as calculable as any
other consequences; oonlyo they must be examined not in the individual
case, but in classes of cases. Take, for example, the case of murder.
There are many persons to kill whom would be to remove men who are a
cause of no good to any human being, of cruel physical and moral
suffering to pseveralp, and whose whole influence tends to increase the
mass of unhappiness and vice. Were such a man to be assassinated, the
balance of traceable consequences would be greatly in favour of the act.
The counter-consideration, on the principle of utility, is, that unless
Edition: current; Page: [182] persons were punished for killing, and
taught not to kill; that if it were thought allowable for any one to put
to death at pleasure any human being whom he believes that the world
would be well rid of, nobody’s life would be safe. To this Dr. Whewell
answers—

How does it appear that the evil, that is, the pain, arising from
violating a general rule once, is too great to be overbalanced by the
pleasurable consequences of that single violation? The actor says, I
acknowledge the general rule—I do not deny its value; but I do not
intend that this one act should be drawn into consequence.

(Pp. 212-13.)

But it does not depend on him whether or not it shall be drawn into
consequence. If one person may break through the rule on his own
judgment, the same liberty cannot be refused to others; and since no one
could rely on the rule’s being observed, the rule would cease to exist.
If a hundred infringements would produce all the mischief implied in the
abrogation of the rule, a hundredth part of that mischief must be
debited to each one of the infringements, though we may not be able to
trace it home individually. And this hundredth part will generally far
outweigh any good qexpected to ariseq from the individual act. We say
generally, not universally; for the admission of exceptions to rules is
a necessity equally felt in all systems of morality. To take an obvious
instance, the rule against homicide, the rule against deceiving, the
rule against taking advantage of superior physical strength, and various
other important moral rules, are suspended against enemies in the field,
and partially against malefactors in private life: in each case
suspended as far as is required by the peculiar nature of the case. That
the moralities arising from the special circumstances of the action may
be so important as to overrule those arising from the class of acts to
which it belongs, perhaps to take it out of the category of virtues into
that of crimes, or vice versâ, is a liability common to all ethical
systems.

And here it may be observed that Dr. Whewell, in his illustration drawn
from flattering lies, gives to the side he advocates a colour of rigid
adherence to principle, which the fact does not bear out. Is none of the
intercourse of society carried on by those who hold the common opinions,
by means of what is here meant by “flattering lies?” Does no one of Dr.
Whewell’s way of thinking say, or allow it to be thought, that he is
glad to see a visitor whom he wishes away? Does he never ask
acquaintances or relatives to stay when he would prefer them to go, or
invite them when he hopes that they will refuse? Does he never show any
interest in persons and things he cares nothing for, or send people away
believing in his friendly feeling, to whom his real feeling is
indifference, or even dislike? Whether these things are right, we are
not now going to discuss. For our part, we think that flattery should be
only permitted to those who can flatter without lying, as all persons of
sympathizing Edition: current; Page: [183] feelings and quick
perceptions can. At all events, the existence of exceptions to moral
rules is no stumbling-block peculiar to the principle of utility. The
essential is, that the exception should be itself a general rule; so
that, being of definite extent, and not leaving the expediencies to the
partial judgment of the agent in the individual case, it may not shake
the stability of the wider rule in the cases to which the reason of the
exception does not extend. This is an ample foundation for “the
construction of a scheme of morality.” With respect to the means of
inducing people to conform in their actions to the scheme so formed, the
utilitarian system depends, like all other schemes of morality, on the
external motives supplied by law and opinion, and the internal feelings
produced by education or reason. It is thus no worse off in this respect
than any other scheme—we might rather say, much better; inasmuch as
people are likely to be more willing to conform to rules when a reason
is given for them.

Dr. Whewell’s second argument against the happiness principle is, that
the morality of actions cannot depend on the happiness they produce,
because the happiness depends on the morality.

Why should a man be truthful and just? Because acts of veracity and
justice, even if they do not produce immediate gratification to him and
his friends in other ways (and it may easily be that they do not), at
least produce pleasure in this way, that they procure him his own
approval and that of all good men. To us this language is intelligible
and significant; but the Benthamite must analyze it further. What does
it mean according to him? A man’s own approval of his act, means that he
thinks it virtuous. And therefore the matter stands thus. He (being a
Benthamite) thinks it virtuous, because it gives him pleasure; and it
gives him pleasure because he thinks it virtuous. This is a vicious
circle, quite as palpable as any of those in which Mr. Bentham is so
fond of representing his adversaries as revolving. And in like manner
with regard to the approval of others. The action is virtuous, says the
Benthamite, because it produces pleasure; namely, the pleasure arising
from the approval of neighbours; they approve it and think it virtuous,
he also says, because it gives pleasure. The virtue depends upon the
pleasure, the pleasure depends upon the virtue. Here again is a circle
from which there is no legitimate egress. We may grant that, taking into
account all the elements of happiness—the pleasures of self-approval—of
peace of mind and harmony within us, and of the approval of others—of
the known sympathy of all good men;—we may grant that, including these
elements, virtue always does produce an overbalance of happiness; but
then we cannot make this moral truth the basis of morality, because we
cannot extricate the happiness and the virtue the one from the other, so
as to make the first, the happiness, the foundation of the second, the
virtue.

(Pp. 215-16.)

In Dr. Whewell’s first argument against utility, he was obliged to
assert that it is impossible for human beings to know that some actions
are useful and others hurtful. In the present, he forgets against what
principle he is combating, and draws out an elaborate argument against
something else. What he now appears to be contending against, is the
doctrine (whether Edition: current; Page: [184] really held by any one
or not), that the test of morality is the greatest happiness of the
agent himself. It argues total ignorance of Bentham, to represent him as
saying that an action is virtuous because it produces “the approbation
of neighbours,” and as making so “fluctuating” a thing as “public
opinion,” and such a “loose and wide abstraction as education,” the
“basis of morality.” When Bentham talks of public opinion in connexion
with morality, he is not talking of the “basis of morality” at all. He
was the last person to found the morality of actions upon anybody’s
opinion of them. He founded it upon facts: namely, upon the observed
tendencies of the actions. Nor did he ever dream of defining morality to
be the self-interest of the agent. His “greatest happiness principle”
was the greatest happiness of mankind, and of all sensitive beings. When
he talks of education, and of “the popular or moral sanction,” meaning
the opinion of our fellow-creatures, it is not as constituents or tests
of virtue, but as motives to it; as means of making the self-interest of
the individual accord with the greatest happiness principle.*

Dr. Whewell’s remark, therefore, that the approval of our
fellow-creatures, presupposing moral ideas, cannot be the foundation of
morality, has no application against Bentham, nor against the principle
of utility. It may, however, be pertinently remarked, that the moral
ideas which this approval presupposes, are no other than those of
utility and hurtfulness. There is no great stretch of hypothesis in
supposing that in proportion as mankind are aware of the tendencies of
actions to produce happiness or misery, they will like and commend the
first, abhor and reprobate the second. How these Edition: current; Page:
[185] feelings of natural complacency and natural dread and aversion
directed towards actions, come to assume the peculiar character of what
we term moral feelings, is not a question of ethics but of metaphysics,
and very fit to be discussed in its proper place. Bentham did not
concern himself with it. He left it to other thinkers. It sufficed him
that the perceived influence of actions on human happiness is cause
enough, both in reason and in fact, for strong feelings of favour to
some actions and of hatred towards others. From the sympathetic reaction
of these feelings in the imagination and self-consciousness of the
agent, naturally arise the more complex feelings of self-approbation and
self-reproach, or, to avoid all disputed questions, we will merely say
of satisfaction and dissatisfaction with ourselves. All this must be
admitted, whatever else may be denied. Whether the greatest happiness is
the principle of morals or not, people do desire their own happiness,
and do consequently like the conduct in other people which they think
promotes it, and dislike that which visibly endangers it. This is
absolutely all that Bentham postulates. Grant this, and you have his
popular sanction, and its reaction on the agent’s own mind, two
influences tending, in proportion to mankind’s enlightenment, to keep
the conduct of each in the line which promotes the general happiness.
Bentham thinks that there is no other true morality than this, and that
the so-called moral sentiments, whatever their origin or composition,
should be trained to act in this direction only. And Dr. Whewell’s
attempt to find anything illogical or incoherent in this theory, only
proves that he does not yet understand it.

Dr. Whewell puts the last hand to his supposed refutation of Bentham’s
principle, by what he thinks a crushing reductio ad absurdum. The reader
might make a hundred guesses before discovering what this is. We have
not yet got over our astonishment, not at Bentham, but at Dr. Whewell.
See, he says, to what consequences your greatest-happiness principle
leads! Bentham says that it is as much a moral duty to regard the
pleasures and pains of other animals as those of human beings. We cannot
resist quoting the admirable passage which Dr. Whewell cites from
Bentham, with the most naïf persuasion that everybody will regard it as
reaching the last pitch of paradoxical absurdity.

Under the Gentoo and Mahometan religion the interests of the rest of the
animal kingdom seem to have met with some attention. Why have they not,
universally, with as much as those of human creatures, allowance made
for the difference in point of sensibility? Because the laws that are,
have been the work of mutual fear; a sentiment which the less rational
animals have not had the same means as man has of turning to account.
Why ought they not? No reason can be given. The day may come when the
rest of the animal creation may acquire those rights which never could
have been withholden from them but by the hand of tyranny. It may come
one day to be recognised that the number of the legs, the villosity of
the skin, or the termination of the os sacrum, are reasons Edition:
current; Page: [186] insufficient for abandoning a sensitive being to
the caprice of a tormentor. What else is it that should trace the
insuperable line? Is it the faculty of reason, or perhaps the faculty of
discourse? But a full-grown horse or dog is beyond comparison a more
rational, as well as a more conversable animal, than an infant of a day,
a week, or even a month old. But suppose the case were otherwise, what
would it avail? The question is not, can they reason? nor, can they
speak? but, can they suffer?[*]

This noble anticipation, in 1780, of the better morality of which a
first dawn has been seen in the laws enacted nearly fifty years
afterwards against cruelty to animals, is in Dr. Whewell’s eyes the
finishing proof that the morality of happiness is absurd!

The pleasures of animals are elements of a very different order from the
pleasures of man. We are bound to endeavour to augment the pleasures of
men, not only because they are pleasures, but because they are human
pleasures. We are bound to men by the universal tie of humanity, of
human brotherhood. We have no such tie to animals. [Lectures, p. 223.]

This then is Dr. Whewell’s noble and disinterested ideal of virtue.
Duties, according to him, are only duties to ourselves and our like.

We are to be humane to them, because we are human, not because we and
they alike feel animal pleasures. . . . The morality which depends upon
the increase of pleasure alone, would make it our duty to increase the
pleasure of pigs or of geese rather than that of men, if we were sure
that the pleasures we could give them were greater than the pleasures of
men. . . . . It is not only not an obvious, but to most persons not a
tolerable doctrine, that we may sacrifice the happiness of men provided
we can in that way produce an overplus of pleasure to cats, dogs, and
hogs.

(Pp. 223-5.)

It is “to most persons” in the Slave States of America not a tolerable
doctrine that we may sacrifice any portion of the happiness of white men
for the sake of a greater amount of happiness to black men. It would
have been intolerable five centuries ago “to most persons” among the
feudal nobility, to hear it asserted that the greatest pleasure or pain
of a hundred serfs ought not to give way to the smallest of a nobleman.
According to the standard of Dr. Whewell, the slavemasters and the
nobles were right. They too felt themselves “bound” by a “tie of
brotherhood” to the white men and to the nobility, and felt no such tie
to the negroes and serfs. And if a feeling on moral subjects is right
because it is natural, their feeling was justifiable. Nothing is more
natural to human beings, nor, up to a certain point in cultivation, more
universal, than to estimate the pleasures and pains of others as
deserving of regard exactly in proportion to their likeness to
rourselvesr. These superstitions of selfishness had the characteristics
by which Dr. Edition: current; Page: [187] Whewell recognises his moral
rules; and his opinion on the rights of animals shows that in this case
at least he is consistent. We are perfectly willing to stake the whole
question on this one issue. Granted that any practice causes more pain
to animals than it gives pleasure to smans; is that practice moral or
immoral? And if, exactly in proportion as human beings raise their heads
out of the slough of selfishness, they do not with one voice answer
“immoral,” let the morality of the principle of utility be for ever
condemned.

There cannot be a fitter transition than this subject affords, from the
Benthamic standard of ethics to that of Dr. Whewell. It is not enough to
object to the morality of utility. It is necessary also to show that
there is another and a better morality. This is what Dr. Whewell
proposes to himself in his Introductory Lecture, and in the whole of his
previous work, Elements of Morality. We shall now, therefore, proceed to
examine Dr. Whewell’s achievements as the constructor of a scientific
foundation for the theory of morals.

“The moral rule of human action,” Dr. Whewell says, is that “we must do
what is right.” (Lectures, p. xi.) Here, at all events, is a safe
proposition; since to deny it would be a contradiction in terms. But
what is meant by “right?” According to Dr. Whewell, “what we must do.”
This, he says, is the very definition of right.

The definition of rightful, or of the adjective right, is, I conceive,
contained in the maxim which I have already quoted as proceeding from
the general voice of mankind: namely this, that we must do what is right
at whatever cost. That an action is right, is a reason for doing it,
which is paramount to all other reasons, and overweighs them all when
they are on the contrary side. It is painful; but it is right: therefore
we must do it. It is a loss; but it is right: therefore we must do it.
It is unkind; but it is right: therefore we must do it. These are
self-evident [he might have said identical] propositions. That a thing
is right, is a supreme reason for doing it. Right implies this supreme,
unconquerable reason; and does this especially and exclusively. No other
word does imply such an irresistible cogency in its effect, except in so
far as it involves the same notion. What we ought to do, what we should
do, that we must do, though it bring pain and loss. But why? Because it
is right. The expressions all run together in their meaning. And this
supreme rule, that we must do what is right, is also the moral rule of
human action.

(Pp. x-xi.)

Right means that which we must do, and the rule of action is, that we
must do what is right; that we must do that which we must do. This we
will call vicious circle the first. But let us not press hardly on Dr.
Whewell at this stage; perhaps he only means that the foundation of
morals is the conviction that there is something which we must do at all
risks; and he admits that we have still to find what this something is.
“What is right; what it is that we Edition: current; Page: [188] ought
to do, we must have some means of determining, in order to complete our
moral scheme.” (P. xi.)

Attempting then to pick out Dr. Whewell’s leading propositions, and
exhibit them in connexion, we find, first, that “the supreme rule of
human action, Rightness,” ought to control the desires and affections,
or otherwise that these are “to be regulated so that they may be right.”
(Pp. xii-xiii.) This does not help towards showing what is right.

But secondly, we come to a “condition which is obviously requisite.” In
order that the desires and affections which relate to “other men” may be
right, “they must conform to this primary and universal condition, that
they do not violate the rights of others. This condition may not be
sufficient, but it is necessary.” (Pp. xiii-xiv.)

This promises something. In tracing to its elements the idea of Right,
the adjective, we are led to the prior, and it is to be presumed more
elementary idea, of Rights, the substantive. But now, what are rights?
and how came they to be rights?

Before answering these questions, Dr. Whewell gives a classification of
rights “commonly recognised among men.” [P. xiv.] He says, they are of
five sorts, “those of person, property, family, state, and contract.”
(P. xv.) But how do we discover that they are rights? and what is meant
by calling them rights? Much to our surprise, Dr. Whewell refers us, on
both these points, to the law. And he asks, “in what manner do we rise
from mere legal rights to moral rightness?” and replies, “we do so in
virtue of this principle: that the supreme rule of man’s actions must be
a rule which has authority over the whole of man; over his intentions as
well as his actions; over his affections, his desires, his habits, his
thoughts, his wishes.” [P. xv.] We must not only not violate the rights
of others, but we must not desire to violate them. “And thus we rise
from legal obligation to moral duty; from legality to virtue; from
blamelessness in the forum of man to innocence in the court of
conscience.” [P. xvi.]

And this Dr. Whewell actually gives as his scheme of morality. His rule
of right is, to infringe no rights conferred by the law, and to cherish
no dispositions which could make us desire such infringements! According
to this, the early Christians, the religious reformers, the founders of
all free governments, Clarkson, Wilberforce, and all enemies of the
rights of slaveowners, must be classed among the wicked. If this is Dr.
Whewell’s morality, it is the very Hobbism which he reprobates, and this
in its worst sense. But though Dr. Whewell says that this is his
morality, he presently unsays it.

Our morality is not derived from the special commands of existing laws,
but from the fact that laws exist, and from our classification of their
subjects. Personal safety, property, contracts, family and civil
relations, are everywhere the subjects of law, and are everywhere
protected by law; therefore we judge that Edition: current; Page: [189]
these things must be the subjects of morality, and must be reverently
regarded by morality. But we are not thus bound to approve of all the
special appointments with regard to those subjects, which may exist at a
given time in the laws of a given country. On the contrary, we may
condemn the laws as being contrary to morality. We cannot frame a
morality without recognising property, and property exists through law;
but yet the law of property, in a particular country, may be at variance
with that moral purpose for which, in our eyes, laws exist. Law is the
foundation and necessary condition of justice; but yet laws may be
unjust, and when unjust ought to be changed.

(P. xvii.)

The practical enormities consequent on Dr. Whewell’s theory are thus got
rid of; but when these are gone, there is nothing of the theory left. He
undertook to explain how we may know what is right. It appeared at first
that he was about to give a criterion, when he said that it is not right
to violate legal rights. According to this, when we want to know what is
right, we have to consult the law, and see what rights it recognises.
But now it seems that these rights may be contrary to right; and all we
can be sure of is, that it is right there should be rights of some sort.
And we learn that, after all, it is for a “moral purpose” that in Dr.
Whewell’s opinion “laws exist.” So that while the meaning of ought is
that we ought to respect rights, it is a previous condition that these
rights must be such as ought to be respected. Morality must conform to
law, but law must first conform to morality. This is vicious circle the
second. Dr. Whewell has broken out of the first; he has made, this time,
a larger sweep; the curve he describes is wider, but it still returns
into itself.

An adherent of “dependent morality” would say that, instead of deriving
right from rights, we must have a rule of right before it can be decided
what ought to be rights; and that, both in law and in morals, the rights
which ought to exist are those which for the general happiness it is
expedient should exist. And Dr. Whewell anticipates that some one may
even do him what he thinks the injustice of supposing this to be his
opinion. He introduces an objector as saying, “that by making our
morality begin from rights, we really do found it upon expediency,
notwithstanding our condemnation of systems so founded. For, it may be
said, rights such as property exist only because they are expedient.”
Dr. Whewell hastens to repel this imputation; and here is his theory.
“We reply as before, that rights are founded on the whole nature of man,
in such a way that he cannot have a human existence without them. He is
a moral being, and must have rights, because morality cannot exist where
rights are not.” [Pp. xviii-xix.] Was ever an unfortunate metaphysician
driven into such a corner? We wanted to know what morality is, and Dr.
Whewell said that it is conforming to rights. We ask how he knows that
there are rights, and he answers, because otherwise there could be no
morality. This is vicious circle the third, and the most wonderful of
the three. The Indians placed their elephant on the back of a tortoise,
but they did not at the same time place the tortoise on the back of the
elephant.

Edition: current; Page: [190]
Dr. Whewell has failed in what it was impossible to succeed in. Every
attempt to dress up an appeal to intuition in the forms of reasoning,
must break down in the same manner. The system must, from the conditions
of the case, revolve in a circle. If morality is not to gravitate to any
end, but to hang self-balanced in space, it is useless attempting to
suspend one point of it upon another point. The fact of moral rules
supposes a certain assemblage of ideas. It is to no purpose detaching
these ideas one from another, and saying that one of them must exist
because another does. Press the moralist a step farther, and he can only
say that the other must exist because of the first. The house must have
a centre because it has wings, and wings because it has a centre. But
the question was about the whole house, and how it comes to exist. It
would be much simpler to say plainly, that it exists because it exists.
This is what Dr. Whewell is in the end obliged to come to; and he would
have saved himself a great deal of bad logic, if he had begun with it.*

So much as to the existence of moral rules: now as to what they are.

We do not rest our rules of action upon the tendency of actions to
produce the happiness of others, or of mankind in general; because we
cannot solve a problem so difficult as to determine which of two courses
of action will produce the greatest amount of human happiness: and we
see a simpler and far more satisfactory mode of deducing such rules;
namely, by considering that there must be such rules; that they must be
rules for man; for man living among men; and for the whole of man’s
being. Since we are thus led directly to moral rules, by the
consideration of the internal condition of man’s being, we cannot think
it wise to turn away from this tmethod,t and to try to determine such
rules by reference to an obscure and unmanageable external condition,
the amount of happiness produced.

(P. xx.)

If these were not Dr. Whewell’s own words, we should expect to be
charged, as he charges Bentham, with caricature. This is given as a
scientific statement of the proper mode of discovering what are the
rules of morality! We are to “deduce such rules” from four
considerations. First, “that there must be such rules;” a necessary
preliminary, certainly. If we are to build a wall, it is because it has
been previously decided that there must be a wall. Edition: current;
Page: [191] But we must know what the wall is for; what end it is
intended to serve; or we shall not know what sort of wall is required.
What end are moral rules intended to serve? No end, according to Dr.
Whewell. They do not exist for the sake of an end. To have them is part
of man’s nature, like (it is Dr. Whewell’s own illustration) the
circulation of the blood. It is now then to be inquired what rules are
part of our nature. This is to be discovered from three things: that
they must be “rules for man; for man living among men; and for the whole
of man’s being.” This is only saying over again, in a greater number of
words, what we want, not how we are to find it. First, they must be
“rules for man;” but we are warned not to suppose that this means for
man’s benefit; it only means that they are for man to obey. This leaves
us exactly where we were before. Next, they are for “man living among
men,” that is, for the conduct of man to men: but how is man to conduct
himself to men? Thirdly, they are “for the whole of man’s being;” that
is, according to Dr. Whewell’s explanation, they are for the regulation
of our desires as well as of our actions; but what we wanted to know
was, how we are to regulate our desires and our actions? Of the four
propositions given as premises from which all moral rules are to be
deduced, not one points to any difference between one kind of moral
rules and another. Whether the rule is to love or to hate our neighbour,
it will equally answer all Dr. Whewell’s conditions. These are the
premises which are more “simple and satisfactory” than such “obscure and
unmanageable” propositions, so utterly impossible to be assured of, as
that some actions are favourable, and others injurious, to human
happiness! Try a parallel case. Let it be required to find the
principles of the art of navigation. Bentham says, we must look to an
“external end;” getting from place to place on the water. No, says Dr.
Whewell, there is a “simpler and more satisfactory” mode, viz. to
consider that there must be such an art; that it must be for a ship; for
a ship at sea; and for all the parts of a ship. Would Dr. Whewell
prevail on any one to suppose that these considerations made it
unnecessary to consider, with Bentham, what a ship is intended to do?

This account is all we get from Dr. Whewell, in the Lectures, of the
mode of discovering and recognising the rules of morality. But perhaps
he succeeds better in doing the thing, than in explaining how it ought
to be done. At all events, having written two volumes of Elements of
Morality, he must have performed this feat, either well or ill; he must
have found a way of “deducing moral rules.” We will now, therefore,
dismiss Dr. Whewell’s generalities, and try to estimate his method, not
by what he says about it, but by what we see him doing when he carries
it into practice.

We turn, then, to his Elements of Morality, and to the third chapter of
that work, which is entitled, “Moral Rules exist necessarily.” And here
we at once find something well calculated to surprise us. That moral
rules must Edition: current; Page: [192] exist, was, it may be
remembered, the first of Dr. Whewell’s four fundamental axioms; and has
been presented hitherto as a law of human nature, requiring no proof. It
must puzzle some of his pupils to find him here proving it; and still
more, to find him proving it from utility.

In enumerating and describing, as we have done, certain desires as among
the most powerful springs of human action, we have stated that man’s
life is scarcely tolerable if these desires are not in some degree
gratified; that man cannot be at all satisfied without some security in
such gratification; that without property, which gratifies one of these
desires, man’s free agency cannot exist; that without marriage, which
gratifies another, there can be no peace, comfort, tranquillity, or
order. And the same may be said of all those springs of actions which we
enumerated as mental desires. Without some provision for the tranquil
gratification of these desires, society is disturbed, unbalanced,
painful. The gratification of such desires must be a part of the order
of the society. There must be rules which direct the course and limits
of such gratification. Such rules are necessary for the peace of
society.

(Elements, Vol. I, pp. 32-3.)

This is a very different mode of treating the subject from that which we
observed in the Lectures. We are now among reasons: good or bad they may
be, but still reasons. Moral rules are here spoken of as means to an
end. We now hear of the peace and comfort of society; of making man’s
life tolerable; of the satisfaction and gratification of human beings;
of preventing a disturbed and painful state of society. This is
utility—this is pleasure and pain. When real reasons are wanted, the
repudiated happiness-principle is always the resource. It is true, this
is soon followed by a recurrence to the old topics, of the necessity of
rules “for the action of man as man,” and the impossibility to “conceive
man as man without conceiving him as subject to rules.” [Vol. I, p. 33.]
But any meaning it is possible to find in these phrases (which is not
much) is all reflected from the utilitarian reasons given just before.
Rules are necessary, because mankind would have no security for any of
the things which they value, for anything which gives them pleasure or
shields them from pain, unless they could rely on one another for doing,
and in particular for abstaining from, certain acts. And it is true,
that man could not be conceived “as man,” that is, with the average
human intelligence, if he were unable to perceive so obvious an utility.

Almost all the generalia of moral philosophy prefixed to the Elements
are in like manner derived from utility. For example: that the desires,
until subjected to general rules, bring mankind into conflict and
opposition; but that, when general rules are established, the feelings
which gather round these “are sources not of opposition, but of
agreement;” that they “tend to make men unanimous; and that such rules
with regard to the affections and desires as tend to control the
repulsive and confirm the attractive forces which operate in human
society; such as tend to unite men, to establish concord, Edition:
current; Page: [193] unanimity, sympathy, agree with that which is the
character of moral rules.” (Vol. I, p. 35.) This is Benthamism—even
approaching to Fourierism.

And again, in attempting a classification and definition of virtues, and
a parallel one of duties corresponding to them. The definitions of both
the one and the other are deduced from utility. After classing virtues
under the several heads of benevolence, justice, truth, purity, and
order, Benevolence is defined as “desire of the good of all men;” and in
a wider sense, as the “absence of all the affections which tend to
separate men, and the aggregate of the affections which unite them.”
(Vol. I, pp. 137-8.) Justice, as “the desire that each person should
have his own.” (P. 138.) Truth is defined “an agreement of the verbal
expression with the thought,” and is declared to be a duty because
“lying and deceit tend to separate and disunite men, and to make all
actions implying mutual dependence, that is, all social action and
social life, impossible.” (Pp. 139, 138-9.) Purity is defined “the
control of the appetites by the moral sentiments and the reason.” [P.
139.] Order, as a conformity of our internal dispositions to the laws
and to moral rules (why not rather to good laws, and good moral rules?)
All these definitions, though very open to criticism in detail, are in
principle utilitarian.* Though Dr. Whewell will not recognise the
promotion of happiness as the ultimate principle, he deduces his
secondary principles from it, and supports his propositions by
utilitarian reasons as far as they will go. He is chiefly distinguished
from utilitarian moralists of the more superficial kind, by this, that
he ekes out his appeals to utility with appeals to “our idea of man as
man;” and when reasons fail, or are not sufficiently convincing, then
“all men think,” or “we cannot help feeling,” serves as a last resort,
and closes the discussion.

Of this hybrid character is the ethics of Dr. Whewell’s Elements of
Morality. And in this he resembles all other writers of the intuitive
school of umoralsu. They are none of them frankly and consistently
intuitive. To use Edition: current; Page: [194] a happy expression of
Bentham in a different case, they draw from a double fountain—utility,
and internal conviction; the tendencies of actions, and the feelings
with which mankind regard them. This is not a matter of choice with
these writers, but of necessity. It arises from the nature of the
morality of internal conviction. Utility, as a standard, is capable of
being carried out singly and consistently; a moralist can deduce from it
his whole system of ethics, without calling to his assistance any
foreign principle. It is not so with one who relies on moral intuition;
for where will he find his moral intuitions? How many ethical
propositions can be enumerated, of which the most reckless assertor will
venture to affirm that they have the adhesion of all mankind? Dr.
Whewell declares unhesitatingly that the moral judgment of mankind, when
it is unanimous, must be right. “What are universally held as virtues,
must be dispositions in conformity with this [the supreme] law: what are
universally reckoned vices, must be wrong.” [Vol. I, p. 164.] This is
saying much, when we consider the worth, in other matters nearly allied
to these, of what is complimentarily called the general opinion of
mankind; when we remember what grovelling superstitions, what
witchcraft, magic, astrology, what oracles, ghosts, what gods and demons
scattered through all nature, were once universally believed in, and
still are so by the majority of the human race. But where are these
unanimously recognised vices and virtues to be found? Practices the most
revolting to the moral feelings of some ages and nations do not incur
the smallest censure from others; and it is doubtful whether there is a
single virtue which is held to be a virtue by all nationsv, in the same
sense, and with the same reservationsv. There are, indeed, some
moralities of an utility so unmistakeable, so obviously indispensable to
the common purposes of life, that as general rules mankind could no more
differ about them than about the multiplication table; but even here,
there is the widest difference of sentiment about the exceptions. The
universal voice of mankind, so often appealed to, is universal only in
its discordance. What passes for it is merely the voice of the majority,
or, failing that, of any large number having a strong feeling on the
subject; especially if it be a feeling of which they cannot give any
account, and which, as it is not consciously grounded on any reasons, is
supposed to be better than reasons, and of higher authority. With Dr.
Whewell, a strong feeling, shared by most of those whom he thinks worth
counting, is always an ultima ratio from which there is no appeal. He
forgets that as much might have been pleaded, and in many cases might
still be pleaded, in defence of the absurdest superstitions.

It seems to be tacitly supposed that however liable mankind are to be
wrong in their opinions, they are generally right in their feelings, and
especially in their antipathies. On the contrary, there is nothing which
it is Edition: current; Page: [195] more imperative that they should be
required to justify by reasons. The antipathies of mankind are mostly
derived from three sources. One of these is an impression, true or
false, of utility. They dislike what is painful or dangerous, or what is
apparently so. These antipathies, being grounded on the happiness
principle, must be required to justify themselves by it. The second
class of antipathies are against what they are taught, or imagine, to be
displeasing to some visible or invisible power, capable of doing them
harm, and whose wrath, once kindled, may be wreaked on those who
tolerated, as well as on those who committed, the offence. The third
kind of antipathies, often as strong as either of the others, are
directed towards mere differences of opinion, or of taste. Any of the
three, when nourished by education, and deriving confidence from mutual
encouragement, assumes to common minds the character of a moral feeling.
But to pretend that any such antipathy, were it ever so general, gives
the smallest guarantee of its own justice and reasonableness, or has any
claim to be binding on those who do not partake in the sentiment, is as
irrational as to adduce the belief in ghosts or witches as a proof of
their real existence. I am not bound to abstain from an action because
another person dislikes it, however he may dignify his dislike with the
name of disapprobation.

We cannot takew leave of Dr. Whewell’s strictures on Bentham, without
adverting to some observations made by him on Bentham’s character as a
jurist rather than as a moralist. In this capacity Dr. Whewell does more
justice to Bentham, than in the department of moral philosophy. But he
finds fault with him for two things: first, for not sufficiently
recognising what Dr. Whewell calls the historical element of
legislation; and imagining “that to a certain extent his schemes of law
might be made independent of local conditions.” [Lectures, p. 254.]x Dr.
Whewell admits it to be part of Bentham’s doctrine, that different
countries must to a certain extent have different laws; and is aware
that he wrote an Essay on the Influence of Time and Place in Matters of
Legislation; but thinks him wrong in maintaining that there should be a
general plan, of which the details only should be modified by local
circumstances; and contends, that different countries require different
ground-plans of legislation.

There is in every national code of law a necessary and fundamental
historical element; not a few supplementary provisions which may be
added or adapted to the local circumstances after the great body of the
code has been constructed: not a few touches of local colouring to be
put in after the picture is almost painted: but an element which belongs
to law from its origin, and penetrates to its roots: a part of the
intimate structure; a cast in the original design. The national views of
personal status; property, and the modes of acquisition; bargains, and
the modes of concluding them; family, and its consequences; government,
and its origin; these affect even the most universal aspects and
divisions of Edition: current; Page: [196] penal offences; these affect
still more every step of the expository process which the civil law
applies to rights in defining penal offences.

(Lectures, p. 254.)

What Dr. Whewell designates by the obscure and misleading expression,
“an historical element,” and accuses Bentham of paying too little regard
to, is the existing opinions and feelings of the people. These may,
without doubt, in some sense be called historical, as being partly the
product of their previous history; but whatever attention is due to
those opinions and feelings in legislation, is due to them not as matter
of history, but as social forces in present being. Now Bentham, in
common with all other rational persons, admitted that a legislator is
obliged to have regard to the opinions and feelings of the people to be
legislated for; but with this difference, that he did not look upon
those opinions and feelings as affecting, in any great degree, what was
desirable to be done, but only what could be done. Take one of Dr.
Whewell’s instances, “the national views of personal status.” The
“national views” may regard slavery as a legitimate condition of human
beings, and Mr. Livingston, in legislating for Louisiana, may have been
obliged to recognise slavery as a fact, and to make provision for it,
and for its consequences, in his code of laws; but he was bound to
regard the equality of human beings as the foundation of his
legislation, and the concession to the “historical element” as a matter
of temporary expediency; and while yielding to the necessity, to
endeavour, by all the means in his power, to educate the nation into
better things. And so of the other subjects mentioned by Dr.
Whewell—property, contracts, family, and government. The fact that, in
any of these matters, a people prefer some particular mode of
legislation, on historical grounds—that is, because they have been long
used to it,—is no proof of any original adaptation in it to their nature
or circumstances, and goes a very little way in recommendation of it as
for their benefit now. But it may be a very important element in
determining what the legislator can do, and still more, the manner in
which he should do it: and in both these respects Bentham allowed it
full weight. What he is at issue with Dr. Whewell upon, is in deeming it
right for the legislator to keep before his mind an ideal of what he
would do if the people for whom he made laws were entirely devoid of
prejudice or accidental prepossession: while Dr. Whewell, by placing
their prejudices and accidental prepossessions “at the basis of the
system,” [Lectures, p. 255,] enjoins legislation not in simple
recognition of existing popular feelings, but in obedience to them.

The other objection made by Dr. Whewell to Bentham as a writer on
legislation, (for we omit the criticism on his classification of
offences, as too much a matter of detail for the present discussion,) is
that he does not fully recognise “the moral object of law” (p. 257). Dr.
Whewell says, in phraseology which we considerably abridge, that law
ought not only to preserve and gratify man, but to improve and teach
him: not only to take care of him Edition: current; Page: [197] as an
animal, but to raise him to a moral life. Punishment, therefore, he
says, “is to be, not merely a means of preventing suffering, but is also
to be a moral lesson.” [Ibid.] But Bentham, as Dr. Whewell is presently
forced to admit, says the same: and in fact carries this doctrine so
far, as to maintain that legal punishment ought sometimes to be attached
to acts for the mere purpose of stigmatizing them, and turning the
popular sentiment against them. No one, more than Bentham, recognises
that most important, but most neglected, function of the legislator, the
office of an instructor, both moral and intellectual. But he receives no
credit for this from Dr. Whewell, except that of being false to his
principles; for Dr. Whewell seems to reckon it an impertinence in
anybody to recognise morality as a good, who thinks, as Bentham does,
that it is a means to an end. If any one who believes that the moral
sentiments should be guided by the happiness of mankind, proposes that
moral sentiments, so guided, should be cultivated and fostered, Dr.
Whewell treats this as a deserting of utilitarian principles, and
borrowing or stealing from his.

As an example of “Bentham’s attempt to exclude morality, as such, in his
legislation,” Dr. Whewell refers to “what he says respecting the laws of
marriage, and especially in favour of a liberty of divorce by common
consent.”[*] As this is the only opportunity Dr. Whewell gives his
readers, of comparing his mode of discussing a specific moral question
with Bentham’s, we shall devote a few words to it.

Having quoted from Bentham the observation that a government which
interdicts divorce “takes upon itself to decide that it understands the
interests of individuals better than they do themselves,”[†] Dr. Whewell
answers, that this is an objection to all laws: that in many other
cases, “government, both in its legislation and administration, does
assume that it understands the interests of individuals, and the public
interest as affected by them, better than they do themselves.”[‡] The
words which we have put in italics, adroitly change the question.
Government is entitled to assume that it will take better care than
individuals of the public interest, but not better care of their own
interest. It is one thing for the legislator to dictate to individuals
what they shall do for their own advantage, and another thing to protect
the interest of other persons who may be injuriously affected by their
acts. Dr. Whewell’s own instances ysuffice:y “What is the meaning of
restraints imposed for the sake of public health, cleanliness, and
comfort? Why are not individuals left to do what they like with
reference to such matters? Plainly because carelessness, ignorance,
indolence, would prevent their doing what is most for their Edition:
current; Page: [198] own interest.” (P. 258.) Say rather, would lead
them to do what is contrary to the interest of other people. The proper
object of sanitary laws is not to compel people to take care of their
own health, but to prevent them from endangering that of others. To
prescribe by law, what they should do for their own health alone, would
by most people be justly regarded as something very like tyranny.

Dr. Whewell continues:—

But is Mr. Bentham ready to apply consistently the principle which he
thus implies, that in such matters individuals are the best judges of
their own interests? Will he allow divorce to take place whenever the
two parties agree in desiring it? . . . Such a facility of divorce as
this, leaves hardly any difference possible between marriage and
concubinage. If a pair may separate when they please, why does the
legislator take the trouble to recognise their living together? [P.
259.]

Apply this to other cases. If a man can pay his tailor when he and his
tailor choose, why does the law take the trouble to recognise them as
debtor and creditor? Why recognise, as partners in business, as
landlords and tenants, as servants and employers, people who are not
tied to each other for life?

Dr. Whewell finds what he thinks an inconsistency in Bentham’s view of
the subject. He thus describes Bentham’s opinions.

Marriage for life is, he [Bentham] says, the most natural marriage: if
there were no laws except the ordinary law of contracts, this would be
the most ordinary arrangement. So far, good. But Mr. Bentham, having
carried his argument so far, does not go on with it. What conclusion are
we to suppose him to intend? This arrangement would be very general
without law, therefore the legislator should pass a law to make it
universal? . . . No. The very next sentence is employed in showing the
absurdity of making the engagement one from which the parties cannot
liberate themselves by mutual consent. And there is no attempt to reduce
these arguments, or their results, to a consistency.

(Pp. 259-60.)

Dr. Whewell’s ideas of inconsistency seem to be peculiar. Bentham, he
says, is of opinion, that in the majority of cases it is best for the
happiness of married persons that they should remain together. Is it so?
(says Dr. Whewell)—then why not force them to remain together, even when
it would be best for their happiness to separate?

Try again parallel cases. In choosing a profession, a sensible person
will fix on one in which he will find it agreeable to remain; therefore,
it should not be lawful to change a profession once chosen. A landlord,
when he has a good tenant, best consults his own interest by not
changing him; therefore, all tenancy should be for life. Electors who
have found a good representative will probably do wisely in re-electing
him; therefore, members of parliament should be irremovable.

Dr. Whewell intended to show into what errors Bentham was led, by
Edition: current; Page: [199] treating the question of marriage apart
from “moral grounds.” Yet part of his complaint is that Bentham does
consider moral grounds, which, according to Dr. Whewell, he has no right
to do. If one married person maltreats the other to procure consent to a
divorce,—

Bentham’s decision is, that liberty should be allowed to the party
maltreated and not to the other. . . . Now to this decision I have
nothing to object: but I must remark, that the view which makes it
tolerable is, its being a decision on moral grounds, such as Mr. Bentham
would not willingly acknowledge. The man may not take advantage of his
own wrong: that is a maxim which quite satisfies us. But Mr. Bentham,
who only regards wrong as harm, would, I think, find it difficult to
satisfy the man that he was fairly used. [P. 261.]

Mr. Bentham would have found it difficult to conceive that any one
attempting to criticise his philosophy could know so little of its
elements. Dr. Whewell wonders what the reason can be, on Bentham’s
principles, for not allowing a man to benefit by his own wrong. Did it
never occur to him, that it is to take away from the man his inducement
to commit the wrong?

Finally, Dr. Whewell says, “No good rule can be established on this
subject without regarding the marriage union in a moral point of view;
without assuming it as one great object of the law to elevate and purify
men’s idea of marriage; to lead them to look upon it as an entire union
of interests and feelings, enjoyments and hopes, between the two
parties.” [P. 262.] We cannot agree in the doctrine that it should be an
object of the law to “lead men to look upon” marriage as being what it
is not. Neither Bentham nor any one who thinks with him would deny that
this entire union is the completest ideal of marriage; but it is bad
philosophy to speak of a relation as if it always was the best thing
that it possibly can be, and then infer that when it is notoriously not
such, as in an immense majority of cases, and even when it is the
extreme contrary, as in a zconsiderablez minority, it should
nevertheless be treated exactly as if the fact corresponded with the
theory. The liberty of divorce is contended for, because marriages are
not what Dr. Whewell says they should be looked upon as being; because a
choice made by an inexperienced person, and not allowed to be corrected,
cannot, except by a happy accident, realize the conditions essential to
this complete union.

We give these observations not as a discussion of the question, but of
Dr. Whewell’s treatment of it; as part of the comparison which he
invites his readers to institute between his method and that of Bentham.
Were it our object to confirm the general character we have given of Dr.
Whewell’s philosophy, by a survey in detail of the morality laid down by
him, the two volumes of Elements afford abundant materials. We could
show that Dr. Whewell not only makes no improvement on the old moral
doctrines, but Edition: current; Page: [200] attempts to set up afresh
several of them which have been loosened or thrown down by the stream of
human progress.

Thus we find him everywhere inculcating, as one of the most sacred
duties, reverence for superiors, even when personally undeserving (Vol.
I, pp. 176-7), and obedience to existing laws, even when bad. “The laws
of the state are to be observed even when they enact slavery.” (Vol. I,
p. 351.) “The morality of the individual,” he says, (Vol. I, p. 58),
“depends on his not violating the law of his nation.” It is not even the
spirit of the law, but the letter (Vol. I, p. 213), to which obedience
is due. The law, indeed, is accepted by Dr. Whewell as the fountain of
rights; of those rights which it is the primary moral duty not to
infringe. And mere custom is of almost equal authority with express
enactment. Even in a matter so personal as marriage, the usage and
practice of the country is to be a paramount law. “In some countries,
the marriage of the child is a matter usually managed by the parents; in
such cases, it is the child’s duty to bring the affections, as far as
possible, into harmony with the custom.” (Vol. I, p. 211.) “Reverence
and affection” towards “the constitution of each country,” he holds
(Vol. II, p. 204) as “one of the duties of a citizen.”

Again, Dr. Whewell affirms, with a directness not usually ventured on in
these days by persons of his standing and importance, that to disbelieve
either a providential government of the world, or revelation, is morally
criminal; for that “men are blameable in disbelieving truths after they
have been promulgated, though they are ignorant without blame before the
promulgation.” (Vol. II, p. 93.) This is the very essence of religious
intolerance, aggravated by the fact, that among the persons thus morally
stigmatized are notoriously included many of the best men who ever
lived. He goes still further, and lays down the principle of intolerance
in its broad generality, saying, that “the man who holds false opinions”
is morally condemnable “when he has had the means of knowing the truth”
(Vol. II, p. 102); that it is “his duty to think rationally,” (i.e. to
think the same as Dr. Whewell): that it is to no purpose his saying that
he has “done all he could to arrive at truth, since a man has never done
all he can to arrive at truth.” (Vol. II, pp. 105, 106.) If a man has
never done all he can, neither has his judge done all he can; and the
heretic may have more agroundsa for believing his opinion true, than the
judge has for affirming it to be false. But the judge is on the side of
received opinions, which, according to Dr. Whewell’s standard, makes all
right.

It is not, however, our object to criticise Dr. Whewell as a teacher of
the details of morality. Our design goes no farther than to illustrate
his controversy with Bentham respecting its first principle. It may,
perhaps, be thought that Dr. Whewell’s arguments against the philosophy
of utility are too feeble Edition: current; Page: [201] to require so
long a refutation. But feeble arguments easily pass for convincing, when
they are on the same side basb the prevailing sentiment; and readers in
general are so little acquainted with that or any other system of moral
philosophy, that they take the word of anybody, especially an author in
repute, who professes to inform them what it is; and suppose that a
doctrine must be indeed absurd, to which mere truisms are offered as a
sufficient reply. It was, therefore, not unimportant to show, by a
minute examination, that Dr. Whewell has misunderstood and
misrepresented the philosophy of utility, and that his attempts to
refute it, and to construct a moral philosophy without it, have been
equally failures.

Edition: current; Page: [202] Edition: current; Page: [203]


UTILITARIANISM
 1861

Edition: current; Page: [204]


EDITOR’S NOTE

4th ed. London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1871. Revised and
reprinted from 3rd ed. (London: Longmans, Green, Reader and Dyer, 1867),
2nd ed. (London: Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green, 1864), 1st
ed. (London: Parker, Son, and Bourn, 1863), and Fraser’s Magazine, LXIV
(Oct., 1861), 391-406 [Chaps. i-ii], ibid. (Nov., 1861), 525-34 [Chaps.
iii-iv], ibid. (Dec., 1861), 658-73 [Chap. v]. The articles in Fraser’s
were identified as “by John Stuart Mill.” Described in JSM’s
bibliography as “An Essay in five Chapters entitled ‘Utilitarianism’
published in the three numbers of Fraser’s Magazine for October,
November and December 1861. Reprinted as a separate work early in 1863.”
(MacMinn, 93.) For a further account of the place of the work in
relation to the other essays in this volume, see the Textual
Introduction, cxxii-cxxvi above.

The following text is collated with those of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd eds.,
and that in Fraser’s. In the footnoted variants, the 4th ed. is
indicated by “71”; the 3rd by “67”; the 2nd by “64”; the 1st by “63”;
and Fraser’s by “61”. There are no copies of relevant editions in
Somerville College. In all versions the title of Chap. v begins “On the
. . .”; the Tables of Contents, however, except for 63, give “Of the. .
. .” Here “On” is accepted.

Edition: current; Page: [205]


CHAPTER I: General Remarks

there are few circumstances among those which make up the present
condition of human knowledge, more unlike what might have been expected,
or more significant of the backward state in which speculation on the
most important subjects still lingers, than the little progress which
has been made in the decision of the controversy respecting the
criterion of right and wrong. From the dawn of philosophy, the question
concerning the summum bonum, or, what is the same thing, concerning the
foundation of morality, has been accounted the main problem in
speculative thought, has occupied the most gifted intellects, and
divided them into sects and schools, carrying on a vigorous warfare
against one another. And after more than two thousand years the same
discussions continue, philosophers are still ranged under the same
contending banners, and neither thinkers nor mankind at large seem
nearer to being unanimous on the subject, than when the youth Socrates
listened to the old Protagoras, and asserted (if Plato’s dialogue be
grounded on a real conversation) the theory of utilitarianism against
the popular morality of the so-called sophist.

It is true that similar confusion and uncertainty, and in some cases
similar discordance, exist respecting the first principles of all the
sciences, not excepting that which is deemed the most certain of them,
mathematics; without much impairing, generally indeed without impairing
at all, the trustworthiness of the conclusions of those sciences. An
apparent anomaly, the explanation of which is, that the detailed
doctrines of a science are not usually deduced from, nor depend for
their evidence upon, what are called its first principles. Were it not
so, there would be no science more precarious, or whose conclusions were
more insufficiently made out, than algebra; which derives none of its
certainty from what are commonly taught to learners as its elements,
since these, as laid down by some of its most eminent teachers, are as
full of fictions as English law, and of mysteries as theology. The
truths which are ultimately accepted as the first principles of a
science, are really the last results of metaphysical analysis, practised
on the elementary notions with which the science is conversant; and
their relation to the science is not that of foundations to an edifice,
but of roots to a tree, which may perform their office equally well
though they be never dug down to and exposed to Edition: current; Page:
[206] light. But though in science the particular truths precede the
general theory, the contrary might be expected to be the case with a
practical art, such as morals or legislation. All action is for the sake
of some end, and rules of action, it seems natural to suppose, must take
their whole character and colour from the end to which they are
subservient. When we engage in a pursuit, a clear and precise conception
of what we are pursuing would seem to be the first thing we need,
instead of the last we are to look forward to. A test of right and wrong
must be the means, one would think, of ascertaining what is right or
wrong, and not a consequence of having already ascertained it.

The difficulty is not avoided by having recourse to the popular theory
of a natural faculty, a sense or instinct, informing us of right and
wrong. For—besides that the existence of such a moral instinct is itself
one of the matters in dispute—those believers in it who have any
pretensions to philosophy, have been obliged to abandon the idea that it
discerns what is right or wrong in the particular case in hand, as our
other senses discern the sight or sound actually present. Our moral
faculty, according to all those of its interpreters who are entitled to
the name of thinkers, supplies us only with the general principles of
moral judgments; it is a branch of our reason, not of our sensitive
faculty; and must be looked to for the abstract doctrines of morality,
not for perception of it in the concrete. The intuitive, no less than
what may be termed the inductive, school of ethics, insists on the
necessity of general laws. They both agree that the morality of an
individual action is not a question of direct perception, but of the
application of a law to an individual case. They recognise also, to a
great extent, the same moral laws; but differ as to their evidence, and
the source from which they derive their authority. According to the one
opinion, the principles of morals are evident à priori, requiring
nothing to command assent, except that the meaning of the terms be
understood. According to the other doctrine, right and wrong, as well as
truth and falsehood, are questions of observation and experience. But
both hold equally that morality must be deduced from principles; and the
intuitive school affirm as strongly as the inductive, that there is a
science of morals. Yet they seldom attempt to make out a list of the à
priori principles which are to serve as the premises of the science;
still more rarely do they make any effort to reduce those various
principles to one first principle, or common ground of obligation. They
either assume the ordinary precepts of morals as of à priori authority,
or they lay down as the common groundwork of those maxims, some
generality much less obviously authoritative than the maxims themselves,
and which has never succeeded in gaining popular acceptance. Yet to
support their pretensions there ought either to be some one fundamental
principle or law, at the root of all morality, or if there be several,
there should be a determinate order of precedence among them; Edition:
current; Page: [207] and the one principle, or the rule for deciding
between the various principles when they conflict, ought to be
self-evident.

To inquire how far the bad effects of this deficiency have been
mitigated in practice, or to what extent the moral beliefs of mankind
have been vitiated or made uncertain by the absence of any distinct
recognition of an ultimate standard, would imply a complete survey and
criticism of past and present ethical doctrine. It would, however, be
easy to show that whatever steadiness or consistency these moral beliefs
have attained, has been mainly due to the tacit influence of a standard
not recognised. Although the non-existence of an acknowledged first
principle has made ethics not so much a guide as a consecration of men’s
actual sentiments, still, as men’s sentiments, both of favour and of
aversion, are greatly influenced by what they suppose to be the effects
of things upon their happiness, the principle of utility, or as Bentham
latterly called it, the greatest happiness principle, has had a large
share in forming the moral doctrines even of those who most scornfully
reject its authority. Nor is there any school of thought which refuses
to admit that the influence of actions on happiness is a most material
and even predominant consideration in many of the details of morals,
however unwilling to acknowledge it as the fundamental principle of
morality, and the source of moral obligation. I might go much further,
and say that to all those à priori moralists who deem it necessary to
argue at all, utilitarian arguments are indispensable. It is not my
present purpose to criticize these thinkers; but I cannot help
referring, for illustration, to a systematic treatise by one of the most
illustrious of them, the Metaphysics of Ethics, by Kant. This remarkable
man, whose system of thought will long remain one of the landmarks in
the history of philosophical speculation, does, in the treatise in
question, lay down an universal first principle as the origin and ground
of moral obligation; it is this:—“So act, that the rule on which thou
actest would admit of being adopted as a law by all rational beings.”[*]
But when he begins to deduce from this precept any of the actual duties
of morality, he fails, almost grotesquely, to show that there would be
any contradiction, any logical (not to say physical) impossibility, in
the adoption by all rational beings of the most outrageously immoral
rules of conduct. All he shows is that the consequences of their
universal adoption would be such as no one would choose to incur.

On the present occasion, I shall, without further discussion of the
other theories, attempt to contribute something towards the
understanding and appreciation of the Utilitarian or Happiness theory,
and towards such proof as it is susceptible of. It is evident that this
cannot be proof in the ordinary and popular meaning of the term.
Questions of ultimate ends are not amenable to direct proof. Whatever
can be proved to be good, must be so by being Edition: current; Page:
[208] shown to be a means to something admitted to be good without
proof. The medical art is proved to be good, by its conducing to health;
but how is it possible to prove that health is good? The art of music is
good, for the reason, among others, that it produces pleasure; but what
proof is it possible to give that pleasure is good? If, then, it is
asserted that there is a comprehensive formula, including all things
which are in themselves good, and that what ever else is good, is not so
as an end, but as a ameana, the formula may be accepted or rejected, but
is not a subject of what is commonly understood by proof. We are not,
however, to infer that its acceptance or rejection must depend on blind
impulse, or arbitrary choice. There is a larger meaning of the word
proof, in which this question is as amenable to it as any other of the
disputed questions of philosophy. The subject is within the cognizance
of the rational faculty; and neither does that faculty deal with it
solely in the way of intuition. Considerations may be presented capable
of determining the intellect either to give or withhold its assent to
the doctrine; and this is equivalent to proof.

We shall examine presently of what nature are these considerations; in
what manner they apply to the case, and what rational grounds,
therefore, can be given for accepting or rejecting the utilitarian
formula. But it is a preliminary condition of rational acceptance or
rejection, that the formula should be correctly understood. I believe
that the very imperfect notion ordinarily formed of its meaning, is the
chief obstacle which impedes its reception; and that could it be
cleared, even from only the grosser misconceptions, the question would
be greatly simplified, and a large proportion of its difficulties
removed. Before, therefore, I attempt to enter into the philosophical
grounds which can be given for assenting to the utilitarian standard, I
shall offer some illustrations of the doctrine itself; with the view of
showing more clearly what it is, distinguishing it from what it is not,
and disposing of such of the practical objections to it as either
originate in, or are closely connected with, mistaken interpretations of
its meaning. Having thus prepared the ground, I shall afterwards
endeavour to throw such light as I can upon the question, considered as
one of philosophical theory.

Edition: current; Page: [209]


CHAPTER II: What Utilitarianism Is

a passing remark is all that needs be given to the ignorant blunder of
supposing that those who stand up for utility as the test of right and
wrong, use the term in that restricted and merely colloquial sense in
which utility is opposed to pleasure. An apology is due to the
philosophical opponents of utilitarianism, for even the momentary
appearance of confounding them with any one capable of so absurd a
misconception; which is the more extraordinary, inasmuch as the contrary
accusation, of referring everything to pleasure, and that too in its
grossest form, is another of the common charges against utilitarianism:
and, as has been pointedly remarked by an able writer, the same sort of
persons, and often the very same persons, denounce the theory “as
impracticably dry when the word utility precedes the word pleasure, and
as too practicably voluptuous when the word pleasure precedes the word
utility.” Those who know anything about the matter are aware that every
writer, from Epicurus to Bentham, who maintained the theory of utility,
meant by it, not something to be contradistinguished from pleasure, but
pleasure itself, together with exemption from pain; and instead of
opposing the useful to the agreeable or the ornamental, have always
declared that the useful means these, among other things. Yet the common
herd, including the herd of writers, not only in newspapers and
periodicals, but in books of weight and pretension, are perpetually
falling into this shallow mistake. Having caught up the word
utilitarian, while knowing nothing whatever about it but its sound, they
habitually express by it the rejection, or the neglect, of pleasure in
some of its forms; of beauty, of ornament, or of amusement. Nor is the
term thus ignorantly misapplied solely in disparagement, but
occasionally in compliment; as though it implied superiority to
frivolity and the mere pleasures of the moment. And this perverted use
is the only one in which the word is popularly known, and the one from
which the new generation are acquiring their sole notion of its meaning.
Those who introduced the word, but who had for many years discontinued
it as a distinctive appellation, may well feel themselves called upon to
resume it, if by doing so they can hope to contribute anything towards
rescuing it from this utter degradation.*

Edition: current; Page: [210]
The creed which accepts as the foundation of morals, Utility, or the
Greatest Happiness Principle, holds that actions are right in proportion
as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the
reverse of happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence
of pain; by unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure. To give a
clear view of the moral standard set up by the theory, much more
requires to be said; in particular, what things it includes in the ideas
of pain and pleasure; and to what extent this is left an open question.
But these supplementary explanations do not affect the theory of life on
which this theory of morality is grounded—namely, that pleasure, and
freedom from pain, are the only things desirable as ends; and that all
desirable things (which are as numerous in the utilitarian as in any
other scheme) are desirable either for the pleasure inherent in
themselves, or as means to the promotion of pleasure and the prevention
of pain.

Now, such a theory of life excites in many minds, and among them in some
of the most estimable in feeling and purpose, inveterate dislike. To
suppose that life has (as they express it) no higher end than
pleasure—no better and nobler object of desire and pursuit—they
designate as utterly mean and grovelling; as a doctrine worthy only of
swine, to whom the followers of Epicurus were, at a very early period,
contemptuously likened; and modern holders of the doctrine are
occasionally made the subject of equally polite comparisons by its
German, French, and English assailants.

When thus attacked, the Epicureans have always answered, that it is not
they, but their accusers, who represent human nature in a degrading
light; since the accusation supposes human beings to be capable of no
pleasures except those of which swine are capable. If this supposition
were true, the charge could not be gainsaid, but would then be no longer
an imputation; for if the sources of pleasure were precisely the same to
human beings and to swine, the rule of life which is good enough for the
one would be good enough for the other. The comparison of the Epicurean
life to that of beasts is felt as degrading, precisely because a beast’s
pleasures do not satisfy a human being’s conceptions of happiness. Human
beings have faculties more elevated than the animal appetites, and when
once made conscious of them, do not regard anything as happiness which
does not include their gratification. Edition: current; Page: [211] I do
not, indeed, consider the Epicureans to have been by any means faultless
in drawing out their scheme of consequences from the utilitarian
principle. To do this in any sufficient manner, many Stoic, as well as
Christian elements require to be included. But there is no known
Epicurean theory of life which does not assign to the pleasures of the
intellect, of the feelings and imagination, and of the moral sentiments,
a much higher value as pleasures than to those of mere sensation. It
must be admitted, however, that utilitarian writers in general have
placed the superiority of mental over bodily pleasures chiefly in the
greater permanency, safety, uncostliness, &c., of the former—that is, in
their circumstantial advantages rather than in their intrinsic nature.
And on all these points utilitarians have fully proved their case; but
they might have taken the other, and, as it may be called, higher
ground, with entire consistency. It is quite compatible with the
principle of utility to recognise the fact, that some kinds of pleasure
are more desirable and more valuable than others. It would be absurd
that while, in estimating all other things, quality is considered as
well as quantity, the estimation of pleasures should be supposed to
depend on quantity alone.

If I am asked, what I mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or
what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a
pleasure, except its being greater in amount, there is but one possible
answer. Of two pleasures, if there be one to which all or almost all who
have experience of both give a decided preference, irrespective of any
feeling of moral obligation to prefer it, that is the more desirable
pleasure. If one of the two is, by those who are competently acquainted
with both, placed so far above the other that they prefer it, even
though knowing it to be attended with a greater amount of discontent,
and would not resign it for any quantity of the other pleasure which
their nature is capable of, we are justified in ascribing to the
preferred enjoyment a superiority in quality, so far outweighing
quantity as to render it, in comparison, of small account.

Now it is an unquestionable fact that those who are equally acquainted
with, and equally capable of appreciating and enjoying, both, do give a
most marked preference to the manner of existence which employs their
higher faculties. Few human creatures would consent to be changed into
any of the lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a
beast’s pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to be a
fool, no instructed person would be an ignoramus, no person of feeling
and conscience would be selfish and base, even though they should be
persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is better satisfied
with his lot than they are with theirs. They would not resign what they
possess more than he, for the most complete satisfaction of all the
desires which they have in common with him. If they ever fancy they
would, it is only in cases of unhappiness so extreme, that to escape
from it they would exchange their lot for almost any other, however
undesirable Edition: current; Page: [212] in their own eyes. A being of
higher faculties requires more to make him happy, is capable probably of
more acute suffering, and bisb certainly accessible to it at more
points, than one of an inferior type; but in spite of these liabilities,
he can never really wish to sink into what he feels to be a lower grade
of existence. We may give what explanation we please of this
unwillingness; we may attribute it to pride, a name which is given
indiscriminately to some of the most and to some of the least estimable
feelings of which mankind are capable; we may refer it to the love of
liberty and personal independence, an appeal to which was with the
Stoics one of the most effective means for the inculcation of it; to the
love of power, or to the love of excitement, both of which do really
enter into and contribute to it: but its most appropriate appellation is
a sense of dignity, which all human beings possess in one form or other,
and in some, though by no means in exact, proportion to their higher
faculties, and which is so essential a part of the happiness of those in
whom it is strong, that nothing which conflicts with it could be,
otherwise than momentarily, an object of desire to them. Whoever
supposes that this preference takes place at a sacrifice of
happiness—that the superior being, in anything like equal circumstances,
is not happier than the inferior—confounds the two very different ideas,
of happiness, and content. It is indisputable that the being whose
capacities of enjoyment are low, has the greatest chance of having them
fully satisfied; and a highly-endowed being will always feel that any
happiness which he can look for, as the world is constituted, is
imperfect. But he can learn to bear its imperfections, if they are at
all bearable; and they will not make him envy the being who is indeed
unconscious of the imperfections, but only because he feels not at all
the good which those imperfections qualify. It is better to be a human
being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates
dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, cisc of
a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the
question. The other party to the comparison knows both sides.

It may be objected, that many who are capable of the higher pleasures,
occasionally, under the influence of temptation, postpone them to the
lower. But this is quite compatible with a full appreciation of the
intrinsic superiority of the higher. Men often, from infirmity of
character, make their election for the nearer good, though they know it
to be the less valuable; and this no less when the choice is between two
bodily pleasures, than when it is between bodily and mental. They pursue
sensual indulgences to the injury of health, though perfectly aware that
health is the greater good. It may be further objected, that many who
begin with youthful enthusiasm for everything noble, as they advance in
years sink into indolence and selfishness. But I do not believe that
those who undergo this very common change, voluntarily Edition: current;
Page: [213] choose the lower description of pleasures in preference to
the higher. I believe that before they devote themselves exclusively to
the one, they have already become incapable of the other. Capacity for
the nobler feelings is in most natures a very tender plant, easily
killed, not only by hostile influences, but by mere want of sustenance;
and in the majority of young persons it speedily dies away if the
occupations to which their position in life has devoted them, and the
society into which it has thrown them, are not favourable to keeping
that higher capacity in exercise. Men lose their high aspirations as
they lose their intellectual tastes, because they have not time or
opportunity for indulging them; and they addict themselves to inferior
pleasures, not because they deliberately prefer them, but because they
are either the only ones to which they have access, or the only ones
which they are any longer capable of enjoying. It may be questioned
whether any one who has remained equally susceptible to both classes of
pleasures, ever knowingly and calmly preferred the lower; though many,
in all ages, have broken down in an ineffectual attempt to combine both.

From this verdict of the only competent judges, I apprehend there can be
no appeal. On a question which is the best worth having of two
pleasures, or which of two modes of existence is the most grateful to
the feelings, apart from its moral attributes and from its consequences,
the judgment of those who are qualified by knowledge of both, or, if
they differ, that of the majority among them, must be admitted as final.
And there needs be the less hesitation to accept this judgment
respecting the quality of pleasures, since there is no other tribunal to
be referred to even on the question of quantity. What means are there of
determining which is the acutest of two pains, or the intensest of two
pleasurable sensations, except the general suffrage of those who are
familiar with both? Neither pains nor pleasures are homogeneous, and
pain is always heterogeneous with pleasure. What is there to decide
whether a particular pleasure is worth purchasing at the cost of a
particular pain, except the feelings and judgment of the experienced?
When, therefore, those feelings and judgment declare the pleasures
derived from the higher faculties to be preferable in kind, apart from
the question of intensity, to those of which the animal nature,
disjoined from the higher faculties, is susceptible, they are entitled
on this subject to the same regard.

I have dwelt on this point, as being a necessary part of a perfectly
just conception of Utility or Happiness, considered as the directive
rule of human conduct. But it is by no means an indispensable condition
to the acceptance of the utilitarian standard; for that standard is not
the agent’s own greatest happiness, but the greatest amount of happiness
altogether; and if it may possibly be doubted whether a noble character
is always the happier for its nobleness, there can be no doubt that it
makes other people happier, and that the world in general is immensely a
gainer by it. Utilitarianism, therefore, Edition: current; Page: [214]
could only attain its end by the general cultivation of nobleness of
character, even if each individual were only benefited by the nobleness
of others, and his own, so far as happiness is concerned, were a sheer
deduction from the benefit. But the bare enunciation of such an
absurdity das this last,d renders refutation superfluous.

According to the Greatest Happiness Principle, as above explained, the
ultimate end, with reference to and for the sake of which all other
things are desirable (whether we are considering our own good or that of
other people), is an existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and
as rich as possible in enjoyments, both in point of quantity and
quality; the test of quality, and the rule for measuring it against
quantity, being the preference felt by those who, in their opportunities
of experience, to which must be added their habits of self-consciousness
and self-observation, are best furnished with the means of comparison.
This, being, according to the utilitarian opinion, the end of human
action, is necessarily also the standard of morality; which may
accordingly be defined, the rules and precepts for human conduct, by the
observance of which an existence such as has been described might be, to
the greatest extent possible, secured to all mankind; and not to them
only, but, so far as the nature of things admits, to the whole sentient
creation.

Against this doctrine, however, arises another class of objectors, who
say that happiness, in any form, cannot be the rational purpose of human
life and action; because, in the first place, it is unattainable: and
they contemptuously ask, What right hast thou to be happy? a question
which Mr. Carlyle clenches by the addition, What right, a short time
ago, hadst thou even to be?[*] Next, they say, that men can do without
happiness; that all noble human beings have felt this, and could not
have become noble but by learning the lesson of Entsagen, or
renunciation; which lesson, thoroughly learnt and submitted to, they
affirm to be the beginning and necessary condition of all virtue.

The first of these objections would go to the root of the matter were it
well founded; for if no happiness is to be had at all by human beings,
the attainment of it cannot be the end of morality, or of any rational
conduct. Though, even in that case, something might still be said for
the utilitarian theory; since utility includes not solely the pursuit of
happiness, but the prevention or mitigation of unhappiness; and if the
former aim be chimerical, there will be all the greater scope and more
imperative need for the latter, so long at least as mankind think fit to
live, and do not take refuge in the simultaneous act of suicide
recommended under certain conditions by Novalis.[†] When, however,
Edition: current; Page: [215] it is thus positively asserted to be
impossible that human life should be happy, the assertion, if not
something like a verbal quibble, is at least an exaggeration. If by
hapiness be meant a continuity of highly pleasurable excitement, it is
evident enough that this is impossible. A state of exalted pleasure
lasts only moments, or in some cases, and with some intermissions, hours
or days, and is the occasional brilliant flash of enjoyment, not its
permanent and steady flame. Of this the philosophers who have taught
that happiness is the end of life were as fully aware as those who taunt
them. The happiness which they meant was not a life of rapture; but
moments of such, in an existence made up of few and transitory pains,
many and various pleasures, with a decided predominance of the active
over the passive, and having as the foundation of the whole, not to
expect more from life than it is capable of bestowing. A life thus
composed, to those who have been fortunate enough to obtain it, has
always appeared worthy of the name of happiness. And such an existence
is even now the lot of many, during some considerable portion of their
lives. The present wretched education, and wretched social arrangements,
are the only real hindrance to its being attainable by almost all.

The objectors perhaps may doubt whether human beings, if taught to
consider happiness as the end of life, would be satisfied with such a
moderate share of it. But great numbers of mankind have been satisfied
with much less. The main constituents of a satisfied life appear to be
two, either of which by itself is often found sufficient for the
purpose: tranquillity, and excitement. With much tranquillity, many find
that they can be content with very little pleasure: with much
excitement, many can reconcile themselves to a considerable quantity of
pain. There is assuredly no inherent impossibility in enabling even the
mass of mankind to unite both; since the two are so far from being
incompatible that they are in natural alliance, the prolongation of
either being a preparation for, and exciting a wish for, the other. It
is only those in whom indolence amounts to a vice, that do not desire
excitement after an interval of repose; it is only those in whom the
need of excitement is a disease, that feel the tranquillity which
follows excitement dull and insipid, instead of pleasurable in direct
proportion to the excitement which preceded it. When people who are
tolerably fortunate in their outward lot do not find in life sufficient
enjoyment to make it valuable to them, the cause generally is, caring
for nobody but themselves. To those who have neither public nor private
affections, the excitements of life are much curtailed, and in any case
dwindle in value as the time approaches when all selfish interests must
be terminated by death: while those who leave after them objects of
personal affection, and especially those who have also cultivated a
fellow-feeling with the collective interests of mankind, retain as
lively an interest in life on the eve of death as in the vigour of youth
and health. Next to selfishness, the principal cause which makes life
unsatisfactory, is want of mental cultivation. Edition: current; Page:
[216] A cultivated mind—I do not mean that of a philosopher, but any
mind to which the fountains of knowledge have been opened, and which has
been taught, in any tolerable degree, to exercise its faculties—finds
sources of inexhaustible interest in all that surrounds it; in the
objects of nature, the achievements of art, the imaginations of poetry,
the incidents of history, the ways of mankind past and present, and
their prospects in the future. It is possible, indeed, to become
indifferent to all this, and that too without having exhausted a
thousandth part of it; but only when one has had from the beginning no
moral or human interest in these things, and has sought in them only the
gratification of curiosity.

Now there is absolutely no reason in the nature of things why an amount
of mental culture sufficient to give an intelligent interest in these
objects of contemplation, should not be the inheritance of every one
born in a civilized country. As little is there an inherent necessity
that any human being should be a selfish egotist, devoid of every
feeling or care but those which centre in his own miserable
individuality. Something far superior to this is sufficiently common
even now, to give ample earnest of what the human species may be made.
Genuine private affections, and a sincere interest in the public good,
are possible, though in unequal degrees, to every rightly brought up
human being. In a world in which there is so much to interest, so much
to enjoy, and so much also to correct and improve, every one who has
this moderate amount of moral and intellectual requisites is capable of
an existence which may be called enviable; and unless such a person,
through bad laws, or subjection to the will of others, is denied the
liberty to use the sources of happiness within his reach, he will not
fail to find this enviable existence, if he escape the positive evils of
life, the great sources of physical and mental suffering—such as
indigence, disease, and the unkindness, worthlessness, or premature loss
of objects of affection. The main stress of the problem lies, therefore,
in the contest with these calamities, from which it is a rare good
fortune entirely to escape; which, as things now are, cannot be
obviated, and often cannot be in any material degree mitigated. Yet no
one whose opinion deserves a moment’s consideration can doubt that most
of the great positive evils of the world are in themselves removable,
and will, if human affairs continue to improve, be in the end reduced
within narrow limits. Poverty, in any sense implying suffering, may be
completely extinguished by the wisdom of society, combined with the good
sense and providence of individuals. Even that most intractable of
enemies, disease, may be indefinitely reduced in dimensions by good
physical and moral education, and proper control of noxious influences;
while the progress of science holds out a promise for the future of
still more direct conquests over this detestable foe. And every advance
in that direction relieves us from some, not only of the chances which
cut short our own lives, but, what concerns us still more, which deprive
Edition: current; Page: [217] us of those in whom our happiness is wrapt
up. As for vicissitudes of fortune, and other disappointments connected
with worldly circumstances, these are principally the effect either of
gross imprudence, of ill-regulated desires, or of bad or imperfect
social institutions. All the grand sources, in short, of human suffering
are in a great degree, many of them almost entirely, conquerable by
human care and effort; and though their removal is grievously
slow—though a long succession of generations will perish in the breach
before the conquest is completed, and this world becomes all that, if
will and knowledge were not wanting, it might easily be made—yet every
mind sufficiently intelligent and generous to bear a part, however small
and unconspicuous, in the endeavour, will draw a noble enjoyment from
the contest itself, which he would not for any bribe in the form of
selfish indulgence consent to be without.

And this leads to the true estimation of what is said by the objectors
concerning the possibility, and the obligation, of learning to do
without happiness. Unquestionably it is possible to do without
happiness; it is done involuntarily by nineteen-twentieths of mankind,
even in those parts of our present world which are least deep in
barbarism; and it often has to be done voluntarily by the hero or the
martyr, for the sake of something which he prizes more than his
individual happiness. But this something, what is it, unless the
happiness of others, or some of the requisites of happiness? It is noble
to be capable of resigning entirely one’s own portion of happiness, or
chances of it: but, after all, this self-sacrifice must be for some end;
it is not its own end; and if we are told that its end is not happiness,
but virtue, which is better than happiness, I ask, would the sacrifice
be made if the hero or martyr did not believe that it would earn for
others immunity from similar sacrifices? Would it be made, if he thought
that his renunciation of happiness for himself would produce no fruit
for any of his fellow creatures, but to make their lot like his, and
place them also in the condition of persons who have renounced
happiness? All honour to those who can abnegate for themselves the
personal enjoyment of life, when by such renunciation they contribute
worthily to increase the amount of happiness in the world; but he who
does it, or professes to do it, for any other purpose, is no more
deserving of admiration than the ascetic mounted on his pillar. He may
be an inspiriting proof of what men can do, but assuredly not an example
of what they should.

Though it is only in a very imperfect state of the world’s arrangements
that any one can best serve the happiness of others by the absolute
sacrifice of his own, yet so long as the world is in that imperfect
state, I fully acknowledge that the readiness to make such a sacrifice
is the highest virtue which can be found in man. I will add, that in
this condition of the world, paradoxical as the assertion may be, the
conscious ability to do without happiness gives the best prospect of
realizing such happiness as is attainable. For Edition: current; Page:
[218] nothing except that consciousness can raise a person above the
chances of life, by making him feel that, let fate and fortune do their
worst, they have not power to subdue him: which, once felt, frees him
from excess of anxiety concerning the evils of life, and enables him,
like many a Stoic in the worst times of the Roman Empire, to cultivate
in tranquillity the sources of satisfaction accessible to him, without
concerning himself about the uncertainty of their duration, any more
than about their inevitable end.

Meanwhile, let utilitarians never cease to claim the morality of
self-devotion as a possession which belongs by as good a right to them,
as either to the Stoic or to the Transcendentalist. The utilitarian
morality does recognise in human beings the power of sacrificing their
own greatest good for the good of others. It only refuses to admit that
the sacrifice is itself a good. A sacrifice which does not increase, or
tend to increase, the sum total of happiness, it considers as wasted.
The only self-renunciation which it applauds, is devotion to the
happiness, or to some of the means of happiness, of others; either of
mankind collectively, or of individuals within the limits imposed by the
collective interests of mankind.

I must again repeat, what the assailants of utilitarianism seldom have
the justice to acknowledge, that the happiness which forms the
utilitarian standard of what is right in conduct, is not the agent’s own
happiness, but that of all concerned. As between his own happiness and
that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial
as a disinterested and benevolent spectator. In the golden rule of Jesus
of Nazareth, we read the complete spirit of the ethics of utility. To do
as eonee would be done by, and to love fone’sf neighbour as goneselfg,
constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian morality. As the means of
making the nearest approach to this ideal, utility would enjoin, first,
that laws and social arrangements should place the happiness, or (as
speaking practically it may be called) the interest, of every
individual, as nearly as possible in harmony with the interest of the
whole; and secondly, that education and opinion, which have so vast a
power over human character, should so use that power as to establish in
the mind of every individual an indissoluble association between his own
happiness and the good of the whole; especially between his own
happiness and the practice of such modes of conduct, negative and
positive, as regard for the universal happiness prescribes: so that not
only he may be unable to conceive the possibility of happiness to
himself, consistently with conduct opposed to the general good, but also
that a direct impulse to promote the general good may be in every
individual one of the habitual motives of action, and the sentiments
connected therewith may fill a large and prominent place in every human
being’s sentient existence. If the impugners of the utilitarian morality
Edition: current; Page: [219] represented it to their own minds in this
its true character, I know not what recommendation possessed by any
other morality they could possibly affirm to be wanting to it: what more
beautiful or more exalted developments of human nature any other ethical
system can be supposed to foster, or what springs of action, not
accessible to the utilitarian, such systems rely on for giving effect to
their mandates.

The objectors to utilitarianism cannot always be charged with
representing it in a discreditable light. On the contrary, those among
them who entertain anything like a just idea of its disinterested
character, sometimes find fault with its standard as being too high for
humanity. They say it is exacting too much to require that people shall
always act from the inducement of promoting the general interests of
society. But this is to mistake the very meaning of a standard of
morals, and htoh confound the rule of action with the motive of it. It
is the business of ethics to tell us what are our duties, or by what
test we may know them; but no system of ethics requires that the sole
motive of all we do shall be a feeling of duty; on the contrary,
ninety-nine hundredths of all our actions are done from other motives,
and rightly so done, if the rule of duty does not condemn them. It is
the more unjust to utilitarianism that this particular misapprehension
should be made a ground of objection to it, inasmuch as utilitarian
moralists have gone beyond almost all others in affirming that the
motive has nothing to do with the morality of the action, though much
with the worth of the agent. He who saves a fellow creature from
drowning does what is morally right, whether his motive be duty, or the
hope of being paid for his trouble: he who betrays the friend that
trusts him, is guilty of a crime, even if his object be to serve another
friend to whom he is under greater obligations.* But to speak only of
actions Edition: current; Page: [220] done from the motive of duty, and
in direct obedience to principle: it is a misapprehension of the
utilitarian mode of thought, to conceive it as implying that people
should fix their minds upon so wide a generality as the world, or
society at large. The great majority of good actions are intended, not
for the benefit of the world, but for that of individuals, of which the
good of the world is made up; and the thoughts of the most virtuous man
need not on these occasions travel beyond the particular persons
concerned, except so far as is necessary to assure himself that in
benefiting them he is not violating the rights—that is, the legitimate
and authorized expectations—of any one else. The multiplication of
happiness is, according to the utilitarian ethics, the object of virtue:
the occasions on which any person (except one in a thousand) has it in
his power to do this on an extended scale, in other words, to be a
public benefactor, are but exceptional; and on these occasions alone is
he called on to consider public utility; in every other case, private
utility, the interest or happiness of some few persons, is all he has to
attend to. Those alone the influence of whose actions extends to society
in general, need concern themselves habitually about so large an object.
In the case of abstinences indeed—of things which people forbear to do,
from moral considerations, though the consequences in the particular
case might be beneficial—it would be unworthy of an intelligent agent
not to be consciously aware that the action is of a class which, if
practised generally, would be generally injurious, and that this is the
ground of the obligation to abstain from it. The amount of regard for
the public interest implied in this recognition, is no greater than is
demanded by every system of morals; for they all enjoin to abstain from
whatever is manifestly pernicious to society.

The same considerations dispose of another reproach against the doctrine
of utility, founded on a still grosser misconception of the purpose of a
standard of morality, and of the very meaning of the words right and
wrong. It is often affirmed that utilitarianism renders men cold and
unsympathizing; that it chills their moral feelings towards individuals;
that it makes them regard only the dry and hard consideration of the
consequences of actions, Edition: current; Page: [221] not taking into
their moral estimate the qualities from which those actions emanate. If
the assertion means that they do not allow their judgment respecting the
rightness or wrongness of an action to be influenced by their opinion of
the qualities of the person who does it, this is a complaint not against
utilitarianism, but against having any standard of morality at all; for
certainly no known ethical standard decides an action to be good or bad
because it is done by a good or a bad man, still less because done by an
amiable, a brave, or a benevolent man, or the contrary. These
considerations are relevant, not to the estimation of actions, but of
persons; and there is nothing in the utilitarian theory inconsistent
with the fact that there are other things which interest us in persons
besides the rightness and wrongness of their actions. The Stoics,
indeed, with the paradoxical misuse of language which was part of their
system, and by which they strove to raise themselves above all concern
about anything but virtue, were fond of saying that he who has that has
everything; that he, and only he, is rich, is beautiful, is a king. But
no claim of this description is made for the virtuous man by the
utilitarian doctrine. Utilitarians are quite aware that there are other
desirable possessions and qualities besides virtue, and are perfectly
willing to allow to all of them their full worth. They are also aware
that a right action does not necessarily indicate a virtuous character,
and that actions which are blameable often proceed from qualities
entitled to praise. When this is apparent in any particular case, it
modifies their estimation, not certainly of the act, but of the agent. I
grant that they are, notwithstanding, of opinion, that in the long run
the best proof of a good character is good actions; and resolutely
refuse to consider any mental disposition as good, of which the
predominant tendency is to produce bad conduct. This makes them
unpopular with many people; but it is an unpopularity which they must
share with every one who regards the distinction between right and wrong
in a serious light; and the reproach is not one which a conscientious
utilitarian need be anxious to repel.

If no more be meant by the objection than that many utilitarians look on
the morality of actions, as measured by the utilitarian standard, with
too exclusive a regard, and do not lay sufficient stress upon the other
beauties of character which go towards making a human being loveable or
admirable, this may be admitted. Utilitarians who have cultivated their
moral feelings, but not their sympathies nor their artistic perceptions,
do fall into this mistake; and so do all other moralists under the same
conditions. What can be said in excuse for other moralists is equally
available for them, namely, that if there is to be any error, it is
better that it should be on that side. As a matter of fact, we may
affirm that among utilitarians as among adherents of other systems,
there is every imaginable degree of rigidity and of laxity in the
application of their standard: some are even puritanically rigorous,
while Edition: current; Page: [222] others are as indulgent as can
possibly be desired by sinner or by sentimentalist. But on the whole, a
doctrine which brings prominently forward the interest that mankind have
in the repression and prevention of conduct which violates the moral
law, is likely to be inferior to no other in turning the sanctions of
opinion against such violations. It is true, the question, What does
violate the moral law? is one on which those who recognise different
standards of morality are likely now and then to differ. But difference
of opinion on moral questions was not first introduced into the world by
utilitarianism, while that doctrine does supply, if not always an easy,
at all events a tangible and intelligible mode of deciding such
differences.

It may not be superfluous to notice a few more of the common
misapprehensions of utilitarian ethics, even those which are so obvious
and gross that it might appear impossible for any person of candour and
intelligence to fall into them: since persons, even of considerable
mental endowments, often give themselves so little trouble to understand
the bearings of any opinion against which they entertain a prejudice,
and men are in general so little conscious of this voluntary ignorance
as a defect, that the vulgarest misunderstandings of ethical doctrines
are continually met with in the deliberate writings of persons of the
greatest pretensions both to high principle and to philosophy. We not
uncommonly hear the doctrine of utility inveighed against as a godless
doctrine. If it be necessary to say anything at all against so mere an
assumption, we may say that the question depends upon what idea we have
formed of the moral character of the Deity. If it be a true belief that
God desires, above all things, the happiness of his creatures, and that
this was his purpose in their creation, utility is not only not a
godless doctrine, but more profoundly religious than any other. If it be
meant that utilitarianism does not recognise the revealed will of God as
the supreme law of morals, I answer, that an utilitarian who believes in
the perfect goodness and wisdom of God, necessarily believes that
whatever God has thought fit to reveal on the subject of morals, must
fulfil the requirements of utility in a supreme degree. But others
besides utilitarians have been of opinion that the Christian revelation
was intended, and is fitted, to inform the hearts and minds of mankind
with a spirit which should enable them to find for themselves what is
right, and incline them to do it when found, rather than to tell them,
except in a very general way, what it is: and that we need a doctrine of
ethics, carefully followed out, to interpret to us the will of God.
Whether this opinion is correct or not, it is superfluous here to
discuss; since whatever aid religion, either natural or revealed, can
afford to ethical investigation, is as open to the utilitarian moralist
as to any other. He can use it as the testimony of God to the usefulness
or hurtfulness of any given course of action, Edition: current; Page:
[223] by as good a right as others can use it for the indication of a
transcendental law, having no connexion with usefulness or with
happiness.

Again, Utility is often summarily stigmatized as an immoral doctrine by
giving it the name of Expediency, and taking advantage of the popular
use of that term to contrast it with Principle. But the Expedient, in
the sense in which it is opposed to the Right, generally means that
which is expedient for the particular interest of the agent himself; as
when a minister sacrifices the iinteresti of his country to keep himself
in place. When it means anything better than this, it means that which
is expedient for some immediate object, some temporary purpose, but
which violates a rule whose observance is expedient in a much higher
degree. The Expedient, in this sense, instead of being the same thing
with the useful, is a branch of the hurtful. Thus, it would often be
expedient, for the purpose of getting over some momentary embarrassment,
or attaining some object immediately useful to ourselves or others, to
tell a lie. But inasmuch as the cultivation in ourselves of a sensitive
feeling on the subject of veracity, is one of the most useful, and the
enfeeblement of that feeling one of the most hurtful, things to which
our conduct can be instrumental; and inasmuch as any, even
unintentional, deviation from truth, does that much towards weakening
the trustworthiness of human assertion, which is not only the principal
support of all present social well-being, but the insufficiency of which
does more than any one thing that can be named to keep back
civilization, virtue, everything on which human happiness on the largest
scale depends; we feel that the violation, for a present advantage, of a
rule of such transcendant expediency, is not expedient, and that he who,
for the sake of a convenience to himself or to some other individual,
does what depends on him to deprive mankind of the good, and inflict
upon them the evil, involved in the greater or less reliance which they
can place in each other’s word, acts the part of one of their worst
enemies. Yet that even this rule, sacred as it is, admits of possible
exceptions, is acknowledged by all moralists; the chief of which is when
the withholding of some fact (as of information from a malefactor, or of
bad news from a person dangerously ill) would jpreserve some onej
(especially ka personk other than oneself) from great and unmerited
evil, and when the withholding can only be effected by denial. But in
order that the exception may not extend itself beyond the need, and may
have the least possible effect in weakening reliance on veracity, it
ought to be recognised, and, if possible, its limits defined; and if the
principle of utility is good for anything, it must be good for weighing
these conflicting utilities against one another, and marking out the
region within which one or the other preponderates.

Edition: current; Page: [224]
Again, defenders of utility often find themselves called upon to reply
to such objections as this—that there is not time, previous to action,
for calculating and weighing the effects of any line of conduct on the
general happiness. This is exactly as if any one were to say that it is
impossible to guide our conduct by Christianity, because there is not
time, on every occasion on which anything has to be done, to read
through the Old and New Testaments. The answer to the objection is, that
there has been ample time, namely, the whole past duration of the human
species. During all that time mankind have been learning by experience
the tendencies of actions; on which experience all the prudence, as well
as all the morality of life, lisl dependent. People talk as if the
commencement of this course of experience had hitherto been put off, and
as if, at the moment when some man feels tempted to meddle with the
property or life of another, he had to begin considering for the first
time whether murder mandm theft are injurious to human happiness. Even
then I do not think that he would find the question very puzzling; but,
at all events, the matter is now done to his hand. It is truly a
whimsical supposition that if mankind were agreed in considering utility
to be the test of morality, they would remain without any agreement as
to what is useful, and would take no measures for having their notions
on the subject taught to the young, and enforced by law and opinion.
There is no difficulty in proving any ethical standard whatever to work
ill, if we suppose universal idiocy to be conjoined with it; but on any
hypothesis short of that, mankind must by this time have acquired
positive beliefs as to the effects of some actions on their happiness;
and nthen beliefs which have thus come down are the rules of morality
for the multitude, and for the philosopher until he has succeeded in
finding better. That philosophers might easily do this, even now, on
many subjects; that the received code of ethics is by no means of divine
right; and that mankind have still much to learn as to the effects of
actions on the general happiness, I admit, or rather, earnestly
maintain. The corollaries from the principle of utility, like the
precepts of every practical art, admit of indefinite improvement, and,
in a progressive state of the human mind, their improvement is
perpetually going on. But to consider the rules of morality as
improvable, is one thing; to pass over the intermediate generalizations
entirely, and endeavour to test each individual action directly by the
first principle, is another. It is a strange notion that the
acknowledgment of a first principle is inconsistent with the admission
of secondary ones. To inform a traveller respecting the place of his
ultimate destination, is not to forbid the use of landmarks and
direction-posts on the way. The proposition that happiness is the end
and aim of morality, does not mean that no road ought to be laid down to
that goal, or that persons going thither should not be advised to
Edition: current; Page: [225] take one direction rather than another.
Men really ought to leave off talking a kind of nonsense on this
subject, which they would neither talk nor listen to on other matters of
practical concernment. Nobody argues that the art of navigation is not
founded on astronomy, because sailors cannot wait to calculate the
Nautical Almanack. Being rational creatures, they go to sea with it
ready calculated; and all rational creatures go out upon the sea of life
with their minds made up on the common questions of right and wrong, as
well as on many of the far more difficult questions of wise and foolish.
And this, as long as foresight is a human quality, it is to be presumed
they will continue to do. Whatever we adopt as the fundamental principle
of morality, we require subordinate principles to apply it by: the
impossibility of doing without them, being common to all systems, can
afford no argument against any one in particular: but gravely to argue
as if no such secondary principles could be had, and as if mankind had
remained till now, and always must remain, without drawing any general
conclusions from the experience of human life, is as high a pitch, I
think, as absurdity has ever reached in philosophical controversy.

The remainder of the stock arguments against utilitarianism mostly
consist in laying to its charge the common infirmities of human nature,
and the general difficulties which embarrass conscientious persons in
shaping their course through life. We are told than an utilitarian will
be apt to make his own particular case an exception to moral rules, and,
when under temptation, will see an utility in the breach of a rule,
greater than he will see in its observance. But is utility the only
creed which is able to furnish us with excuses for evil doing, and means
of cheating our own conscience? They are afforded in abundance by all
doctrines which recognise as a fact in morals the existence of
conflicting considerations; which all doctrines do, that have been
believed by sane persons. It is not the fault of any creed, but of the
complicated nature of human affairs, that rules of conduct cannot be so
framed as to require no exceptions, and that hardly any kind of action
can safely be laid down as either always obligatory or always
condemnable. There is no ethical creed which does not temper the
rigidity of its laws, by giving a certain latitude, under the moral
responsibility of the agent, for accommodation to peculiarities of
circumstances; and under every creed, at the opening thus made,
self-deception and dishonest casuistry get in. There exists no moral
system under which there do not arise unequivocal cases of conflicting
obligation. These are the real difficulties, the knotty points both in
the theory of ethics, and in the conscientious guidance of personal
conduct. They are overcome practically with greater or with less success
according to the intellect and virtue of the individual; but it can
hardly be pretended that any one will be the less qualified for dealing
with them, from possessing an ultimate standard to which conflicting
rights and duties can be referred. Edition: current; Page: [226] If
utility is the ultimate source of moral obligations, utility may be
invoked to decide between them when their demands are incompatible.
Though the application of the standard may be difficult, it is better
than none at all: while in other systems, the moral laws all claiming
independent authority, there is no common umpire entitled to interfere
between them; their claims to precedence one over another rest on little
better than sophistry, and unless determined, as they generally are, by
the unacknowledged influence of considerations of utility, afford a free
scope for the action of personal desires and partialities. We must
remember that only in these cases of conflict between secondary
principles is it requisite that first principles should be appealed to.
There is no case of moral obligation in which some secondary principle
is not involved; and if only one, there can seldom be any real doubt
which one it is, in the mind of any person by whom the principle itself
is recognised.

Edition: current; Page: [227]


CHAPTER III: Of the Ultimate Sanction of the Principle of Utility

the question is often asked, and properly so, in regard to any supposed
moral standard—What is its sanction? what are the motives to obey it? or
more specifically, what is the source of its obligation? whence does it
derive its binding force? It is a necessary part of moral philosophy to
provide the answer to this question; which, though frequently assuming
the shape of an objection to the utilitarian morality, as if it had some
special applicability to that above others, really arises in regard to
all standards. It arises, in fact, whenever a person is called on to
adopt a standard, or refer morality to any basis on which he has not
been accustomed to rest it. For the customary morality, that which
education and opinion have consecrated, is the only one which presents
itself to the mind with the feeling of being in itself obligatory; and
when a person is asked to believe that this morality derives its
obligation from some general principle round which custom has not thrown
the same halo, the assertion is to him a paradox; the supposed
corollaries seem to have a more binding force than the original theorem;
the superstructure seems to stand better without, than with, what is
represented as its foundation. He says to himself, I feel that I am
bound not to rob or murder, betray or deceive; but why am I bound to
promote the general happiness? If my own happiness lies in something
else, why may I not give that the preference?

If the view adopted by the utilitarian philosophy of the nature of the
moral sense be correct, this difficulty will always present itself,
until the influences which form moral character have taken the same hold
of the principle which they have taken of some of the
consequences—until, by the improvement of education, the feeling of
unity with our fellow creatures shall be (what it cannot be odoubtedo
that Christ intended it to be) as deeply rooted in our character, and to
our own consciousness as completely a part of our nature, as the horror
of crime is in an ordinarily well-brought up young person. In the mean
time, however, the difficulty has no peculiar application to the
doctrine of utility, but is inherent in every attempt to analyse
morality and reduce Edition: current; Page: [228] it to principles;
which, unless the principle is already in men’s minds invested with as
much sacredness as any of its applications, always seems to divest them
of a part of their sanctity.

The principle of utility either has, or there is no reason why it might
not have, all the sanctions which belong to any other system of morals.
Those sanctions are either external or internal. Of the external
sanctions it is not necessary to speak at any length. They are, the hope
of favour and the fear of displeasure from our fellow creatures or from
the Ruler of the Universe, along with whatever we may have of sympathy
or affection for them, or of love and awe of Him, inclining us to do his
will independently of selfish consequences. There is evidently no reason
why all these motives for observance should not attach themselves to the
utilitarian morality, as completely and as powerfully as to any other.
Indeed, those of them which refer to our fellow creatures are sure to do
so, in proportion to the amount of general intelligence; for whether
there be any other ground of moral obligation than the general happiness
or not, men do desire happiness; and however imperfect may be their own
practice, they desire and commend all conduct in others towards
themselves, by which they think their happiness is promoted. With regard
to the religious motive, if men believe, as most profess to do, in the
goodness of God, those who think that conduciveness to the general
happiness is the essence, or even only the criterion, of good, must
necessarily believe that it is also that which God approves. The whole
force therefore of external reward and punishment, whether physical or
moral, and whether proceeding from God or from our fellow men, together
with all that the capacities of human nature admit, of disinterested
devotion to either, become available to enforce the utilitarian
morality, in proportion as that morality is recognised; and the more
powerfully, the more the appliances of education and general cultivation
are bent to the purpose.

So far as to external sanctions. The internal sanction of duty, whatever
our standard of duty may be, is one and the same—a feeling in our own
mind; a pain, more or less intense, attendant on violation of duty,
which in properly-cultivated moral natures rises, in the more serious
cases, into shrinking from it as an impossibility. This feeling, when
disinterested, and connecting itself with the pure idea of duty, and not
with some particular form of it, or with any of the merely accessory
circumstances, is the essence of Conscience; though in that complex
phenomenon as it actually exists, the simple fact is in general all
encrusted over with collateral associations, derived from sympathy, from
love, and still more from fear; from all the forms of religious feeling;
from the recollections of childhood and of all our past life; from
self-esteem, desire of the esteem of others, and occasionally even
self-abasement. This extreme complication is, I apprehend, the origin of
the sort of mystical character which, by a tendency of the human mind of
which there are Edition: current; Page: [229] many other examples, is
apt to be attributed to the idea of moral obligation, and which leads
people to believe that the idea cannot possibly attach itself to any
other objects than those which, by a supposed mysterious law, are found
in our present experience to excite it. Its binding force, however,
consists in the existence of a mass of feeling which must be broken
through in order to do what violates our standard of right, and which,
if we do nevertheless violate that standard, will probably have to be
encountered afterwards in the form of remorse. Whatever theory we have
of the nature or origin of conscience, this is what essentially
constitutes it.

The ultimate sanction, therefore, of all morality (external motives
apart) being a subjective feeling in our own minds, I see nothing
embarrassing to those whose standard is utility, in the question, what
is the sanction of that particular standard? We may answer, the same as
of all other moral standards—the conscientious feelings of mankind.
Undoubtedly this sanction has no binding efficacy on those who do not
possess the feelings it appeals to; but neither will these persons be
more obedient to any other moral principle than to the utilitarian one.
On them morality of any kind has no hold but through the external
sanctions. Meanwhile the feelings exist, a fact in human nature, the
reality of which, and the great power with which they are capable of
acting on those in whom they have been duly cultivated, are proved by
experience. No reason has ever been shown why they may not be cultivated
to as great intensity in connexion with the utilitarian, as with any
other rule of morals.

There is, I am aware, a disposition to believe that a person who sees in
moral obligation a transcendental fact, an objective reality belonging
to the province of “Things in themselves,” is likely to be more obedient
to it than one who believes it to be entirely subjective, having its
seat in human consciousness only. But whatever a person’s opinion may be
on this point of Ontology, the force he is really urged by is his own
subjective feeling, and is exactly measured by its strength. No one’s
belief that Duty is an objective reality is stronger than the belief
that God is so; yet the belief in God, apart from the expectation of
actual reward and punishment, only operates on conduct through, and in
proportion to, the subjective religious feeling. The sanction, so far as
it is disinterested, is always in the mind itself; and the notion
therefore of the transcendental moralists must be, that this sanction
will not exist in the mind unless it is believed to have its root out of
the mind; and that if a person is able to say to himself, This which is
restraining me, and which is called my conscience, is only a feeling in
my own mind, he may possibly draw the conclusion that when the feeling
ceases the obligation ceases, and that if he find the feeling
inconvenient, he may disregard it, and endeavour to get rid of it. But
is this danger confined to the utilitarian morality? Does the belief
that moral obligation has its seat outside the mind Edition: current;
Page: [230] make the feeling of it too strong to be got rid of? The fact
is so far otherwise, that all moralists admit and lament the ease with
which, in the generality of minds, conscience can be silenced or
stifled. The question, Need I obey my conscience? is quite as often put
to themselves by persons who never heard of the principle of utility, as
by its adherents. Those whose conscientious feelings are so weak as to
allow of their asking this question, if they answer it affirmatively,
will not do so because they believe in the transcendental theory, but
because of the external sanctions.

It is not necessary, for the present purpose, to decide whether the
feeling of duty is innate or implanted. Assuming it to be innate, it is
an open question to what objects it naturally attaches itself; for the
philosophic supporters of that theory are now agreed that the intuitive
perception is of principles of morality, and not of the details. If
there be anything innate in the matter, I see no reason why the feeling
which is innate should not be that of regard to the pleasures and pains
of others. If there is any principle of morals which is intuitively
obligatory, I should say it must be that. If so, the intuitive ethics
would coincide with the utilitarian, and there would be no further
quarrel between them. Even as it is, the intuitive moralists, though
they believe that there are other intuitive moral obligations, do
already believe this to be one; for they unanimously hold that a large
portion of morality turns upon the consideration due to the interests of
our fellow creatures. Therefore, if the belief in the transcendental
origin of moral obligation gives any additional efficacy to the internal
sanction, it appears to me that the utilitarian principle has already
the benefit of it.

On the other hand, if, as is my own belief, the moral feelings are not
innate, but acquired, they are not for that reason the less natural. It
is natural to man to speak, to reason, to build cities, to cultivate the
ground, though these are acquired faculties. The moral feelings are not
indeed a part of our nature, in the sense of being in any perceptible
degree present in all of us; but this, unhappily, is a fact admitted by
those who believe the most strenuously in their transcendental origin.
Like the other acquired capacities above referred to, the moral faculty,
if not a part of our nature, is a natural outgrowth from it; capable,
like them, in a certain small degree, of springing up spontaneously; and
susceptible of being brought by cultivation to a high degree of
development. Unhappily it is also susceptible, by a sufficient use of
the external sanctions and of the force of early impressions, of being
cultivated in almost any direction: so that there is hardly anything so
absurd or so mischievous that it may not, by means of these influences,
be made to act on the human mind with all the authority of conscience.
To doubt that the same potency might be given by the same means to the
principle of utility, even if it had no foundation in human nature,
would be flying in the face of all experience.

But moral associations which are wholly of artificial creation, when
intellectual culture goes on, yield by degrees to the dissolving force
of analysis: Edition: current; Page: [231] and if the feeling of duty,
when associated with utility, would appear equally arbitrary; if there
were no leading department of our nature, no powerful class of
sentiments, with which that association would harmonize, which would
make us feel it congenial, and incline us not only to foster it in
others (for which we have abundant interested motives), but also to
cherish it in ourselves; if there were not, in short, a natural basis of
sentiment for utilitarian morality, it might well happen that this
association also, even after it had been implanted by education, might
be analysed away.

But there is this basis of powerful natural sentiment; and this it is
which, when once the general happiness is recognised as the ethical
standard, will constitute the strength of the utilitarian morality. This
firm foundation is that of the social feelings of mankind; the desire to
be in unity with our fellow creatures, which is already a powerful
principle in human nature, and happily one of those which tend to become
stronger, even without express inculcation, from the influences of
advancing civilization. The social state is at once so natural, so
necessary, and so habitual to man, that, except in some unusual
circumstances or by an effort of voluntary abstraction, he never
conceives himself otherwise than as a member of a body; and this
association is riveted more and more, as mankind are further removed
from the state of savage independence. Any condition, therefore, which
is essential to a state of society, becomes more and more an inseparable
part of every person’s conception of the state of things which he is
born into, and which is the destiny of a human being. Now, society
between human beings, except in the relation of master and slave, is
manifestly impossible on any other footing than that the interests of
all are to be consulted. Society between equals can only exist on the
understanding that the interests of all are to be regarded equally. And
since in all states of civilization, every person, except an absolute
monarch, has equals, every one is obliged to live on these terms with
somebody; and in every age some advance is made towards a state in which
it will be impossible to live permanently on other terms with anybody.
In this way people grow up unable to conceive as possible to them a
state of total disregard of other people’s interests. They are under a
necessity of conceiving themselves as at least abstaining from all the
grosser injuries, and (if only for their own protection) living in a
state of constant protest against them. They are also familiar with the
fact of co-operating with others, and proposing to themselves a
collective, not an individual, interest, as the aim (at least for the
time being) of their actions. So long as they are co-operating, their
ends are identified with those of others; there is at least a temporary
feeling that the interests of others are their own interests. Not only
does all strengthening of social ties, and all healthy growth of
society, give to each individual a stronger personal interest in
practically consulting the welfare of others; it also leads him to
identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at least with an
ever greater degree of practical consideration for it. Edition: current;
Page: [232] He comes, as though instinctively, to be conscious of
himself as a being who of course pays regard to others. The good of
others becomes to him a thing naturally and necessarily to be attended
to, like any of the physical conditions of our existence. Now, whatever
amount of this feeling a person has, he is urged by the strongest
motives both of interest and of sympathy to demonstrate it, and to the
utmost of his power encourage it in others; and even if he has none of
it himself, he is as greatly interested as any one else that others
should have it. Consequently, the smallest germs of the feeling are laid
hold of and nourished by the contagion of sympathy and the influences of
education; and a complete web of corroborative association is woven
round it, by the powerful agency of the external sanctions. This mode of
conceiving ourselves and human life, as civilization goes on, is felt to
be more and more natural. Every step in political improvement renders it
more so, by removing the sources of opposition of interest, and
levelling those inequalities of legal privilege between individuals or
classes, owing to which there are large portions of mankind whose
happiness it is still practicable to disregard. In an improving state of
the human mind, the influences are constantly on the increase, which
tend to generate in each individual a feeling of unity with all the
rest; which pfeelingp, if perfect, would make him never think of, or
desire, any beneficial condition for himself, in the benefits of which
they are not included. If we now suppose this feeling of unity to be
taught as a religion, and the whole force of education, of institutions,
and of opinion, directed, as it once was in the case of religion, to
make every person grow up from infancy surrounded on all sides both by
the profession and qbyq the practice of it, I think that no one, who can
realize this conception, will feel any misgiving about the sufficiency
of the ultimate sanction for the Happiness morality. To any ethical
student who finds the realization difficult, I recommend, as a means of
facilitating it, the second of M. Comte’s two principal works, the
rSystêmer de Politique Positive.[*] I entertain the strongest objections
to the system of politics and morals set forth in that treatise; but I
think it has superabundantly shown the possibility of giving to the
service of humanity, even without the aid of belief in a Providence,
both the spsychicals power and the social efficacy of a religion; making
it take hold of human life, and colour all thought, feeling, and action,
in a manner of which the greatest ascendancy ever exercised by any
religion may be but a type and foretaste; and of which the danger is,
not that it should be insufficient, but that it should be so excessive
as to interfere unduly with human freedom and individuality.

Edition: current; Page: [233]
Neither is it necessary to the feeling which constitutes the binding
force of the utilitarian morality on those who recognise it, to wait for
those social influences which would make its obligation felt by mankind
at large. In the comparatively early state of human advancement in which
we now live, a person cannot indeed feel that entireness of sympathy
with all others, which would make any real discordance in the general
direction of their conduct in life impossible; but already a person in
whom the social feeling is at all developed, cannot bring himself to
think of the rest of his fellow creatures as struggling rivals with him
for the means of happiness, whom he must desire to see defeated in their
object in order that he may succeed in his. The deeply-rooted conception
which every individual even now has of himself as a social being, tends
to make him feel it one of his natural wants that there should be
harmony between his feelings and aims and those of his fellow creatures.
If differences of opinion and of mental culture make it impossible for
him to share many of their actual feelings—perhaps make him denounce and
defy those feelings—he still needs to be conscious that his real aim and
theirs do not conflict; that he is not opposing himself to what they
really wish for, namely, their own good, but is, on the contrary,
promoting it. This feeling in most individuals is much inferior in
strength to their selfish feelings, and is often wanting altogether. But
to those who have it, it possesses all the characters of a natural
feeling. It does not present itself to their minds as a superstition of
education, or a law despotically imposed by the power of society, but as
an attribute which it would not be well for them to be without. This
conviction is the ultimate sanction of the greatest-happiness morality.
This it is which makes any mind, of well-developed feelings, work with,
and not against, the outward motives to care for others, afforded by
what I have called the external sanctions; and when those sanctions are
wanting, or act in an opposite direction, constitutes in itself a
powerful internal binding force, in proportion to the sensitiveness and
thoughtfulness of the character; since few but those whose mind is a
moral blank, could bear to lay out their course of life on the plan of
paying no regard to others except so far as their own private interest
compels.

Edition: current; Page: [234]


CHAPTER IV: Of What Sort of Proof the Principle of Utility Is Susceptible

it has already been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do not
admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. To be incapable
of proof by reasoning is common to all first principles; to the first
premises of our knowledge, as well as to those of our conduct. But the
former, being matters of fact, may be the subject of a direct appeal to
the faculties which judge of fact—namely, our senses, and our internal
consciousness. Can an appeal be made to the same faculties on questions
of practical ends? Or by what other faculty is cognizance taken of them?

Questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are
desirable. The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and
the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only
desirable as means to that end. What ought to be required of this
doctrine—what conditions is it requisite that the doctrine should
fulfil—to make good its claim to be believed?

The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that
people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that
people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like
manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that
anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end
which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory
and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince
any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general
happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes
it to be attainable, desires his own happiness. This, however, being a
fact, we have not only all the proof which the case admits of, but all
which it is possible to require, that happiness is a good: that each
person’s happiness is a good to that person, and the general happiness,
therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons. Happiness has made
out its title as one of the ends of conduct, and consequently one of the
criteria of morality.

But it has not, by this alone, proved itself to be the sole criterion.
To do that, it would seem, by the same rule, necessary to show, not only
that people desire happiness, but that they never desire anything else.
Now it is palpable Edition: current; Page: [235] that they do desire
things which, in common language, are decidedly distinguished from
happiness. They desire, for example, virtue, and the absence of vice, no
less really than pleasure and the absence of pain. The desire of virtue
is not as universal, but it is as authentic a fact, as the desire of
happiness. And hence the opponents of the utilitarian standard deem that
they have a right to infer that there are other ends of human action
besides happiness, and that happiness is not the standard of approbation
and disapprobation.

But does the utilitarian doctrine deny that people desire virtue, or
maintain that virtue is not a thing to be desired? The very reverse. It
maintains not only that virtue is to be desired, but that it is to be
desired disinterestedly, for itself. Whatever may be the opinion of
utilitarian moralists as to the original conditions by which virtue is
made virtue; however they may believe (as they do) that actions and
dispositions are only virtuous because they promote another end than
virtue; yet this being granted, and it having been decided, from
considerations of this description, what is virtuous, they not only
place virtue at the very head of the things which are good as means to
the ultimate end, but they also recognise as a psychological fact the
possibility of its being, to the individual, a good in itself, without
looking to any end beyond it; and hold, that the mind is not in a right
state, not in a state conformable to Utility, not in the state most
conducive to the general happiness, unless it does love virtue in this
manner—as a thing desirable in itself, even although, in the individual
instance, it should not produce those other desirable consequences which
it tends to produce, and on account of which it is held to be virtue.
This opinion is not, in the smallest degree, a departure from the
Happiness principle. The ingredients of happiness are very various, and
each of them is desirable in itself, and not merely when considered as
swelling an aggregate. The principle of utility does not mean that any
given pleasure, as music, for instance, or any given exemption from
pain, as for example health, are to be looked upon as means to a
collective something termed happiness, and to be desired on that
account. They are desired and desirable in and for themselves; besides
being means, they are a part of the end. Virtue, according to the
utilitarian doctrine, is not naturally and originally part of the end,
but it is capable of becoming so; and in those who love it
disinterestedly it has become so, and is desired and cherished, not as a
means to happiness, but as a part of their happiness.

To illustrate this farther, we may remember that virtue is not the only
thing, originally a means, and which if it were not a means to anything
else, would be and remain indifferent, but which by association with
what it is a means to, comes to be desired for itself, and that too with
the utmost intensity. What, for example, shall we say of the love of
money? There is nothing originally more desirable about money than about
any heap of glittering Edition: current; Page: [236] pebbles. Its worth
is solely that of the things which it will buy; the desires for other
things than itself, which it is a means of gratifying. Yet the love of
money is not only one of the strongest moving forces of human life, but
money is, in many cases, desired in and for itself; the desire to
possess it is often stronger than the desire to use it, and goes on
increasing when all the desires which point to ends beyond it,t to be
compassed by it, are falling off. It umay be thenu said truly, that
money is desired not for the sake of an end, but as part of the end.
From being a means to happiness, it has come to be itself a principal
ingredient of the individual’s conception of happiness. The same may be
said of the majority of the great objects of human life—power, for
example, or vfamev; except that to each of these there is a certain
amount of immediate pleasure annexed, which has at least the semblance
of being naturally inherent in them; a thing which cannot be said of
money. Still, however, the strongest natural attraction, both of power
and of wfamew, is the immense aid they give to the attainment of our
other wishes; and it is the strong association thus generated between
them and all our objects of desire, which gives to the direct desire of
them the intensity it often assumes, so as in some characters to surpass
in strength all other desires. In these cases the means have become a
part of the end, and a more important part of it than any of the things
which they are means to. What was once desired as an instrument for the
attainment of happiness, has come to be desired for its own sake. In
being desired for its own sake it is, however, desired as part of
happiness. The person is made, or thinks he would be made, happy by its
mere possession; and is made unhappy by failure to obtain it. The desire
of it is not a different thing from the desire of happiness, any more
than the love of music, or the desire of health. They are included in
happiness. They are some of the elements of which the desire of
happiness is made up. Happiness is not an abstract idea, but a concrete
whole; and these are some of its parts. And the utilitarian standard
sanctions and approves their being so. Life would be a poor thing, very
ill provided with sources of happiness, if there were not this provision
of nature, by which things originally indifferent, but conducive to, or
otherwise associated with, the satisfaction of our primitive desires,
become in themselves sources of pleasure more valuable than the
primitive pleasures, both in permanency, in the space of human existence
that they are capable of covering, and even in intensity.

Virtue, according to the utilitarian conception, is a good of this
description. There was no original desire of it, or motive to it, save
its conduciveness to pleasure, and especially to protection from pain.
But through the association thus formed, it may be felt a good in
itself, and desired as such with as great intensity as any other good;
and with this difference between it and the Edition: current; Page:
[237] love of money, of power, or of xfamex, that all of these may, and
often do, render the individual noxious to the other members of the
society to which he belongs, whereas there is nothing which makes him so
much a blessing to them as the cultivation of the disinterested love of
virtue. And consequently, the utilitarian standard, while it tolerates
and approves those other acquired desires, up to the point beyond which
they would be more injurious to the general happiness than promotive of
it, enjoins and requires the cultivation of the love of virtue up to the
greatest strength possible, as being above all things important to the
general happiness.

It results from the preceding considerations, that there is in reality
nothing desired except happiness. Whatever is desired otherwise than as
a means to some end beyond itself, and ultimately to happiness, is
desired as itself a part of happiness, and is not desired for itself
until it has become so. Those who desire virtue for its own sake, desire
it either because the consciousness of it is a pleasure, or because the
consciousness of being without it is a pain, or for both reasons united;
as in truth the pleasure and pain seldom exist separately, but almost
always together, the same person feeling pleasure in the degree of
virtue attained, and pain in not having attained more. If one of these
ygavey him no pleasure, and the other no pain, he would not love or
desire virtue, or would desire it only for the other benefits which it
might produce to himself or to persons whom he cared for.

We have now, then, an answer to the question, of what sort of proof the
principle of utility is susceptible. If the opinion which I have now
stated is psychologically true—if human nature is so constituted as to
desire nothing which is not either a part of happiness or a means of
happiness, we can have no other proof, and we require no other, that
these are the only things desirable. If so, happiness is the sole end of
human action, and the promotion of it the test by which to judge of all
human conduct; from whence it necessarily follows that it must be the
criterion of morality, since a part is included in the whole.

And now to decide whether this is really so; whether mankind do desire
nothing for itself but that which is a pleasure to them, or of which the
absence is a pain; we have evidently arrived at a question of fact and
experience, dependent, like all similar questions, upon evidence. It can
only be determined by practised self-consciousness and self-observation,
assisted by observation of others. I believe that these sources of
evidence, impartially consulted, will declare that desiring a thing and
finding it pleasant, aversion to it and thinking of it as painful, are
phenomena entirely inseparable, or rather two parts of the same
phenomenon; in strictness of language, two different modes of naming the
same psychological fact: that to think of an object as desirable (unless
for the sake of its consequences), and to think of it as Edition:
current; Page: [238] pleasant, are one and the same thing; and that to
desire anything, except in proportion as the idea of it is pleasant, is
a physical and metaphysical impossibility.

So obvious does this appear to me, that I expect it will hardly be
disputed: and the objection made will be, not that desire can possibly
be directed to anything ultimately except pleasure and exemption from
pain, but that the will is a different thing from desire; that a person
of confirmed virtue, or any other person whose purposes are fixed,
carries out his purposes without any thought of the pleasure he has in
contemplating them, or expects to derive from their fulfilment; and
persists in acting on them, even though these pleasures are much
diminished, by changes in his character or decay of his passive
sensibilities, or are outweighed by the pains which the pursuit of the
purposes may bring upon him. All this I fully admit, and have stated it
elsewhere,[*] as positively and emphatically as any one. Will, the
active phenomenon, is a different thing from desire, the state of
passive sensibility, and though originally an offshoot from it, may in
time take root and detach itself from the parent stock; so much so, that
in the case of an habitual purpose, instead of willing the thing because
we desire it, we often desire it only because we will it. This, however,
is but an instance of that familiar fact, the power of habit, and is
nowise confined to the case of virtuous actions. Many indifferent
things, which men originally did from a motive of some sort, they
continue to do from habit. Sometimes this is done unconsciously, the
consciousness coming only after the action: at other times with
conscious volition, but volition which has became habitual, and is put
zintoz operation by the force of habit, in opposition perhaps to the
deliberate preference, as often happens with those who have contracted
habits of vicious or hurtful indulgence. Third and last comes the case
in which the habitual act of will in the individual instance is not in
contradiction to the general intention prevailing at other times, but in
fulfilment of it; as in the case of the person of confirmed virtue, and
of all who pursue deliberately and consistently any determinate end. The
distinction between will and desire thus understood, is an authentic and
highly important psychological fact; but the fact consists solely in
this—that will, like all other parts of our constitution, is amenable to
habit, and that we may will from habit what we no longer desire for
itself, or desire only because we will it. It is not the less true that
will, in the beginning, is entirely produced by desire; including in
that term the repelling influence of pain as well as the attractive one
of pleasure. Let us take into consideration, no longer the person who
has a confirmed will to do right, but him in whom that virtuous will is
still feeble, conquerable by temptation, and not to be Edition: current;
Page: [239] fully relied on; by what means can it be strengthened? How
can the will to be virtuous, where it does not exist in sufficient
force, be implanted or awakened? Only by making the person desire
virtue—by making him think of it in a pleasurable light, or of its
absence in a painful one. It is by associating the doing right with
pleasure, or the doing wrong with pain, or by eliciting and impressing
and bringing home to the person’s experience the pleasure naturally
involved in the one or the pain in the other, that it is possible to
call forth that will to be virtuous, which, when confirmed, acts without
any thought of either pleasure or pain. Will is the child of desire, and
passes out of the dominion of its parent only to come under that of
habit. That which is the result of habit affords no presumption of being
intrinsically good; and there would be no reason for wishing that the
purpose of virtue should become independent of pleasure and pain, were
it not that the influence of the pleasurable and painful associations
which prompt to virtue is not sufficiently to be depended on for
unerring constancy of action until it has acquired the support of habit.
Both in feeling and in conduct, habit is the only thing which imparts
certainty; and it is because of the importance to others of being able
to rely absolutely on one’s feelings and conduct, and to oneself of
being able to rely on one’s own, that the will to do right ought to be
cultivated into this habitual independence. In other words, this state
of the will is a means to good, not intrinsically a good; and does not
contradict the doctrine that nothing is a good to human beings but in so
far as it is either itself pleasurable, or a means of attaining pleasure
or averting pain.

But if this doctrine be true, the principle of utility is proved.
Whether it is so or not, must now be left to the consideration of the
thoughtful reader.

Edition: current; Page: [240]


CHAPTER V: On the Connexion between Justice and Utility

in all ages of speculation, one of the strongest obstacles to the
reception of the doctrine that Utility or Happiness is the criterion of
right and wrong, has been drawn from the idea of Justice. The powerful
sentiment, and apparently clear perception, which that word recals with
a rapidity and certainty resembling an instinct, have seemed to the
majority of thinkers to point to an inherent quality in things; to show
that the Just must have an existence in Nature as something
absolute—generically distinct from every variety of the Expedient, and,
in idea, opposed to it, though (as is commonly acknowledged) never, in
the long run, disjoined from it in fact.

In the case of this, as of our other moral sentiments, there is no
necessary connexion between the question of its origin, and that of its
binding force. That a feeling is bestowed on us by Nature, does not
necessarily legitimate all its promptings. The feeling of justice might
be a peculiar instinct, and might yet require, like our other instincts,
to be controlled and enlightened by a higher reason. If we have
intellectual instincts, leading us to judge in a particular way, as well
as animal instincts that prompt us to act in a particular way, there is
no necessity that the former should be more infallible in their sphere
than the latter in theirs: it may as well happen that wrong judgments
are occasionally suggested by those, as wrong actions by these. But
though it is one thing to believe that we have natural feelings of
justice, and another to acknowledge them as an ultimate criterion of
conduct, these two opinions are very closely connected in point of fact.
Mankind are always predisposed to believe that any subjective feeling,
not otherwise accounted for, is a revelation of some objective reality.
Our present object is to determine whether the reality, to which the
feeling of justice corresponds, is one which needs any such special
revelation; whether the justice or injustice of an action is a thing
intrinsically peculiar, and distinct from all its other qualities, or
only a combination of certain of those qualities, presented under a
peculiar aspect. For the purpose of this inquiry, it is practically
important to consider whether the feeling itself, of justice and
injustice, is sui generis like our sensations of colour and taste, or a
derivative feeling, formed by a combination Edition: current; Page:
[241] of others. And this it is the more essential to examine, as people
are in general willing enough to allow, that objectively the dictates of
justice coincide with a part of the field of General Expediency; but
inasmuch as the subjective mental feeling of Justice is different from
that which commonly attaches to simple expediency, and, except ina
extreme cases of the latter, is far more imperative in its demands,
people find it difficult to see, in Justice, only a particular kind or
branch of general utility, and think that its superior binding force
requires a totally different origin.

To throw light upon this question, it is necessary to attempt to
ascertain what is the distinguishing character of justice, or of
injustice: what is the quality, or whether there is any quality,
attributed in common to all modes of conduct designated as unjust (for
justice, like many other moral attributes, is best defined by its
opposite), and distinguishing them from such modes of conduct as are
disapproved, but without having that particular epithet of
disapprobation applied to them. If, in everything which men are
accustomed to characterize as just or unjust, some one common attribute
or collection of attributes is always present, we may judge whether this
particular attribute or combination of attributes would be capable of
gathering round it a sentiment of that peculiar character and intensity
by virtue of the general laws of our emotional constitution, or whether
the sentiment is inexplicable, and requires to be regarded as a special
provision of Nature. If we find the former to be the case, we shall, in
resolving this question, have resolved also the main problem: if the
latter, we shall have to seek for some other mode of investigating it.

To find the common attributes of a variety of objects, it is necessary
to begin by surveying the objects themselves in the concrete. Let us
therefore advert successively to the various modes of action, and
arrangements of human affairs, which are classed, by universal or widely
spread opinion, as Just or as Unjust. The things well known to excite
the sentiments associated with those names, are of a very multifarious
character. I shall pass them rapidly in review, without studying any
particular arrangement.

In the first place, it is mostly considered unjust to deprive any one of
his personal liberty, his property, or any other thing which belongs to
him by law. Here, therefore, is one instance of the application of the
terms just and unjust in a perfectly definite sense, namely, that it is
just to respect, unjust to violate, the legal rights of any one. But
this judgment admits of several exceptions, arising from the other forms
in which the notions of justice and injustice present themselves. For
example, the person who suffers the deprivation may (as the phrase is)
have forfeited the rights which he is so deprived of: Edition: current;
Page: [242] a case to which we shall return presently. But also,

Secondly; the legal rights of which he is deprived, may be rights which
ought not to have belonged to him; in other words, the law which confers
on him these rights, may be a bad law. When it is so, or when (which is
the same thing for our purpose) it is supposed to be so, opinions will
differ as to the justice or injustice of infringing it. Some maintain
that no law, however bad, ought to be disobeyed by an individual
citizen; that his opposition to it, if shown at all, should only be
shown in endeavouring to get it altered by competent authority. This
opinion (which condemns many of the most illustrious benefactors of
mankind, and would often protect pernicious institutions against the
only weapons which, in the state of things existing at the time, have
any chance of succeeding against them) is defended, by those who hold
it, on grounds of expediency; principally on that of the importance, to
the common interest of mankind, of maintaining inviolate the sentiment
of submission to law. Other persons, again, hold the directly contrary
opinion, that any law, judged to be bad, may blamelessly be disobeyed,
even though it be not judged to be unjust, but only inexpedient; while
others would confine the licence of disobedience to the case of unjust
laws: but again, some say, that all laws which are inexpedient are
unjust; since every law imposes some restriction on the natural liberty
of mankind, which restriction is an injustice, unless legitimated by
tending to their good. Among these diversities of opinion, it seems to
be universally admitted that there may be unjust laws, and that law,
consequently, is not the ultimate criterion of justice, but may give to
one person a benefit, or impose on another an evil, which justice
condemns. When, however, a law is thought to be unjust, it seems always
to be regarded as being so in the same way in which a breach of law is
unjust, namely, by infringing somebody’s right; which, as it cannot in
this case be a legal right, receives a different appellation, and is
called a moral right. We may say, therefore, that a second case of
injustice consists in taking or withholding from any person that to
which he has a moral right.

Thirdly, it is universally considered just that each person should
obtain that (whether good or evil) which he deserves; and unjust that he
should obtain a good, or be made to undergo an evil, which he does not
deserve. This is, perhaps, the clearest and most emphatic form in which
the idea of justice is conceived by the general mind. As it involves the
notion of desert, the question arises, what constitutes desert? Speaking
in a general way, a person is understood to deserve good if he does
right, evil if he does wrong; and in a more particular sense, to deserve
good from those to whom he does or has done good, and evil from those to
whom he does or has done evil. The precept of returning good for evil
has never been regarded as a case of the fulfilment of justice, but as
one in which the claims of justice are waved, in obedience to other
considerations.

Fourthly, it is confessedly unjust to break faith with any one: to
violate Edition: current; Page: [243] an engagement, either express or
implied, or disappoint expectations raised by our own conduct, at least
if we have raised those expectations knowingly and voluntarily. Like the
other obligations of justice already spoken of, this one is not regarded
as absolute, but as capable of being overruled by a stronger obligation
of justice on the other side; or by such conduct on the part of the
person concerned as is deemed to absolve us from our obligation to him,
and to constitute a forfeiture of the benefit which he has been led to
expect.

Fifthly, it is, by universal admission, inconsistent with justice to be
partial; to show favour or preference to one person over another, in
matters to which favour and preference do not properly apply.
Impartiality, however, does not seem to be regarded as a duty in itself,
but rather as instrumental to some other duty; for it is admitted that
favour and preference are not always censurable, and indeed the cases in
which they are condemned are rather the exception than the rule. A
person would be more likely to be blamed than applauded for giving his
family or friends no superiority in good offices over strangers, when he
could do so without violating any other duty; and no one thinks it
unjust to seek one person in preference to another as a friend,
connexion, or companion. Impartiality where rights are concerned is of
course obligatory, but this is involved in the more general obligation
of giving to every one his right. A tribunal, for example, must be
impartial, because it is bound to award, without regard to any other
consideration, a disputed object to the one of two parties who has the
right to it. There are other cases in which impartiality means, being
solely influenced by desert; as with those who, in the capacity of
judges, preceptors, or parents, administer reward and punishment as
such. There are cases, again, in which it means, being solely influenced
by consideration for the public interest; as in making a selection among
candidates for a government employment. Impartiality, in short, as an
obligation of justice, may be said to mean, being exclusively influenced
by the considerations which it is supposed ought to influence the
particular case in hand; and resisting the solicitation of any motives
which prompt to conduct different from what those considerations would
dictate.

Nearly allied to the idea of impartiality, is that of equality; which
often enters as a component part both into the conception of justice and
into the practice of it, and, in the eyes of many persons, constitutes
its essence. But in this, still more than in any other case, the notion
of justice varies in different persons, and always conforms in its
variations to their notion of utility. Each person maintains that
equality is the dictate of justice, except where he thinks that
expediency requires inequality. The justice of giving equal protection
to the rights of all, is maintained by those who support the most
outrageous inequality in the rights themselves. Even in slave countries
it is theoretically admitted that the rights of the slave, such as they
are, ought to be as sacred as those of the master; and that a tribunal
which fails to enforce Edition: current; Page: [244] them with equal
strictness is wanting in justice; while, at the same time, institutions
which leave to the slave scarcely any rights to enforce, are not deemed
unjust, because they are not deemed inexpedient. Those who think that
utility requires distinctions of rank, do not consider it unjust that
riches and social privileges should be unequally dispensed; but those
who think this inequality inexpedient, think it unjust also. Whoever
thinks that government is necessary, sees no injustice in as much
inequality as is constituted by giving to the magistrate powers not
granted to other people. Even among those who hold levelling doctrines,
there are as many questions of justice as there are differences of
opinion about expediency. Some Communists consider it unjust that the
produce of the labour of the community should be shared on any other
principle than that of exact equality; others think it just that those
should receive most whose bneedsb are greatest; while others hold that
those who work harder, or who produce more, or whose services are more
valuable to the community, may justly claim a larger quota in the
division of the produce. And the sense of natural justice may be
plausibly appealed to in behalf of every one of these opinions.

Among so many diverse applications of the term Justice, which yet is not
regarded as ambiguous, it is a matter of some difficulty to seize the
mental link which holds them together, and on which the moral sentiment
adhering to the term essentially depends. Perhaps, in this
embarrassment, some help may be derived from the history of the word, as
indicated by its etymology.

In most, if not in all, languages, the etymology of the word which
corresponds to Just, pointsc to an origin connected deither with
positive law, or with that which was in most cases the primitive form of
law—authoritative customd. Justum is a form of jussum, that which has
been ordered. eJus is of the same origin.e Δίκαιον comesf from δίκη, gof
which the principal meaning, at least in the historical ages of Greece,
wasg a suit at law. hOriginally, indeed, it meant only the mode or
manner of doing things, but it early came to mean the prescribed manner;
that which the recognised authorities, patriarchal, judicial, or
political, would enforce.h Recht, from which came right and righteous,
is synonymous with law. iThe original meaning indeed of recht did not
point to law, but to physical straightness; as wrong and its Latin
equivalents meant twisted or tortuous; and from this it is argued that
right did not originally mean law, but on the contrary law meant right.
But however this may be, the fact that recht and droit became restricted
in their meaning to positive law, although much which is not jrequiredj
by law is Edition: current; Page: [245] equally necessary to moral
straightness or rectitude, is as significant of the original character
of moral ideas as if the derivation had been the reverse way.i The
courts of justice, the administration of justice, are the courts and the
administration of law. La justice, in French, is the established term
for judicature.k There can, I think, be no doubt that the idée mère, the
primitive element, in the formation of the notion of justice, was
conformity to law. It constituted the entire idea among the Hebrews, up
to the birth of Christianity; as might be expected in the case of a
people whose laws attempted to embrace all subjects on which precepts
were required, and who believed those laws to be a direct emanation from
the Supreme Being. But other nations, and in particular the Greeks and
Romans, who knew that their laws had been made originally, and still
continued to be made, by men, were not afraid to admit that those men
might make bad laws; might do, by law, the same things, and from the
same motives, which, if done by individuals without the sanction of law,
would be called unjust. And hence the sentiment of injustice came to be
attached, not to all violations of law, but only to violations of such
laws as ought to exist, including such as ought to exist but do not; and
to laws themselves, if supposed to be contrary to what ought to be law.
In this manner the idea of law and of its injunctions was still
predominant in the notion of justice, even when the laws actually in
force ceased to be accepted as the standard of it.

It is true that mankind consider the idea of justice and its obligations
as applicable to many things which neither are, nor is it desired that
they should be, regulated by law. Nobody desires that laws should
interfere with the whole ldetaill of private life; yet every one allows
that in all daily conduct a person may and does show himself to be
either just or unjust. But even here, the idea of the breach of what
ought to be law, still lingers in a modified shape. It would always give
us pleasure, and chime in with our feelings of fitness, that acts which
we deem unjust should be punished, though we do not always think it
expedient that this should be done by the tribunals. We forego that
gratification on account of incidental inconveniences. We should be glad
to see just conduct enforced and injustice repressed, even in the
minutest details, if we were not, with reason, afraid of trusting the
magistrate with so unlimited an amount of power over individuals. When
we think that a person is bound in justice to do a thing, it is an
ordinary form of language to say, that he ought to be compelled to do
it. We should be gratified to see the obligation enforced by anybody who
had the power. If we see that its enforcement by law would be
inexpedient, we lament the Edition: current; Page: [246] impossibility,
we consider the impunity given to injustice as an evil, and strive to
make amends for it by bringing a strong expression of our own and the
public disapprobation to bear upon the offender. Thus the idea of legal
constraint is still the generating idea of the notion of justice, though
undergoing several transformations before that notion, as it exists in
an advanced state of society, becomes complete.

The above is, I think, a true account, as far as it goes, of the origin
and progressive growth of the idea of justice. But we must observe, that
it contains, as yet, nothing to distinguish that obligation from moral
obligation in general. For the truth is, that the idea of penal
sanction, which is the essence of law, enters not only into the
conception of injustice, but into that of any kind of wrong. We do not
call anything wrong, unless we mean to imply that a person ought to be
punished in some way or other for doing it; if not by law, by the
opinion of his fellow creatures; if not by opinion, by the reproaches of
his own conscience. This seems the real turning point of the distinction
between morality and simple expediency. It is a part of the notion of
Duty in every one of its forms, that a person may rightfully be
compelled to fulfil it. Duty is a thing which may be exacted from a
person, as one exacts a debt. Unless we think that it mmightm be exacted
from him, we do not call it his duty. Reasons of prudence, or the
interest of other people, may militate against actually exacting it; but
the person himself, it is clearly understood, would not be entitled to
complain. There are other things, on the contrary, which we wish that
people should do, which we like or admire them for doing, perhaps
dislike or despise them for not doing, but yet admit that they are not
bound to do; it is not a case of moral obligation; we do not blame them,
that is, we do not think that they are proper objects of punishment. How
we come by these ideas of deserving and not deserving punishment, will
appear, perhaps, in the sequel; but I think there is no doubt that this
distinction lies at the bottom of the notions of right and wrong; that
we call any conduct wrong, or employ, instead, some other term of
dislike or disparagement, according as we think that the person ought,
or ought not, to be punished for it; and we nsay thatn it would be right
to do so and so, or merely that it would be desirable or laudable,
according as we would wish to see the person whom it concerns,
compelled, or only persuaded and exhorted, to act in that manner.*

This, therefore, being the characteristic difference which marks off,
not Edition: current; Page: [247] justice, but morality in general, from
the remaining provinces of Expediency and Worthiness; the character is
still to be sought which distinguishes justice from other branches of
morality. Now it is known that ethical writers divide moral duties into
two classes, denoted by the ill-chosen expressions, duties of perfect
and of imperfect obligation; the latter being those in which, though the
act is obligatory, the particular occasions of performing it are left to
our choice; as in the case of charity or beneficence, which we are
indeed bound to practise, but not towards any definite person, nor at
any prescribed time. In the more precise language of philosophic
jurists, duties of perfect obligation are those duties in virtue of
which a correlative right resides in some person or persons; duties of
imperfect obligation are those moral obligations which do not give birth
to any right. I think it will be found that this distinction exactly
coincides with that which exists between justice and the other
obligations of morality. In our survey of the various popular
acceptations of justice, the term appeared generally to involve the idea
of a personal right—a claim on the part of one or more individuals, like
that which the law gives when it confers a proprietary or other legal
right. Whether the injustice consists in depriving a person of a
possession, or in breaking faith with him, or in treating him worse than
he deserves, or worse than other people who have no greater claims, in
each case the supposition implies two things—a wrong done, and some
assignable person who is wronged. Injustice may also be done by treating
a person better than others; but the wrong in this case is to his
competitors, who are also assignable persons. It seems to me that this
feature in the case—a right in some person, correlative to the moral
obligation—constitutes the specific difference between justice, and
generosity or beneficence. Justice implies something which it is not
only right to do, and wrong not to do, but which some individual person
can claim from us as his moral right. No one has a moral right to our
generosity or beneficence, because we are not morally bound to practise
those virtues towards any given individual. And it will be found with
respect to this as owith respecto to every correct definition, that the
instances which seem to conflict with it are those which most confirm
it. For if a moralist attempts, as some have done, to make out that
mankind generally, though not any given individual, have a right to all
the good we can do them, he at once, by that thesis, includes generosity
and beneficence within the category of justice. He is obliged to say,
that our utmost exertions are due to our fellow creatures, thus
assimilating them to a debt; or that nothing less can be a sufficient
return for what society does for us, thus classing the case as one of
gratitude; both of which are acknowledged cases of justice. Wherever
there is a right, the case is one of justice, and not of the virtue of
beneficence: and whoever does not place the distinction between justice
and morality in general where we have now Edition: current; Page: [248]
placed it, will be found to make no distinction between them at all, but
to merge all morality in justice.

Having thus endeavoured to determine the distinctive elements which
enter into the composition of the idea of justice, we are ready to enter
on the inquiry, whether the feeling, which accompanies the idea, is
attached to it by a special dispensation of nature, or whether it could
have grown up, by any known laws, out of the idea itself; and in
particular, whether it can have originated in considerations of general
expediency.

I conceive that the sentiment itself does not arise from anything which
would commonly, or correctly, be termed an idea of expediency; but that
though the sentiment does not, whatever is moral in it does.

We have seen that the two essential ingredients in the sentiment of
justice are, the desire to punish a person who has done harm, and the
knowledge or belief that there is some definite individual or
individuals to whom harm has been done.

Now it appears to me, that the desire to punish a person who has done
harm to some individual, is a spontaneous outgrowth from two sentiments,
both in the highest degree natural, and which either are or resemble
instincts; the impulse of self-defence, and the feeling of sympathy.

It is natural to resent, and to repel or retaliate, any harm done or
attempted against ourselves, or against those with whom we sympathize.
The origin of this sentiment it is not necessary here to discuss.
Whether it be an instinct or a result of intelligence, it is, we know,
common to all animal nature; for every animal tries to hurt those who
have hurt, or who it thinks are about to hurt, itself or its young.
Human beings, on this point, only differ from other animals in two
particulars. First, in being capable of sympathizing, not solely with
their offspring, or, like some of the more noble animals, with some
superior animal who is kind to them, but with all human, and even with
all sentient, beings. Secondly, in having a more developed intelligence,
which gives a wider range to the whole of their sentiments, whether
self-regarding or sympathetic. By virtue of his superior intelligence,
even apart from his superior range of sympathy, a human being is capable
of apprehending a community of interest between himself and the human
society of which he forms a part, such that any conduct which threatens
the security of the society generally, is threatening to his own, and
calls forth his instinct (if instinct it be) of self-defence. The same
superiority of intelligence, joined to the power of sympathizing with
human beings generally, enables him to attach himself to the collective
idea of his tribe, his country, or mankind, in such a manner that any
act hurtful to them prousesp his instinct of sympathy, and urges him to
resistance.

The sentiment of justice, in that one of its elements which consists of
the Edition: current; Page: [249] desire to punish, is thus, I conceive,
the natural feeling of retaliation or vengeance, rendered by intellect
and sympathy applicable to those injuries, that is, to those hurts,
which wound us through, or in common with, society at large. This
sentiment, in itself, has nothing moral in it; what is moral is, the
exclusive subordination of it to the social sympathies, so as to wait on
and obey their call. For the natural feeling qtends toq make us resent
indiscriminately whatever any one does that is disagreeable to us; but
when moralized by the social feeling, it only acts in the directions
conformable to the general good: just persons resenting a hurt to
society, though not otherwise a hurt to themselves, and not resenting a
hurt to themselves, however painful, unless it be of rther kind which
society has a common interest with them in the repression of.

It is no objection against this doctrine to say, that when we feel our
sentiment of justice outraged, we are not thinking of society at large,
or of any collective interest, but only of the individual case. It is
common enough certainly, though the reverse of commendable, to feel
resentment merely because we have suffered pain; but a person whose
resentment is really a moral feeling, that is, who considers whether an
act is blameable before he allows himself to resent it—such a person,
though he may not say expressly to himself that he is standing up for
the interest of society, certainly does feel that he is asserting a rule
which is for the benefit of others as well as for his own. If he is not
feeling this—if he is regarding the act solely as it affects him
individually—he is not consciously just; he is not concerning himself
about the justice of his actions. This is admitted even by
anti-utilitarian moralists. When Kant (as before remarked)[*] propounds
as the fundamental principle of morals, “So act, that thy rule of
conduct might be adopted as a law by all rational beings,” he virtually
acknowledges that the interest of mankind collectively, or at least of
mankind indiscriminately, must be in the mind of the agent when
conscientiously deciding on the morality of the act. Otherwise he uses
words without a meaning: for, that a rule even of utter selfishness
could not possibly be adopted by all rational beings—that there is any
insuperable obstacle in the nature of things to its adoption—cannot be
even plausibly maintained. To give any meaning to Kant’s principle, the
sense put upon it must be, that we ought to shape our conduct by a rule
which all rational beings might adopt with benefit to their scollective
interests.

To recapitulate: the idea of justice supposes two things; a rule of
conduct, and a sentiment which sanctions the rule. The first must be
supposed common to all mankind, and intended for their good. The other
(the sentiment) Edition: current; Page: [250] is a desire that
punishment may be suffered by those who infringe the rule. There is
involved, in addition, the conception of some definite person who
suffers by the infringement; whose rights (to use the expression
appropriated to the case) are violated by it. And the sentiment of
justice appears to me to be, the animal desire to repel or retaliate a
hurt or damage to oneself, or to those with whom one sympathizes,
widened so as to include all persons, by the human capacity of enlarged
sympathy, and the human conception of intelligent self-interest. tFrom
the latter elements, the feeling derives its morality; from the former,
its peculiar impressiveness, and energy of self-assertion.t

I have, throughout, treated the idea of a right residing in the injured
person, and violated by the injury, not as a separate element in the
composition of the idea and sentiment, but as one of the forms in which
the other two elements clothe themselves. These elements are, a hurt to
some assignable person or persons on the one hand, and a demand for
punishment on the other. An examination of our own minds, I think, will
show, that these two things include all that we mean when we speak of
violation of a right. When we call anything a person’s right, we mean
that he has a valid claim on society to protect him in the possession of
it, either by the force of law, or by that of education and opinion. If
he has what we consider a sufficient claim, on whatever account, to have
something guaranteed to him by society, we say that he has a right to
it. If we desire to prove that anything does not belong to him by right,
we think this done as soon as it is admitted that society ought not to
take measures for securing it to him, but should leave uitu to chance,
or to his own exertions. Thus, a person is said to have a right to what
he can earn in fair professional competition; because society ought not
to allow any other person to hinder him from endeavouring to earn in
that manner as much as he can. But he has not a right to three hundred
a-year, though he may happen to be earning it; because society is not
called on to provide that he shall earn that sum. On the contrary, if he
owns ten thousand pounds three per cent stock, he has a right to three
hundred a-year; because society has come under an obligation to provide
him with an income of that amount.

To have a right, then, is, I conceive, to have something which society
ought to defend me in the possession of. If the objector goes on to vask
why it ought,v I can give him no other reason than general utility. If
that expression does not seem to convey a sufficient feeling of the
strength of the obligation, nor to account for the peculiar energy of
the wfeelingw, it is because xthere goes to the composition of the
sentiment, not a rational only but also an animal element, the thirst
for retaliation; and this thirst derives its intensity, as well as its
moral justification, fromx the extraordinarily important Edition:
current; Page: [251] and impressive kind of utility which is concerned.
The interest involved is that of security, to every one’s feelings the
most vital of all interests. yNearly ally other earthly benefits are
needed by one person, not needed by another; and many of them can, if
necessary, be cheerfully foregone, or replaced by something else; but
security no human being can possibly do without; on it we depend for all
our immunity from evil, and for the whole value of all and every good,
beyond the passing moment; since nothing but the gratification of the
instant could be of any worth to us, if we could be deprived of
everything the next instant by whoever was momentarily stronger than
ourselves. Now this most indispensable of all necessaries, after
physical nutriment, cannot be had, unless the machinery for providing it
is kept unintermittedly in active play. Our notion, therefore, of the
claim we have on our fellow-creatures to join in making safe for us the
very groundwork of our existence, gathers feelings round it so much more
intense than those concerned in any of the more common cases of utility,
that the difference in degree (as is often the case in psychology)
becomes a real difference in kind. The claim assumes that character of
absoluteness, that apparent infinity, and incommensurability with all
other considerations, which constitute the distinction between the
feeling of right and wrong and that of ordinary expediency and
inexpediency. The feelings concerned are so powerful, and we count so
positively on finding a responsive feeling in others (all being alike
interested), that ought and should grow into must, and recognised
indispensability becomes a moral necessity, analogous to physical, and
often not inferior to it in binding force.

If the preceding analysis, or something resembling it, be not the
correct account of the notion of justice; if justice be totally
independent of utility, and be a standard per se, which the mind can
recognise by simple introspection of itself; it is hard to understand
why that internal oracle is so ambiguous, and why so many things appear
either just or unjust, according to the light in which they are
regarded.

We are continually informed that Utility is an uncertain standard, which
every different person interprets differently, and that there is no
safety but in the immutable, ineffaceable, and unmistakeable dictates of
Justice, which carry their evidence in themselves, and are independent
of the fluctuations of opinion. One would suppose from this that on
questions of justice there could be no controversy; that if we take that
for our rule, its application to any given case could leave us in as
little doubt as a mathematical demonstration. So far is this from being
the fact, that there is as much difference of opinion, and as zfiercez
discussion, about what is just, as about what is useful to society. Not
only have different nations and individuals different notions Edition:
current; Page: [252] of justice, but, in the mind of one and the same
individual, justice is not some one rule, principle, or maxim, but many,
which do not always coincide in their dictates, and in choosing between
which, he is guided either by some extraneous standard, or by his own
personal predilections.

For instance, there are some who say, that it is unjust to punish any
one for the sake of example to others; that punishment is just, only
when intended for the good of the sufferer himself. Others maintain the
extreme reverse, contending that to punish persons who have attained
years of discretion, for their own benefit, is despotism and injustice,
since if the matter at issue is solely their own good, no one has a
right to control their own judgment of it; but that they may justly be
punished to prevent evil to others, this being aana exercise of the
legitimate right of self-defence. Mr. Owen, again, affirms that it is
unjust to punish at all; for the criminal did not make his own
character; his education, and the circumstances which bsurroundb him,
have made him a criminal, and for these he is not responsible. All these
opinions are extremely plausible; and so long as the question is argued
as one of justice simply, without going down to the principles which lie
under justice and are the source of its authority, I am unable to see
how any of these reasoners can be refuted. For, in truth, every one of
the three builds upon rules of justice confessedly true. The first
appeals to the acknowledged injustice of singling out an individual, and
making him a sacrifice, without his consent, for other people’s benefit.
The second relies on the acknowledged justice of self-defence, and the
admitted injustice of forcing one person to conform to another’s notions
of what constitutes his good. The Owenite invokes the admitted
principle, that it is unjust to punish any one for what he cannot help.
Eact is triumphant so long as he is not compelled to take into
consideration any other maxims of justice than the one he has selected;
but as soon as their several maxims are brought face to face, each
disputant seems to have exactly as much to say for himself as the
others. No one of them can carry out his own notion of justice without
trampling upon another equally binding. These are difficulties; they
have always been felt to be such; and many devices have been invented to
turn rather than to overcome them. As a refuge from the last of the
three, men imagined what they called the freedom of the will; fancying
that they could not justify punishing a man whose will is in a
thoroughly hateful state, unless it be supposed to have come into that
state through no influence of anterior circumstances. To escape from the
other difficulties, a favourite contrivance has been the fiction of a
contract, whereby at some unknown period all the members of society
engaged to obey the laws, and consented to be punished for any
disobedience to them; thereby giving to their legislators the right,
which it is assumed they would not otherwise have had, of punishing
them, either for their own good or for Edition: current; Page: [253]
that of society. This happy thought was considered to get rid of the
whole difficulty, and to legitimate the infliction of punishment, in
virtue of another received maxim of justice, volenti non fit injuria;[*]
that is not unjust which is done with the consent of the person who is
supposed to be hurt by it. I need hardly remark, that even if the
consent were not a mere fiction, this maxim is not superior in authority
to the others which it is brought in to supersede. It is, on the
contrary, an instructive specimen of the loose and irregular manner in
which supposed principles of justice grow up. This particular one
evidently came into use as a help to the coarse exigencies of courts of
law, which are sometimes obliged to be content with very uncertain
presumptions, on account of the greater evils which would often arise
from any attempt on their part to cut finer. But even courts of law are
not able to adhere consistently to the maxim, for they allow voluntary
engagements to be set aside on the ground of fraud, and sometimes on
that of mere mistake or misinformation.

Again, when the legitimacy of inflicting punishment is admitted, how
many conflicting conceptions of justice come to light in discussing the
proper apportionment of cpunishmentc to offences. No rule on dthisd
subject recommends itself so strongly to the primitive and spontaneous
sentiment of justice, as the lex talionis, an eye for an eye and a tooth
for a tooth. Though this principle of the Jewish and of the Mahomedan
law has been generally abandoned in Europe as a practical maxim, there
is, I suspect, in most minds, a secret hankering after it; and when
retribution accidentally falls on an offender in that precise shape, the
general feeling of satisfaction evinced, bears witness how natural is
the sentiment to which this repayment in kind is acceptable. With many
the test of justice in penal infliction is that the punishment should be
proportioned to the offence; meaning that it should be exactly measured
by the moral guilt of the culprit (whatever be their standard for
measuring moral guilt): the consideration, what amount of punishment is
necessary to deter from the offence, having nothing to do with the
question of justice, in their estimation: while there are others to whom
that consideration is all in all; who maintain that it is not just, at
least for man, to inflict on a fellow-creature, whatever may be his
offences, any amount of suffering beyond the least that will suffice to
prevent him from repeating, and others from imitating, his misconduct.

To take another example from a subject already once referred to. In a
co-operative industrial association, is it just or not that talent or
skill should give a title to superior remuneration? On the negative side
of the question it is argued, that whoever does the best he can,
deserves equally well, and Edition: current; Page: [254] ought not in
justice to be put in a position of inferiority for no fault of his own;
that superior abilities have already advantages more than enough, in the
admiration they excite, the personal influence they command, and the
internal sources of satisfaction attending them, without adding to these
a superior share of the world’s goods; and that society is bound in
justice rather to make compensation to the less favoured, for this
unmerited inequality of advantages, than to aggravate it. On the
contrary side it is contended, that society receives more from the more
efficient labourer; that his services being more useful, society owes
him a larger return for them; that a greater share of the joint result
is actually his work, and not to allow his claim to it is a kind of
robbery; that if he is only to receive as much as others, he can only be
justly required to produce as much, and to give a smaller amount of time
and eexertione, proportioned to his superior efficiency. Who shall
decide between these appeals to conflicting principles of justice?
Justice has in this case two sides to it, which it is impossible to
bring into harmony, and the two disputants have chosen opposite sides;
the one looks to what it is just that the individual should receive, the
other to what it is just that the community should give. Each, from his
own point of view, is unanswerable; and any choice between them, on
grounds of justice, must be perfectly arbitrary. Social utility alone
can decide the preference.

How many, again, and how irreconcileable, are the standards of justice
to which reference is made in discussing the repartition of taxation.
One opinion is, that payment to the State should be in numerical
proportion to pecuniary means. Others think that justice dictates what
they term graduated taxation; taking a higher percentage from those who
have more to spare. In point of natural justice a strong case might be
made for disregarding means altogether, and taking the same absolute sum
(whenever it could be got) from every one: as the subscribers to a mess,
or to a club, all pay the same sum for the same privileges, whether they
can all equally afford it or not. Since the protection (it might be
said) of law and government is afforded to, and is equally required by,
all, there is no injustice in making all buy it at the same price. It is
reckoned justice, not injustice, that a dealer should charge to all
customers the same price for the same article, not a price varying
according to their means of payment. This doctrine, as applied to
taxation, finds no advocates, because it conflictsf strongly with
gmen’sg feelings of humanity and hperceptionsh of social expediency; but
the principle of justice which it invokes is as true and as binding as
those which can be appealed to against it. Accordingly, it exerts a
tacit influence on the line of defence employed for other modes of
assessing taxation. People feel obliged to argue that the State does
more for the rich than for the poor, as a justification for its taking
more from them: Edition: current; Page: [255] though this is in reality
not true, for the rich would be far better able to protect themselves,
in the absence of law or government, than the poor, and indeed would
probably be successful in converting the poor into their slaves. Others,
again, so far defer to the same conception of justice, as to maintain
that all should pay an equal capitation tax for the protection of their
persons (these being of equal value to all), and an unequal tax for the
protection of their property, which is unequal. To this others reply,
that the all of one man is as valuable to him as the all of another.
From these confusions there is no other mode of extrication than the
utilitarian.

Is, then, the difference between the Just and the Expedient a merely
imaginary distinction? Have mankind been under a delusion in thinking
that justice is a more sacred thing than policy, and that the latter
ought only to be listened to after the former has been satisfied? By no
means. The exposition we have given of the nature and origin of the
sentiment, recognises a real distinction; and no one of those who
profess the most sublime contempt for the consequences of actions as an
element in their morality, attaches more importance to the distinction
than I do. While I dispute the pretensions of any theory which sets up
an imaginary standard of justice not grounded on utility, I account the
justice which is grounded on utility to be the chief part, and
incomparably the most sacred and binding part, of all morality. Justice
is a name for certain classes of moral rules, which concern the
essentials of human well-being more nearly, and are therefore of more
absolute obligation, than any other rules for the guidance of life; and
the notion which we have found to be of the essence of the idea of
justice, that of a right residing in an individual, implies and
testifies to this more binding obligation.

The moral rules which forbid mankind to hurt one another (in which we
must never forget to include wrongful interference with each other’s
freedom) are more vital to human well-being than any maxims, however
important, which only point out the best mode of managing some
department of human affairs. They have also the peculiarity, that they
are the main element in determining the whole of the social feelings of
mankind. It is their observance which alone preserves peace among human
beings: if obedience to them were not the rule, and disobedience the
exception, every one would see in every one else ia probablei enemy,
against whom he must be perpetually guarding himself. What is hardly
less important, these are the precepts which mankind have the strongest
and the most direct inducements for impressing upon one another. By
merely giving to each other prudential instruction or exhortation, they
may gain, or think they gain, nothing: in inculcating on each other the
duty of positive beneficence they have an unmistakeable interest, but
far less in degree: a person may possibly not need the benefits of
Edition: current; Page: [256] others; but he always needs that they
should not do him hurt. Thus the moralities which protect every
individual from being harmed by others, either directly or by being
hindered in his freedom of pursuing his own good, are at once those
which he himself has most at heart, and those which he has the strongest
interest in publishing and enforcing by word and deed. It is by a
person’s observance of these, that his fitness to exist as one of the
fellowship of human beings, is tested and decided; for on that depends
his being a nuisance or not to those with whom he is in contact. Now it
is these moralities primarily, which compose the obligations of justice.
The most marked cases of injustice, and those which give the tone to the
feeling of repugnance which characterizes the sentiment, are acts of
wrongful aggression, or wrongful exercise of power over some one; the
next are those which consist in wrongfully withholding from him
something which is his due; in both cases, inflicting on him a positive
hurt, either in the form of direct suffering, or of the privation of
some good which he had reasonable ground, either of a physical or of a
social kind, for counting upon.

The same powerful motives which command the observance of these primary
moralities, enjoin the punishment of those who violate them; and as the
impulses of self-defence, of defence of others, and of vengeance, are
all called forth against such persons, retribution, or evil for evil,
becomes closely connected with the sentiment of justice, and is
universally included in the idea. Good for good is also one of the
dictates of justice; and this, though its social utility is evident, and
though it carries with it a natural human feeling, has not at first
sight that obvious connexion with hurt or injury, which, existing in the
most elementary cases of just and unjust, is the source of the
characteristic intensity of the sentiment. But the connexion, though
less obvious, is not less real. He who accepts benefits, and denies a
return of them when needed, inflicts a real hurt, by disappointing one
of the most natural and reasonable of expectations, and one which he
must at least tacitly have encouraged, otherwise the benefits would
seldom have been conferred. The important rank, among human evils and
wrongs, of the disappointment of expectation, is shown in the fact that
it constitutes the principal criminality of two such highly immoral acts
as a breach of friendship and a breach of promise. Few hurts which human
beings can sustain are greater, and none wound more, than when that on
which they habitually and with full assurance relied, fails them in the
hour of need; and few wrongs are greater than this mere withholding of
good; none excite more resentment, either in the person suffering, or in
a sympathizing spectator. The principle, therefore, of giving to each
what they deserve, that is, good for good as well as evil for evil, is
not only included within the idea of Justice as we have defined it, but
is a proper object of that intensity of sentiment, which places the
Just, in human estimation, above the simply Expedient.

Edition: current; Page: [257]
Most of the maxims of justice current in the world, and commonly
appealed to in its transactions, are simply instrumental to carrying
into effect the principles of justice which we have now spoken of. That
a person is only responsible for what he has done voluntarily, or could
voluntarily have avoided; that it is unjust to condemn any person
unheard; that the punishment ought to be proportioned to the offence,
and the like, are maxims intended to prevent the just principle of evil
for evil from being perverted to the infliction of evil without that
justification. The greater part of these common maxims have come into
use from the practice of courts of justice, which have been naturally
led to a more complete recognition and elaboration than was likely to
suggest itself to others, of the rules necessary to enable them to
fulfil their double function, of inflicting punishment when due, and of
awarding to each person his right.

That first of judicial virtues, impartiality, is an obligation of
justice, partly for the reason last mentioned; as being a necessary
condition of the fulfilment of the other obligations of justice. But
this is not the only source of the exalted rank, among human
obligations, of those maxims of equality and impartiality, which, both
in popular estimation and in that of the most enlightened, are included
among the precepts of justice. In one point of view, they may be
considered as corollaries from the principles already laid down. If it
is a duty to do to each according to his deserts, returning good for
good as well as repressing evil by evil, it necessarily follows that we
should treat all equally well (when no higher duty forbids) who have
deserved equally well of jusj, and that society should treat all equally
well who have deserved equally well of kitk, that is, who have deserved
equally well absolutely. This is the highest abstract standard of social
and distributive justice; towards which all institutions, and the
efforts of all virtuous citizens, should be made in the utmost possible
degree to converge. But this great moral duty rests upon a still deeper
foundation, being a direct emanation from the first principle of morals,
and not a mere logical corollary from secondary or derivative doctrines.
It is involved in the very meaning of Utility, or the Greatest-Happiness
Principle. That principle is a mere form of words without rational
signification, unless one person’s happiness, supposed equal in degree
(with the proper allowance made for kind), is counted for exactly as
much as another’s. Those conditions being supplied, Bentham’s dictum,
“everybody to count for one, nobody for more than one,”[*] might be
written under the principle of utility as an explanatory commentary.*
The equal claim of everybody to Edition: current; Page: [258] happiness
in the estimation of the moralist and the legislator, involves an equal
claim to all the means of happiness, except in so far as the inevitable
conditions of human life, and the general interest, in which that of
every individual is included, set limits to the maxim; and those limits
ought to be strictly construed. As every other maxim of justice, so
this, is by no means applied or held applicable universally; on the
contrary, as I have already remarked, it bends to every person’s ideas
of social expediency. But in whatever case it is deemed applicable at
all, it is held to be the dictate of justice. All persons are deemed to
have a right to equality of treatment, except when some recognised
social expediency requires the reverse. And hence all social
inequalities which have ceased to be considered expedient, assume the
character not of simple inexpediency, but of injustice, and appear so
tyrannical, that people are apt to wonder how they ever could have been
tolerated; forgetful that they themselves perhaps tolerate other
inequalities under an equally mistaken notion of expediency, the
correction of which would make Edition: current; Page: [259] that which
they approve seem quite as monstrous as what they have at last learnt to
condemn. The entire history of social improvement has been a series of
transitions, by which one custom or institution after another, from
being a supposed primary necessity of social existence, has passed into
the rank of an universally stigmatized injustice and tyranny. So it has
been with the distinctions of slaves and freemen, nobles and serfs,
patricians and plebeians; and so it will be, and in part already is,
with the aristocracies of colour, race, and sex.

It appears from what has been said, that justice is a name for certain
moral requirements, which, regarded collectively, stand higher in the
scale of social utility, and are therefore of more paramount obligation,
than any others; though particular cases may occur in which some other
social duty is so important, as to overrule any one of the general
maxims of justice. Thus, to save a life, it may not only be allowable,
but a duty, to steal, or take by force, the necessary food or medicine,
or to kidnap, and compel to officiate, the only qualified medical
practitioner. In such cases, as we do not call anything justice which is
not a virtue, we usually say, not that justice must give way to some
other moral principle, but that what is just in ordinary cases is, by
reason of that other principle, not just in the particular case. By this
useful accommodation of language, the character of indefeasibility
attributed to justice is kept up, and we are saved from the necessity of
maintaining that there can be laudable injustice.

The considerations which have now been adduced resolve, I conceive, the
only real difficulty in the utilitarian theory of morals. It has always
been evident that all cases of justice are also cases of expediency: the
difference is in the peculiar sentiment which attaches to the former, as
contradistinguished from the latter. If this characteristic sentiment
has been sufficiently accounted for; if there is no necessity to assume
for it any peculiarity of origin; if it is simply the natural feeling of
resentment, moralized by being made co-extensive with the demands of
social good; and if this feeling not only does but ought to exist in all
the classes of cases to which the idea of justice corresponds; that idea
no longer presents itself as a stumbling-block to the utilitarian
ethics. Justice remains the appropriate name for certain social
utilities which are vastly more important, and therefore more absolute
and imperative, than any others are as a class (though not more so than
others may be in particular cases); and which, therefore, ought to be,
as well as naturally are, guarded by a sentiment not only different in
degree, but also in kind; distinguished from the milder feeling which
attaches to the mere idea of promoting human pleasure or convenience, at
once by the more definite nature of its commands, and by the sterner
character of its sanctions.

Edition: current; Page: [260] Edition: current; Page: [261]


AUGUSTE COMTE AND POSITIVISM
 1865

Edition: current; Page: [262]


EDITOR’S NOTE

2nd ed. London: Trübner, 1866. Reprinted from 1st ed., ibid., 1865; and
from Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review, LXXXIII (Apr., 1865),
339-405 [Part I], and ibid., LXXXIV (July, 1865), 1-42 [Part II], these
two articles signed “J.S.M.” The former is headed: “Art. I.—The Positive
Philosophy of Auguste Comte. / 1. Cours de Philosophie Positive. Par
Auguste Comte, Répétiteur d’Analyse transcendante et de Mécanique
rationnelle à l’Ecole Polytechnique, et Examinateur des Candidats qui se
destinent à cette Ecole. Deuxième Edition, augmentée d’une Préface par
E. Littré, et d’une Table alphabétique des matières. [6 vols.] Paris:
[Baillière,] 1864. / 2. Auguste Comte et la Philosophie Positive. Par.
E. Littré. Paris: [Hachette,] 1863.” The second is headed: “Art.
I.—Later Speculations of Auguste Comte,” and lists the works reviewed as
in the footnote to 328 below, giving Comte as the author of the first
four books.

Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “Two articles on Comte’s Philosophy
in the Westminster Review for April and July 1865, afterwards reprinted
and published by Trübner as a volume entitled ‘Auguste Comte and
Positivism’ ” (MacMinn, 95). For further discussion of the writing of
the work and its relation to other essays in this volume, see the
Textual Introduction, cxxix-cxxxiv above.

The following text is collated with that of the 1st ed., and that in the
Westminster. In the footnoted variants, the 2nd ed. is indicated by
“66”; the 1st by “651”; the Westminster by “65”. There are no changes or
corrections in the offprints of the articles or in the two copies of the
2nd ed. in the Somerville College Library, but several corrections are
found in the copy of the 1st ed. The following typographical errors, all
of which were corrected in the 2nd ed. (and hence are not listed in the
Textual Introduction above), are marked for correction: 290.40 “we”
corrected to “he”, 320.n4 “with” corrected to “into”, 320.n11 “part”
corrected to “fact”, 338.39 “then” corrected to “them”, 345.33 the “a”
before “private life” deleted. Two errors in 65 that were partially
altered in 651, and altered again in 66 are marked in the Somerville
College copy of the 1st ed.: 296.12 “of” altered to “to” (see 296c-c),
and 342.39 “it all he” altered to “all it” (see 342e-e). At 338.12 the
correction indicated (“others” for “other”) is retained as a variant
because the earlier form is found in 65 as well as 651; so is that at
352.34 (“desirous” for “desiring”) because the incomplete correction was
not adopted. Finally, the change indicated in the Somerville copy at
332.38 (“evoked” for “invoked”) is accepted in the text below, though
the change was not made in 66. One substantive variant occurs in the
posthumous 3rd ed. (London: Trübner, 1882) and therefore in the
paperback photographic reproduction of that edition (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1961): at 351.39 the reading in 1882 is
“it is supposed” rather than “as he calculates”. The minor changes in
the list of publications listed in the second part between 651 and 66
are not here indicated (JSM gives the identification of Comte as “Auteur
du Systême de Philosophie Positive” in the first title, and as “Auteur
du Systême de Philosophie Positive et du Systême de Politique Positive”
in the next three titles; the common eighteenth-century spelling,
“Systême” rather than “Système”, found in the list in 65 is retained in
651 at the second appearance of the word in the fourth title).

Edition: current; Page: [263]


PART I: The Cours de Philosophie Positive*

for some time much has been said, in England and on the Continent,
concerning “Positivism” and “the Positive Philosophy.” Those phrases,
which during the life of the eminent thinker who introduced them had
made their way into no writings or discussions but those of his very few
direct disciples, have emerged from the depths and manifested themselves
on the surface of the philosophy of the age. It is not very widely known
what they represent, but it is understood that they represent something.
They are symbols of a recognized mode of thought, and one of sufficient
importance to induce almost all who now discuss the great problems of
philosophy, or survey from any elevated point of view the opinions of
the age, to take what is termed the Positivist view of things into
serious consideration, and define their own position, more or less
friendly or hostile, in regard to it. Indeed, though the mode of thought
expressed by the terms Positive and Positivism is widely spread, the
words themselves are, as usual, better known through the enemies of that
mode of thinking than through its friends; and more than one thinker who
never called himself or his opinions by those appellations, and
carefully guarded himself against being confounded with those who did,
finds himself, sometimes to his displeasure, though generally by a
tolerably correct instinct, classed with Positivists, and assailed as a
Positivist. This change in the bearings of philosophic opinion commenced
in England earlier than in France, where a philosophy of a contrary kind
had been more widely cultivated, and had taken a firmer hold on the
speculative minds of a generation formed by Royer-Collard, Cousin,
Jouffroy, and their compeers. The great treatise of M. Comte was
scarcely mentioned in French literature or criticism, when it was
already working powerfully on the minds of many British students and
thinkers. But agreeably to the usual course of things in France, the new
tendency, when it set in, set in more strongly. Those who call
themselves Positivists are indeed not numerous; but all French writers
who adhere to the common philosophy, now feel it necessary to begin by
fortifying their position against “the Positivist school.” And the mode
of thinking thus designated is already manifesting its importance by one
of the most unequivocal signs, the appearance of thinkers who attempt a
compromise or juste Edition: current; Page: [264] milieu between it and
its opposite. The acute critic and metaphysician M. Taine, and the
distinguished chemist M. Berthelot, are the authors of the two most
conspicuous of these attempts.[*]

The time, therefore, seems to have come, when every philosophic thinker
not only ought to form, but may usefully express, a judgment respecting
this intellectual movement; endeavouring to understand what it is,
whether it is essentially a wholesome movement, and if so, what is to be
accepted and what rejected of the direction given to it by its most
important movers. There cannot be a more appropriate amode of discussing
these points than in the form ofa a critical examination of the
philosophy of Auguste Comte; for which the appearance of a new edition
of his fundamental treatise, with a preface by the most eminent, in
every point of view, of his professed disciples, M. Littré, affords a
good opportunity. The name of M. Comte is more identified than any other
with this mode of thought. He is the first who has attempted its
complete systematization, and the scientific extension of it to all
objects of human knowledge. And in doing this he has displayed a
quantity and quality of mental power, and achieved an amount of success,
which have not only won but retained the high admiration of thinkers as
radically and strenuously opposed as it is possible to be, to nearly the
whole of his later tendencies, and to many of his earlier opinions. It
would have been a mistake had such thinkers busied themselves in the
first instance with drawing attention to what they regarded as errors in
his great work. Until it had taken the place in the world of thought
which belonged to it, the important matter was not to criticise it, but
to help in making it known. To have put those who neither knew nor were
capable of appreciating the greatness of the book, in possession of its
vulnerable points, would have indefinitely retarded its progress to a
just estimation, and was not needful for guarding against any serious
inconvenience. While a writer has few readers, and no influence except
on independent thinkers, the only thing worth considering in him is what
he can teach us: if there be anything in which he is less wise than we
are already, it may be left unnoticed until the time comes when his
errors can do harm. But the high place which M. Comte has now assumed
among European thinkers, and the increasing influence of his principal
work, while they make it a more hopeful task than before to impress and
enforce the strong points of his philosophy, have rendered it, for the
first time, not inopportune to discuss his mistakes. Whatever errors he
may have fallen into are now in a position to be injurious, while the
free exposure of them can no longer be so.

Edition: current; Page: [265]
We propose, then, to pass in review the main principles of M. Comte’s
philosophy; bcommencing withb the great treatise by which, in this
country, he is chiefly known, and cpostponing consideration ofc the
writings of the last ten years of his life, except for the occasional
illustration of detached points. When we extend our examination to these
later productions,d we shall have, in the main, to reverse our judgment.
Instead of recognizing, as in the Cours de Philosophie Positive, an
essentially sound view of philosophy, with a few capital errors, it is
in their general character that we deem the subsequent speculations
false and misleading, while in the midst of this wrong general tendency,
we find a crowd of valuable thoughts, and suggestions of thought, in
detail. For the present we put out of the question this signal anomaly
in M. Comte’s intellectual career. We shall consider only the principal
gift which he has left to the world, his clear, full, and comprehensive
exposition, and in part creation, of what he terms the Positive
Philosophy: endeavouring to sever what in our estimation is true, from
the much less which is erroneous, in that philosophy as he conceived it,
and distinguishing, as we proceed, the part which is specially his, from
that which belongs to the philosophy of the age, and is the common
inheritance of thinkers. This last discrimination has been partially
made in a late pamphlet, by Mr. Herbert Spencer, in vindication of his
own independence of thought: but this does not diminish the utility of
doing it, with a less limited purpose, here; especially as Mr. Spencer
rejects nearly all which properly belongs to M. Comte, and in his
abridged mode of statement does scanty justice to what he rejects.[*]
The separation is not difficult, even on the direct evidence given by M.
Comte himself, who, far from claiming any originality not really
belonging to him, was eager to connect his own most original thoughts
with every germ of anything similar which he observed in previous
thinkers.

The fundamental doctrine of a true philosophy, according to M. Comte,
and the character by which he defines Positive Philosophy, is the
following:—We have no knowledge of anything but Phænomena; and our
knowledge of phænomena is relative, not absolute. We know not the
essence, nor the real mode of production, of any fact, but only its
relations to other facts in the way of succession or of similitude.
These relations are constant; that is, always the same in the same
circumstances. The constant resemblances which link phænomena together,
and the constant sequences which unite them as antecedent and
consequent, are termed their laws. The laws of phænomena are all we know
respecting them. Their essential nature, and Edition: current; Page:
[266] their ultimate causes, either efficient or final, are unknown and
inscrutable to us.

M. Comte claims no originality for this conception of human knowledge.
He avows that it has been virtually acted on from the earliest period by
all who have made any real contribution to science, and became
distinctly present to the minds of speculative men from the time of
Bacon, Descartes, and Galileo, whom he regards as collectively the
founders of the Positive Philosophy. As he says, the knowledge which
mankind, even in the earliest ages, chiefly pursued, being that which
they most needed, was foreknowledge: “savoir, pour prévoir.” When they
sought for the cause, it was mainly in order to control the effect, or
if it was uncontrollable, to foreknow and adapt their conduct to it.
Now, all foresight of phænomena, and power over them, depend on
knowledge of their sequences, and not upon any notion we may have formed
respecting their origin or inmost nature. We foresee a fact or event by
means of facts which are signs of it, because experience has shown them
to be its antecedents. We bring about any fact, other than our own
muscular contractions, by means of some fact which experience has shown
to be followed by it. All foresight, therefore, and all intelligent
action, have only been possible in proportion as men have successfully
attempted to ascertain the successions of phænomena. Neither
foreknowledge, nor the knowledge which is practical power, can be
acquired by any other means.

The conviction, however, that knowledge of the successions and
co-existences of phænomena is the sole knowledge accessible to us, could
not be arrived at in a very early stage of the progress of thought. Men
have not even now left off hoping for other knowledge, nor believing
that they have attained it; and that, when attained, it is, in some
undefinable manner, greatly more precious than mere knowledge of
sequences and co-existences. The true doctrine was not seen in its full
clearness even by Bacon, though it is the result to which all his
speculations tend: still less by Descartes. It was, however,
eapprehended with considerable correctnesse by Newton.* But it was
probably first conceived in its entire generality by Hume, who carries
it a step further than Comte, maintaining not merely that the only
causes of phænomena which can be known to us are other phænomena, their
invariable antecedents, but that there is no other kind of causes:
cause, as he interprets it, means the invariable antecedent. This is the
only part of Hume’s doctrine which was contested by his great adversary,
Kant; who, maintaining as strenuously as Comte that we know nothing of
Things in themselves, of Noumena, of real Substances and real Causes,
yet peremptorily asserted their Edition: current; Page: [267] existence.
But neither does Comte question this: on the contrary, all his language
implies it. Among the direct successors of Hume, the writer who has best
stated and defended Comte’s fundamental doctrine is Dr. Thomas Brown.
The doctrine and spirit of Brown’s philosophy are entirely Positivist,
and no better introduction to Positivism than the early part of his
Lectures[*] has yet been produced. Of living thinkers we do not speak;
but the same great truth formed the groundwork of all the speculative
philosophy of Bentham, and pre-eminently of James Mill: and Sir William
Hamilton’s famous doctrine of the Relativity of human knowledge has
guided many to it, though we cannot credit Sir William Hamilton himself
with having understood the principle, or been willing to assent to it if
he had.

The foundation of M. Comte’s philosophy is thus in no way peculiar to
him, but the general property of the age, however far as yet from being
universally accepted even by thoughtful minds. The philosophy called
Positive is not a recent invention of M. Comte, but a simple adherence
to the traditions of all the great scientific minds whose discoveries
have made the human race what it is. M. Comte has never presented it in
any other light. But he has made the doctrine his own by his manner of
treating it. To know rightly what a thing is, we require to know, with
equal distinctness, what it is not. To enter into the real character of
any mode of thought we must understand what other modes of thought
compete with it. M. Comte has taken care that we should do so. The modes
of philosophizing which, according to him, dispute ascendancy with the
Positive, are two in number, both of them anterior to it in date; the
Theological, and the Metaphysical.

We use the words Theological, Metaphysical, and Positive, because they
are chosen by M. Comte as a vehicle for M. Comte’s ideas. Any
philosopher whose thoughts another person undertakes to set forth, has a
right to require that it should be done by means of his own
nomenclature. They are not, however, the terms we should ourselves
choose. In all languages, but especially in English, they excite ideas
other than those intended. The words Positive and Positivism, in the
meaning assigned to them, are ill fitted to take root in English soil;
while Metaphysical suggests, and suggested even to M. Comte, much that
in no way deserves to be included in his denunciation. The term
Theological is less wide of the mark, though the use of it as a term of
condemnation implies, as we shall see, a greater reach of negation than
need be included in the Positive creed. Instead of the Theological we
should prefer to speak of the Personal, or Volitional explanation of
ffactsf; instead of Metaphysical, the Abstractional or Ontological: and
the meaning of Positive would be less ambiguously expressed in the
objective aspect by Phænomenal, Edition: current; Page: [268] in the
subjective by Experiential. But M. Comte’s opinions are best stated in
his own phraseology; several of them, indeed, can scarcely be presented
in some of their bearings without it.

The Theological, which is the original and spontaneous form of thought,
regards the facts of the universe as governed not by invariable laws of
sequence, but by single and direct volitions of beings, real or
imaginary, possessed of life and intelligence. In the infantile state of
reason and experience, individual objects are looked upon as animated.
The next step is the conception of invisible beings, each of whom
superintends and governs an entire class of objects or events. The last
merges this multitude of divinities in a single God, who made the whole
universe in the beginning, and guides and carries on its phænomena by
his continued action, or, as others think, only modifies them from time
to time by special interferences.

The mode of thought which M. Comte terms Metaphysical, accounts for
phænomena by ascribing them, not to volitions either sublunary or
celestial, but to realized abstractions. In this stage it is no longer a
god that causes and directs each of the various agencies of nature: it
is a power, or a force, or an occult quality, considered as real
existences, inherent in but distinct from the concrete bodies in which
they reside, and which they in a manner animate. Instead of Dryads
presiding over trees, producing and regulating their phænomena, every
plant or animal has now a Vegetative Soul, the θρεπτίκη ψυχή of
Aristotle.[*] At a later period the Vegetative Soul has become a Plastic
Force, and still later, a Vital Principle. Objects now do all that they
do because it is their Essence to do so, or by reason of an inherent
Virtue. Phænomena are accounted for by supposed tendencies and
propensities of the abstraction Nature; which, though regarded as
impersonal, is figured as acting on a sort of motives, and in a manner
more or less analogous to that of conscious beings. Aristotle affirms a
tendency of nature towards the best, which helps him to a theory of many
natural phænomena. The rise of water in a pump is attributed to Nature’s
horror of a vacuum. The fall of heavy bodies, and the ascent of flame
and smoke, are construed as attempts of each to get to its natural
place. Many important consequences are deduced from the doctrine that
Nature has no breaks (non habet saltum). In medicine the curative force
(vis medicatrix) of Nature furnishes the explanation of the reparative
processes which modern physiologists refer each to its own particular
agencies and laws.

Examples are not necessary to prove to those who are acquainted with the
past phases of human thought, how great a place both the theological and
the metaphysical interpretations of phænomena have historically
occupied, as well in the speculations of thinkers as in the familiar
conceptions of the multitude. Many had perceived before M. Comte that
neither of these Edition: current; Page: [269] modes of explanation was
final: the warfare against both of them could scarcely be carried on
more vigorously than it already was, early in the seventeenth century,
by Hobbes. Nor is it unknown to any one who has followed the history of
the various physical sciences, that the positive explanation of facts
has substituted itself, step by step, for the theological and
metaphysical, as the progress of inquiry brought to light an increasing
number of the invariable laws of phænomena. In these respects M. Comte
has not originated anything, but has taken his place in a fight long
since engaged, and on the side already in the main victorious. The
generalization which belongs to himself, and in which he had not, to the
best of our knowledge, been at all anticipated, is, that every distinct
class of human conceptions passesg through all these stages, beginning
with the theological, and proceeding through the metaphysical to the
positive: the metaphysical being a mere state of transition, but an
indispensable one, from the theological mode of thought to the positive,
which is destined finally to prevail, by the universal recognition that
all phænomena without exception are governed by invariable laws, with
which no volitions, either natural or supernatural, interfere. This
general theorem is completed by the addition, that the theological mode
of thought has three stages, Fetichism, Polytheism, and Monotheism: the
successive transitions being prepared, and indeed caused, by the gradual
uprising of the two rival modes of thought, the metaphysical and the
positive, and in their turn preparing the way for the ascendancy of
these; first and temporarily of the metaphysical, finally of the
positive.

This generalization is the most fundamental of the doctrines which
originated with M. Comte; and the survey of history, which occupies the
two largest volumes of the six composing his work, is a continuous
exemplification and verification of the law. How well it accords with
the facts, and how vast a number of the greater historical phænomena it
explains, is known only to those who have studied its exposition, where
alone it can be found—in these most striking and instructive volumes. As
this theory is the key to M. Comte’s other generalizations, all of which
are more or less dependent on it; as it forms the backbone, if we may so
speak, of his philosophy, and, unless it be true, he has accomplished
little; we cannot better employ part of our space than in clearing it
from misconception, and giving the explanations necessary to remove the
obstacles which prevent many competent persons from assenting to it.

It is proper to begin by relieving the doctrine from a religious
prejudice. The doctrine condemns all theological explanations, and
replaces them, or thinks them destined to be replaced, by theories which
take no account of anything but an ascertained order of phænomena. It is
inferred that if this change were completely accomplished, mankind would
cease to refer the Edition: current; Page: [270] constitution of Nature
to an intelligent will, or to believe at all in a Creator and supreme
Governor of the world. This supposition is the more natural, as M. Comte
was avowedly of that opinion. He indeed disclaimed, with some acrimony,
dogmatic atheism, and even says (in a later work, but the earliest
contains nothing at variance with it) that the hypothesis of design has
much greater verisimilitude than that of a blind mechanism. But
conjecture, founded on analogy, did not seem to him a basis to rest a
theory on, in a mature state of human intelligence. He deemed all real
knowledge of a commencement inaccessible to us, and the inquiry into it
an overpassing of the essential limits of our mental faculties. To this
point, however, those who accept his theory of the progressive stages of
opinion are not obliged to follow him. The Positive mode of thought is
not necessarily a denial of the supernatural; it merely throws back that
question to the origin of all things. If the universe had a beginning,
its beginning, by the very conditions of the case, was supernatural; the
laws of nature cannot account for their own origin. The Positive
philosopher is free to form his opinion on the subject, according to the
weight he attaches to the analogies which are called marks of design,
and to the general traditions of the human race. The value of these
evidences is indeed a question for Positive philosophy, but it is not
one upon which Positive philosophers must necessarily be agreed. It is
one of M. Comte’s mistakes that he never allows of open questions.
Positive Philosophy maintains that within the existing order of the
universe, or rather of the part of it known to us, the direct
determining cause of every phænomenon is not supernatural but natural.
It is compatible with this to believe, that the universe was created,
and even that it is continuously governed, by an Intelligence, provided
we admit that the intelligent Governor adheres to fixed laws, which are
only modified or counteracted by other laws of the same dispensation,
and are never either capriciously or providentially departed from.
Whoever regards all events as parts of a constant order, each one being
the invariable consequent of some antecedent condition, or combination
of conditions, accepts fully the Positive mode of thought: whether he
acknowledges or not an universal antecedent on which the whole system of
nature was originally consequent, and whether that universal antecedent
is conceived as an Intelligence or not.

There is a corresponding misconception to be corrected respecting the
Metaphysical mode of thought. In repudiating metaphysics, M. Comte did
not interdict himself from analyzing or criticising any of the abstract
conceptions of the mind. He was not ignorant (though he sometimes seemed
to forget) that such analysis and criticism are a necessary part of the
scientific process, and accompany the scientific mind in all its
operations. What he condemned was the habit of conceiving these mental
abstractions as real entities, which could exert power, produce
phænomena, and the enunciation of Edition: current; Page: [271] which
could be regarded as a theory or explanation of facts. Men of the
present day with difficulty believe that so absurd a notion was ever
really entertained, so repugnant is it to the mental habits formed by
long and assiduous cultivation of the positive sciences. But those
sciences, however widely cultivated, have never formed the basis of
intellectual education in any society. It is with philosophy as with
religion: men marvel at the absurdity of other people’s tenets, while
exactly parallel absurdities remain in their own, and the same man is
unaffectedly astonished that words can be mistaken for things, who is
treating other words as if they were things every time he opens his
mouth to discuss. No one, unless entirely ignorant of the history of
thought, will deny that the mistaking of abstractions for realities
pervaded speculation all through antiquity and the middle ages. The
mistake was generalized and systematized in the famous Ideas of Plato.
The Aristotelians carried it on. Essences, quiddities, virtues residing
in things, were accepted as a bonâ fide explanation of phænomena. Not
only abstract qualities, but the concrete names of genera and species,
were mistaken for objective existences. It was believed that there were
General Substances corresponding to all the familiar classes of concrete
things: a substance Man, a substance Tree, a substance Animal, which,
and not the individual objects so called, were directly denoted by those
names. The real existence of Universal Substances was the question at
issue in the famous controversy of the later middle ages between
Nominalism and Realism, which is one of the turning points in the
history of thought, being its first struggle to emancipate itself from
the dominion of verbal abstractions. The Realists were the stronger
party, but though the Nominalists for a time succumbed, the doctrine
they rebelled against fell, after a short interval, with the rest of the
scholastic philosophy. But while universal substances and substantial
forms, being the grossest kind of realized abstractions, were the
soonest discarded, Essences, Virtues, and Occult Qualities long survived
them, and were first completely extruded from real existence by the
Cartesians. In Descartes’ conception of science, all physical phænomena
were to be explained by matter and motion, that is, not by abstractions
but by invariable physical laws: though his own explanations were many
of them hypothetical, and turned out to be erroneous. Long after him,
however, fictitious entities (as they are happily termed by Bentham)[*]
continued to be imagined as means of accounting for the more mysterious
phænomena; above all in physiology, where, under great varieties of
phrase, mysterious forces and principles were the explanation, or
substitute for explanation, of the phænomena of organized beings. To
modern philosophers these fictions are merely the abstract names of the
classes of phænomena which correspond to them; and it is one of the
Edition: current; Page: [272] puzzles of philosophy, how mankind, after
inventing a set of mere names to keep together certain combinations of
ideas or images, could have so far forgotten their own act as to invest
these creations of their will with objective reality, and mistake the
name of a phænomenon for its efficient cause. What was a mystery from
the purely dogmatic point of view, is cleared up by the historical.
These abstract words are indeed now mere names of phænomena, but were
not so in their origin. To us they denote only the phænomena, because we
have ceased to believe in what else they once designated; and the
employment of them in explanation is to us evidently, as M. Comte says,
the naïf reproduction of the phænomenon as the reason for itself: but it
was not so in the beginning. The metaphysical point of view was not a
perversion of the positive, but a transformation of the theological. The
human mind, in framing a class of objects, did not set out from the
notion of a name, but from that of a divinity. The realization of
abstractions was not the embodiment of a word, but the gradual
disembodiment of a Fetish.

The primitive tendency or instinct of mankind is to assimilate all the
agencies which they perceive in Nature, to the only one of which they
are directly conscious, their own voluntary activity. Every object which
seems to originate power, that is, to act without being first visibly
acted upon, to communicate motion without having first received it, they
hinvest, or are disposed to invest, withh life, consciousness, will.
This first rude conception of nature can scarcely, however, have been at
any time extended to all phænomena. The simplest observation, without
which the preservation of life would have been impossible, must have
pointed out many uniformities in nature, many objects which, under given
circumstances, acted exactly like one another: and whenever this was
observed, men’s natural and untutored faculties led them to form the
similar objects into a class, and to think of them together: of which it
was a natural consequence to refer effects, which were exactly alike, to
a single will, rather than to a number of wills precisely accordant. But
this single will could not be the will of the objects themselves, since
they were many: it must be the will of an invisible being, apart from
the objects, and ruling them from an unknown distance. This is
Polytheism. We are not aware that in any tribe of savages or negroes who
have been observed, Fetishism has been found totally unmixed with
Polytheism, and it is probable that the two coexisted from the earliest
period at which the human mind was capable of forming objects into
classes. Fetishism proper gradually becomes limited to objects
possessing a marked individuality. A particular mountain or river is
worshipped bodily (as it is even now by the Hindoos and the South Sea
Islanders) as a divinity in itself, not the mere residence of one, long
after invisible gods have been imagined as rulers of all the great
classes of phænomena, even intellectual and moral, as war, love, wisdom,
beauty, &c. The worship of the earth (Tellus or Pales) and of the
Edition: current; Page: [273] various heavenly bodies, was prolonged
into the heart of Polytheism. Every scholar knows, though littérateurs
and men of the world do not, that in the full vigour of the Greek
religion, the Sun and Moon, not a god and goddess thereof, were
sacrificed to as deities—older deities than Zeus and his descendants,
belonging to the earlier dynasty of the Titans (which was the mythical
version of the fact that their worship was older), and these deities had
a distinct set of fables or legends connected with them. The father of
Phaëthon and the lover of Endymion were not Apollo and Diana, whose
identification with the Sungod and the Moongoddess was a late invention.
Astrolatry, which, as M. Comte observes, is the last form of Fetishism,
survived the other forms, partly because its objects, being
inaccessible, were not so soon discovered to be in themselves inanimate,
and partly because of the persistent spontaneousness of their apparent
motions.

As far as Fetishism reached, and as long as it lasted, there was no
abstraction, or classification of objects, and no room consequently for
the metaphysical mode of thought. But as soon as the voluntary agent,
whose will governed the phænomenon, ceased to be the physical object
itself, and was removed to an invisible position, from which he or she
superintended an entire class of natural agencies, it began to seem
impossible that this being should exert his powerful activity from a
distance, unless through the medium of something present on the spot.
Through the same Natural Prejudice which made Newton unable to conceive
the possibility of his own law of gravitation without a subtle ether
filling up the intervening space, and through which the attraction could
be communicated—from this same natural infirmity of the human mind, it
seemed indispensable that the god, at a distance from the object, must
act through something residing in it, which was the immediate agent, the
god having imparted to the intermediate something the power whereby it
influenced and directed the object. When mankind felt a need for naming
these imaginary entities, they called them the nature of the object, or
its essence, or virtues residing in it, or by many other different
names. These metaphysical conceptions were regarded as intensely real,
and at first as mere instruments in the hands of the appropriate
deities. But the habit being acquired of ascribing not only substantive
existence, but real and efficacious agency, to the abstract entities,
the consequence was that when belief in the deities declined and faded
away, the entities were left standing, and a semblance of explanation of
phænomena, equal to what existed before, was furnished by the entities
alone, without referring them to any volitions. When things had reached
this point, the metaphysical mode of thought had completely substituted
itself for the theological.

Thus did the different successive states of the human intellect, even at
an early stage of its progress, overlap one another, the Fetishistic,
the Polytheistic, and the Metaphysical modes of thought coexisting even
in the same minds, while the belief in invariable laws, which
constitutes the Positive Edition: current; Page: [274] mode of thought,
was slowly winning its way beneath them all, as observation and
experience disclosed in one class of phænomena after another the laws to
which they are really subject. It was this growth of positive knowledge
which principally determined the next transition in the theological
conception of the universe, from Polytheism to Monotheism.

It cannot be doubted that this transition took place very tardily. The
conception of a unity in Nature, which would admit of attributing it to
a single will, is far from being natural to man, and only finds
admittance after a long period of discipline and preparation, the
obvious appearances all pointing to the idea of a government by many
conflicting principles. We know how high a degree both of material
civilization and of moral and intellectual development preceded the
conversion of the leading populations of the world to the belief in one
God. The superficial observations by which Christian travellers have
persuaded themselves that they found their own Monotheistic belief in
some tribes of savages, have always been contradicted by more accurate
knowledge: those who have read, for instance, Mr. Kohl’s Kitchigami,[*]
know what to think of the Great Spirit of the American Indians, who
belongs to a well-defined system of Polytheism, interspersed with large
remains of an original Fetishism. We have no wish to dispute the matter
with those who believe that Monotheism was the primitive religion,
transmitted to our race from its first parents in uninterrupted
tradition. By their own acknowledgment, the tradition was lost by all
the nations of the world except a small and peculiar people, in whom it
was miraculously kept alive, but who were themselves continually lapsing
from it, and in all the earlier parts of their history did not hold it
at all in its full meaning, but admitted the real existence of other
gods, though believing their own to be the most powerful, and to be the
Creator of the world. A greater proof of the unnaturalness of Monotheism
to the human mind before a certain period in its development, could not
well be required.* The highest form of Monotheism, Christianity, has
persisted to the present time in giving partial satisfaction to the
mental dispositions that lead to Polytheism, by admitting into its
theology the thoroughly polytheistic conception of a devil. When
Monotheism, after many centuries, made its way to the Greeks and Romans
from the small corner of the world where it existed, we know how the
notion of dæmons facilitated Edition: current; Page: [275] its
reception, by making it unnecessary for Christians to deny the existence
of the gods previously believed in, it being sufficient to place them
under the absolute power of the new God, as the gods of Olympus were
already under that of Zeus, and as the local deities of all the
subjugated nations had been subordinated by conquest to the divine
patrons of the Roman State.

In whatever mode, natural or supernatural, we choose to account for the
early Monotheism of the Hebrews, there can be no question that its
reception by the Gentiles was only rendered possible by the slow
preparation which the human mind had undergone from the philosophers. In
the age of the Cæsars nearly the whole educated and cultivated class had
outgrown the polytheistic creed, and though individually liable to
returns of the superstition of their childhood, were predisposed (such
of them as did not reject all religion whatever) to the acknowledgment
of one Supreme Providence. It is vain to object that Christianity did
not find the majority of its early proselytes among the educated class:
since, except in Palestine, its teachers and propagators were mainly of
that class—many of them, like St. Paul, well versed in the mental
culture of their time; and they had evidently found no intellectual
obstacle to the new doctrine in their own minds. We must not be deceived
by the recrudescence, at a much later date, of a metaphysical Paganism
in the Alexandrian and other philosophical schools, provoked not by
attachment to Polytheism, but by distaste for the political and social
ascendancy of the Christian teachers. The fact was, that Monotheism had
become congenial to the cultivated mind: and a belief which has gained
the cultivated minds of any society, unless put down by force, is
certain, sooner or later, to reach the multitude. Indeed the multitude
itself had been prepared for it, as already hinted, by the more and more
complete subordination of all other deities to the supremacy of Zeus;
from which the step to a single Deity, surrounded by a host of angels,
and keeping in recalcitrant subjection an army of devils, was by no
means difficult.

By what means, then, had the cultivated minds of the Roman Empire been
educated for Monotheism? By the growth of a practical feeling of the
invariability of natural laws. Monotheism had a natural adaptation to
this belief, while Polytheism naturally and ialmosti necessarily
conflicted with it. As men could not easily, and in fact never did,
suppose that beings so powerful had their power absolutely restricted,
each to its special department, the will of any divinity might always be
frustrated by another: and unless all their wills were in complete
harmony (which would itself be the most difficult to credit of all cases
of invariability, and would require beyond anything else the ascendancy
of a Supreme Deity) it was impossible that the course of any of the
phænomena under their government could be invariable. But if, on the
contrary, all the phænomena of the universe were under the exclusive and
Edition: current; Page: [276] uncontrollable influence of a single will,
it was an admissible supposition that this will might be always
consistent with itself, and might choose to conduct each class of its
operations in an invariable manner. In proportion, therefore, as the
invariable laws of phænomena revealed themselves to observers, the
theory which ascribed them all to one will began to grow plausible; but
must still have appeared improbable until it had come to seem likely
that invariability was the common rule of all nature. The Greeks and
Romans at the Christian era had reached a point of advancement at which
this supposition had become probable. The admirable height to which
geometry had already been carried, had familiarized the educated mind
with the conception of laws absolutely invariable. The logical analysis
of the intellectual processes by Aristotle had shown a similar
uniformity of law in the realm of mind. In the concrete external world,
the most imposing phænomena, those of the heavenly bodies, which by
their power over the imagination had done most to keep up the whole
system of ideas connected with supernatural agency, had been ascertained
to take place in so regular an order as to admit of being predicted with
a precision which to the notions of those days must have appeared
perfect. And though an equal degree of regularity had not been discerned
in natural phænomena generally, even the most empirical observation had
ascertained so many cases of an uniformity almost complete, that
inquiring minds were eagerly on the look-out for further indications
pointing in the same direction; and vied with one another in the
formation of theories which, though hypothetical and essentially
premature, it was hoped would turn out to be correct representations of
invariable laws governing large classes of phænomena. When this hope and
expectation became general, they were already a great encroachment on
the original domain of the theological principle. Instead of the old
conception, of events regulated from day to day by the unforeseen and
changeable volitions of a legion of deities, it seemed more and more
probable that all the phænomena of the universe took place according to
rules which must have been planned from the beginning; by which
conception the function of the gods seemed to be limited to forming the
plans, and setting the machinery in motion: their subsequent office
appeared to be reduced to a sinecure, or if they continued to reign, it
was in the manner of constitutional kings, bound by the laws to which
they had previously given their assent. Accordingly, the pretension of
philosophers to explain physical phænomena by physical causes, or to
predict their occurrence, was, up to a very late period of Polytheism,
regarded as a sacrilegious insult to the gods. Anaxagoras was banished
for it j(according to some authorities, even sentenced to death)j;
Aristotle had to fly for his life; and the mere unfounded suspicion of
it contributed greatly to the condemnation of Socrates. We are too well
acquainted with this form of the religious sentiment Edition: current;
Page: [277] even now, to have any difficulty in comprehending what must
have been its violence then. It was inevitable that philosophers should
be anxious to get rid of at least these gods, and so escape from the
particular fables which stood immediately in their way; accepting a
notion of divine government which harmonized better with the lessons
they learnt from the study of nature, and a God concerning whom no
mythos, as far as they knew, had yet been invented.

kAnd indeedk, when the idea became prevalent that the constitution of
every part of Nature had been planned from the beginning, and continued
to take place as it had been planned, this was itself a striking feature
of resemblance extending through all Nature, and affording a presumption
that the whole was the work, not of many, but of the same hand. It must
have appeared vastly more probable that there should be one indefinitely
foreseeing Intelligence and immovable Will, than hundreds and thousands
of such. The philosophers had not at that time the arguments which might
have been grounded on universal laws not yet suspected, such as the law
of gravitation and the laws of heat; but there was a multitude, obvious
even to them, of analogies and homologies in natural phænomena, which
suggested unity of plan; and a still greater number were raised up by
their active fancy, aided by their premature scientific theories, all of
which aimed at interpreting some phænomenon by the analogy of others
supposed to be better known; assuming, indeed, a much greater similarity
among the various processes of Nature, than ampler experience has since
shown to exist. The theological mode of thought thus advanced from
Polytheism to Monotheism through the direct influence of the Positive
mode of thought, not yet aspiring to complete speculative ascendancy.
But, inasmuch as the belief in the invariability of natural laws was
still imperfect even in highly cultivated minds, and in the merest
infancy in the uncultivated, it gave rise to the belief in one God, but
not in an immovable one. For many centuries the God believed in was
flexible by entreaty, was incessantly ordering the affairs of mankind by
direct volitions, and continually reversing the course of nature by
miraculous interpositions; and this is believed still, wherever the
invariability of law has established itself in men’s convictions as a
general, but not as an universal truth.

In the change from Polytheism to Monotheism, the Metaphysical mode of
thought contributed its part, affording great aid to the up-hill
struggle which the Positive spirit had to maintain against the
prevailing form of the Theological. M. Comte, indeed, has considerably
exaggerated the share of the Metaphysical spirit in this mental
revolution, since by a lax use of terms he credits the Metaphysical mode
of thought with all that is due to dialectics and negative criticism—to
the exposure of inconsistencies and absurdities in the Edition: current;
Page: [278] received religions. But this operation is quite independent
of the Metaphysical mode of thought, and was no otherwise connected with
it than in being very generally carried on by the same minds (Plato is a
brilliant example), since the most eminent efficiency in it does not
necessarily depend on the possession of positive scientific knowledge.
lThel Metaphysical spirit strictly so called, did mhoweverm contribute
largely to the advent of Monotheism. The conception of impersonal
entities, interposed between the governing deity and the phænomena, and
forming the machinery through which these are immediately produced, is
not repugnant, as the theory of direct supernatural volitions is, to the
belief in invariable laws. The entities not being, like the gods, framed
after the exemplar of men—being neither, like them, invested with human
passions, nor supposed, like them, to have power beyond the phænomena
which are the special department of each, there was no fear of offending
them by the attempt to foresee and define their action, or by the
supposition that it took place according to fixed laws. The popular
tribunal which condemned Anaxagoras had evidently not risen to the
metaphysical point of view. Hippocrates, who was concerned only with a
select and instructed class, could say with impunity, speaking of what
were called the god-inflicted diseases, that to his mind they were
neither more nor less god-inflicted than all others. The doctrine of
abstract entities was a kind of instinctive conciliation between the
observed uniformity of the facts of nature, and their dependence on
arbitrary volition; since it was easier to conceive a single volition as
setting a machinery to work, which afterwards went on of itself, than to
suppose an inflexible constancy in so capricious and changeable a thing
as volition must then have appeared. But though the régime of
abstractions was in strictness compatible with Polytheism, it demanded
Monotheism as the condition of its free development. The received
Polytheism being only the first remove from Fetishism, its gods were too
closely mixed up in the daily details of phænomena, and the habit of
propitiating them and ascertaining their will before any important
action of life was too inveterate, to admit, without the strongest shock
to the received system, the notion that they did not habitually rule by
special interpositions, but left phænomena in all ordinary cases to the
operation of the essences or peculiar natures which they had first
implanted in them. Any modification of Polytheism which would have made
it fully compatible with the Metaphysical conception of the world, would
have been more difficult to effect than the transition to Monotheism, as
Monotheism was at first conceived.

We have given, in our own way, and at some length, this important
portion of M. Comte’s view of the evolution of human thought, as a
sample of the manner in which his theory corresponds with and interprets
historical facts, and also to obviate some objections to it, grounded on
an imperfect comprehension, Edition: current; Page: [279] or rather on a
mere first glance. Some, for example, think the doctrine of the three
successive stages of speculation and belief, inconsistent with the fact
that they all three existed contemporaneously; much as if the natural
succession of the hunting, the nomad, and the agricultural state could
be refuted by the fact that there are still hunters and nomads. That the
three states were contemporaneous, that they all began before authentic
history, and still coexist, is M. Comte’s express statement: as well as
that the advent of the two later modes of thought was the very cause
which disorganized and is gradually destroying the primitive one. The
Theological mode of explaining phænomena was once universal, with the
exception, doubtless, of the familiar facts which, being even then seen
to be controllable by human will, belonged already to the Positive mode
of thought. The first and easiest generalizations of common observation,
anterior to the first traces of the scientific spirit, determined the
birth of the Metaphysical mode of thought; and every further advance in
the observation of nature, gradually bringing to light its invariable
laws, determined a further development of the Metaphysical spirit at the
expense of the Theological, this being the only medium through which the
conclusions of the Positive mode of thought and the premises of the
Theological could be temporarily made compatible. At a later period,
when the real character of the positive laws of nature had come to be in
a certain degree understood, and the theological idea had assumed, in
scientific minds, its final character, that of a God governing by
general laws, the positive spirit, having now no longer need of the
fictitious medium of imaginary entities, set itself to the easy task of
demolishing the instrument by which it had risen. But though it
destroyed the actual belief in the objective reality of these
abstractions, that belief has left behind it vicious tendencies of the
human mind, which are still far enough from being extinguished, and
which we shall presently have occasion to characterize.

The next point on which we have to touch is one of greater importance
than it seems. If all human speculation had to pass through the three
stages, we may presume that its different branches, having always been
very unequally advanced, could not pass from one stage to another at the
same time. There must have been a certain order of succession in which
the different sciences would enter, first into the metaphysical, and
afterwards into the purely positive stage; and this order M. Comte
proceeds to investigate. The result is his remarkable conception of a
scale of subordination of the sciences, being the order of the logical
dependence of those which follow on those which precede. It is not at
first obvious how a mere classification of the sciences can be not
merely a help to their study, but itself an important part of a body of
doctrine; the classification, however, is a very important part of M.
Comte’s philosophy.

He first distinguishes between the abstract and the concrete sciences.
The Edition: current; Page: [280] abstract sciences have to do with the
laws which govern the elementary facts of Nature; laws on which all
phænomena actually realized must of course depend, but which would have
been equally compatible with many other combinations than those which
actually come to pass. The concrete sciences, on the contrary, concern
themselves only with the particular combinations of phænomena which are
found in existence. For example; the minerals which compose our planet,
or are found in it, have been produced and are held together by the laws
of mechanical aggregation and by those of chemical union. It is the
business of the abstract sciences, Physics and Chemistry, to ascertain
these laws: to discover how and under what conditions bodies may become
aggregated, and what are the possible modes and results of chemical
combination. The great majority of these aggregations and combinations
take place, so far as we are aware, only in our laboratories; with these
the concrete science, Mineralogy, has nothing to do. Its business is
with those aggregates, and those chemical compounds, which form
themselves, or have at some period been formed, in the natural world.
Again, Physiology, the abstract science, investigates, by such means as
are available to it, the general laws of organization and life. Those
laws determine what living beings are possible, and maintain the
existence and determine the phænomena of those which actually exist: but
they would be equally capable of maintaining in existence plants and
animals very different from these. The concrete sciences, Zoology and
Botany, confine themselves to species which really exist, or can be
shown to have really existed: and do not concern themselves with the
mode in which even these would comport themselves under all
circumstances, but only under those which really take place. They set
forth the actual mode of existence of plants and animals, the phænomena
which they in fact present: but they set forth all of these, and take
into simultaneous consideration the whole real existence of each
species, however various the ultimate laws on which it depends, and to
whatever number of different abstract sciences these laws may belong.
The existence of a date tree, or of a lion, is nan joint result of many
natural laws, physical, chemical, biological, and even astronomical.
Abstract science deals with these laws separately, but considers each of
them in all its aspects, all its possibilities of operation: concrete
science considers them only in combination, and so far as they exist and
manifest themselves in the animals or plants of which we have
experience. The distinctive attributes of the two are summed up by M.
Comte in the expression, that concrete science relates to Beings, or
Objects, abstract science to Events.*

Edition: current; Page: [281]
The concrete sciences are inevitably later in their development than the
abstract sciences on which they depend. Not that they begin later to be
studied; on the contrary, they are the earliest cultivated, since in our
abstract investigations we necessarily set out from spontaneous facts.
But though we may make empirical generalizations, we can form no
scientific theory of concrete phænomena until the laws which govern and
explain them are first known; and those laws are the subject of the
abstract sciences. In consequence, there is not one of the concrete
studies (unless we count astronomy among them) which has received, up to
the present time, its final scientific constitution, or can be accounted
a science, except in a very loose sense, but only materials for science:
partly from insufficiency of facts, but more, because the abstract
sciences, except those at the very beginning of the scale, have not
attained the degree of perfection necessary to render real concrete
sciences possible.

Postponing, therefore, the concrete sciences, as not yet formed, but
only tending towards formation, the abstract sciences remain to be
classed. These, as marked out by M. Comte, are six in number; and the
principle which he proposes for their classification is admirably in
accordance with the conditions of our study of Nature. It might have
happened that the different classes of phænomena had depended on laws
altogether distinct; that in changing Edition: current; Page: [282] from
one to another subject of scientific study, the student left behind all
the laws he previously knew, and passed under the dominion of a totally
new set of uniformities. The sciences would then have been wholly
independent of one another; each would have rested entirely on its own
inductions, and if deductive at all, would have drawn its deductions
from premises exclusively furnished by itself. The fact, however, is
otherwise. The relation which really subsists between different kinds of
phænomena, enables the sciences to be arranged in such an order, that in
travelling through them we do not pass out of the sphere of any laws,
but merely take up additional ones at each step. In this order M. Comte
proposes to arrange them. He classes the sciences in an ascending
series, according to the degree of complexity of their phænomena; so
that each science depends on the truths of all those which precede it,
with the addition of peculiar truths of its own.

Thus, the truths of number are true of all things, and depend only on
their own laws; the science, therefore, of Number, consisting of
Arithmetic and Algebra, may be studied without reference to any other
science. The truths of Geometry presuppose the laws of Number, and a
more special class of laws peculiar to extended bodies, but require no
others: Geometry, therefore, can be studied independently of all
sciences except that of Number. Rational Mechanics presupposes, and
depends on, the laws of number and those of extension, and along with
them another set of laws, those of Equilibrium and Motion. The truths of
Algebra and Geometry nowise depend on these last, and would have been
true if these had happened to be the reverse of what we find them: but
the phænomena of equilibrium and motion cannot be understood, nor even
stated, without assuming the laws of number and extension, such as they
actually are. The phænomena of Astronomy depend on these three classes
of laws, and on the law of gravitation besides; which last has no
influence on the truths of number, geometry, or mechanics. Physics
(badly named in common English parlance Natural Philosophy) presupposes
the three mathematical sciences, and also astronomy; since all
terrestrial phænomena are affected by influences derived from the
motions of the earth and of the heavenly bodies. Chemical phænomena
depend (besides their own laws) on all the preceding, those of physics
among the rest, especially on the laws of heat and electricity;
physiological phænomena, on the laws of physics and chemistry, and their
own laws in addition. The phænomena of human society obey laws of their
own, but do not depend solely upon these: they depend upon all the laws
of organic and animal life, together with those of inorganic nature,
these last influencing society not only through their influence on life,
but by determining the physical conditions under which society has to be
carried on. “Chacun de ces degrés successifs exige des inductions qui
lui sont propres; mais elles ne peuvent jamais devenir Edition: current;
Page: [283] systématiques que sous l’impulsion déductive resultée de
tous les ordres moins compliqués.”*

Thus arranged by M. Comte in a series, of which each term represents an
advance in speciality beyond the term preceding it, and (what
necessarily accompanies increased speciality) an increase of
complexity—a set of phænomena determined by a more numerous combination
of laws; the sciences stand in the following order: 1st, Mathematics;
its three branches following one another on the same principle, Number,
Geometry, Mechanics. 2nd, Astronomy. 3rd, Physics. 4th, Chemistry. 5th,
Biology. 6th, Sociology, or the Social Science, the phænomena of which
depend on, and cannot be understood without, the principal truths of all
the other sciences. The subject matter and contents of these various
sciences are obvious of themselves, with the exception of Physics, which
is a group of sciences rather than a single science, and is again
divided by M. Comte into five departments: Barology, or the science of
weight; Thermology, or that of heat; Acoustics, Optics, and Electrology.
These he attempts to arrange on the same principle of increasing
speciality and complexity, but they hardly admit of such a scale, and M.
Comte’s mode of placing them varied at different periods. All the five
being essentially independent of one another, he attached little
importance to their order, except that barology ought to come first, as
the connecting link with astronomy, and electrology last, as the
transition to chemistry.

If the best classification is that which is grounded on the properties
most important for our purposes, this classification will stand the
test. By placing the sciences in the order of the complexity of their
subject matter, it presents them in the order of their difficulty. Each
science proposes to itself a more arduous inquiry than those which
precede it in the series; it is therefore likely to be susceptible, even
finally, of a less degree of perfection, and will certainly arrive later
at the degree attainable by it. In addition to this, each science, to
establish its own truths, needs those of all the sciences anterior to
it. The only means, for example, by which the physiological laws of life
could have been ascertained, was by distinguishing, among the
multifarious and complicated facts of life, the portion which physical
and chemical laws cannot account for. Only by thus isolating the effects
of the peculiar organic laws, did it become possible to discover what
these are. It follows that the order in which the sciences succeed one
another in the series, cannot but be, in the main, the historical order
of their development; and is the only order in which they can rationally
be studied. For this last there is an additional reason: since the more
special and complete sciences require not only the truths of the simpler
and more general ones, but still more their methods. The scientific
Edition: current; Page: [284] intellect, both in the individual and in
the race, must learn in the more elementary studies that art of
investigation and those canons of proof which are to be put in practice
in the more elevated. No intellect is properly qualified for the higher
part of the scale, without due practice in the lower.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his essay entitled “The Genesis of oScienceo,”*
and more recently in a pamphlet on “the Classification of the Sciences,”
has criticised and condemned M. Comte’s classification, and proposed a
more elaborate one of his own: and M. Littré, in his valuable
biographical and philosophical work on M. Comte (Auguste Comte et la
Philosophie Positive),[*] has at some length criticised the criticism.
Mr. Spencer is one of the small number of persons who by the solidity
and encyclopedical character of their knowledge, and their power of
co-ordination and concatenation, may claim to be the peers of M. Comte,
and entitled to a vote in the estimation of him. But after giving to his
animadversions the respectful attention due to all that comes from Mr.
Spencer, we cannot find that he has made out any case. It is always easy
to find fault with a classification. There are a hundred possible ways
of arranging any set of objects, and something may almost always be said
against the best, and in favour of the worst of them. But the merits of
a classification depend on the purposes to which it is instrumental. We
have shown the purposes for which M. Comte’s classification is intended.
Mr. Spencer has not shown that it is ill adapted to those purposes: and
we cannot perceive that his own answers any ends equally important. His
chief objection is that if the more special sciences need the truths of
the more general ones, the latter also need some of those of the former,
and have at times been stopped in their progress by the imperfect state
of sciences which follow long after them in M. Comte’s scale; so that,
the dependence being mutual, there is a consensus, but not an ascending
scale or hierarchy of the sciences.[†] That the earlier sciences derive
help from the later is undoubtedly true; it is part of M. Comte’s
theory, and amply exemplified in the details of his work. When he
affirms that one science historically precedes another, he does not mean
that the perfection of the first precedes the humblest commencement of
those which follow. Mr. Spencer does not distinguish between the
empirical stage of the cultivation of a branch of knowledge, and the
scientific stage. The commencement of every study consists in gathering
together unanalyzed facts, and treasuring up such spontaneous
generalizations as present themselves to natural sagacity. In Edition:
current; Page: [285] this stage any branch of inquiry can be carried on
independently of every other; and it is one of M. Comte’s own remarks
that the most complex, in a scientific point of view, of all studies,
the latest in his series, the study of man as a moral and social being,
since from its absorbing interest it is cultivated more or less by every
one, and pre-eminently by the great practical minds, acquired at an
early period a greater stock of just though unscientific observations
than the more elementary sciences. It is these empirical truths that the
later and more special sciences lend to the earlier; or, at most, some
extremely elementary scientific truth, which happening to be easily
ascertainable by direct experiment, could be made available for carrying
a previous science already founded, to a higher stage of development; a
re-action of the later sciences on the earlier which M. Comte not only
fully recognized, but attached great importance to systematizing.*

But though detached truths relating to the more complex order of
phænomena may be empirically observed, and a few of them even
scientifically established, contemporaneously with an early stage of
some of the sciences anterior in the scale, such detached truths, as M.
Littré justly remarks, do not constitute a science. What is known of a
subject, only becomes a science when it is made a connected body of
truth; in which the relation between the general principles and the
details is definitely made out, and each particular truth can be
recognized as a case of the operation of wider laws. This point Edition:
current; Page: [286] of progress, at which the study passes from pthep
preliminary state of mere preparation, into a science, cannot be reached
by the more complex studies until it has been attained by the simpler
ones. A certain regularity of recurrence in the celestial appearances
was ascertained empirically before much progress had been made in
geometry; but astronomy could no more be a science until geometry was a
highly advanced one, than the rule of three could have been practised
before addition and subtraction. The truths of the simpler sciences are
a part of the laws to which the phænomena of the more complex sciences
conform: and are not only a necessary element in their explanation, but
must be so well understood as to be traceable through complex
combinations, before the special laws which co-exist and co-operate with
them can be brought to light. This is all that M. Comte affirms, and
enough for his purpose.* He no doubt occasionally indulges in more
unqualified expressions than can be completely justified, regarding the
logical perfection of the construction of his series, and its exact
correspondence with the historical evolution of the sciences;
exaggerations confined to language, and which the details of his
exposition often correct. But he is sufficiently near the truth, in both
respects, for every practical purpose† Minor inaccuracies Edition:
current; Page: [287] must often be forgiven even to great thinkers. Mr.
Spencer, in the very writings in which he criticises M. Comte, affords
signal instances of them.*

Combining the doctrines, that every science is in a less advanced state
as it occupies a higher place in the ascending scale, and that all the
sciences pass through the three stages, theological, metaphysical, and
positive, it follows that the more special a science is, the tardier is
it in effecting each Edition: current; Page: [288] transition, so that a
completely positive state of an earlier science has often coincided with
the metaphysical state of the one next to it, and a purely theological
state of those qfurtherq on. This statement correctly represents the
general course of the facts, though requiring allowances in the detail.
Mathematics, for example, from the very beginning of its cultivation,
can hardly at any time have been in the theological state, though
exhibiting many traces of the metaphysical. No one, probably, ever
believed that the will of a god kept parallel lines from meeting, or
made two and two equal to four; or ever prayed to the gods to make the
square of the hypothenuse equal to more or less than the sum of the
squares of the sides. The most devout believers have recognized in
propositions of this description, a class of truths independent of the
divine omnipotence. Even among the truths which popular philosophy calls
by the misleading name of Contingent, the few which are at once exact
and obvious were probably, from the very first, excepted from the
theological explanation. M. Comte observes, after Adam Smith, that we
are not told in any age or country of a god of Weight.[*] It was
otherwise with Astronomy: the heavenly bodies were believed not merely
to be moved by gods, but to be gods themselves: and when this theory was
exploded, their movements were explained by metaphysical conceptions;
such as a tendency of Nature to perfection, in virtue of which these
sublime bodies, being left to themselves, move in the most perfect
orbit, the circle. Even Kepler was full of fancies of this description,
which only terminated when Newton, by unveiling the real physical laws
of the celestial motions, closed the metaphysical period of astronomical
science. As M. Comte remarks, our power of foreseeing phænomena, and our
power of controlling them, are the two things which destroy the belief
of their being governed by changeable wills. In the case of phænomena
which science has not yet taught us either to foresee or to control, the
theological mode of thought has not ceased to operate: men still pray
for rain, or for success in war, or to avert a shipwreck or a
pestilence, but not to put back the stars in their courses, to abridge
the time necessary for a journey, or to arrest the tides. Such vestiges
of the primitive mode of thought linger in the more intricate
departments of sciences which have attained a high degree of positive
development. The metaphysical mode of explanation, being less
antagonistic than the theological to the idea of invariable laws, is
still slower in being entirely discarded. M. Comte finds remains of it
in the sciences which are the most completely positive, with the single
exception of astronomy, reven mathematics not having, he thinks,
altogether freed itselfr from them: which is not wonderful, when we see
at how very recent a Edition: current; Page: [289] date mathematicians
have been able to give the really positive interpretation of their own
symbols.* We have already however had occasion to notice M. Comte’s
propensity to use the term metaphysical in cases containing nothing that
truly answers to his definition of the word. For instance, he considers
chemistry as tainted with the metaphysical mode of thought by the notion
of chemical affinity. He thinks that the chemists who said that bodies
combine because they have an affinity for each other, believed in a
mysterious entity residing in bodies and inducing them to combine. On
any other supposition, he thinks the statement could only mean that
bodies combine because they combine. But it really meant more. It was
the abstract expression of the doctrine, that bodies have an invariable
tendency to combine with one thing in preference to another: that the
tendencies of different substances to combine are fixed quantities, of
which the greater always prevails over the less, so that if A detaches B
from C in one case it will do so in every other; which was called having
a greater attraction, or, more technically, a greater affinity for it.
This was not a metaphysical theory, but a positive generalization, which
accounted for a great number of facts, and would have kept its place as
a law of nature, had it not been disproved by the discovery of cases in
which though A detached B from C in some circumstances, C detached it
from A in others, showing the law of elective chemical combination to be
a less simple one than had at first been supposed. In this case,
therefore, M. Comte made a mistake: and he will be found to have made
many similar ones. But in the science next after chemistry, biology, the
empty mode of explanation by scholastic entities, such as a plastic
force, a vital principle, and the like, has been kept up even to the
present day. The German physiology of the school of Oken,
notwithstanding his acknowledged genius, is almost as metaphysical as
Hegel, and there is in France a quite recent revival of the Animism of
Stahl. These metaphysical explanations, besides their inanity, did
serious harm, by directing the course of positive scientific inquiry
into wrong channels. There was indeed nothing to prevent investigating
the mode of action of the supposed plastic or vital force by observation
and experiment; but the phrases gave currency and coherence to a false
abstraction and generalization, setting inquirers to look out for one
cause of complex phenomena which undoubtedly depended on many.

According to M. Comte, chemistry entered into the positive stage with
Lavoisier, in the latter half of the last century (in a subsequent
treatise he places the date a generation earlier); and biology at the
beginning of the present, when Bichat drew the fundamental distinction
between nutritive or vegetative and properly animal life, and referred
the properties of organs to Edition: current; Page: [290] the general
laws of the component tissues. The most complex of all sciences, the
Social, had not, he maintained, become positive at all, but was the
subject of an ever-renewed and barren contest between the theological
and the metaphysical modes of thought. To make this highest of the
sciences positive, and thereby complete the positive character of all
human speculations, was the principal aim of his labours, and he
believed himself to have accomplished it in the last three volumes of
his Treatise. But the term Positive is not, any more than Metaphysical,
always used by M. Comte in the same meaning. There never can have been a
period in any science when it was not in some degree positive, since it
always professed to draw conclusions from experience and observation. M.
Comte would have been the last to deny that previous to his own
speculations, the world possessed a multitude of truths, of greater or
less certainty, on social subjects, the evidence of which was obtained
by inductive or deductive processes from observed sequences of
phænomena. Nor could it be denied that the best writers on subjects upon
which so many men of the highest mental capacity had employed their
powers, had accepted sthe positive point of view as thoroughlys, and
rejected the theological and metaphysical as decidedly, as M. Comte
himself. Montesquieu; even Macchiavelli; tTurgot,t Adam Smith, and the
political economists universally, both in France and in England;
Bentham, and all thinkers initiated by him,—had a full conviction that
social phænomena conform to invariable laws, the discovery and
illustration of which was their great object as speculative thinkers.
All that can be said is, that those philosophers did not get so far as
M. Comte in discovering the methods best adapted to bring these laws to
light. It was not, therefore, reserved for M. Comte to make sociological
inquiries positive. But what he really meant by making a science
positive, is what we will call, with M. Littré, giving it its final
scientific constitution; in other words, discovering or proving, and
pursuing to their consequences, those of its truths which are fit to
form the connecting links among the rest: truths which are to it what
the law of gravitation is to astronomy, what the elementary properties
of the tissues are to physiology, and we will add (though M. Comte did
not) what the laws of association are to psychology. This is an
operation which, when accomplished, puts an end to the empirical period,
and enables the science to be conceived as a co-ordinated and coherent
body of doctrine. This is what had not yet been done for sociology; and
the hope of effecting it was, from his early years, the prompter and
incentive of all M. Comte’s philosophic labours.

It was with a view to this that he undertook that wonderful
systematization of the philosophy of all the antecedent sciences, from
mathematics to physiology, which, if he had done nothing else, would
have stamped him, in all Edition: current; Page: [291] minds competent
to appreciate it, as one of the principal thinkers of the age. To make
its nature intelligible to those who are not acquainted with it, we must
explain what we mean by the philosophy of a science, as distinguished
from the science itself. The proper meaning of philosophy we take to be,
whatu, in the main,u the ancients understood by it—the scientific
knowledge of Man, as an intellectual, moral, and social being. Since his
intellectual faculties include his knowing faculty, the science of Man
includes everything that man can know, so far as regards his mode of
knowing it: in other words, the whole doctrine of the conditions of
human knowledge. The philosophy of a Science thus comes to mean the
science itself, considered not as to its results, the truths which it
ascertains, but as to the processes by which the mind attains them, the
marks by which it recognizes them, and the co-ordinating and methodizing
of them with a view to the greatest clearness of conception and the
fullest and readiest availability for use: in one word, the logic of the
science. M. Comte has accomplished this for the first five of the
fundamental sciences, with a success which can hardly be too much
admired. We never reopen even the least admirable part of this survey,
the volume on chemistry and biology (which was behind the actual state
of those sciences when first written, and is far in the rear of them
now), without a renewed sense of the great reach of its speculations,
and a conviction that the way to a complete rationalizing of those
sciences, still very imperfectly conceived by most who cultivate them,
has been shown nowhere so successfully as there.

Yet, for a correct appreciation of this great philosophical achievement,
we ought to take account of what has not been accomplished, as well as
of what has. Some of the chief deficiencies and infirmities of M.
Comte’s system of thought will be found, as is usually the case, in
close connexion with its greatest successes.

The philosophy of Science consists of two principal parts; the methods
of investigation, and the requisites of proof. The one points out the
roads by which the human intellect arrives at conclusions, the other the
mode of testing their evidence. The former if complete would be an
Organon of Discovery, the latter of Proof. It is to the first of these
that M. Comte principally confines himself, and he treats it with a
degree of perfection hitherto unrivalled. Nowhere is there anything
comparable, in its kind, to his survey of the resources which the mind
has at its disposal for investigating the laws of phænomena; the
circumstances which render each of the fundamental modes of exploration
suitable or unsuitable to each class of phænomena; the extensions and
transformations which the process of investigation has to undergo in
adapting itself to each new province of the field of study; and the
especial gifts with which every one of the fundamental sciences enriches
the Edition: current; Page: [292] method of positive inquiry, each
science in its turn being the best fitted to bring to perfection one
process or another. These, and many cognate subjects, such as the theory
of Classification, and the proper use of scientific Hypotheses, M. Comte
has treated with a completeness of insight which leaves little to be
desired. Not less admirable is his survey of the most comprehensive
truths that had been arrived at by each science, considered as to their
relation to the general sum of human knowledge, and their logical value
as aids to its further progress. But after all this, there remains a
further and distinct question. We are taught the right way of searching
for results, but when a result has been reached, how shall we know that
it is true? How assure ourselves that the process has been performed
correctly, and that our premises, whether consisting of generalities or
of particular facts, really prove the conclusion we have grounded on
them? On this question M. Comte throws no light. He supplies no test of
proof. As regards deduction, he neither recognizes the syllogistic
system of Aristotle and his successors (the insufficiency of which is as
evident as its utility is real) nor proposes any other in lieu of it:
and of induction he has no canons whatever. He does not seem to admit
the possibility of any general criterion by which to decide whether a
given inductive inference is correct or not. Yet he does not, with Dr.
Whewell, regard an inductive theory as proved if it accounts for the
facts: on the contrary, he sets himself in the strongest opposition to
those scientific hypotheses which, like the luminiferous ether, are not
susceptible of direct proof, and are accepted on the sole evidence of
their aptitude for explaining phænomena. He maintains that no hypothesis
is legitimate unless it is susceptible of verification, and that none
ought to be accepted as true unless it can be shown not only that it
accords with the facts, but that its falsehood would be inconsistent
with them. He therefore needs a test of inductive proof; and in
assigning none, he seems to give up as impracticable the main problem of
Logic properly so called. At the beginning of his treatise he speaks of
a doctrine of Method, apart from particular applications, as
conceivable, but not needful: method, according to him, is learnt only
by seeing it in operation, and the logic of a science can only usefully
be taught through the science itself. Towards the end of the work, he
assumes a more decidedly negative tone, and treats the very conception
of studying Logic otherwise than in its applications as chimerical. He
got on, in his subsequent writings, to considering it as wrong. This
indispensable part of Positive Philosophy he not only left to be
supplied by others, but did all that depended on him to discourage them
from attempting it.

This hiatus in M. Comte’s system is not unconnected with a defect in his
original conception of the subject matter of scientific investigation,
which has been generally noticed, for it lies on the surface, and is
more apt to be exaggerated than overlooked. It is often said of him that
he rejects the study Edition: current; Page: [293] of causes. This is
not, in the correct acceptation, true, for it is only questions of
ultimate origin, and of Efficient as distinguished from what are called
Physical causes, that he rejects. The causes that he regards as
inaccessible are causes which are not themselves phænomena. Like other
people he admits the study of causes, in every sense in which one
physical fact can be the cause of another. But he has an objection to
the word cause; he will only consent to speak of Laws of Succession: and
depriving himself of the use of a word which has a Positive meaning, he
misses the meaning it expresses. He sees no difference between such
generalizations as Kepler’s laws, and such as the theory of gravitation.
He fails to perceive the real distinction between the laws of succession
and coexistence which thinkers of a different school call Laws of
Phænomena, and those of what they call the action of Causes: the former
exemplified by the succession of day and night, the latter by the
earth’s rotation which vproducesv it. The succession of day and night is
as much an invariable sequence, as the alternate exposure of opposite
sides of the earth to the sun. Yet day and night are not the causes of
one another; why? Because their sequence, though invariable in our
experience, is not unconditionally so: those facts only succeed each
other, provided that the presence and absence of the sun succeed each
other, and if this alternation were to cease, we might have either day
or night unfollowed by one another. There are thus two kinds of
uniformities of succession, the one unconditional, the other conditional
on the first: laws of causation, and other successions dependent on
those laws. All ultimate laws are laws of causation, and the only
universal law beyond the pale of mathematics is the law of universal
causation, namely, that every phænomenon has a phænomenal cause; has
some phænomenon other than itself, or some combination of phænomena, on
which it is invariably and unconditionally consequent. It is on the
universality of this law that the possibility rests of establishing a
canon of Induction. A general proposition inductively obtained is only
then proved to be true, when the instances on which it rests are such
that if they have been correctly observed, the falsity of the
generalization would be inconsistent with the constancy of causation;
with the universality of the fact that the phænomena of nature take
place according to invariable laws of succession.* It is probable,
therefore, that M. Comte’s determined abstinence from the word and
Edition: current; Page: [294] the idea of Cause, had much to do with his
inability to conceive an Inductive Logic, by diverting his attention
from the only basis upon which it could be founded.

We are afraid it must also be said, though shown only by slight
indications in his fundamental work, and coming out in full evidence
only in his later writings—that M. Comte, at bottom, was not so
solicitous about completeness of proof as becomes a positive
philosopher, and that the unimpeachable objectivity, as he would have
called it, of a conception—its exact correspondence to the realities of
outward fact—was not, with him, an indispensable condition of adopting
it, if it was subjectively useful, by affording facilities to the mind
for grouping phænomena. This appears very curiously in his chapters on
the philosophy of Chemistry. He recommends, as a judicious use of “the
degree of liberty left to our intelligence by the end and purpose of
positive science,”[*] that we should accept as a convenient
generalization the doctrine that all chemical composition is between two
elements only; that every substance which our analysis decomposes, let
us say into four elements, has for its immediate constituents two
hypothetical substances, each compounded of two simpler ones. There
would have been nothing to object to in this as a scientific hypothesis,
assumed tentatively as a means of suggesting experiments by which its
truth wmayw be tested. With this for its destination, the conception
would have been legitimate and philosophical; the more so, as, if
confirmed, it would have afforded an explanation of the fact that some
substances which analysis shows to be composed of the same elementary
substances in the same proportions, differ in their general properties,
as for instance, sugar and gum.* And if, besides affording a reason for
difference between things which differ, the hypothesis had afforded a
reason for agreement between things which agree; if the xtwo immediate
constituents into which the quaternary compound was resolvedx, could
have been so chosen as to bring ythe casey within the analogies of some
known class of binary compounds (which it is easy to suppose possible,
and which in some particular instances actually happens);† the
universality of binary composition Edition: current; Page: [295] would
have been a successful example of an hypothesis in anticipation of a
positive theory, to give a direction to inquiry which might end in its
being either proved or abandoned. But M. Comte evidently thought that
even though it should never be proved—however many cases of chemical
composition might always remain in which the theory was still as
hypothetical as at first—so long as it was not actually disproved (which
it is scarcely in the nature of the case that it should ever be) it
would deserve to be retained, for its mere convenience in bringing a
large body of phænomena under a general conception. In a résumé of the
general zprinciplesz of the positive method at the end of the work, he
claims, in express terms, an unlimited license of adopting “without any
vain scruple” hypothetical conceptions of this sort; “in order to
satisfy, within proper limits, our just mental inclinations, which
always turn, with an instinctive predilection, towards simplicity,
continuity, and generality of conceptions, while always respecting the
reality of external laws in so far as accessible to us” (Vol. VI, pp.
639-40). “The most philosophic point of view leads us to conceive the
study of natural laws as destined to represent the external world so as
to give as much satisfaction to the essential inclinations of our
intelligence, as is consistent with the degree of exactitude commanded
by the aggregate of our practical wants” (ibid., p. 642). Among these
“essential inclinations” he includes not only our “instinctive
predilection for order and harmony,” [ibid.] which makes us relish any
conception, even fictitious, that helps to reduce phænomena to system;
but even our feelings of taste, “les convenances purement esthétiques,”
which, he says, have a legitimate part in the employment of the “genre
de liberté resté facultatif pour notre intelligence.” [Ibid., pp.
646-7.] After the due satisfaction of our “most eminent mental
inclinations,” there will still remain “a considerable margin of
indeterminateness, which should be made use of to give a direct
gratification to our besoin of ideality, by embellishing our scientific
thoughts, without injury to their essential reality” (ibid., p. 647). In
consistency with all this, M. Comte warns thinkers against too severe a
scrutiny of the exact truth of scientific laws, and stamps with “severe
reprobation” those who break down “by too minute an investigation”
generalizations already made, without being able to substitute others
(ibid., p. 639): as in the case of Lavoisier’s general theory of
chemistry, which would have made that science more satisfactory than at
present to “the instinctive inclinations of our intelligence” if it had
turned out true, but unhappily it did not [Vol. III, pp. 131 ff.]. These
mental dispositions in M. Comte account for his not having found or
sought a logical criterion of proof; but they are scarcely consistent
with his inveterate hostility to the hypothesis of the luminiferous
ether [Vol. II, p. 302], which certainly gratifies our “predilection for
order and harmony,” not to say our “besoin d’idéalité,” in no ordinary
degree. This notion of the “destination” of the study of natural
Edition: current; Page: [296] laws is to our minds a complete
dereliction of the essential principles which form the Positive
conception of science; and contained the germ of the perversion of his
own philosophy which marked his later yearsa. It might be interesting,
but bnot worth while hereb, to attempt to penetrate to the just thought
which misled M. Comte, for there is almost always a grain of truth in
the errors of an original and powerful mind.

There is another grave aberration in M. Comte’s view of the method of
positive science, which though not more unphilosophical than the last
mentioned, is of greater practical importance. He rejects totally, as an
invalid process, psychological observation properly so called, or in
other words, internal consciousness, at least as regards our
intellectual operations. He gives no place in his series cto the science
ofc Psychology, and always speaks of it with contempt. The study of
mental phænomena, or, as he expresses it, of moral and intellectual
functions [Vol. III, p. 530], has a place in his scheme, under the head
of Biology, but only as a branch of physiology. Our knowledge of the
human mind must, he thinks, be acquired by observing other people. How
we are to observe other people’s mental operations, or how interpret the
signs of them without having learnt what the signs mean by knowledge of
ourselves, he does not state. But it is clear to him that we can learn
very little about the feelings, and nothing at all about the intellect,
by self-observation. Our intelligence can observe all other things, but
not itself: we cannot observe ourselves observing, or observe ourselves
reasoning: and if we could, attention to this reflex operation would
annihilate its object, by stopping the process observed.

There is little need for an elaborate refutation of a fallacy respecting
which the only wonder is that it should impose on any one. Two answers
may be given to it. In the first place, M. Comte might be referred to
experience, and to the writings of his countryman M. Cardaillac and our
own Sir William Hamilton, for proof that the mind can not only be
conscious of, but attend to, more than one, and even a considerable
number, of impressions at once.* It is true that attention is weakened
by being divided; and this forms a special difficulty in psychological
observation, as psychologists (Sir William Hamilton in particular) have
fully recognized; but a difficulty is not an impossibility. Secondly, it
might have occurred to M. Comte that a fact may be studied through the
medium of memory, not at the very moment of our perceiving it, but the
moment after: and this is really the mode in which our Edition: current;
Page: [297] best knowledge of our intellectual acts is generally
acquired. We reflect on what we have been doing, when the act is past,
but when its impression in the memory is still fresh. Unless in one of
these ways, we could not have acquired the knowledge, which nobody
denies us to have, of what passes in our minds. M. Comte would scarcely
have affirmed that we are not aware of our own intellectual operations.
We know of our observings and our reasonings, either at the very time,
or by memory the moment after; in either case, by direct knowledge, and
not (like things done by us in a state of somnambulism) merely by their
results. This simple fact destroys the whole of M. Comte’s argument.
Whatever we are directly aware of, we can directly observe.

And what Organon for the study of “the moral and intellectual functions”
does M. Comte offer, in lieu of the direct mental observation which he
repudiates? We are almost ashamed to say, that it is Phrenology! [Vol.
III, p. 539 n.] Not, indeed, he says, as a science formed, but as one
still to be created; for he rejects almost all the special organs
imagined by phrenologists, and accepts only their general division of
the brain into the three regions of the propensities, the sentiments,
and the intellect,* and the subdivision of the latter region between the
organs of meditation and those of observation. Yet this mere first
outline of an apportionment of the mental functions among different
organs, he regards as extricating the mental study of man from the
metaphysical stage, and elevating it to the positive. The condition of
mental science would be sad indeed if this were its best chance of being
positive; for the later course of physiological observation and
speculation has not tended to confirm, but to discredit, the
phrenological hypothesis. And even if that hypothesis were true,
psychological observation would still be necessary; for how is it
possible to ascertain the correspondence between two things, by
observation of only one of them? To establish a relation between mental
functions and cerebral conformations, requires not only a parallel
system of observations applied to each, but (as M. Comte himself, with
some inconsistency, acknowledges) an analysis of the mental faculties,
“des diverses facultés élémentaires,” (Vol. III, p. 573), conducted
without any reference to the physical conditions, since the proof of the
theory would lie in the correspondence between the division of the brain
into organs and that of the mind into faculties, each shown by separate
evidence. To accomplish this analysis requires direct psychological
study carried to a high pitch of perfection; it being necessary, among
other things, to investigate the degree in which mental character is
created by circumstances, since no one supposes that cerebral
conformation does all, and circumstances nothing. The phrenological
study of Mind thus supposes as its necessary preparation the whole of
the Association psychology. Without, then, rejecting any aid which study
Edition: current; Page: [298] of the brain and nerves can afford to
psychology (and it has afforded, and will yet afford, much), we may
affirm that M. Comte has done nothing for the constitution of the
positive method of mental science. He refused to profit by the very
valuable commencements made by his predecessors, especially by Hartley,
Brown, and James Mill (if indeed any of those philosophers were known to
him), and left the psychological branch of the positive method, as well
as psychology itself, to be put in their true position as a part of
Positive Philosophy by successors who duly placed themselves at the
twofold point of view of physiology and psychology, Mr. Bain and Mr.
Herbert Spencer. This great mistake is not a mere hiatus in M. Comte’s
system, but the parent of serious errors in his attempt to create a
Social Science. He is indeed very skilful in estimating the effect of
circumstances in moulding the general character of the human race; were
he not, his historical theory could be of little worth: but in
appreciating the influence which circumstances exercise, through
psychological laws, in producing diversities of character, collective or
individual, he is sadly at fault.

After this summary view of M. Comte’s conception of Positive Philosophy,
it remains to give some account of his more special and equally
ambitious attempt to create the Science of Sociology, or, as he
expresses it, to elevate the study of social phænomena to the positive
state.

He regarded all who profess any political opinions as hitherto divided
between the adherents of the theological and those of the metaphysical
mode of thought: the former deducing all their doctrines from divine
ordinances, the latter from abstractions. This assertion, however,
cannot be intended in the same sense as when the terms are applied to
the sciences of inorganic nature; for it is impossible that acts
evidently proceeding from the human will could be ascribed to the agency
(at least immediate) of either divinities or abstractions. No one ever
regarded himself or his fellow-man as a mere piece of machinery worked
by a god, or as the abode of an entity which was the true author of what
the man himself appeared to do. True, it was believed that the gods, or
God, could move or change human wills, as well as control their
consequences, and prayers were offered to them accordingly, rather as
able to overrule the spontaneous course of things, than as at each
instant carrying it on. On the whole, however, the theological and
metaphysical conceptions, in their application to sociology, had
reference not to the production of phænomena, but to the rule of duty,
and conduct in life. It is this which was based, either on a divine
will, or on abstract mental conceptions, which, by an illusion of the
rational faculty, were invested with objective validity. On the one
hand, the established rules of morality were everywhere referred to a
divine origin. In the majority of countries the entire civil and
criminal law was looked upon as revealed from above; and it is to the
petty military communities which escaped this delusion, that man is
indebted for Edition: current; Page: [299] being now a progressive
being. The fundamental institutions of the state were almost everywhere
believed to have been divinely established, and to be still, in a
greater or less degree, of divine authority. The divine right of certain
lines of kings to rule, and even to rule absolutely, was but lately the
creed of the dominant party in most countries of Europe; while the
divine right of popes and bishops to dictate men’s beliefs (and not
respecting the invisible world alone) is still striving, though under
considerable difficulties, to rule mankind. When these opinions began to
be out of date, a rival theory presented itself to take their place.
There were, in truth, many such theories, and to some of them the term
metaphysical, in M. Comte’s sense, cannot justly be applied. All
theories in which the ultimate standard of institutions and rules of
action was the happiness of mankind, and observation and experience the
guides (and some such there have been in all periods of free
speculation), are entitled to the name Positive, whatever, in other
respects, their imperfections may be. But these were a small minority.
M. Comte was right in affirming that the prevailing schools of moral and
political speculation, when not theological, have been metaphysical.
They affirmed that moral rules, and even political institutions, were
not means to an end, the general good, but corollaries evolved from the
conception of Natural Rights. This was especially the case in all the
countries in which the ideas of publicists were the offspring of the
Roman Law. The legislators of opinion on these subjects, when not
theologians, were lawyers: and the Continental lawyers followed the
Roman jurists, who followed the Greek metaphysicians, in acknowledging
as the ultimate source of right and wrong in morals, and consequently in
institutions, the imaginary law of the imaginary being Nature. The first
systematizers of morals in Christian Europe, on any other than a purely
theological basis, the writers on International Law, reasoned wholly
from these premises, and transmitted them to a long line of successors.
This mode of thought reached its culmination in Rousseau, in whose hands
it became as powerful an instrument for destroying the past, as it was
impotent for directing the future. The complete victory which this
philosophy gained, in speculation, over the old doctrines, was
temporarily followed by an equally complete practical triumph, the
French Revolution: when, having had, for the first time, a full
opportunity of developing its tendencies, and showing what it could not
do, it failed so conspicuously as to determine a partial reaction to the
doctrines of feudalism and Catholicism. Between these and the political
metaphysics (metapolitics as Coleridge called it)[*] of the Revolution,
society has since oscillated; raising up in the process a hybrid
intermediate party, termed Conservative, or the party of Order, which
has no doctrines of its own, but attempts to hold the scales even
between the Edition: current; Page: [300] two others, borrowing
alternately the arguments of each, to use as weapons against whichever
of the two seems at the moment most likely to prevail.

Such, reduced to a very condensed form, is M. Comte’s dversiond of the
state of European opinion on politics and society. An Englishman’s
criticism would be, that it describes well enough the general division
of political opinion in France and the countries which follow her lead,
but not in England, or the communities of English origin: in all of
which, divine right died out with the Jacobites, and the law of nature
and natural rights have never been favourites even with the extreme
popular party, who preferred to rest their claims on the historical
traditions of their own country, and on maxims drawn from its law books,
and since they outgrew this standard, almost always base them on general
expediency. In England, the preference of one form of government to
another seldom turns on anything but the practical consequences which it
produces, or which are expected from it. M. Comte can point to little of
the nature of metaphysics in English politics, except “la metaphysique
constitutionnelle,”[*] a name he chooses to give to the conventional
fiction by which the occupant of the throne is supposed to be the source
from whence all power emanates, while nothing can be further from the
belief or intention of anybody than that such should really be the case.
Apart from this, which is a matter of forms and words, and has no
connexion with any belief except belief in the proprieties, the severest
criticism can find nothing either worse or better, in the modes of
thinking either of our conservative or of our liberal party, than a
particularly shallow and flimsy kind of positivism. The working classes
indeed, or some portion of them, perhaps still rest their claim to
universal suffrage on abstract right, in addition to more substantial
reasons, and thus far and no farther does metaphysics prevail in the
region of English politics. But politics is not the eentiree art of
social existence: ethics is fa stillf deeper and more vital part of it:
and in that, as much in England as elsewhere, the current opinions are
still divided between the theological mode of thought and the
metaphysical. What is the whole doctrine of Intuitive Morality, which
reigns supreme wherever the idolatry of Scripture texts has abated and
the influence of Bentham’s philosophy has not reached, but the
metaphysical state of ethical science? What else, indeed, is the whole à
priori philosophy, in morals, jurisprudence, psychology, logic, even
physical science, for it does not always keep its hands off that, the
oldest domain of observation and experiment? It has the universal
diagnostic of the metaphysical mode of thought, in the Comtean sense of
the word; that of erecting a mere creation of the mind into a test or
norma of external truth, and presenting the abstract expression of the
beliefs already entertained, as the Edition: current; Page: [301] reason
and evidence which justifies them. Of those who still adhere to the old
opinions we need not speak; but when one of the most vigorous as well as
boldest thinkers that English speculation has yet produced, full of the
true scientific spirit, Mr. Herbert Spencer, places in the front of his
philosophy the doctrine that the ultimate test of the truth of a
proposition is the inconceivableness of its negative; when, following in
the steps of Mr. Spencer, an able expounder of positive philosophy like
Mr. Lewes, in his meritorious and by no means superficial work on
Aristotle, after laying, very justly, the blame of almost every error of
the ancient thinkers on their neglecting to verify their opinions,
announces that there are two kinds of verification, the Real and the
Ideal, the ideal test of truth being that its negative is unthinkable,
and by the application of that test judges that gravitation must be
universal even in the stellar regions, because in the absence of proof
to the contrary, “the idea of matter without gravity is
unthinkable;”[*]—when those from whom it was least to be expected thus
set up acquired necessities of thought in the minds of one or two
generations as evidence of real necessities in the universe, we must
admit that the metaphysical mode of thought still rules the higher
philosophy, even in the department of inorganic nature, and far more in
all that relates to man as a moral, intellectual, and social being.

But, while M. Comte is so far in the right, we often, as already
intimated, find him using the name metaphysical to denote certain
practical conclusions, instead of a particular kind of theoretical
premises. Whatever goes by the different names of the revolutionary, the
radical, the democratic, the liberal, the free-thinking, the sceptical,
or the negative and critical school or party in religion, politics, or
philosophy, all passes with him under the designation of metaphysical,
and whatever he has to say about it forms part of his description of the
metaphysical school of social science. He passes in review, one after
another, what he deems the leading doctrines of the revolutionary school
of politics, and dismisses them all as mere instruments of attack upon
the old social system, with no permanent validity as social truth.

He assigns only this humble rank to the first of all the articles of the
liberal creed, “the absolute right of free examination, or the dogma of
unlimited liberty of conscience.”[†] As far as this doctrine only means
that opinions, and their expression, should be exempt from legal
restraint, either in the form of prevention or of penalty, M. Comte is a
firm adherent of it: but the moral right of every human being, however
ill-prepared by the necessary instruction and discipline, to erect
himself into a judge of the most intricate as well as the most important
questions that can occupy the human intellect, he resolutely denies.
“There is no liberty of conscience,” he said in Edition: current; Page:
[302] an early work, “in astronomy, in physics, in chemistry, even in
physiology, in the sense that every one would think it absurd not to
accept in confidence the principles established in those sciences by the
competent persons. If it is otherwise in politics, the reason is merely
because, the old doctrines having gone by and the new ones not being yet
formed, there are not properly, during the interval, any established
opinions.”[*] When first mankind outgrew the old doctrines, an appeal
from doctors and teachers to the outside public was inevitable and
indispensable, since without the toleration and encouragement of
discussion and criticism from all quarters, it would have been
impossible for any new doctrines to grow up. But in itself, the practice
of carrying the questions which more than all others require special
knowledge and preparation, before the incompetent tribunal of common
opinion, is, he contends, radically irrational, and will and ought to
cease when once mankind have again made up their minds to a system of
doctrine. The prolongation of this provisional state, producing an
ever-increasing divergence of opinions, is already, according to him,
extremely dangerous, since it is only when there is a tolerable
unanimity respecting the rule of life, that a real moral control can be
established over the self-interest and passions of individuals. Besides
which, when every man is encouraged to believe himself a competent judge
of the most difficult social questions, he cannot be prevented from
thinking himself competent also to the most important public duties, and
the baneful competition for power and official functions spreads
constantly downwards to a lower and lower grade of intelligence. In M.
Comte’s opinion, the peculiarly complicated nature of sociological
studies, and the great amount of previous knowledge and intellectual
discipline requisite for them, together with the serious consequences
that may be produced by even temporary errors on such subjects, render
it necessary in the case of ethics and politics, still more than of
mathematics and physics, that whatever legal liberty may exist of
questioning and discussing, the opinions of mankind should really be
formed for them by an exceedingly small number of minds of the highest
class, trained to the task by the most thorough and laborious mental
preparation: and that the questioning of their conclusions by any one,
not of an equivalent grade of intellect and instruction, should be
accounted equally presumptuous, and more blamable, than the attempts
occasionally made by sciolists to refute the Newtonian astronomy. All
this is, in a sense, true: but we confess our sympathy with those who
feel towards it like the man in the story, who being asked whether he
admitted that six and five make eleven, refused to give an answer until
he knew what use was to be made of it. The doctrine is one of a class of
truths which, unless completed by other truths, are so liable to
perversion, that we may fairly decline Edition: current; Page: [303] to
take notice of them except in connexion with some definite application.
In justice to M. Comte it should be said that he does not wish this
intellectual dominion to be exercised over an ignorant people. Far from
him is the thought of promoting the allegiance of the mass to scientific
authority by withholding from them scientific knowledge. He holds it the
duty of society to bestow on every one who grows up to manhood or
womanhood as complete a course of instruction in every department of
science, from mathematics to sociology, as can possibly be made general:
and his ideas of what is possible in that respect are carried to a
length to which few are prepared to follow him. There is something
startling, though, when closely looked into, not Utopian or chimerical,
in the amount of positive knowledge of the most varied kind which he
believes may, by good methods of teaching, be made the common
inheritance of all persons with ordinary faculties who are born into the
world: not the mere knowledge of results, to which, except for the
practical arts, he attaches only secondary value, but knowledge also of
the mode in which those results were attained, and the evidence on which
they rest, so far as it can be known and understood by those who do not
devote their lives to its study.

We have stated thus fully M. Comte’s opinion on the most fundamental
doctrine of liberalism, because it is the clue to much of his general
conception of politics. If his object had only been to exemplify by that
doctrine the purely negative character of the principal liberal and
revolutionary schools of thought, he need not have gone so far: it would
have been enough to say, that the mere liberty to hold and express any
creed, cannot itself be that creed. Every one is free to believe and
publish that two and two make ten, but the important thing is to know
that they make four. M. Comte has no difficulty in making out an equally
strong case against the other principal tenets of what he calls the
revolutionary school; since all that they generally amount to is, that
something ought not to be: which cannot possibly be the whole truth, and
which M. Comte, in general, will not admit to be even part of it. Take
for instance the doctrine which denies to governments any initiative in
social progress, restricting them to the function of preserving order,
or in other words keeping the peace: an opinion which, so far as
grounded on so-called rights of the individual, he justly regards as
purely metaphysical; but does not recognize that it is also widely held
as an inference from the laws of human nature and human affairs, and
therefore, whether true or false, as a Positive doctrine. Believing with
M. Comte that there are no absolute truths in the political art, nor
indeed in any art whatever, we agree with him that the laisser faire
doctrine, stated without large qualifications, is both unpractical and
unscientific; but it does not follow that those who assert it are not,
nineteen times out of twenty, practically nearer the truth than those
who deny it. The doctrine of Equality meets no better fate at M. Comte’s
hands. He Edition: current; Page: [304] regards it as the erection into
an absolute dogma of a mere protest against the inequalities which came
down from the middle ages, and ganswerg no legitimate end in modern
society. He observes, that mankind in a normal state, having to act
together, are necessarily, in practice, organized and classed with some
reference to their unequal aptitudes, natural or acquired, which demand
that some should be under the direction of others: scrupulous regard
being at the same time had to the fulfilment towards all, of “the claims
rightfully inherent in the dignity of a human being; the aggregate of
which, still very insufficiently appreciated, will constitute more and
more the principle of universal morality as applied to daily use. . . .
. a grand moral obligation, which has never been directly denied since
the abolition of slavery” (Vol. IV, p. 54). There is not a word to be
said against these doctrines: but the practical question is one which M.
Comte never even entertains—viz., when, after being properly educated,
people are left to find their places for themselves, do they not
spontaneously class themselves in a manner much more conformable to
their unequal or dissimilar aptitudes, than governments or social
institutions are likely to do it for them? The Sovereignty of the
People, again,—that metaphysical axiom which in France and the rest of
the Continent has so long been the theoretic basis of radical and
democratic politics,—he regards as of a purely negative character,
signifying the right of the people to rid themselves by insurrection of
a social order that has become oppressive; but, when erected into a
positive principle of government, which condemns indefinitely all
superiors to “an arbitrary dependence upon the multitude of their
inferiors,” he considers it as a sort of “transportation to hpeoplesh of
the divine right so much reproached to kings” (ibid., pp. 55-6). On the
doctrine as a metaphysical dogma or an absolute principle, this
criticism is just; but there is also a Positive doctrine, without any
pretension to being absolute, which claims the direct participation of
the governed in their own government, not as a natural right, but as a
means to important ends, under the conditions and with the limitations
which those ends impose. The general result of M. Comte’s criticism on
the revolutionary philosophy, is that he deems it not only incapable of
aiding the necessary reorganization of society, but a serious impediment
thereto, by setting up, on all the great interests of mankind, the mere
negation of authority, direction, or organization, as the most perfect
state, and the solution of all problems: the extreme point of this
aberration being reached by Rousseau and his followers, when they
extolled the savage state, as an ideal from which civilization was only
a degeneracy, more or less marked and complete.

The state of sociological speculation being such as has been
described—divided between a feudal and theological school, now effete,
and a democratic Edition: current; Page: [305] and metaphysical one, of
no value except for the destruction of the former; the problem, how to
render the social science positive, must naturally have presented
itself, more or less distinctly, to superior minds. M. Comte examines
and criticises, for the most part justly, some of the principal efforts
which have been made by individual thinkers for this purpose. But the
weak side of his philosophy comes out prominently in his strictures on
the only systematic attempt yet made by any body of thinkers, to
constitute a science, not indeed of social phænomena generally, but of
one great class or division of them. We mean, of course, political
economy, which (with a reservation in favour of the speculations of Adam
Smith as valuable preparatory studies for science) he deems
unscientific, unpositive, and a mere branch of metaphysics, that
comprehensive category of condemnation in which he places all attempts
at positive science which are not in his opinion directed by a right
scientific method. Any one acquainted with the writings of political
economists need only read his few pages of animadversions on them (Vol.
IV, pp. 193-205), to learn how extremely superficial M. Comte can
sometimes be. He affirms that they have added nothing really new to the
original aperçus of Adam Smith; when every one who has read them knows
that they have added so much as to have changed the whole aspect of the
science, besides rectifying and clearing up in the most essential points
the aperçus themselves. He lays an almost puerile stress, for the
purpose of disparagement, on the discussions about the meaning of words
which are found in the best books on political economy, as if such
discussions were not an indispensable accompaniment of the progress of
thought, and abundant in the history of every physical science. On the
whole question he has but one remark of any value, and that he
misapplies; namely, that the study of the conditions of national wealth
as a detached subject is unphilosophical, because, all the different
aspects of social phænomena acting and reacting on one another, they
cannot be rightly understood apart: which by no means proves that the
material and industrial phænomena of society are not, even by
themselves, susceptible of useful generalizations, but only that these
generalizations must necessarily be relative to a given form of
civilization and a given stage of social advancement. This, we
apprehend, is what no political economist would deny. None of them
pretend that the laws of wages, profits, values, prices, and the like,
set down in their treatises, would be istrictly true, or many of them
true at all,i in the savage state (for example), or in a community
composed of masters and slaves. But they do think, with good reason,
that whoever understands the political economy of a country with the
complicated and manifold civilization of the nations of Europe, can
deduce without difficulty the political economy of any other state of
society, with Edition: current; Page: [306] the particular circumstances
of which he is equally well acquainted.* We do not pretend that
political economy has never been prosecuted or taught in a contracted
spirit. As often as a study is cultivated by narrow minds, they will
draw from it narrow conclusions. If a political economist is deficient
in general knowledge, he will exaggerate the importance and universality
of the limited class of truths which he knows. All kinds of scientific
men are liable to this imputation, and M. Comte is never weary of urging
it against them; reproaching them with their narrowness of mind, the
petty scale of their thoughts, their incapacity for large views, and the
stupidity of those they occasionally attempt beyond the bounds of their
own subjects. Political economists do not deserve these reproaches more
than other classes of positive inquirers, but less than most. The
principal error of narrowness with which they are frequently chargeable,
is that of regarding, not any economical doctrine, but their present
experience of mankind, as of universal validity; mistaking temporary or
local phases of human character for human nature itself; having no faith
in the wonderful pliability of the human mind; deeming it impossible, in
spite of the strongest evidence, that the earth can produce human beings
of a different type from that which is familiar to them in their own
age, or even, perhaps, in their own country. The only security against
this narrowness is a liberal mental cultivation, and all it proves is
that a person is not likely to be a good political economist who is
nothing else.

Thus far, we have had to do with M. Comte, as a sociologist, only in his
critical capacity. We have now to deal with him as a constructor—the
author of a sociological system. The first question is that of the
Method proper to the study. His view of this is highly instructive.

The Method proper to the Science of Society must be, in substance, the
same as in all other sciences; the interrogation and interpretation of
experience, by the twofold process of Induction and Deduction. But its
mode of practising these operations has features of peculiarity. In
general, Induction furnishes to science the laws of the elementary
facts, from which, when known, those of the complex combinations are
thought out deductively: specific observation of complex phænomena
yields no general laws, or only empirical ones; its scientific function
is to verify the laws obtained by deduction. Edition: current; Page:
[307] This mode of philosophizing is not adequate to the exigencies of
sociological investigation. In social phænomena the elementary facts are
feelings and actions, and the laws of these are the laws of human
nature, social facts being the results of human acts and situations.
Since, then, the phænomena of man in society result from his nature as
an individual being, it might be thought that the proper mode of
constructing a positive Social Science must be by deducing it from the
general laws of human nature, using the facts of history merely for
verification. Such, accordingly, has been the conception of social
science by many of those who have endeavoured to render it positive,
particularly by the school of Bentham. M. Comte considers this as an
error. We may, he says, draw from the universal laws of human nature
some conclusions (though even these, we think, rather precarious)
concerning the very earliest stages of human progress, of which there
are either no, or very imperfect, historical records. But as society
proceeds in its development, its phænomena are determined, more and
more, not by the simple tendencies of universal human nature, but by the
accumulated influence of past generations over the present. The human
beings themselves, on the laws of whose nature the facts of history
depend, are not abstract or universal but historical human beings,
already shaped, and made what they are, by human society. This being the
case, no powers of deduction could enable any one, starting from the
mere conception of the Being Man, placed in a world such as the earth
may have been before the commencement of human agency, to predict and
calculate the phænomena of his development such as they have in fact
proved. If the facts of history, empirically considered, had not given
rise to any generalizations, a deductive study of history could never
have reached higher than more or less plausible conjecture. By good
fortune (for the case might easily have been otherwise) the history of
our species, looked at as a comprehensive whole, does exhibit a
determinate course, a certain order of development: though history alone
cannot prove this to be a necessary law, as distinguished from a
temporary accident. Here, therefore, begins the office of Biology (or,
as we should say, of Psychology) in the social science. The universal
laws of human nature are part of the data of sociology, but in using
them we must reverse the method of the deductive physical sciences: for
while, in these, specific experience commonly serves to verify laws
arrived at by deduction, in sociology it is specific experience which
suggests the laws, and deduction which verifies them. If a sociological
theory, collected from historical evidence, contradicts the established
general laws of human nature; if (to use M. Comte’s instances) it
implies, in the mass of mankind, any very decided natural bent, either
in a good or in a bad direction; if it supposes that the reason, in
average human beings, predominates over the desires, or the
disinterested desires over the personal; we may know that history has
been misinterpreted, and that the theory is false. On Edition: current;
Page: [308] the other hand, if laws of social phænomena, empirically
generalized from history, can when once suggested be affiliated to the
known laws of human nature; if the direction actually taken by the
developments and changes of human society, can be seen to be such as the
properties of man and of his dwelling-place made antecedently probable,
the empirical generalizations are raised into positive laws, and
Sociology becomes a science.

Much has been said and written for centuries past, by the practical or
empirical school of politicians, in condemnation of theories founded on
principles of human nature, without an historical basis; and the
theorists, in their turn, have successfully retaliated on the
practicalists. But we know not any thinker who, before M. Comte, had
penetrated to the philosophy of the matter, and placed the necessity of
historical studies as the foundation of sociological speculation on the
true footing. From this time any political thinker who fancies himself
able to dispense with a connected view of the great facts of history, as
a chain of causes and effects, must be regarded as below the level of
the age; while the vulgar mode of using history, by looking in it for
parallel cases, as if any cases were parallel, or as if a single
instance, or even many instances not compared and analyzed, could reveal
a law, will be more than ever, and irrevocably, discredited.

The inversion of the ordinary relation between Deduction and Induction
is not the only point in which, according to M. Comte, the Method proper
to Sociology differs from that of the sciences of inorganic nature. The
common order of science proceeds from the details to the whole. The
method of Sociology should proceed from the whole to the details. There
is no universal principle for the order of study, but that of proceeding
from the known to the unknown; finding our way to the facts at whatever
point is most open to our observation. In the phænomena of the social
state, the collective phænomenon is more accessible to us than the parts
of which it is composed. This is already, in a great degree, true of the
mere animal body. It is essential to the idea of an organism, and it is
even more true of the social organism than of the individual. The state
of every part of the social whole at any time, is intimately connected
with the contemporaneous state of all the others. Religious belief,
philosophy, science, the fine arts, the industrial arts, commerce,
navigation, government, all are in close mutual dependence on one
another, insomuch that when any considerable change takes place in one,
we may know that a parallel change in all the others has preceded or
will follow it. The progress of society from one general state to
another is not an aggregate of partial changes, but the product of a
single impulse, acting through all the partial agencies, and can
therefore be most easily traced by studying them together. Could it even
be detected in them separately, its true nature could not be understood
except by examining them in the ensemble. In constructing, therefore, a
theory of society, all the different Edition: current; Page: [309]
aspects of the social organization must be taken into consideration at
once.

Our space is not consistent with inquiring into all the limitations of
this doctrine. It requires many of which M. Comte’s theory takes no
account. There is one, in particular, dependent on a scientific artifice
familiar to students of science, especially of the applications of
mathematics to the study of nature. When an effect depends on several
variable conditions, some of which change less, or more slowly, than
others, we are often able to determine, either by reasoning or by
experiment, what would be the law of variation of the effect if its
changes depended only on some of the conditions, the remainder being
supposed constant. The law so found will be sufficiently near the truth
for all times and places in which the latter set of conditions do not
vary greatly, and will be a basis to set out from when it becomes
necessary to allow for the variations of those conditions also. Most of
the conclusions of social science applicable to practical use are of
this description. M. Comte’s system makes no room for them. We have seen
how he deals with the part of them which are the most scientific in
character, the generalizations of political economy.

There is one more point in the general philosophy of sociology requiring
notice. Social phænomena, like all others, present two aspects, the
statical, and the dynamical; the phænomena of equilibrium, and those of
motion. The statical aspect is that of the laws of social existence,
considered abstractedly from progress, and confined to what is common to
the progressive and the stationary state. The dynamical aspect is that
of social progress. The statics of society is the study of the
conditions of existence and permanence of the social state. The dynamics
studies the laws of its evolution. The first is the theory of the
consensus, or interdependence of social phænomena. The second is the
theory of their filiation.

The first division M. Comte, in his great work, treats in a much more
summary manner than the second; and it forms, to our thinking, the
weakest part of the treatise. He can hardly have seemed even to himself
to have originated, in the statics of society, anything new,* unless his
revival of the Catholic idea of a Spiritual Power may be so considered.
The remainder, with the exception of detached thoughts, in which even
his feeblest productions are always rich, is trite, while in our
judgment far from being always true.

He begins by a statement of the general properties of human nature which
Edition: current; Page: [310] make social existence possible. Man has a
spontaneous propensity to the society of his fellow-beings, and seeks it
instinctively, for its own sake, and not out of regard to the advantages
it procures for him, which, in many conditions of humanity, must appear
to him very problematical. Man has also a certain, though moderate,
amount of natural benevolence. On the other hand, these social
propensities are by nature weaker than his selfish ones; and the social
state, being mainly kept in existence through the former, involves an
habitual antagonism between the two. Further, our wants of all kinds,
from the purely organic upwards, can only be satisfied by means of
labour, nor does bodily labour suffice, without the guidance of
intelligence. But labour, especially when prolonged and monotonous, is
naturally hateful, and mental labour the most irksome of all; and hence
a second antagonism, which must exist in all societies whatever. The
character of the society is principally determined by the degree in
which the better incentive, in each of these cases, makes head against
the worse. In both the points, human nature is capable of great
amelioration. The social instincts may approximate much nearer to the
strength of the personal ones, though never entirely coming up to it;
the aversion to labour in general, and to intellectual labour in
particular, may be much weakened, and the predominance of the
inclinations over the reason greatly diminished, though never completely
destroyed. The spirit of improvement results from the increasing
strength of the social instincts, combined with the growth of an
intellectual activity, which guiding the personal propensities, inspires
each individual with a deliberate desire to improve his condition. The
personal instincts left to their own guidance, and the indolence and
apathy natural to mankind, are the sources which mainly feed the spirit
of Conservation. The struggle between the two spirits is an universal
incident of the social state.

The next of the universal elements in human society is family life;
which M. Comte regards as originally the sole, and always the principal,
source of the social feelings, and the only school open to mankind in
general, in which unselfishness can be learnt, and the feelings and
conduct demanded by social relations be made habitual. M. Comte takes
this opportunity of declaring his opinions on the proper constitution of
the family, and in particular of the marriage institution. They are of
the most orthodox and conservative sort. M. Comte adheres not only to
the popular Christian, but to the Catholic view of marriage in its
utmost strictness, and rebukes Protestant nations for having tampered
with the indissolubility of the engagement, by permitting divorce. He
admits that the marriage institution has been, in various respects,
beneficially modified with the advance of society, and that we may not
yet have reached the last of these modifications; but strenuously
maintains that such changes cannot possibly affect what he regards as
the essential principles of the institution—the irrevocability of the
engagement, Edition: current; Page: [311] and the complete subordination
of the wife to the husband, and of women generally to men; which are
precisely the great vulnerable points of the existing constitution of
society on this important subject. It is unpleasant to have to say it of
a philosopher, but the incidents of his life which have been made public
by his biographers afford an explanation of one of these two opinions:
he had quarrelled with his wife.* At a later period, under the influence
of circumstances equally personal, his opinions and feelings respecting
women were very much modified, without becoming more rational: in his
final scheme of society, instead of being treated as grown children,
they were exalted into goddesses: honours, privileges, and immunities,
were lavished on them, only not simple justice. On the other question,
the irrevocability of marriage, M. Comte must receive credit for
impartiality, since the opposite doctrine would have better suited his
personal convenience: but we can give him no other credit, for his
argument is not only futile but refutes itself. He says that with
liberty of divorce, life would be spent in a constant succession of
experiments and failures; and in the same breath congratulates himself
on the fact, that modern manners and sentiments have in the main
prevented the baneful effects which the toleration of divorce in
Protestant countries might have been expected to produce. He did not
perceive that if modern habits and feelings have successfully resisted
what he deems the tendency of a less rigorous marriage law, it must be
because modern habits and feelings are inconsistent with the perpetual
series of new trials which he dreaded. If there are tendencies in human
nature which seek change and variety, there are others which demand
fixity, in matters which touch the daily sources of happiness; and one
who had studied history as much as M. Comte, ought to have known that
ever since the nomad mode of life was exchanged for the agricultural,
the latter tendencies have been always gaining ground on the former. All
experience testifies that regularity in domestic relations is almost in
direct proportion to industrial civilization. Idle life, and military
life with its long intervals of idleness, are the conditions to which
either sexual profligacy, or prolonged vagaries of imagination on that
subject, are congenial. Busy men have no time for them, and have too
much other occupation for their thoughts: they require that home should
be a place of rest, not of incessantly renewed excitement and
disturbance. In the condition, therefore, into which modern society has
passed, there is no probability that marriages would often be contracted
without a sincere desire on both sides that they should be permanent.
That this has been the case hitherto in countries where divorce was
permitted, we have on M. Comte’s own showing: and everything Edition:
current; Page: [312] leads us to believe that the power, if granted
elsewhere, would in general be used only for its legitimate purpose—for
enabling those who, by a blameless or excusable mistake, have lost their
first throw for domestic happiness, to free themselves (with due regard
for all interests concerned) from the burthensome yoke, and try, under
more favourable auspices, another chance. Any further discussion of
these great social questions would evidently be incompatible with the
nature and limits of the present paper.

Lastly, a phænomenon universal in all societies, and constantly assuming
a wider extension as they advance in their progress, is the co-operation
of mankind one with another, by the division of employments and
interchange of commodities and services; a communion which extends to
nations as well as individuals. The economic importance of this
spontaneous organization of mankind as joint workers with and for one
another, has often been illustrated. Its moral effects, in connecting
them by their interests, and as a more remote consequence, by their
sympathies, are equally salutary. But there are some things to be said
on the other side. The increasing specialization of all employments; the
division of mankind into innumerable small fractions, each engrossed by
an extremely minute fragment of the business of society, is not without
inconveniences, as well moral as intellectual, which, if they could not
be remedied, would be a serious abatement from the benefits of advanced
civilization. The interests of the whole—the bearings of things on the
ends of the social union—are less and less present to the minds of men
who have so contracted a sphere of activity. The insignificant detail
which forms their whole occupation—the infinitely minute wheel they help
to turn in the machinery of society—does not arouse or gratify any
feeling of public spirit, or unity with their fellow-men. Their work is
a mere tribute to physical necessity, not the glad performance of a
social office. This lowering effect of the extreme division of labour
tells most of all on those who are set up as the lights and teachers of
the rest. A man’s mind is as fatally narrowed, and his feelings towards
the great ends of humanity as miserably stunted, by giving all his
thoughts to the classification of a few insects or the resolution of a
few equations, as to sharpening the points or putting on the heads of
pins. The “dispersive speciality”[*] of the present race of scientific
men, who, unlike their predecessors, have a positive aversion to
enlarged views, and seldom either know or care for any of the interests
of mankind beyond the narrow limits of their pursuit, is dwelt on by M.
Comte as one of the great and growing evils of the time, and the one
which most retards moral and intellectual regeneration. To contend
against it is one of the main purposes towards which he thinks the
forces of society should be directed. The obvious remedy is a large and
liberal general education, preparatory to all special pursuits: and this
is M. Comte’s opinion: but the education of youth Edition: current;
Page: [313] is not in his estimation enough: he requires an agency set
apart for obtruding upon all classes of persons through the whole of
life, the paramount claims of the general interest, and the
comprehensive ideas that demonstrate the mode in which human actions
promote or impair it. In other words, he demands a moral and
intellectual authority, charged with the duty of guiding men’s opinions
and enlightening and warning their consciences; a Spiritual Power, whose
judgments on all matters of high moment should deserve, and receive, the
same universal respect and deference which is paid to the united
jjudgmentj of astronomers in matters astronomical. The very idea of such
an authority implies that an unanimity has been attained, at least in
essentials, among moral and political thinkers, corresponding or
approaching to that which already exists in the other sciences. There
cannot be this unanimity, until the true methods of positive science
have been applied to all subjects, as completely as they have been
applied to the study of physical science: to this, however, there is no
real obstacle; and when once it is accomplished, the same degree of
accordance will naturally follow. The undisputed authority which
astronomers possess in astronomy, will be possessed on the great social
questions by Positive Philosophers; to whom will belong the spiritual
government of society, subject to two conditions: that they be entirely
independent, within their own sphere, of the temporal government, and
that they be peremptorily excluded from all share in it, receiving
instead the entire conduct of education.

This is the leading feature in M. Comte’s conception of a regenerated
society; and however much this ideal differs from that which is implied
more or less confusedly in the negative philosophy of the last three
centuries, we hold the amount of truth in the two to be about the same.
M. Comte has got hold of half the truth, and the so-called liberal or
revolutionary school possesses the other half; each sees what the other
does not see, and seeing it exclusively, draws consequences from it
which to the other appear mischievously absurd. It is, without doubt,
the necessary condition of mankind to receive most of their opinions on
the authority of those who have specially studied the matters to which
they relate. The wisest can act on no other rule, on subjects with which
they are not themselves thoroughly conversant; and the mass of mankind
have always done the like on all the great subjects of thought and
conduct, acting with implicit confidence on opinions of which they did
not know, and were often incapable of understanding, the grounds, but on
which as long as their natural guides were unanimous they fully relied,
growing uncertain and sceptical only when these became divided, and
teachers who as far as they could judge were equally competent,
professed contradictory opinions. Any doctrines which come recommended
by the nearly universal verdict of instructed minds will no doubt
continue to be, as Edition: current; Page: [314] they have hitherto
been, accepted without misgiving by the rest. The difference is, that
with the wide diffusion of scientific education among the whole people,
demanded by M. Comte, their faith, however implicit, would not be that
of ignorance: it would not be the blind submission of dunces to men of
knowledge, but the intelligent deference of those who know much, to
those who know still more. It is those who have some knowledge of
astronomy, not those who have none at all, who best appreciate how
prodigiously more Lagrange or Laplace knew than themselves. This is what
can be said in favour of M. Comte. On the contrary side it is to be
said, that in order that this salutary ascendancy over opinion should be
exercised by the most eminent thinkers, it is not necessary that they
should be associated and organized. The ascendancy will come of itself
when the unanimity is attained, without which it is neither desirable
nor possible. It is because astronomers agree in their teaching that
astronomy is trusted, and not because there is an Academy of Sciences or
a Royal Society issuing decrees or passing resolutions. A constituted
moral authority can only be required when the object is not merely to
promulgate and diffuse principles of conduct, but to direct the detail
of their application; to declare and inculcate, not duties, but each
person’s duty, as was attempted by the spiritual authority of the middle
ages. From this extreme application of his principle M. Comte does not
shrink. A function of this sort, no doubt, may often be very usefully
discharged by individual members of the speculative class; but if
entrusted to any organized body, would involve nothing less than a
spiritual despotism. This however is what M. Comte really contemplated,
though it would practically nullify that peremptory separation of the
spiritual from the temporal power, which he justly deemed essential to a
wholesome state of society. Those whom an irresistible public opinion
invested with the right to dictate or control the acts of rulers, though
without the means of backing their advice by force, would have all the
real power of the temporal authorities, without their labours or their
responsibilities. M. Comte would probably have answered that the
temporal rulers, having the whole legal power in their hands, would
certainly not pay to the spiritual authority more than a very limited
obedience: which amounts to saying that the ideal form of society which
he sets up, is only fit to be an ideal because it cannot possibly be
realized.

That education should be practically directed by the philosophic class,
when there is a philosophic class who have made good their claim to the
place in opinion hitherto filled by the clergy, would be natural and
indispensable. But that all education should be in the hands of a
centralized authority, whether composed of clergy or of philosophers,
and be consequently all framed on the same model, and directed to the
perpetuation of the same type, is a state of things which instead of
becoming more acceptable, will assuredly be more repugnant to mankind,
with every step of their Edition: current; Page: [315] progress in the
unfettered exercise of their highest faculties. We shall see, kin the
Second Partk, the evils with which the conception of the new Spiritual
Power is pregnant, coming out into full bloom in the more complete
development which M. Comte gave to the idea in his later years.

After this unsatisfactory attempt to trace the outline of Social
Statics, M. Comte passes to a topic on which he is much more at home—the
subject of his most eminent speculations; Social Dynamics, or the laws
of the evolution of human society.

Two questions meet us at the outset: Is there a natural evolution in
human affairs? and is that evolution an improvement? M. Comte resolves
them both in the affirmative by the same answer. The natural progress of
society consists in the growth of our human attributes, comparatively to
our animal and our purely organic ones: the progress of our humanity
towards an ascendancy over our animality, ever more nearly approached
though incapable of being completely realized. This is the character and
tendency of human development, or of what is called civilization; and
the obligation of seconding this movement—of working in the direction of
it—is the nearest approach which M. Comte makes in this treatise to a
general principle or standard of morality.

But as our more eminent, and peculiarly human, faculties are of various
orders, moral, intellectual, and æsthetic, the question presents itself,
is there any one of these whose development is the predominant agency in
the evolution of our species? According to M. Comte, the main agent in
the progress of mankind is their intellectual development. Not because
the intellectual is the most powerful part of our nature, for, limited
to its inherent strength, it is one of the weakest: but because it is
the guiding part, and acts not with its own strength alone, but with the
united force of all parts of our nature which it can draw after it. In a
social state the feelings and propensities cannot act with their full
power, in a determinate direction, unless the speculative intellect
places itself at their head. The passions are, in the individual man, a
more energetic power than a mere intellectual conviction; but the
passions tend to divide, not to unite, mankind: it is only by a common
belief that passions are brought to work together, and become a
collective force instead of forces neutralizing one another. Our
intelligence is first awakened by the stimulus of our animal wants and
of our stronger and coarser desires; and these for a long time almost
exclusively determine the direction in which our intelligence shall
work: but once roused to activity, it assumes more and more the
management of the operations of which stronger impulses are the
prompters, and constrains them to follow its lead, not by its own
strength, but because in the play of antagonistic forces, the path it
points out is (in scientific phraseology) the direction of least
resistance. Personal interests Edition: current; Page: [316] and
feelings, in the social state, can only obtain the maximum of
satisfaction by means of co-operation, and the necessary condition of
co-operation is a common belief. All human society, consequently, is
grounded on a system of fundamental opinions, which only the speculative
faculty can provide, and which, when provided, directs our other
impulses in their mode of seeking their gratification. And hence the
history of opinions, and of the speculative faculty, has always been the
leading element in the history of mankind.

This doctrine has been combated by Mr. Herbert Spencer, in the pamphlet
already referred to; and we will quote, in his own words, the theory he
propounds in opposition to it:—

Ideas do not govern and overthrow the world; the world is governed or
overthrown by feelings, to which ideas serve only as guides. The social
mechanism does not rest finally upon opinions, but almost wholly upon
character. Not intellectual anarchy, but moral antagonism, is the cause
of political crises. All social phænomena are produced by the totality
of human emotions and beliefs, of which the emotions are mainly
predetermined, while the beliefs are mainly postdetermined. Men’s
desires are chiefly inherited; but their beliefs are chiefly acquired,
and depend on surrounding conditions; and the most important surrounding
conditions depend on the social state which the prevalent desires have
produced. The social state at any time existing, is the resultant of all
the ambitions, self-interest, fears, reverences, indignations,
sympathies, &c., of ancestral citizens and existing citizens. The ideas
current in this social state must, on the average, be congruous with the
feelings of citizens, and therefore, on the average, with the social
state these feelings have produced. Ideas wholly foreign to this social
state cannot be evolved, and if introduced from without, cannot get
accepted—or, if accepted, die out when the temporary phase of feeling
which caused their acceptance ends. Hence, though advanced ideas, when
once established, act upon society and aid its further advance, yet the
establishment of such ideas depends on the fitness of society for
receiving them. Practically, the popular character and the social state
determine what ideas shall be current; instead of the current ideas
determining the social state and the character. The modification of
men’s moral natures, caused by the continuous discipline of social life,
which adapts them more and more to social relations, is therefore the
chief proximate cause of social progress.*

A great part of these statements would have been acknowledged as true by
M. Comte, and belong as much to his theory as to Mr. Spencer’s. The
re-action of all other mental and social elements upon the intellectual
not only is fully recognized by him, but his philosophy of history makes
great use of it, pointing out that the principal intellectual changes
could not have taken place unless changes in other elements of society
had preceded; but also showing that these were themselves consequences
of prior intellectual changes. It will not be found, on a fair
examination of what M. Comte has written, that he has overlooked any of
the truth that there is in Mr. Spencer’s Edition: current; Page: [317]
theory. He would not indeed have said (what Mr. Spencer apparently
wishes us to say) that the effects which can be historically traced, for
example to religion, were not produced by the belief in God, but by
reverence and fear of him. He would have said that the reverence and
fear presuppose the belief: that a God must be believed in before he can
be feared or reverenced. The whole influence of the belief in a God upon
society and civilization, depends on the powerful human sentiments which
are ready to attach themselves to the belief; and yet the sentiments are
only a social force at all, through the definite direction given to them
by that or some other intellectual conviction; nor did the sentiments
spontaneously throw up the belief in a God, since in themselves they
were equally capable of gathering round some other object. Though it is
true that men’s passions and interests often dictate their opinions, or
rather decide their choice among the two or three forms of opinion which
the existing condition of human intelligence renders possible, this
disturbing cause is confined to morals, politics, and religion; and it
is the intellectual movement in other regions than these, which is at
the root of all the great changes in human affairs. It was not human
emotions and passions which discovered the motion of the earth, or
detected the evidence of its antiquity; which exploded Scholasticism,
and inaugurated the exploration of nature; which invented printing,
paper, and the mariner’s compass. Yet the Reformation, the English and
French Revolutions, and still greater moral and social changes yet to
come, are direct consequences of these and similar discoveries. Even
alchemy and astrology were not believed because people thirsted for gold
and were anxious to pry into the future, for these desires are as strong
now as they were then: but because alchemy and astrology were
conceptions natural to a particular stage in the growth of human
knowledge, and consequently determined during that stage the particular
means whereby the passions which always exist, sought their
gratification. To say that men’s intellectual beliefs do not determine
their conduct, is like saying that the ship is moved by the steam and
not by the steersman. The steam indeed is the motive power; the
steersman, left to himself, could not advance the vessel a single inch;
yet it is the steersman’s will and the steersman’s knowledge which
decide in what direction it shall move and whither it shall go.

Examining next what is the natural order of intellectual progress among
mankind, M. Comte observes, that as their general mode of conceiving the
universe must give its character to all their conceptions of detail, the
determining fact in their intellectual history must be the natural
succession of theories of the universe; which, it has been seen,
consists of three stages, the theological, the metaphysical, and the
positive. The passage of mankind through these stages, including the
successive modifications of the theological conception by the rising
influence of the other two, is, to M. Comte’s Edition: current; Page:
[318] mind, the most decisive fact in the evolution of humanity.
Simultaneously, however, there has been going on throughout history a
parallel movement in the purely temporal department of things,
consisting of the gradual decline of the military mode of life
(originally the chief occupation of all freemen) and its replacement by
the industrial. M. Comte maintains that there is a necessary connexion
and interdependence between this historical sequence and the other: and
he easily shows that the progress of industry and that of positive
science are correlative; man’s power to modify the facts of nature
evidently depending on the knowledge he has acquired of their laws. We
do not think him equally successful in showing a natural connexion
between the theological mode of thought and the military system of
society: but since they both belong to the same age of the world—since
each is, in itself, natural and inevitable, and they are together
modified and together undermined by the same cause, the progress of
science and industry, M. Comte is justified in considering them as
linked together, and the movement by which mankind emerge from them as a
single evolution.

These propositions having been laid down as the first principles of
social dynamics, M. Comte proceeds to verify and apply them by a
connected view of universal history. This survey nearly fills two large
volumes, above a third of the work, in all of which there is scarcely a
sentence that does not add an idea. We regard it as by far his greatest
achievement, except his review of the sciences, and in some respects
more striking even than that. We wish it were practicable in the compass
of an essay like the present, to give even a faint conception of the
extraordinary merits of this historical analysis. It must be read to be
appreciated. Whoever disbelieves that the philosophy of history can be
made a science, should suspend his judgment until he has read these
volumes of M. Comte. We do not affirm that they would certainly change
his opinion; but we would strongly advise him to give them a chance.

We shall not attempt the vain task of abridgment. A few words are all we
can give to the subject. M. Comte confines himself to the main stream of
human progress, looking only at the races and nations that led the van,
and regarding as the successors of a people not their actual
descendants, but those who took up the thread of progress after them.
His object is to characterize truly, though generally, the successive
states of society through which the advanced guard of our species has
passed, and the filiation of these states on one another—how each grew
out of the preceding and was the parent of the following state. A more
detailed explanation, taking into account minute differences and more
special and local phænomena, M. Comte does not aim at, though he does
not avoid it when it falls in his path. Here, as in all his other
speculations, we meet occasional misjudgments, and his historical
correctness in minor matters is now and then at fault; but we may well
wonder that it is not oftener so, considering the vastness of the field,
and a passage Edition: current; Page: [319] in one of his prefaces in
which he says of himself that he rapidly amassed the materials for his
great enterprise (Vol. VI, p. 34). This expression in his mouth does not
imply what it would in that of the majority of men, regard being had to
his rare capacity of prolonged and concentrated mental labour: and it is
wonderful that he so seldom gives cause to wish that his collection of
materials had been less “rapid.” But (as he himself remarks) in an
inquiry of this sort the vulgarest facts are the most important. A
movement common to all mankind—to all of them at least who do move—must
depend on causes affecting them all; and these, from the scale on which
they operate, cannot require abstruse research to bring them to light:
they are not only seen, but best seen, in the most obvious, most
universal, and most undisputed phænomena. Accordingly M. Comte lays no
claim to new views respecting the mere facts of history; he takes them
as he finds them, builds almost exclusively on those concerning which
there is no dispute, and only tries what positive results can be
obtained by combining them. Among the vast mass of historical
observations which he has grouped and co-ordinated, if we have found any
errors they are in things which do not affect his main conclusions. The
chain of causation by which he connects the spiritual and temporal life
of each era with one another and with the entire series, will be found,
we think, in all essentials, irrefragable. When local or temporary
disturbing causes have to be taken into the account as modifying the
general movement, criticism has more to say. But this will only become
important when the attempt is made to write the history or delineate the
character of some given society on M. Comte’s principles.

lSuch doubtful statements, or misappreciations of states of society, as
we have remarked, are confined to cases which stand more or less apart
from the principal line of development of the progressive societies. For
instance, he makes greatly too much of what, with many other Continental
thinkers, he calls the Theocratic state. He regards this as a natural,
and at one time almost an universal, stage of social progress, though
admitting that it either never existed or speedily ceased in the two
ancient nations to which mankind are chiefly indebted for being
permanently progressive. We hold it doubtful if there ever existed what
M. Comte means by a theocracy. There was indeed no lack of societies in
which, the civil and penal law being supposed to have been divinely
revealed, the priests were its authorized interpreters. But this is the
case even in Mussulman countries, the extreme opposite of theocracy. By
a theocracy we understand to be meant, and we understand M. Comte to
mean, a society founded on caste, and in which the speculative,
necessarily identical with the priestly caste, has the temporal
government in its hands or under its control. We believe that no such
state of things ever existed in the societies commonly cited as
theocratic. There is Edition: current; Page: [320] no reason to think
that in any of them, the king, or chief of the government, was ever,
unless by occasional usurpation, a member of the priestly caste.* It was
not so in Israel, even in the time of the Judges; Jephtha, for example,
was a Gileadite, of the tribe of Manasseh, and a military captain, as
all governors in such an age and country needed to be. Priestly rulers
only present themselves in two anomalous cases, of which next to nothing
is known: the Mikados of Japan and the Grand Lamas of Thibet: in neither
of which instances was the general constitution of society one of caste,
and in the latter of them the priestly sovereignty is as nominal as it
has become in the former. India is the typical specimen of the
institution of caste—the only case in which we are certain that it ever
really existed, for its existence anywhere else is a matter of mmore or
less probablem inference in the remote past. But in India, where the
importance of the sacerdotal order was greater than in any other
recorded state of society, the king not only was not a priest, but,
consistently with the religious law, could not be one: he belonged to a
different caste. The Brahmins were invested with an exalted character of
sanctity, and an enormous amount of civil privileges; the king was
enjoined to have a council of Brahmin advisers; but practically he took
their advice or disregarded it exactly as he pleased. As is observed by
the historian who first threw the light of reason on Hindoo society,†
the king, though in dignity, Edition: current; Page: [321] to judge by
the written code, he seemed vastly inferior to the Brahmins, had always
the full power of a despotic monarch: the reason being that he had the
command of the army, and the control of the public revenue. There is no
case known to authentic history in which either of these belonged to the
sacerdotal caste. Even in the cases most favourable to them, the
priesthood had no voice in temporal affairs, except the
“consultative”[*] voice which M. Comte’s theory allows to every
spiritual power. His collection of materials must have been unusually
“rapid” in this instance, for he regards almost all the societies of
antiquity, except the Greek and Roman, as theocratic, even Gaul under
the Druids, and Persia under Darius; admitting, however, that in these
two countries, when they emerge into the light of history, the theocracy
had already been much broken down by military usurpation. By what
evidence he could have proved that it ever existed, we confess ourselves
unable to divine.

The only other imperfection worth noticing here, which we find in M.
Comte’s view of history, is that he has a very insufficient
understanding of the peculiar phænomena of English development; though
he recognizes, and on the whole correctly estimates, its exceptional
character in relation to the general European movement. His failure
consists chiefly in want of appreciation of Protestantism; which, like
almost all thinkers, even unbelievers, who have lived and thought
exclusively in a Catholic atmosphere, he sees and knows only on its
negative side, regarding the Reformation as a mere destructive movement,
stopped short in too early a stage. He does not seem to be aware that
Protestantism has any positive influences, other than the general ones
of Christianity; and misses one of the most important facts connected
with it, its remarkable efficacy, as contrasted with Catholicism, in
cultivating the intelligence and conscience of the individual believer.
Protestantism, when not merely professed but actually taken into the
mind, makes a demand on the intelligence; the mind is expected to be
active, not passive, in the reception of it. The feeling of a direct
responsibility of the individual immediately to God, is almost wholly a
creation of Protestantism. Even when Protestants were nearly as
persecuting as Catholics (quite as much so they never were); even when
they held as firmly as Catholics that salvation depended on having the
true belief, they still maintained that the belief was not to be
accepted from a priest, but to be sought and found by the believer, at
his eternal peril if he failed; and that no one could answer to God for
him, but that he had to answer for himself. The avoidance of fatal error
thus became in a great measure a question of culture; and there was the
strongest inducement to every believer, however humble, to seek culture
and to profit by it. In those Protestant countries, accordingly, whose
Churches were not, as the Church of England always was, principally
political institutions—in Edition: current; Page: [322] Scotland, for
instance, and the New England States—an amount of education was carried
down to the poorest of the people, of which there is no other example;
every peasant expounded the Bible to his family (many to their
neighbours), and had a mind practised in meditation and discussion on
all the points of his religious creed. The food may not have been the
most nourishing, but we cannot be blind to the sharpening and
strengthening exercise which such great topics gave to the
understanding—the discipline in abstraction and reasoning which such
mental occupation brought down to the humblest layman, and one of the
consequences of which was the privilege long enjoyed by Scotland of
supplying the greater part of Europe with professors for its
universities, and educated and skilled workmen for its practical arts.l

nThis, however, notwithstanding its importance, is, in a comprehensive
view of universal history, only a matter of detail. We find no
fundamental errors in M. Comte’s general conception of history. Hen is
singularly exempt from most of the twists and exaggerations which we are
used to find in almost all thinkers who meddle with speculations oof
this charactero. Scarcely any of them is so free (for example) from the
opposite errors of ascribing too much or too little influence to
accident, and to the qualities of individuals. The vulgar mistake of
supposing that the course of history has no tendencies of its own, and
that great events usually proceed from small causes, or that kings, or
conquerors, or the founders of philosophies and religions, can do with
society what they please, no one has more completely avoided or more
tellingly exposed. But he is equally free from the error of those who
ascribe all to general causes, and imagine that neither casual
circumstances, nor governments by their acts, nor individuals of genius
by their thoughts, materially accelerate or retard human progress. This
is the mistake which pervades the instructive writings of the thinker
who in England and in our own times bore the nearest, though a very
remote, resemblance to M. Comte—the lamented Mr. Buckle; who, had he not
been unhappily cut off in an early stage of his labours, and before the
complete maturity of his powers, would probably have thrown off an
error, the more to be regretted as it gives a colour to the prejudice
which regards the doctrine of the invariability of natural laws as
identical with fatalism. Mr. Buckle also fell into another mistake which
M. Comte avoided, that of regarding the intellectual as the only
progressive element in man, and the moral as too much the same at all
times to affect even the annual average of crime. M. Comte shows, on the
contrary, a most acute sense of the causes which elevate or lower the
general level of moral excellence; and deems intellectual progress in no
other way so beneficial as by creating a standard to guide the Edition:
current; Page: [323] moral sentiments of mankind, and a mode of bringing
those sentiments effectively to bear on conduct.

M. Comte is equally free from the error of considering any practical
rule or doctrine that can be laid down in politics as universal and
absolute. All political truth he deems strictly relative, implying as
its correlative a given state or situation of society. This conviction
is now common to him with all thinkers who are on a level with the age,
and comes so naturally to any intelligent reader of history, that the
only wonder is how men could have been prevented from reaching it
sooner. It marks one of the principal differences between the political
philosophy of the present time and that of the past; but M. Comte
adopted it when the opposite mode of thinking was still general, and
there are few thinkers to whom the principle owes more in the way of
comment and illustration.

Again, while he sets forth the historical succession of systems of
belief and forms of political society, and places in the strongest light
those imperfections in each which make it impossible that any of them
should be final, this does not make him for a moment unjust to the men
or the opinions of the past. He accords with generous recognition the
gratitude due to all who, with whatever imperfections of doctrine or
even of conduct, contributed materially to the work of human
improvement. In all past modes of thought and forms of society he
acknowledged a useful, in many a necessary, office, in carrying mankind
through one stage of improvement into a higher. The theological spirit
in its successive forms, the metaphysical in its principal varieties,
are honoured by him for the services they rendered in bringing mankind
out of pristine savagery into a state in which more advanced modes of
belief became possible. His list of heroes and benefactors of mankind
includes, not only every important name in the scientific movement, from
Thales pof Miletusp to Fourier the mathematician and Blainville the
biologist, and in the æsthetic from Homer to Manzoni, but the most
illustrious names in the annals of the various religions and
philosophies, and the really great politicians in all states of
society.* Above all, he has the most Edition: current; Page: [324]
profound admiration for the services rendered by Christianity, and by
the Church of the middle ages. His estimate of the Catholic period is
such as the majority of Englishmen (from whom we take the liberty to
differ) would deem exaggerated, if not absurd. The great men of
Christianity, from St. Paul to St. Francis of Assisi, receive his
warmest homage: nor does he forget the greatness even of those who lived
and thought in the centuries in which the Catholic Church, having stopt
short while the world had gone on, had become a hindrance to progress
instead of a promoter of it; such men as Fénélon and St. Vincent de
Paul, Bossuet and Joseph de Maistre. A more comprehensive, and, in the
primitive sense of the term, more catholic, sympathy and reverence
towards real worth, and every kind of service to humanity, we have not
met with in any thinker. Men who would have torn each other in pieces,
who even tried to do so, if each usefully served in his own way the
interests of mankind, are all hallowed to him.

Neither is his a cramped and contracted notion of human excellence,
which cares only for certain forms of development. He not only
personally appreciates, but rates high in moral value, the creations of
poets and artists in all departments, deeming them, by their mixed
appeal to the sentiments and the understanding, admirably fitted to
educate the feelings of abstract thinkers, and enlarge the intellectual
horizon of people of the world.* He regards the law of progress as
applicable, in spite of appearances, to poetry and art as much as to
science and politics. The common impression to the contrary he ascribes
solely to the fact, that the perfection of æsthetic creation requires as
its condition a consentaneousness in the feelings of mankind, which
depends for its existence on a fixed and settled state of opinions:
while the last five centuries have been a period not of settling, but of
unsettling and decomposing, the most general beliefs and sentiments of
mankind. The numerous monuments of poetic and artistic genius which the
modern mind has produced even under this great disadvantage, are (he
maintains) sufficient proof what great productions it will be capable
of, when one harmonious vein of sentiment shall once more thrill through
the whole of society, as in the days of Homer, of Æschylus, of Phidias,
and even of Dante.

After so profound and comprehensive a view of the progress of human
society in the past, of which the future can only be a prolongation, it
is natural to ask, to what use does he put this survey as a basis of
practical recommendations? Such recommendations he certainly makes,
though, in the present Treatise, they are of a much less definite
character than in his later writings. But we miss a necessary link;
there is a break in the otherwise Edition: current; Page: [325] close
concatenation of his speculations. We fail to see any scientific
connexion between his theoretical explanation of the past progress of
society, and his proposals for future improvement. The proposals are
not, as we might expect, recommended as that towards which human society
has been tending and working through the whole of history. It is thus
that thinkers have usually proceeded, who formed theories for the
future, grounded on historical analysis of the past. Tocqueville, for
example, and others, finding, as they thought, through all history, a
steady progress in the direction of social and political equality,
argued that to smooth this transition, and make the best of what is
certainly coming, is the proper employment of political foresight. We do
not find M. Comte supporting his recommendations by a similar line of
argument. They rest as completely, each on its separate reasons of
supposed utility, as with philosophers who, like Bentham, theorize on
politics without any historical basis at all. The only bridge of
connexion which leads from his historical speculations to his practical
conclusions, is the inference, that since the old powers of society,
both in the region of thought and of action, are declining and destined
to disappear, leaving only the two rising powers, positive thinkers on
the one hand, leaders of industry on the other, the future necessarily
belongs to these: spiritual power to the former, temporal to the latter.
As a specimen of historical forecast this is very deficient; for are
there not the masses as well as the leaders of industry? and is not
theirs also a growing power? Be this as it may, M. Comte’s conceptions
of the mode in which these growing powers should be organized and used,
are grounded on anything rather than on history. And we cannot but
remark a singular anomaly in a thinker of M. Comte’s calibre. After the
ample evidence he has brought forward of the slow growth of the
sciences, all of which except the mathematico-astronomical couple are
still, as he justly thinks, in a very early stage, it yet appears as if,
to his mind, the mere institution of a positive science of sociology
were tantamount to its completion; as if all the diversities of opinion
on the subject, which set mankind at variance, were solely owing to its
having been studied in the theological or the metaphysical manner, and
as if when the positive method which has raised up real sciences on
other subjects of knowledge, is similarly employed on this, divergence
would at once cease, and the entire body of positive social inquirers
would exhibit as much agreement in their doctrines as those who
cultivate any of the sciences of inorganic life. Happy would be the
prospects of mankind if this were so. A time such as M. Comte reckoned
upon may come; unless something stops the progress of human improvement,
it is sure to come: but after an unknown duration of hard thought and
violent controversy. The period of decomposition, which has lasted, on
his own computation, from the beginning of the fourteenth century to the
present, is not yet terminated: the shell of the old edifice will remain
standing until there is another ready to replace it; and the new
synthesis is barely begun, nor is Edition: current; Page: [326] even the
preparatory analysis completely finished. On other occasions M. Comte is
very well aware that the Method of a science is not the science itself,
and that when the difficulty of discovering the right processes has been
overcome, there remains a still greater difficulty, that of applying
them. This, which is true of all sciences, is truest of all in
Sociology. The facts being more complicated, and depending on a greater
concurrence of forces, than in any other science, the difficulty of
treating them deductively is proportionally increased, while the wide
difference between any one case and every other in some of the
circumstances which affect the result, makes the pretence of direct
induction usually no better than empiricism. It is therefore, out of all
proportion, more uncertain than in any other science, whether two
inquirers equally competent and equally disinterested will take the same
view of the evidence, or arrive at the same conclusion. When to this
intrinsic difficulty is added the infinitely greater extent to which
personal or class interests and predilections interfere with impartial
judgment, the hope of such accordance of opinion among sociological
inquirers as would obtain, in mere deference to their authority, the
universal assent which M. Comte’s scheme of society requires, must be
adjourned to an indefinite distance.

M. Comte’s own theory is an apt illustration of these difficulties,
since, though prepared for these speculations as no one had ever been
prepared before, his views of social regeneration even in the
rudimentary form in which they appear above-ground in this treatise (not
to speak of the singular system into which he afterwards enlarged them)
are such as perhaps no other person of equal knowledge and capacity
would agree in. Were those views as true as they are questionable, they
could not take effect until the unanimity among positive thinkers, to
which he looked forward, shall have been attained; since the mainspring
of his system is a Spiritual Power composed of positive philosophers,
which only the previous attainment of the unanimity in question could
call into existence. A few words will sufficiently express the outline
of his scheme. A corporation of philosophers, receiving a modest support
from the state, surrounded by reverence, but peremptorily excluded not
only from all political power or employment, but from all riches, and
all occupations except their own, are to have the entire direction of
education: together with, not only the right and duty of advising and
reproving all persons respecting both their public and their private
life, but also a control (whether authoritative or only moral is not
defined) over the speculative class itself, to prevent them from wasting
time and ingenuity on inquiries and speculations of no value to mankind
(among which he includes many now in high estimation), and compel them
to employ all their powers on the investigations which may be judged, at
the time, to be the most urgently important to the general welfare. The
temporal government which is to coexist with this spiritual authority,
consists of an aristocracy of capitalists, whose dignity and authority
are to be in the ratio of the degree of generality of their conceptions
Edition: current; Page: [327] and operations—bankers at the summit,
merchants next, then manufacturers, and agriculturists at the bottom of
the scale. No representative system, or other popular organization, by
way of counterpoise to this governing power, is ever contemplated. The
checks relied upon for preventing its abuse, are the counsels and
remonstrances of the Spiritual Power, and unlimited liberty of
discussion and comment by all classes of inferiors. Of the mode in which
either set of authorities should fulfil the office assigned to it,
little is said in this treatise: but the general idea is, while
regulating as little as possible by law, to make the pressure of
opinion, directed by the Spiritual Power, so heavy on every individual,
from the humblest to the most powerful, as to render legal obligation,
in as many cases as possible, needless. Liberty and spontaneity on the
part of individuals form no part of the scheme. M. Comte looks on them
with as great jealousy as any scholastic pedagogue, or ecclestiastical
director of consciences. Every particular of conduct, public or private,
is to be open to the public eye, and to be kept, by the power of
opinion, in the course which the Spiritual corporation shall judge to be
the most right.

This is not a sufficiently tempting picture to have much chance of
making converts rapidly, and the objections to the scheme are too
obvious to need stating. Indeed, it is only thoughtful persons to whom
it will be credible, that speculations leading to this result can
deserve the attention necessary for understanding them. qWe propose in
the next Essay toq examine them as part of the elaborate and coherent
system of doctrine, which M. Comte afterwards put together for the
reconstruction of society. Meanwhile the reader will gather, from what
has been said, that M. Comte has not, in our opinion, created Sociology.
Except his analysis of history, to which there is much to be added, but
which we do not think likely to be ever, in its general features,
superseded, he has done nothing in Sociology which does not require to
be done over again, and better. Nevertheless, he has greatly advanced
the study. Besides the great stores of thought, of various and often of
eminent merit, with which he has enriched the subject, his conception of
its method is so much truer and more profound than that of any one who
preceded him, as to constitute an era in its cultivation. If it cannot
be said of him that he has created a science, it may be said truly that
he has, for the first time, made the creation possible. This is a great
achievement, and, with the extraordinary merit of his historical
analysis, and of his philosophy of the physical sciences, is enough to
immortalize his name. But his renown with posterity would probably have
been greater than it is now likely to be, if after showing the way in
which the social science should be formed, he had not flattered himself
that he had formed it, and that it was already sufficiently solid for
attempting to build upon its foundation the entire fabric of the
Political Art.

Edition: current; Page: [328]


PART II: The Later Speculations of M. Comte*

the rappendedr list of publications contains the materials for knowing
and estimating what M. Comte termed his second career, in which the
savant, historian, and philosopher of his fundamental treatise, came
forth transfigured as the High Priest of the Religion of Humanity. They
include all his writings snot purely scientific,s except the Cours de
Philosophie Positive: for his early productions, and the occasional
publications of his later life, are reprinted as Preludes or Appendices
to the treatises here enumerated, or in Dr. Robinet’s volume, which, as
well as that of M. Littré, also contains copious extracts from his
correspondence.

In the concluding pages of his great systematic work, M. Comte had
announced four other treatises as in contemplation: on Politics; on the
Philosophy of Mathematics; on Education, a project subsequently enlarged
to include the systematization of Morals; and on Industry, or the action
of man upon external nature. Our list comprises the only two of these
which he lived to execute. It further contains a brief exposition of his
final doctrines, in the form of a Dialogue, or, as he terms it, a
Catechism, of which a translation Edition: current; Page: [329] has been
published by his principal English adherent, Mr. Congreve.[*] There has
also appeared very recently, under the title of A General View of
Positivism,[†] a translation by Dr. Bridges, of the Preliminary
Discourse in six chapters, prefixed to the Système de Politique
Positive. The tlastt three books on our list are the productions of
disciples in different degrees. M. Littré, the only thinker of
established reputation who accepts that character, is a disciple only of
the Cours de Philosophie Positive, and can see the weak points even in
that.[‡] Some of them he has discriminated and discussed with great
judgment: and the merits of his volume, both as a sketch of M. Comte’s
life and an appreciation of his doctrines, would well deserve a fuller
notice than we are able to give it here. M. de Blignières is a far more
thorough adherent; so much so, that the reader of his singularly well
and attractively written condensation and popularization of his master’s
doctrines, does not easily discover in what it falls short of that
unqualified acceptance which alone, it would seem, could find favour
with M. Comte. For he ended by casting off M. de Blignières, as he had
previously cast off M. Littré, and every other person who, having gone
with him a certain length, refused to follow him to the end. The author
of the last work in our enumeration, Dr. Robinet, is a disciple after M.
Comte’s own heart; one whom no difficulty stops, and no absurdity
startles. But it is far from our disposition to speak otherwise than
respectfully of Dr. Robinet and the other earnest men, who maintain
uroundu the tomb of their master an organized co-operation for the
diffusion of doctrines which they believe destined to regenerate the
human race. Their enthusiastic veneration for him, and devotion to the
ends he pursued, do honour alike to them and to their teacher, and are
an evidence of the personal ascendancy he exercised over those who
approached him; an ascendancy which for a time carried away even M.
Littré, as he confesses, to a length which his calmer judgment does not
now approve.[§]

These various writings raise many points of interest regarding M.
Comte’s personal history, and some, not without philosophic bearings,
respecting his mental habits: from all which matters we shall abstain,
with the exception of two, which he himself proclaimed with great
emphasis, and a knowledge of which is almost indispensable to an
apprehension of the characteristic difference between his second career
and his first. It should be known that Edition: current; Page: [330]
during his later life, and even before completing his first great
treatise, M. Comte adopted a rule, to which he very rarely made any
exception: to abstain systematically, not only from newspapers or
periodical publications, even scientific, but from all reading whatever,
except a few favourite poets in the ancient and modern European
languages. This abstinence he practised for the sake of mental health;
by way, as he said, of “hygiène cérébrale.”[*] We are far from thinking
that the practice has nothing whatever to recommend it. For most
thinkers, doubtless, it would be a very unwise one; but we will not
affirm that it may not sometimes be advantageous to a mind of the
peculiar quality of M. Comte’s—one that can usefully devote itself to
following out to the remotest developments a particular line of
meditations, of so arduous a kind that the complete concentration of the
intellect upon its own thoughts is almost a necessary condition of
success. When a mind of this character has laboriously and
conscientiously laid in beforehand, as M. Comte had done, an ample stock
of materials, he may be justified in thinking that he will contribute
most to the mental wealth of mankind by occupying himself solely in
working upon these, without distracting his attention by continually
taking in more matter, or keeping a communication open with other
independent intellects. The practice, therefore, may be legitimate; but
no one should adopt it without being aware of what he loses by it. He
must resign the pretension of arriving at the whole truth on the
subject, whatever it be, of his meditations. That he should effect this,
even on a narrow subject, by the mere force of his own mind, building on
the foundations of his predecessors, without aid or correction from his
vcontemporariesv, is simply impossible. He may do eminent service by
elaborating certain sides of the truth, but he must expect to find that
there are other sides which have wholly escaped his attention. However
great his powers, everything that he can do without the aid of incessant
remindings from other thinkers, is merely provisional, and will require
a thorough revision. He ought to be aware of this, and accept it with
his eyes open, regarding himself as a pioneer, not a constructor. If he
thinks that he can contribute most towards the elements of the final
synthesis by following out his own original thoughts as far as they will
go, leaving to other thinkers, or to himself at a subsequent time, the
business of adjusting them to the thoughts by which they ought to be
accompanied, he is right in doing so. But he deludes himself if he
imagines that any conclusions he can arrive at, while he practises M.
Comte’s rule of hygiène cérébrale, can possibly be definitive.

Neither is such a practice, in a hygienic point of view, free from the
gravest dangers to the philosopher’s own mind. When once he has
persuaded himself Edition: current; Page: [331] that he can work out the
final truth on any subject, exclusively from his own sources, he is apt
to lose all measure or standard by which to be apprized when he is
departing from common sense. Living only with his own thoughts, he
gradually forgets the aspect they present to minds of a different mould
from his own; he looks at his conclusions only from the point of view
which suggested them, and from which they naturally appear perfect; and
every consideration which from other points of view might present
itself, either as an objection or as a necessary modification, is to him
as if it did not exist. When his merits come to be recognised and
appreciated, and especially if he obtains disciples, the intellectual
infirmity soon becomes complicated with a moral one. The natural result
of the position is a gigantic self-confidence, not to say self-conceit.
That of M. Comte is colossal. Except here and there in an entirely
self-taught thinker, who has no high standard with which to compare
himself, we have met with nothing approaching to it. As his thoughts
grew more extravagant, his self-confidence grew more outrageous. The
height it ultimately attained must be seen, in his writings, to be
believed.

The other circumstance of a personal nature which it is impossible not
to notice, because M. Comte is perpetually referring to it as the origin
of the great superiority which he ascribes to his later as compared with
his earlier speculations, is the “moral regeneration” which he underwent
from “une angélique influence” and “une incomparable passion privée.”[*]
He formed a passionate attachment to a lady whom he describes as uniting
everything which is morally with much that is intellectually admirable,
and his relation to whom, besides the direct influence of her character
upon his own, gave him an insight into the true sources of human
happiness, which changed his whole conception of life. This attachment,
which always remained pure, gave him but one year of passionate
enjoyment, the lady having been cut off by death at the end of that
short period; but the adoration of her memory survived, and became, as
we shall see, the type of his conception of the sympathetic culture
proper for all human beings. The change thus effected in his personal
character and sentiments, manifested itself at once in his speculations;
which, from having been only a philosophy, now aspired to become a
religion; and from having been as purely, and almost rudely, scientific
and intellectual, as was compatible with a character always enthusiastic
in its admirations and in its ardour for whumanw improvement, became
from this time what, for want of a better name, may be called
sentimental; but sentimental in a way of its own, very curious to
contemplate. In considering the system of religion, politics, and
morals, which in his later writings M. Comte constructed, it is not
unimportant to bear in mind the nature of the personal Edition: current;
Page: [332] experience and inspiration to which he himself constantly
attributed this phasis of his philosophy. But as we shall have much more
to say against, than in favour of, the conclusions to which he was in
this manner conducted, it is right to declare that, from the evidence of
his writings, we really believe the moral influence of Madame Clotilde
de Vaux upon his character to have been of the ennobling as well as
softening character which he ascribes to it. Making allowance for the
effects of his exuberant growth in self-conceit, we perceive almost as
much improvement in his feelings, as deterioration in his speculations,
compared with those of the Philosophie Positive. Even the speculations
are, in some secondary aspects, improved through the beneficial effect
of the improved feelings; and might have been more so, if, by a rare
good fortune, the object of his attachment had been qualified to
exercise as improving an influence over him intellectually as morally,
and if he could have been contented with something less ambitious than
being the supreme moral legislator and religious pontiff of the human
race.

When we say that M. Comte has erected his philosophy into a religion,
the word religion must not be understood in its ordinary sense. He made
no change in the purely negative attitude which he maintained towards
theology: his religion is without a God. In saying this, we have done
enough to induce nine-tenths of all readers, at least in our own
country, to avert their faces and close their ears. To have no religion,
though scandalous enough, is an idea they are partly used to: but to
have no God, and to talk of religion, is to their feelings at once an
absurdity and an impiety. Of the remaining tenth, a great proportion,
perhaps, will turn away from anything which calls itself by the name of
religion at all. Between the two, it is difficult to find an audience
who can be induced to listen to M. Comte without an insurmountable
prejudice. But, to be just to any opinion, it ought to be considered,
not exclusively from an opponent’s point of view, but from that of the
mind which propounds it. Though conscious of being in an extremely small
minority, we venture to think that a religion may exist without belief
in a God, and that a religion without a God may be, even to Christians,
an instructive and profitable object of contemplation.

What, in truth, are the conditions necessary to constitute a religion?
There must be a creed, or conviction, claiming authority over the whole
of human life; a belief, or set of beliefs, deliberately adopted,
respecting human destiny and duty, to which the believer inwardly
acknowledges that all his actions ought to be subordinate. Moreover,
there must be a sentiment connected with this creed, or capable of being
evoked by it, sufficiently powerful to give it in fact, the authority
over human conduct to which it lays claim in theory. It is a great
advantage (though not absolutely indispensable) that this sentiment
should crystallize, as it were, round a concrete object; if possible a
really existing one, though, in all the more important cases, only
Edition: current; Page: [333] ideally present. Such an object Theism and
Christianity offer to the believer: but the condition may be fulfilled,
if not in a manner strictly equivalent, by another object. It has been
said that whoever believes in “the Infinite nature of Duty,”[*] even if
he believe in nothing else, is religious. M. Comte believes in what is
meant by the infinite nature of duty, but he refers the obligations of
duty, as well as all sentiments of devotion, to a concrete object, at
once ideal and real; the Human Race, conceived as a continuous whole,
including the past, the present, and the future. This great collective
existence, this “Grand Etre,” as he terms it, though the feelings it can
excite are necessarily very different from those which direct themselves
towards an ideally perfect Being, has, as he forcibly urges, this
advantage in respect to us, that it really needs our services, which
Omnipotence cannot, in any genuine sense of the term, be supposed to do:
and M. Comte says, that assuming the existence of a Supreme Providence
(which he is as far from denying as from affirming), the best, and even
the only, way in which we can rightly worship or serve Him, is by doing
our utmost to love and serve that other Great Being, whose inferior
Providence has bestowed on us all the benefits that we owe to the
labours and virtues of former generations. It may not be consonant to
usage to call this a religion; but the term so applied has a meaning,
and one which is not adequately expressed by any other word. Candid
persons of all creeds may be willing to admit, that if a person has an
ideal object, his attachment and sense of duty towards which are able to
control and discipline all his other sentiments and propensities, and
prescribe to him a rule of life, that person has a religion: and though
every one naturally prefers his own religion to any other, all must
admit that if the object of this attachment, and of this feeling of
duty, is the aggregate of our fellow-creatures, this Religion of the
Infidel cannot, in honesty and conscience, be called an intrinsically
bad one. Many, indeed, may be unable to believe that this object is
capable of gathering round it feelings sufficiently strong: but this is
exactly the point on which a doubt can hardly remain in an intelligent
reader of M. Comte: and we join with him in contemning, as equally
irrational and mean, the conception of human nature as incapable of
giving its love and devoting its existence to any object which cannot
afford in exchange an eternity of personal enjoyment.

The power which may be acquired over the mind by the idea of the general
interest of the human race, both as a source of emotion and as a motive
to conduct, many have perceived; but we know not if any one, before M.
Comte, realized so fully as he has done, all the majesty of which that
idea is susceptible. It ascends into the unknown recesses of the past,
embraces the manifold present, and descends into the indefinite and
unforeseeable future. Forming a collective Existence without assignable
beginning or end, it Edition: current; Page: [334] appeals to that
feeling of the Infinite, which is deeply rooted in human nature, and
which seems necessary to the imposingness of all our highest
conceptions. Of the vast unrolling web of human life, the part best
known to us is irrevocably past; this we can no longer serve, but can
still love: it comprises for most of us the far greater number of those
who have loved us, or from whom we have received benefits, as well as
the long series of those who, by their labours and sacrifices for
mankind, have deserved to be held in everlasting and grateful
remembrance. As M. Comte truly says, the highest minds, even now, live
in thought with the great dead, far more than with the living; and, next
to the dead, with those ideal human beings yet to come, whom they are
never destined to see. If we honour as we ought those who have served
mankind in the past, we shall feel that we are also working for those
benefactors by serving that to which their lives were devoted. And when
reflection, guided by history, has taught us the intimacy of the
connexion of every age of humanity with every other, making us see in
the earthly destiny of mankind the playing out of a great drama, or the
action of a prolonged epic, all the generations of mankind become
indissolubly united into a single image, combining all the power over
the mind of the idea of Posterity, with our best feelings towards the
living world which surrounds us, and towards the predecessors who have
made us what we are. That the ennobling power of this grand conception
may have its full efficacy, we should, with M. Comte, regard the Grand
Etre, Humanity, or Mankind, as composed, in the past, solely of those
who, in every age and variety of position, have played their part
worthily in life. It is only as thus restricted that the aggregate of
our species becomes an object deserving our veneration. The unworthy
members of it are best dismissed from our habitual thoughts; and the
imperfections which adhered through life, even to those of the dead who
deserve honourable remembrance, should be no further borne in mind than
is necessary not to falsify our conception of facts. On the other hand,
the Grand Etre in its completeness ought to include not only all whom we
venerate, but all sentient beings to which we owe duties, and which have
a claim on our attachment. M. Comte, therefore, incorporates into the
ideal object whose service is to be the law of our life, not our own
species exclusively, but, in a subordinate degree, our humble
auxiliaries, those animal races which enter into real society with man,
which attach themselves to him, and voluntarily co-operate with him,
like the noble dog who gives his life for his human friend and
benefactor. For this M. Comte has been subjected to unworthy ridicule,
but there is nothing truer or more honourable to him in the whole body
of his doctrines. The strong sense he always shows of the worth of the
inferior animals, and of the duties of mankind towards them, is one of
the very finest traits of his character.

We, therefore, not only hold that M. Comte was justified in the attempt
Edition: current; Page: [335] to develope his philosophy into a
religion, and had realized the essential conditions of one, but that all
other religions are made better in proportion as, in their practical
result, they are brought to coincide with that which he aimed at
constructing. But, unhappily, the next thing we are obliged to do, is to
charge him with making a complete mistake at the very outset of his
operations—with fundamentally misconceiving the proper office of a rule
of life. He committed the error which is often, but falsely, charged
against the whole class of utilitarian moralists; he required that the
test of conduct should also be the exclusive motive to it. Because the
good of the human race is the ultimate standard of right and wrong, and
because moral discipline consists in cultivating the utmost possible
repugnance to all conduct injurious to the general good, M. Comte infers
that the good of others is the only inducement on which we should allow
ourselves to act; and that we should endeavour to starve the whole of
the desires which point to our personal satisfaction, by denying them
all gratification not strictly required by physical necessities. The
golden rule of morality, in M. Comte’s religion, is to live for others,
“vivre pour autrui.”[*] To do as we would be done by, and to love our
neighbour as ourself, are not sufficient for him: they partake, he
thinks, of the nature of personal calculations. We should endeavour not
to love ourselves at all. We shall not succeed in it, but we should make
the nearest approach to it possible. Nothing less will satisfy him, as
towards humanity, than the sentiment which one of his favourite writers,
Thomas à Kempis, addresses to God: Amem te plus quam me, nec me nisi
propter te.[†] All education and all moral discipline should have but
one object, to make altruism (a word of his own coining)[‡] predominate
over egoism. If by this were only meant that egoism is bound, and should
be taught, always to give way to the well-understood interests of
enlarged altruism, no one who acknowledges any morality at all would
object to the proposition. But M. Comte, taking his stand on the
biological fact that organs are strengthened by exercise and atrophied
by disuse, and firmly convinced that each of our elementary inclinations
has its distinct cerebral organ, thinks it the grand duty of life not
only to strengthen the social affections by constant habit and by
referring all our actions to them, but, as far as possible, to deaden
the personal passions and propensities by desuetude. Even the exercise
of the intellect is required to obey as an authoritative rule the
dominion of the social feelings over the intelligence (du cœur sur
l’esprit).[§] The physical and other personal instincts are to be
mortified far beyond the demands of bodily health, which indeed the
morality of the future is not to insist much upon, for fear Edition:
current; Page: [336] of encouraging “les calculs personnels.”[*] M.
Comte condemns only such austerities as, by diminishing the vigour of
the constitution, make us less capable of being useful to others. Any
indulgence, even in food, not necessary to health and strength, he
condemns as immoral.[†] All gratifications except those of the
affections, are to be tolerated only as “inevitable infirmities.”[‡]
Novalis said of Spinoza that he was a God-intoxicated man:[§] M. Comte
is a morality-intoxicated man. Every question with him is one of
morality, and no motive but that of morality is permitted.

The explanation of this we find in an original mental twist, very common
in French thinkers, and by which M. Comte was distinguished beyond them
all. He could not dispense with what he called “unity.” It was for the
sake of Unity that a religion was, in his eyes, desirable. Not in the
mere sense of Unanimity, but in a far wider one. A religion must be
something by which to “systematize” human life. His definition of it, in
the Catéchisme, is

the state of complete unity which distinguishes our existence, at once
personal and social, when all its parts, both moral and physical,
converge habitually to a common destination . . . Such a harmony,
individual and collective, being incapable of complete realization in an
existence so complicated as ours, this definition of religion
characterizes the immovable type towards which tends more and more the
aggregate of human efforts. Our happiness and our merit consist
especially in approaching as near as possible to this unity, of which
the gradual increase constitutes the best measure of real improvement,
personal or social.[∥]

To this theme he continually returns, and argues that this unity or
harmony among all the elements of our life is not consistent with the
predominance of the personal propensities, since these drag us in
different directions; it can only result from the subordination of them
all to the social feelings, which may be made to act in a uniform
direction by a common system of convictions, and which differ from the
personal inclinations in this, that we all naturally encourage them in
one another, while, on the contrary, social life is a perpetual
restraint upon the selfish propensities.

The fons errorum in M. Comte’s later speculations is this inordinate
demand for “unity” and “systematization.” This is the reason why it does
not suffice to him that all should be ready, in case of need, to
postpone their personal interests and inclinations to the requirements
of the general good: he demands that each should regard as vicious any
care at all for his personal interests, except as a means to the good of
others—should be ashamed Edition: current; Page: [337] of it, should
strive to cure himself of it, because his existence is not
“systematized,” is not in “complete unity,” as long as he cares for more
than one thing. The strangest part of the matter is, that this doctrine
seems to M. Comte to be axiomatic. That all perfection consists in
unity, he apparently considers to be a maxim which no sane man thinks of
questioning. It never seems to enter into his conceptions that any one
could object ab initio, and ask, why this universal systematizing,
systematizing, systematizing? Why is it necessary that all human life
should point but to one object, and be cultivated into a system of means
to a single end? May it not be the fact that mankind, who after all are
made up of single human beings, obtain a greater sum of happiness when
each pursues his own, under the rules and conditions required by the
good of the rest, than when each makes the good of the rest his only
xobjectx, and allows himself no personal pleasures not indispensable to
the preservation of his faculties? The regimen of a blockaded town
should be cheerfully submitted to when high purposes require it, but is
it the ideal perfection of human existence? M. Comte sees none of these
difficulties. The only true happiness, he affirms, is in the exercise of
the affections. He had found it so for a whole year, which was enough to
enable him to get to the bottom of the question, and to judge whether he
could do without everything else. Of course the supposition was not to
be heard of that any other person could require, or be the better for,
what M. Comte did not value. “Unity” and “systematization” absolutely
demanded that all other people should model themselves after M. Comte.
It would never do to suppose that there could be more than one road to
human happiness, or more than one ingredient in it.

The most prejudiced must admit that this religion without theology is
not chargeable withy relaxation of moral restraints. On the contrary, it
prodigiously exaggerates them. It makes the same ethical mistake as the
theory of Calvinism, that every act in life should be done for the glory
of God, and that whatever is not a duty is a sin. It does not perceive
that between the region of duty and that of sin there is an intermediate
space, the region of positive worthiness. It is not good that persons
should be bound, by other people’s opinion, to do everything that they
would deserve praise for doing. There is a standard of altruism to which
all should be required to come up, and a degree beyond it which is not
obligatory, but meritorious. It is incumbent on every one to restrain
the pursuit of his personal objects within the limits consistent with
the essential interests of others. What those limits are, it is the
province of ethical science to determine; and to keep all individuals
and aggregations of individuals within them, is the proper office of
punishment and of moral blame. If in addition to fulfilling this
obligation, persons Edition: current; Page: [338] make the good of
others a direct object of disinterested exertions, postponing or
sacrificing to it even innocent personal indulgences, they deserve
gratitude and honour, and are fit objects of moral praise. So long as
they are in no way compelled to this conduct by any external pressure,
there cannot be too much of it; but a necessary condition is its
spontaneity; since the notion of a happiness for all, procured by the
self-sacrifice of each, if the abnegation is really felt to be a
sacrifice, is a contradiction. Such spontaneity by no means excludes
sympathetic encouragement; but the encouragement should take the form of
making self-devotion pleasant, not that of making everything else
painful. The object should be to stimulate services to humanity by their
natural rewards; not to render the pursuit of our own good in any other
manner impossible, by visiting it with the reproaches of zotherz and of
our own conscience. The proper office of those sanctions is to enforce
upon every one, the conduct necessary to give all other persons their
fair chance: conduct which chiefly consists in not doing them harm, and
not impeding them in anything which without harming others does good to
themselves. To this must of course be added, that when we either
expressly or tacitly undertake to do more, we are bound to keep our
promise. And inasmuch as every one, who avails himself of the advantages
of society, leads others to expect from him all such positive good
offices and disinterested services as the moral improvement attained by
mankind has rendered customary, he deserves moral blame if, without just
cause, he disappoints that expectation. Through this principle the
domain of moral dutya, in an improving society,a is always widening.
When what once was uncommon virtue becomes common virtue, it comes to be
numbered among obligations, while a degree exceeding what has grown
common, remains simply meritorious.

M. Comte is accustomed to draw most of his ideas of moral cultivation
from the discipline of the Catholic Church. Had he followed that
guidance in the present case, he would have been less wide of the mark.
For the distinction which we have drawn was fully recognized by the
sagacious and far-sighted men who bconstructedb the Catholic ethics. It
is even one of the stock reproaches against Catholicism, that it has two
standards of morality, and does not make obligatory on all Christians
the highest rule of Christian perfection. It has one standard which,
faithfully acted up to, suffices for salvation, another and a higher
which when realized constitutes a saint. M. Comte, perhaps
unconsciously, for there is nothing that he would have been more
unlikely to do if he had been aware of it, has taken a leaf out of the
book of the despised Protestantism. Like the extreme Calvinists, he
requires that all believers shall be saints, and damns them (after his
own fashion) if they are not.

Edition: current; Page: [339]
Our conception of human life is different. We do not conceive life to be
so rich in enjoyments, that it can afford to forego the cultivation of
all those which address themselves to what M. Comte terms the egoistic
propensities. On the contrary, we believe that a sufficient
gratification of these, short of excess, but up to the measure which
renders the enjoyment greatest, is almost always favourable to the
benevolent affections. The moralization of the personal enjoyments we
deem to consist, not in reducing them to the smallest possible amount,
but in cultivating the habitual wish to share them with others, and with
all others, and scorning to desire anything for oneself which is
incapable of being so shared. There is only one passion or inclination
which is permanently incompatible with this condition—the love of
domination, or superiority, for its own sake; which implies, and is
grounded on, the equivalent depression of other people. As a rule of
conduct, to be enforced by moral sanctions, we think no more should be
attempted than to prevent people from doing harm to others, or omitting
to do such good as they have undertaken. Demanding no more than this,
society, in any tolerable circumstances, obtains much more; for the
natural activity of human nature, shut out from all noxious directions,
will expand itself in useful ones. This is our conception of the moral
rule prescribed by the religion of Humanity. But above this standard
there is an unlimited range of moral worth, up to the most exalted
heroism, which should be fostered by every positive encouragement,
though not converted into an obligation. It is as much a part of our
scheme as of M. Comte’s, that the direct cultivation of altruism, and
the subordination of egoism to it, far beyond the point of absolute
moral duty, should be one of the chief aims of education, both
individual and collective. We even recognize the value, for this end, of
ascetic discipline, in the original Greek sense of the word. We think
with Dr. Johnson, that he who has never denied himself anything which is
not wrong, cannot be fully trusted for denying himself everything which
is so. We do not doubt that children and young persons will one day be
again systematically disciplined in self-mortification; that they will
be taught, as in antiquity, to control their appetites, to brave
dangers, and submit voluntarily to pain, as simple exercises in
education. Something has been lost as well as gained by no longer giving
to every citizen the training necessary for a soldier. Nor can any pains
taken be too great, to form the habit, and develop the desire, of being
useful to others and to the world, by the practice, independently of
reward and of every personal consideration, of positive virtue beyond
the bounds of prescribed duty. No efforts should be spared to associate
the pupil’s self-respect, and his desire of the respect of others, with
service rendered to Humanity; when possible, collectively, but at all
events, what is always possible, in the persons of its individual
members. There are many remarks and precepts in M. Comte’s volumes,
which, as no less pertinent to our conception of Edition: current; Page:
[340] morality than to his, we fully accept. For example; without
admitting that to make “calculs personnels” is contrary to morality, we
agree with him in the opinion, that the principal hygienic precepts
should be inculcated, not solely or principally as maxims of prudence,
but as a matter of duty to others, since by squandering our health we
disable ourselves from rendering to our fellow-creatures the services to
which they are entitled.[*] As M. Comte truly says, the prudential
motive is by no means fully sufficient for the purpose, even physicians
often disregarding their own precepts. The personal penalties of neglect
of health are commonly distant, as well as more or less uncertain, and
require the additional and more immediate sanction of moral
responsibility. M. Comte, therefore, in this instance, is, we conceive,
right in principle; though we have not the smallest doubt that he would
have gone into extreme exaggeration in practice, and would have wholly
ignored the legitimate liberty of the individual to judge for himself
respecting his own bodily conditions, with due relation to the
sufficiency of his means of knowledge, and taking the responsibility of
the result.

Connected with the same considerations is another idea of M. Comte,
which has great beauty and grandeur in it, and the realization of which,
within the bounds of possibility, would be a cultivation of the social
feelings on a most essential point. It is, that every person who lives
by any useful work, should be habituated to regard himself not as an
individual working for his private benefit, but as a public
functionary;[†] and his wages, of whatever sort, cnot asc the
remuneration or purchase-money of his labour, which should be given
freely, but as the provision made by society to enable him to carry it
on, and to replace the materials and products which have been consumed
in the process. M. Comte observes,[‡] that in modern industry every one
in fact works much more for others than for himself, since his
productions are to be consumed by others, and it is only necessary that
his thoughts and imagination should adapt themselves to the real state
of the fact. The practical problem, however, is not quite so simple, for
a strong sense that he is working for others may lead to nothing better
than feeling himself necessary to them, and instead of freely giving his
commodity, may only encourage him to put a high price upon it. What M.
Comte really means is that we should regard working for the benefit of
others as a good in itself; that we should desire it for its own sake,
and not for the sake of remuneration, which cannot justly be claimed for
doing what we like: that the proper return for a service to society is
the gratitude of society: and that the moral claim of any one in regard
to the provision for his personal wants, is not a Edition: current;
Page: [341] question of quid pro quo in respect to his co-operation, but
of how much the circumstances of society permit to be assigned to him,
consistently with the just claims of others. To this opinion we entirely
subscribe. The rough method of settling the labourer’s share of the
produce,d the competition of the market, may represent a practical
necessity, but certainly not a moral ideal. Its defence is, that
civilization has not hitherto been equal to organizing anything better
than this first rude approach to an equitable distribution. Rude as it
is, we for the present go less wrong by leaving the thing to settle
itself, than by settling it artificially in any mode which has yet been
tried. But in whatever manner that question may ultimately be decided,
the true moral and social idea of Labour is in no way affected by it.
Until labourers and employers perform the work of industry in the spirit
in which soldiers perform that of an army, industry will never be
moralized, and military life will remain, what, in spite of the
anti-social character of its direct object, it has hitherto been—the
chief school of moral co-operation.

Thus far of the general idea of M. Comte’s ethics and religion. We must
now say something of the details. Here we approach the ludicrous side of
the subject: but we shall unfortunately have to relate other things far
more really ridiculous.

There cannot be a religion without a cultus. We use this term for want
of any other, for its nearest equivalent, worship, suggests a different
order of ideas. We mean by it, a set of systematic observances, intended
to cultivate and maintain the religious sentiment. Though M. Comte
justly appreciates the superior efficacy of acts, in keeping up and
strengthening the feeling which prompts them, over any mode whatever of
mere expression, he takes pains to organize the latter also with great
minuteness. He provides an equivalent both for the private devotions,
and for the public ceremonies, of other faiths. The reader will be
surprised to learn, that the former consists of prayer. But prayer, as
understood by M. Comte, does not mean asking; it is a mere outpouring of
feeling; and for this view of it he claims the authority of the
Christian mystics. It is not to be addressed to the Grand Etre, to
collective Humanity; though he occasionally carries metaphor so far as
to style this a goddess. The honours to collective Humanity are reserved
for the public celebrations. Private adoration is to be addressed to it
in the persons of worthy individual representatives, who may be either
living or dead, but must in all cases be women; for women, being the
sexe aimant,[*] represent the best attribute of humanity, that which
ought to regulate all human life, nor can Humanity possibly be
symbolized in any form but that of a woman. The objects of private
adoration are the mother, the wife, and the daughter, representing
severally the past, the present, and the future, and Edition: current;
Page: [342] calling into active exercise the three social sentiments,
veneration, attachment, and kindness. We are to regard them, whether
dead or alive, as our guardian angels, “les vrais anges gardiens.”[*] If
the last two have never existed, or if, in the particular case, any of
the three types is too faulty for the office assigned to it, their place
may be supplied by some other type of womanly excellence, even by one
merely historical. Be the object living or dead, the adoration (as we
understand it) is to be addressed only to the idea. The prayer consists
of two parts; a commemoration, followed by an effusion. By a
commemoration M. Comte means an effort of memory and imagination,
summoning up with the utmost possible vividness the image of the object:
and every artifice is exhausted to render the image as life-like, as
close to the reality, as near an approach to actual hallucination, as is
consistent with sanity. This degree of intensity having been, as far as
practicable, attained, the effusion follows. Every person should compose
his own form of prayer, which should be repeated not mentally only, but
orally, and may be added to or varied for sufficient cause, but never
arbitrarily. It may be interspersed with passages from the best poets,
when they present themselves spontaneously, as giving a felicitous
expression to the adorer’s own feeling. These observances M. Comte
practised to the memory of his Clotilde, and he enjoins them on all true
believers. They are to occupy two hours of every day, divided into three
parts; at rising, in the middle of the working hours, and in bed at
night. The first, which should be in a kneeling attitude, will commonly
be the longest, and the second the shortest. The third is to be extended
as nearly as possible to the moment of falling asleep, that its effect
may be felt in disciplining even the dreams.

The public cultus consists of a series of celebrations or festivals,
eighty-four in the year, so arranged that at least one occurs in every
week. They are devoted to the successive glorification of Humanity
itself; of the various ties, political and domestic, among mankind; of
the successive stages in the past evolution of our species; and of the
several classes into which M. Comte’s polity divides mankind. M. Comte’s
religion has, moreover, nine Sacraments; consisting in the solemn
consecration, by the priests of Humanity, with appropriate exhortations,
of all the great transitions in life; the entry into life itself, and
into each of its successive stages: education, marriage, the choice of a
profession, and so forth. Among these is death, which receives the name
of transformation, and is considered as a passage from objective
existence to subjective—to living in the memory of our fellow-creatures.
Having no eternity of objective existence to offer, M. Comte’s religion
gives eit all ite can, by holding out the hope of subjective
immortality—of existing in the remembrance and in the posthumous
adoration of mankind at large, Edition: current; Page: [343] if we have
done anything to deserve remembrance from them; at all events, of those
whom we loved during life; and when they too are gone, of being included
in the collective adoration paid to the Grand Etre. People are to be
taught to look forward to this as a sufficient recompense for the
devotion of a whole life to the service of Humanity. Seven years after
death, comes the last Sacrament: a public judgment, by the priesthood,
on the memory of the defunct. This is not designed for purposes of
reprobation, but of honour, and any one may, by declaration during life,
exempt himself from it. If judged, and found worthy, he is solemnly
incorporated with the Grand Etre, and his remains are transferred from
the civil to the religious place of sepulture: “le bois sacré qui doit
entourer chaque temple de l’Humanité.”[*]

This brief abstract gives no idea of the minuteness of M. Comte’s
prescriptions, and the extraordinary height to which he carries the
mania for regulation by which Frenchmen are distinguished among
Europeans, and M. Comte among Frenchmen. It is this which throws an
irresistible air of ridicule over the whole subject. There is nothing
really ridiculous in the devotional practices which M. Comte recommends
towards a cherished memory or an ennobling ideal, when they come
unprompted from the depths of the individual feeling; but there is
something ineffably ludicrous in enjoining that everybody shall practise
them three times daily for a period of two hours, not because his
feelings require them, but for the premeditated purpose of getting his
feelings up. The ludicrous, however, in any of its shapes, is a
phænomenon with which M. Comte seems to have been totally unacquainted.
There is nothing in his writings from which it could be inferred that he
knew of the existence of such things as wit and humour. The only writer
fdistinguished for either, off whom he shows any admiration, is Molière,
and him he admires not for his wit but for his wisdom. We notice this
without intending any reflection on M. Comte; for a profound conviction
raises a person above the feeling of ridicule. But there are passages in
his writings which, it really seems to us, could have been written by no
man who had ever laughed. We will give one of these instances. Besides
the regular prayers, M. Comte’s religion, like the Catholic, has need of
forms which can be applied to casual and unforeseen occasions. These, he
says, must in general be left to the believer’s own choice; but he
suggests as a very suitable one the repetition of “the fundamental
formula of Positivism,” viz., “l’amour pour principe, l’ordre pour base,
et le progrès pour but.”[†] Not content, however, with an equivalent for
the Paters and Aves of Catholicism, he must have one for the sign of the
cross also; and he thus delivers himself:* “Cette expansion peut être
perfectionnée par des signes universels. . . . Afin de Edition: current;
Page: [344] mieux développer l’aptitude nécessaire de la formule
positiviste à représenter toujours la condition humaine, il convient
ordinairement de l’énoncer en touchant successivement les principaux
organes que la théorie cérébrale assigne à ses trois éléments.” This may
be a very appropriate mode of expressing one’s devotion to the Grand
Etre: but any one who had appreciated its effect on the profane reader,
would have thought it judicious to keep it back till a considerably more
advanced stage in the propagation of the Positive Religion.

As M. Comte’s religion has a cultus, so also it has a clergy, who are
the pivot of his entire social and political system. Their nature and
office will be best shown by describing his ideal of political society
in its normal state, with the various classes of which it is composed.

The necessity of a Spiritual Power, distinct and separate from the
temporal government, is the essential principle of M. Comte’s political
scheme; as it may well be, since the Spiritual Power is the only
counterpoise he provides or tolerates, to the absolute dominion of the
civil rulers. Nothing can exceed his combined detestation and contempt
for government by assemblies, and for parliamentary or representative
institutions in any form. They are an expedient, in his opinion, only
suited to a state of transition, and even that nowhere but in England.
The attempt to naturalize them in France, or any Continental nation, he
regards as mischievous quackery. Louis Napoleon’s usurpation is
absolved, is made laudable to him, because it overthrew a representative
government. Election of superiors by inferiors, except as a
revolutionary expedient, is an abomination in his sight. Public
functionaries of all kinds should name their successors, subject to the
approbation of their own superiors, and giving public notice of the
nomination so long beforehand as to admit of discussion, and the timely
revocation of a wrong choice. But, by the side of the temporal rulers,
he places another authority, with no power to command, but only to
advise and remonstrate. The family being, in his mind as in that of
Frenchmen generally, the foundation and essential type of all society,
the separation of the two powers commences there. The spiritual, or
moral and religious power, in gag family, is the women of it. The
positivist family is composed of the “fundamental couple,”[*] their
children, and the parents of the man, if alive. The whole government of
the household, except as regards the education of the children, resides
in the man; and even over that he has complete power, but should forbear
to exert it. The part assigned to the women is to improve the man
through his affections, and to bring up the children, who, until the age
of fourteen, at which scientific instruction begins, are to be educated
wholly by their mother. That women may be better fitted for these
functions, they are peremptorily excluded from Edition: current; Page:
[345] all others. No woman is to work for her living. Every woman is to
be supported by her husband or her male relations, and if she has none
of these, by the State. She is to have no powers of government, even
domestic, and no property. Her legal rights of inheritance are preserved
to her, that her feelings of duty may make her voluntarily forego them.
There are to be no marriage portions, that women may no longer be sought
in marriage from interested motives. Marriages are to be rigidly
indissoluble, except for a single cause. It is remarkable that the
bitterest enemy of divorce among all philosophers, nevertheless allows
it, in a case which the laws of England, and of other countries
reproached by him with tolerating divorce, do not admit: namely, when
one of the parties has been sentenced to an infamizing punishment,
involving loss of civil rights. It is monstrous that condemnation, even
for life, to a felon’s punishment, should leave an unhappy victim bound
to, and in the wife’s case under the legal authority of, the culprit. M.
Comte could feel for the injustice in this special case, because it
chanced to be the unfortunate situation of his Clotilde. Minor degrees
of unworthiness may entitle the innocent party to a legal separation,
but without the power of re-marriage. Second marriages, indeed, are not
permitted by the Positive Religion. There is to be no impediment to them
by law, but morality is to condemn them, and every couple who are
married religiously as well as civilly are to make a vow of eternal
widowhood, “le veuvage éternel.”[*] This absolute monogamy is, in M.
Comte’s opinion, essential to the complete fusion between two beings,
which is the essence of marriage; and moreover, eternal constancy is
required by the posthumous adoration, which is to be continuously paid
by the survivor to one who, though objectively dead, still lives
“subjectively.” The domestic spiritual power, which resides in the women
of the family, is chiefly concentrated in the most venerable of them,
the husband’s mother, while alive. It has an auxiliary in the influence
of age, represented by the husband’s father, who is supposed to have
passed the period of retirement from active life, fixed by M. Comte (for
he fixes everything) at sixty-three; at which age the head of the family
gives up the reins of authority to his son, retaining only a
consultative voice.

This domestic Spiritual Power, being principally moral, and confined to
private life, requires the support and guidance of an intellectual power
exterior to it, the sphere of which will naturally be wider, extending
also to public life. This consists of the clergy, or priesthood, for M.
Comte is fond of borrowing the consecrated expressions of Catholicism to
denote the nearest equivalents which his own system affords. The clergy
are the theoretic or philosophical class, and are supported by an
endowment from the State, voted periodically, but administered by
themselves. Like women, they are to be excluded from all riches, and
from all participation in power (except the Edition: current; Page:
[346] hundivided dominionh of each over his own household). They are
neither to inherit, nor to receive emolument from any of their
functions, or from their writings or teachings of any description, but
are to live solely on their small salaries. This M. Comte deems
necessary to the complete disinterestedness of their icounseli. To have
the confidence of the masses, they must, like the masses, be poor. Their
exclusion from political and from all other practical occupations is
indispensable for the same reason, and for others equally peremptory.
Those occupations are, he contends, incompatible with the habits of mind
necessary to philosophers. A practical position, either private or
public, chains the mind to specialities and details, while a
philosopher’s business is with general truths and connected views (vues
d’ensemble).[*] These, again, require an habitual abstraction from
details, which unfits the mind for judging well and rapidly of
individual cases. The same person cannot be both a good theorist and a
good practitioner or ruler, though practitioners and rulers ought to
have a solid theoretic education. The two kinds of function must be
absolutely exclusive of one another: to attempt them both, is
inconsistent with fitness for either. But as men may mistake their
vocation, up to the age of thirty-five they are allowed to change their
career.

To the clergy is entrusted the theoretic or scientific instruction of
youth. The medical art also is to be in their hands, since no one is fit
to be a physician who does not study and understand the whole man, moral
as well as physical. M. Comte has a contemptuous opinion of the existing
race of physicians, who, he says, deserve no higher name than that of
veterinaires, since they concern themselves with man only in his animal,
and not in his human character.[†] In his last years, M. Comte (as we
learn from Dr. Robinet’s volume) indulged in the wildest speculations on
medical science, declaring all maladies to be one and the same disease,
the disturbance or destruction of “l’unité cérébrale.”[‡] The other
functions of the clergy are moral, much more than intellectual. They are
the spiritual directors, and venerated advisers, of the active or
practical classes, including the political. They are the mediators in
all social differences; between the labourers, for instance, and their
employers. They are to advise and admonish on all important violations
of the moral law. Especially, it devolves on them to keep the rich and
powerful to the performance of their moral duties towards their
inferiors. If private remonstrance fails, public denunciation is to
follow: in extreme cases they may proceed to the length of
excommunication, which, though it only operates through opinion, yet if
it carries opinion with it, may, as M. Comte complacently observes, be
of such powerful efficacy, that the richest man Edition: current; Page:
[347] may be driven to produce his subsistence by his own manual labour,
through the impossibility of inducing any other person to work for
him.[*] In this as in all other cases, the priesthood depends for its
authority on carrying with it the mass of the people—those who,
possessing no accumulations, live on the wages of daily labour;
popularly but incorrectly termed the working classes, and by French
writers, in their Roman law phraseology, proletaires. These, therefore,
who are not allowed the smallest political rights, are incorporated into
the Spiritual Power, of which they form, after women and the clergy, the
third element.

It remains to give an account of the Temporal Power, composed of the
rich and the employers of labour, two classes who in M. Comte’s system
are reduced to one, for he allows of no idle rich. A life made up of
mere amusement and self-indulgence, though not interdicted by law, is to
be deemed so disgraceful, that nobody with the smallest sense of shame
would choose to be guilty of it. Here, we think, M. Comte has lighted on
a true principle, towards which the tone of opinion in modern Europe is
more and more tending, and which is destined to be one of the
constitutive principles of regenerated society. We believe, for example,
with him, that in the future there will be no class of landlords living
at ease on their rents, but every landlord will be a capitalist trained
to agriculture, himself superintending and directing the cultivation of
his estate. No one but he who guides the work, should have the control
of the tools. In M. Comte’s system, the rich, as a rule, consist of the
“captains of industry:”[†] but the rule is not entirely without
exception, for M. Comte recognizes other useful modes of employing
riches. In particular, one of his favourite ideas is that of an order of
Chivalry, composed of the most generous and self-devoted of the rich,
voluntarily dedicating themselves, like knights-errant of old, to the
redressing of wrongs, and the protection of the weak and oppressed. He
remarks, that oppression, in modern life, can seldom reach, or even
venture to attack, the life or liberty of its victims (he forgets the
case of domestic tyranny), but only their pecuniary means, and it is
therefore by the purse chiefly that individuals can usefully interpose,
as they formerly did by the sword. The occupation, however, of nearly
all the rich, will be the direction of labour, and for this work they
will be educated. Reciprocally, it is in M. Comte’s opinion essential,
that all directors of labour should be rich. Capital (in which he
includes land) should be concentrated in a few holders, so that every
capitalist may conduct the most extensive operations which one mind is
capable of superintending. This is not only demanded by good economy, in
order to take the utmost advantage of a rare kind of practical ability,
but it necessarily follows from the principle of M. Comte’s Edition:
current; Page: [348] scheme, which regards a capitalist as a public
functionary. M. Comte’s conception of the relation of capital to society
is essentially that of Socialists, but he would bring about by education
and opinion, what they aim at effecting by positive institution. The
owner of capital is by no means to consider himself its absolute
proprietor. Legally he is not to be controlled in his dealings with it,
for power should be in proportion to responsibility: but it does not
belong to him for his own use; he is merely entrusted by society with a
portion of the accumulations made by the past providence of mankind, to
be administered for the benefit of the present generation and of
posterity, under the obligation of preserving them unimpaired, and
handing them down, more or less augmented, to jthose who are to comej.
He is not entitled to dissipate them, or divert them from the service of
Humanity to his own pleasures. Nor has he a moral right to consume on
himself the whole even of his profits. He is bound in conscience, if
they exceed his reasonable wants, to employ the surplus in improving
either the efficiency of his operations, or the physical and mental
condition of his labourers. The portion of his gains which he may
appropriate to his own use, must be decided by himself, under
accountability to opinion; and opinion ought not to look very narrowly
into the matter, nor hold him to a rigid reckoning for any moderate
indulgence of luxury or ostentation; since under the great
responsibilities that will be imposed on him, the position of an
employer of labour will be so much less desirable, to any one in whom
the instincts of pride and vanity are not strong, than the “heureuse
insouciance” of a labourer, that those instincts must be to a certain
degree indulged, or no one would undertake the office. With this
limitation, every employer is a mere administrator of his possessions,
for his work-people and for society at large. If he indulges himself
lavishly, without reserving an ample remuneration for all who are
employed under him, he is morally culpable, and will incur sacerdotal
admonition. This state of things necessarily implies that capital should
be in few hands, because, as M. Comte observes, without great riches,
the obligations which society ought to impose, could not be fulfilled
without an amount of personal abnegation that it would be hopeless to
expect. If a person is conspicuously qualified for the conduct of an
industrial enterprise, but destitute of the fortune necessary for
undertaking it, M. Comte recommends that he should be enriched by
subscription, or, in cases of sufficient importance, by the State. Small
landed proprietors and capitalists, and the middle classes altogether,
he regards as a parasitic growth, destined to disappear, the best of the
body becoming large capitalists, and the remainder proletaires. Society
will consist only of rich and poor, and it will be the business of the
rich to make the best possible lot for the poor. The remuneration of the
labourers will continue, as at present, to be a matter of voluntary
arrangement between them and their employers, the last resort Edition:
current; Page: [349] on either side being refusal of co-operation,
“refus de concours,”[*] in other words, a strike or a lock-out; with the
sacerdotal order for mediators in case of need. But though wages are to
be an affair of free contract, their standard is not to be the
competition of the market, but the application of the products in
equitable proportion between the wants of the labourers and the wants
and dignity of the employer. As it is one of M. Comte’s principles that
a question cannot be usefully proposed without an attempt at a solution,
he gives his ideas from the beginning as to what the normal income of a
labouring family should be. They are on such a scale, that until some
great extension shall have taken place in the scientific resources of
mankind, it is no wonder he thinks it necessary to limit as much as
possible the number of those who are to be supported by what is left of
the produce. In the first place the labourer’s dwelling, which is to
consist of seven rooms, is, with all that it contains, to be his own
property: it is the only landed property he is allowed to possess, but
every family should be the absolute owner of all things which are
destined for its exclusive use. Lodging being thus independently
provided for, and education and medical attendance being secured
gratuitously by the general arrangements of society, the pay of the
labourer is to consist of two portions, the one monthly, and of fixed
amount, the other weekly, and proportioned to the produce of his labour.
The former M. Comte fixes at 100 francs (£4) for a month of 28 days;
being £52 a year: and the rate of piece-work should be such as to make
the other part amount to an average of seven francs (5s. 6d.) per
working day.[†]

Agreeably to M. Comte’s rule, that every public functionary should
appoint his successor, the capitalist has unlimited power of
transmitting his capital by gift or bequest, after his own death or
retirement. In general it will be best bestowed entire upon one person,
unless the business will advantageously admit of subdivision. He will
naturally leave it to one or more of his sons, if sufficiently
qualified; and rightly so, hereditary being, in M. Comte’s opinion,
preferable to acquired wealth, as being usually more generously
administered. But, merely as his sons, they have no moral right to it.
M. Comte here recognizes another of the principles, on which we believe
that the constitution of regenerated society will rest. He maintains (as
others in the present generation have done) that the father owes nothing
to his son, except a good education, and pecuniary aid sufficient for an
advantageous start in life: that he is entitled, and may be morally
bound, to leave the bulk of his fortune to some other properly selected
person or persons, whom he judges likely to make a more beneficial use
of it. This is the first of three important points, in which M. Comte’s
theory of the family, wrong as we deem it in its foundations, is in
advance of prevailing theories and existing Edition: current; Page:
[350] institutions. The second is the re-introduction of adoption, not
only in default of children, but to fulfil the purposes, and satisfy the
sympathetic wants, to which such children as there are may happen to be
inadequate. The third is a most important point—the incorporation of
domestics as substantive members of the family. There is hardly any part
of the present constitution of society more essentially vicious, and
morally injurious to both parties, than the relation between masters and
servants. To make this a really human and a moral relation, is one of
the principal desiderata in social improvement. The feeling of the
vulgar of all classes, that domestic service has anything in it
peculiarly mean, is a feeling than which there is none meaner. In the
feudal ages, youthful nobles of the highest rank though themselves
honoured by officiating in what is now called a menial capacity, about
the persons of superiors of both sexes, for whom they felt respect: and,
as M. Comte observes, there are many families who can in no other way so
usefully serve Humanity, as by ministering to the bodily wants of other
families, called to functions which require the devotion of all their
thoughts. We will add, by way of supplement to M. Comte’s doctrine, that
much of the daily physical work of a household, even in opulent
families, if silly notions of degradation, common to all ranks, did not
interfere, might very advantageously be performed by the family itself,
at least by its younger members; to whom it would give healthful
exercise of the bodily powers, which has now to be sought in modes far
less useful, and also a familiar acquaintance with the real work of the
world, and a moral willingness to take their share of its burthens,
which, in the great majority of the better-off classes, do not now get
cultivated at all.

We have still to speak of the directly political functions of the rich,
or, as M. Comte terms them, the patriciate.[*] The entire political
government is to be in their hands. First, however, the existing nations
are to be broken up into small republics, the largest not exceeding the
size of Belgium, Portugal, or Tuscany; any larger nationalities being
incompatible with the unity of wants and feelings, which is required,
not only to give due strength to the sentiment of patriotism (always
strongest in small states), but to prevent undue compression; for no
territory, M. Comte thinks, can without oppression be governed from a
distant centre. Algeria, therefore, is to be given up to the Arabs,
Corsica to its inhabitants, and France proper is to be, before the end
of the century, divided into seventeen republics, corresponding to the
number of considerable towns: Paris, however, (need it be said?)
succeeding to Rome as the religious metropolis of the world. Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales, are to be separated from England, which is of
course to detach itself from all its transmarine dependencies. In each
state thus constituted, the powers of government are to be vested in a
triumvirate of the three principal bankers, who are to take the foreign,
home, and financial departments Edition: current; Page: [351]
respectively. How they are to conduct the government and remain bankers,
does not clearly appear; but it must be intended that they should
combine both offices, for they are to receive no pecuniary remuneration
for the political one. Their power is to amount to a dictatorship (M.
Comte’s own word):[*] and he is hardly justified in saying that he gives
political power to the rich, since he gives it over the rich and every
one else, to three individuals of the number, not even chosen by the
rest, but named by their predecessors. As a check on the dictators,
there is to be complete freedom of speech, writing, printing, and
voluntary association; and all important acts of the government, except
in cases of emergency, are to be announced sufficiently long beforehand
to ensure ample discussion. This, and the kinfluencek of the Spiritual
Power, are the only guarantees provided against misgovernment. When we
consider that the complete dominion of every nation of mankind is thus
handed over to only four men—for the Spiritual Power is to be under the
absolute and undivided control of a single Pontiff for the whole human
race—one is appalled at the picture of entire subjugation and slavery,
which is recommended to us as the last and highest result of the
evolution of Humanity. But the conception rises to the terrific, when we
are told the mode in which the single High Priest of Humanity is
intended to use his authority. It is the most warning example we know,
into what frightful aberrations a powerful and comprehensive mind may be
led by the exclusive following out of a single idea.

The single idea of M. Comte, on this subject, is that the intellect
should be wholly subordinated to the feelings; or, to translate the
meaning out of sentimental into logical language, that the exercise of
the intellect, as of all our other faculties, should have for its sole
object the general good. Every other employment of it should be
accounted not only idle and frivolous, but morally culpable. Being
indebted wholly to Humanity for the cultivation to which we owe our
mental powers, we are bound in return to consecrate them wholly to her
service. Having made up his mind that this ought to be, there is with M.
Comte but one step to concluding that the Grand Pontiff of Humanity must
take care that it lshalll be; and on this foundation he organizes an
elaborate system for the total suppression of all independent thought.
He does not, indeed, invoke the arm of the law, or call for any
prohibitions. The clergy are to have no monopoly. Any one else may
cultivate science if he can, may write and publish if he can find
readers, may give private instruction if anybody consents to receive it.
But since the sacerdotal body will absorb into itself all but those whom
it deems either intellectually or morally unequal to the vocation, all
rival teachers will, as he calculates, be so discredited beforehand,
that their competition will not be formidable. Within the body Edition:
current; Page: [352] itself, the High Priest has it in his power to make
sure that there shall be no opinions, and no exercise of mind, but such
as he approves; for he alone decides the duties and local residence of
all its members, and can even eject them from the body. Before electing
to be under this rule, we feel a natural curiosity to know in what
manner it is to be exercised. Humanity has only yet had one Pontiff,
whose mental qualifications for the post are not likely to be often
surpassed, M. Comte himself. It is of some importance to know what are
the ideas of this High Priest, concerning the moral and religious
government of the human intellect.

One of the doctrines which M. Comte most strenuously enforces in his
later writings is, that during the preliminary evolution of humanity,
terminated by the foundation of Positivism, the free development of our
forces of all kinds was the important matter, but that from this time
forward the principal need is to regulate them. Formerly the danger was
of their being insufficient, but henceforth, of their being abused. Let
us express, in passing, our entire dissent from this doctrine. Whoever
thinks that the wretched education which mankind as yet receive, calls
forth their mental powers (except those of a select few) in a sufficient
or even tolerable degree, must be very easily satisfied: and the abuse
of them, far from becoming proportionally greater as knowledge and
mental capacity increase, becomes rapidly less, provided always that the
diffusion of those qualities keeps pace with their growth. The abuse of
intellectual power is only to be dreaded, when society is divided
between a few highly cultivated intellects and an ignorant and stupid
multitude. But mental power is a thing which M. Comte does not want—or
wants infinitely less than he wants submission and obedience. Of all the
ingredients of human nature, he continually says, the intellect most
needs to be disciplined and reined-in. It is the most turbulent, “le
plus perturbateur,”[*] of all the mental elements; more so than even the
selfish instincts. Throughout the whole modern transition, beginning
with ancient Greece (for M. Comte tells us that we have always been in a
state of revolutionary transition since then), the intellect has been in
a state of systematic insurrection against “le cœur.”[†] The
metaphysicians and literati (lettrès), after helping to pull down the
old religion and social order, are rootedly hostile to the construction
of the new, mdesiringm only to prolong the existing scepticism and
intellectual anarchy, which secure to them a cheap social ascendancy,
without the labour of earning it by solid scientific preparation.[‡] The
Edition: current; Page: [353] scientific class, from whom better might
have been expected, are, if possible, worse. Void of enlarged views,
despising all that is too large for their comprehension, devoted neach
exclusivelyn to his special science, contemptuously indifferent to moral
and political interests, their sole aim is to acquire an easy
reputation, and in France (through paid Academies and professorships)
personal lucre, by pushing their sciences into idle and useless
inquiries (speculations oiseuses),[*] of no value to the real interests
of mankind, and tending to divert the thoughts from them. One of the
duties most incumbent on opinion and on the Spiritual Power, is to
stigmatize as immoral, and effectually suppress, these useless
employments of the speculative faculties. All exercise of thought should
be abstained from, which has not some beneficial tendency, some actual
utility to mankind. M. Comte, of course, is not the man to say that it
must be a merely material utility. If a speculation, though it has no
doctrinal, has a logical value—if it throws any light on universal
Method—it is still more deserving of cultivation than if its usefulness
was merely practical: but, either as method or as doctrine, it must
bring forth fruits to Humanity, otherwise it is not only contemptible,
but criminal.

That there is a portion of truth at the bottom of all this, we should be
the last to deny. No respect is due to any employment of the intellect
which does not tend to the good of mankind. It is precisely on a level
with any idle amusement, and should be condemned as waste of time, if
carried beyond the limit within which amusement is permissible. And
whoever devotes powers of thought which could render to Humanity
services it urgently needs, to speculations and studies which it could
dispense with, is liable to the discredit attaching to a well-grounded
suspicion of caring little for Humanity. But who can affirm positively
of any speculations, guided by right scientific methods, on subjects
really accessible to the human faculties, that they are incapable of
being of any use? Nobody knows what knowledge will prove to be of use,
and what is destined to be useless. The most that can be said is that
some kinds are of more certain, and above all, of more present utility
than others. How often the most important practical results have been
the remote consequence of studies which no one would have expected to
lead to them! Could the mathematicians, who, in the schools of
Alexandria, investigated the properties of the ellipse, have foreseen
that nearly two thousand years afterwards their speculations would
explain the solar system, and a little later would enable ships safely
to circumnavigate the earth? Even in M. Comte’s opinion, it is well for
mankind that, in those early days, knowledge was thought worth pursuing
for its own sake. Nor has the “foundation of Positivism,” we imagine, so
far changed the conditions of human existence, that Edition: current;
Page: [354] it should now be criminal to acquire, by observation and
reasoning, a knowledge of the facts of the universe, leaving to
posterity to find a use for it. Even in the last two or three years, has
not the discovery of new metals, which may prove important even in the
practical arts, arisen from one of the investigations which M. Comte
most unequivocally condemns as idle, the research into the internal
constitution of the sun? How few, moreover, of the discoveries which
have changed the face of the world, either were or could have been
arrived at by investigations aiming directly at the object! Would the
mariner’s compass ever have been found by direct efforts for the
improvement of navigation? Should we have reached the electric telegraph
by any amount of striving for a means of instantaneous communication, if
Franklin had not identified electricity with lightning, and Ampère with
magnetism? The most apparently insignificant archæological or geological
fact, is often found to throw a light on human history, which M. Comte,
the basis of whose social philosophy is history, should be the last
person to disparage. The direction of the entrance to the othree great
Pyramidso of Ghizeh, by showing the position of the circumpolar stars at
the time when pthey werep built, is the best evidence we even now have
of the immense antiquity of Egyptian civilization.* The one point on
which M. Comte’s doctrine has some colour of reason, is the case of
sidereal astronomy: so little knowledge of it being really accessible to
us, and the connexion of that little with any terrestrial interests
being, according to all our means of judgment, infinitesimal. It is
certainly difficult to qimagineq how any considerable benefit to
humanity can be derived from a knowledge of the motions of the double
stars: should these ever become important to us it will be in so
prodigiously remote an age, that we can afford to remain ignorant of
them until, at least, all our moral, political, and social difficulties
have been settled. Yet the discovery that gravitation extends even to
those remote regions, gives some additional strength to the conviction
of the universality of natural laws; and the habitual meditation on such
vast objects and distances is not without an æsthetic usefulness, by
kindling and exalting the imagination, the worth of which in itself, and
even its reaction on the intellect, M. Comte is quite capable of
appreciating. He would reply, however, that there are better means of
accomplishing these purposes. In the same spirit he condemns the study
even of the solar system, when extended to any planets but those which
are visible to the naked eye, and which alone exert an appreciable
gravitative influence on the earth. Even the perturbations he thinks it
idle to study, beyond a mere general conception of them, and thinks that
astronomy may well limit its domain to the motions and Edition: current;
Page: [355] mutual action of the earth, sun, and moon. He looks for a
similar expurgation of all the other sciences. In one passage he
expressly says that the greater part of the researches which are really
accessible to us are idle and useless. He would pare down the dimensions
of all the sciences as narrowly as possible. He is continually repeating
that no science, as an abstract study, should be carried further than is
necessary to lay the foundation for the science next above it, and so
ultimately for moral science, the principal purpose of them all. Any
further extension of the mathematical and physical sciences should be
merely “episodic;”[*] limited to what may from time to time be demanded
by the requirements of industry and the arts; and should be left to the
industrial classes, except when they find it necessary to apply to the
sacerdotal order for some additional development of scientific theory.
This, he evidently thinks, would be a rare contingency, most physical
truths sufficiently concrete and real for practice being empirical.
Accordingly in estimating the number of clergy necessary for France,
Europe, and our entire planet (for his forethought extends thus far), he
proportions it solely to their moral and religious attributions
(overlooking, by the way, even their medical); and leaves nobody with
any time to cultivate the sciences, except abortive candidates for the
priestly office, who having been refused admittance into it for
insufficiency in moral excellence or in strength of character, may be
thought worth retaining as “pensioners”[†] of the sacerdotal order, on
account of their theoretic abilities.

It is no exaggeration to say, that M. Comte gradually acquired a real
hatred for scientific and all purely intellectual pursuits, and was bent
on retaining no more of them than was strictly indispensable. The
greatest of his anxieties is lest people should reason, and seek to
know, more than enough. He regards all abstraction and all reasoning as
morally dangerous, by developing an inordinate pride (orgueil), and
still more, by producing dryness (sécheresse).[‡] Abstract thought, he
says, is not a wholesome occupation for more than a small number of
human beings, nor of them for more than a small part of their time. Art,
which calls the emotions into play along with and more than the reason,
is the only intellectual exercise really adapted to human nature. It is
nevertheless indispensable that the chief theories of the various
abstract sciences, together with the modes in which those theories were
historically and logically arrived at, should form a part of universal
education: for, first, it is only thus that the methods can be learnt,
by which to attain the results sought by the moral and social sciences:
though we cannot perceive that M. Comte got at his own moral and social
results by Edition: current; Page: [356] those processes. Secondly, the
principal truths of the subordinate sciences are necessary to the
systematization (still systematization!) of our conceptions, by binding
together our notions of the world in a set of propositions, which are
coherent, and rarer a sufficiently correct representation of fact for
our practical wants. Thirdly, a familiar knowledge of the invariable
laws of natural phenomena is a great elementary lesson of submission,
which, he is never weary of saying, is the first condition both of
morality and of happiness. For these reasons, he would cause to be
taught, from the age of fourteen to that of twenty-one, to all persons,
rich and poor, girls or youths, a knowledge of the whole series of
abstract sciences, such as none but the most highly instructed persons
now possess, and of a far more systematic and philosophical character
than is usually possessed even by them. (N.B.—They are to learn, during
the same years, Greek and Latin, having previously, between the ages of
seven and fourteen, learnt the five principal modern languages, to the
degree necessary for reading, with due appreciation, the chief poetical
compositions in each.)[*] But they are to be taught all this, not only
without encouraging, but stifling as much as possible, the examining and
questioning spirit. The disposition which should be encouraged is that
of receiving all on the authority of the teacher. The Positivist faith,
even in its scientific part, is la foi démontrable, but ought by no
means to be la foi toujours démontrée.[†] The pupils have no business to
be over-solicitous about proof. The teacher should not even present the
proofs to them in a complete form, or as proofs. The object of
instruction is to make them understand the doctrines themselves,
perceive their mutual connexion, and form by means of them a consistent
and systematized conception of nature. As for the demonstrations, it is
rather desirable than otherwise that even theorists should forget them,
retaining only the results. Among all the aberrations of scientific men,
M. Comte thinks none greater than the pedantic anxiety they show for
complete proof, and perfect rationalization of scientific processes. It
ought to be enough that the doctrines afford an explanation of
phænomena, consistent with itself and with known facts, and that the
processes are justified by their fruits. This over-anxiety for proof, he
complains, is breaking down, by vain scruples, the knowledge which
seemed to have been attained; witness the present state of chemistry.
The demand of proof for what has been accepted by Humanity, is itself a
mark of “distrust, if not hostility, to the sacerdotal order”[‡] (the
naïveté of this would be charming, if it were not deplorable), and is a
revolt against the traditions of the human race. So early had the new
High Priest adopted the feelings and taken up the Edition: current;
Page: [357] inheritance of the old. One of his favourite aphorisms is
the strange one, that the living are more and more governed by the
dead.[*] As is not uncommon with him, he introduces the dictum in one
sense, and uses it in another. What he at first means by it, is that as
civilization advances, the sum of our possessions, physical and
intellectual, is due in a decreasing proportion to ourselves, and in an
increasing one to our progenitors. The use he makes of it is, that we
should submit ourselves more and more implicitly to the authority of
previous generations, and suffer ourselves less and less to doubt their
judgment, or test by our own reason the grounds of their opinions. The
unwillingness of the human intellect and conscience, in their present
state of “anarchy,” to sign their own abdication, he calls “the
insurrection of the living against the dead.”[†] To this complexion has
Positive Philosophy come at last!

Worse, however, remains to be told. M. Comte selects a hundred volumes
of science, philosophy, poetry, history, and general knowledge, which he
deems a sufficient library for every positivist, even of the theoretic
order, and actually proposes a systematic holocaust of books in
general—it would almost seem of all books except these.[‡] Even that to
which he shows most indulgence, poetry, except the very best, is to
sshare thiss fate, with the reservation of select passages, on the
ground that, poetry being intended to cultivate our instinct of ideal
perfection, any kind of it that is less than the best is worse than
none. This imitation of the error, we will call it the crime, of the
early Christians—and in an exaggerated form, for even they destroyed
only those writings of pagans or heretics which were directed against
themselves—is the one thing in M. Comte’s projects which merits real
indignation. When once M. Comte has decided, all evidence on the other
side, nay, the very historical evidence on which he grounded his
decision, had better perish. When mankind have enlisted under his
banner, they must burn their ships. There is, though in a less offensive
form, the same overweening presumption in a suggestion he makes, that
all species of animals and plants which are useless to man should be
systematically rooted out. As if any one could presume to assert that
the smallest weed may not, as knowledge advances, be found to have some
property serviceable to man. When we consider that the united power of
the whole human race cannot reproduce a species once eradicated—that
what is once done, in the extirpation of races, can never be repaired;
one can only be thankful that amidst all which the past rulers of
mankind have to answer for, they have never come up to the measure of
the great regenerator of Humanity; mankind have not yet been under the
rule of one Edition: current; Page: [358] who assumes that he knows all
there is to be known, and that when he has put himself at the head of
humanity, the book of human knowledge may be closed.

Of course M. Comte does not make this assumption consistently. He does
not imagine that he actually possesses all knowledge, but only that he
is an infallible judge what knowledge is worth possessing. He does not
believe that mankind have reached in all directions the extreme limits
of useful and laudable scientific inquiry. He thinks there is a large
scope for it still, in adding to our power over the external world, but
chiefly in perfecting our own physical, intellectual, and moral nature.
He holds that all our mental strength should be economized, for the
pursuit of this object in the mode leading most directly to the end.
With this view, some one problem should always be selected, the solution
of which would be more important than any other to the interests of
humanity, and upon this the entire intellectual resources of the
theoretic mind should be concentrated, until it is either resolved, or
has to be given up as insoluble: after which mankind should go on to
another, to be pursued with similar exclusiveness. The selection of this
problem of course rests with the sacerdotal order, or in other words,
with the High Priest. We should then see the whole speculative intellect
of the human race simultaneously at work on one question, by orders from
above, as a French minister of public instruction once boasted that a
million of boys were saying the same lesson during the same half-hour in
every town and village of France. The reader will be anxious to know,
how much better and more wisely the human intellect will be applied
under this absolute monarchy, and to what degree this system of
government will be preferable to the present anarchy, in which every
theorist does what is intellectually right in his own eyes. M. Comte has
not left us in ignorance on this point. He gives us ample means of
judging. The Pontiff of Positivism informs us what problem, in his
opinion, should be selected before all others for this united pursuit.

What this problem is, we must leave those who are curious on the subject
to learn from the treatise itself. When they have done so, they will be
qualified to form their own opinion of the amount of advantage which the
general good of mankind would be likely to derive, from exchanging the
present “dispersive speciality” and “intellectual anarchy” for the
subordination of the intellect to the cœur, personified in a High
Priest, prescribing a single problem for the undivided study of the
theoretic mind.

We have given a sufficient general idea of M. Comte’s plan for the
regeneration of human society, by putting an end to anarchy, and
“systematizing” human thought and conduct under the direction of
feeling. But an adequate conception will not have been formed of the
height of his self-confidence, until something more has been told. Be it
known, then, that M. Comte by no means proposes this new constitution of
society for realization in the Edition: current; Page: [359] remote
future. A complete plan of measures of transition is ready prepared, and
he determines the year, before the end of the present century, in which
the new spiritual and temporal powers will be installed, and the régime
of our maturity will begin. He did not indeed calculate on converting to
Positivism, within that time, more than a thousandth part of all the
heads of families in Western Europe and its offshoots beyond the
Atlantic. But he fixes the time necessary for the complete political
establishment of Positivism at thirty-three years, divided into three
periods, of seven, five, and twenty-one years respectively. At the
expiration of seven, the direction of public education in France would
be placed in M. Comte’s hands. In five years more, the Emperor Napoleon,
or his successor, will resign his power to a provisional triumvirate,
composed of three eminent proletaires of the positivist faith; for
proletaires, though not fit for permanent rule, are the best agents of
the transition, being the most free from the prejudices which are the
chief obstacle to it. These rulers will employ the remaining twenty-one
years in preparing society for its final constitution; and after duly
installing the Spiritual Power, and effecting the decomposition of
France into the seventeen republics before mentioned, will give over the
temporal government of each to the normal dictatorship of the three
bankers. A man may be deemed happy, but scarcely modest, who had such
boundless confidence in his own powers of foresight, and expected so
complete a triumph of his own ideas on the reconstitution of society
within the possible limits of his lifetime. If he could live (he said)
to the age of Fontenelle, or of Hobbes, or even of Voltaire, he should
see all this realized, or as good as realized. He died, however, at
sixty, without leaving any disciple sufficiently advanced to be
appointed his successor. There is now a College, and a Director, of
Positivism; but Humanity no longer possesses a High Priest.

What more remains to be said may be despatched more summarily. Its
interest is philosophic rather than practical. In his four volumes of
Politique Positive, M. Comte revises and re-elaborates the scientific
and historical expositions of his first treatise. His object is to
systematize (again to systematize) knowledge from the human or
subjective point of view, the only one, he contends, from which a real
synthesis is possible. For (he says) the knowledge attainable by us of
the laws of the universe is at best fragmentary, and incapable of
reduction to a real unity. An objective synthesis, the dream of
Descartes and the best thinkers of old, is impossible.[*] The laws of
the real world are too numerous, and the manner of their working into
one another too intricate, to be, as a general rule, correctly traced
and represented by our reason. The only connecting principle in our
knowledge is its relation to our wants, and it is upon that we must
found our systematization. The answer to this is, first, that there is
no necessity for an universal synthesis; Edition: current; Page: [360]
and secondly, that the same arguments may be used against the
possibility of a complete subjective, as of a complete objective
systematization. A subjective synthesis must consist in the arrangement
and co-ordination of all useful knowledge, on the basis of its relation
to human wants and interests. But those wants and interests are, like
the laws of the universe, extremely multifarious, and the order of
preference among them in all their different gradations (for it varies
according to the degree of each) cannot be cast into precise general
propositions. M. Comte’s subjective synthesis consists only in
eliminating from the sciences everything that he deems useless, and
presenting as far as possible every theoretical investigation as the
solution of a practical problem. To this, however, he cannot
consistently adhere; for, in every science, the theoretic truths are
much more closely connected with one another than with the human
purposes which they eventually serve, and can only be made to cohere in
the intellect by being, to a great degree, presented as if they were
truths of pure reason, irrespective of any practical application.

There are many things eminently characteristic of M. Comte’s second
career, in this revision of the results of his first. Under the head of
Biology, and for the better combination of that science with Sociology
and Ethics, he found that he required a new system of Phrenology, being
justly dissatisfied with that of Gall and his successors. Accordingly he
set about constructing one à priori, grounded on the best enumeration
and classification he could make of the elementary faculties of our
intellectual, moral, and animal nature; to each of which he assigned an
hypothetical place in the skull, the most conformable that he could to
the few positive facts on the subject which he considered as
established, and to the general presumption that functions which react
strongly on one another must have their organs adjacent: leaving the
localities avowedly to be hereafter verified, by anatomical and
inductive investigation. There is considerable merit in this attempt,
though it is liable to obvious criticisms, of the same nature as his own
upon Gall. But the characteristic thing is, that while presenting all
this as hypothesis waiting for verification, he could not have taken its
truth more completely for granted if the verification had been made. In
all that he afterwards wrote, every detail of his theory of the brain is
as unhesitatingly asserted, and as confidently built upon, as any other
doctrine of science. This is his first great attempt in the “Subjective
Method,” which, originally meaning only the subordination of the pursuit
of the truth to human uses, had already come to mean drawing truth
itself from the fountain of his own mind. He had become, on the one
hand, almost indifferent to proof, provided he attained theoretic
coherency, and on the other, serenely confident that even the guesses
which originated with himself could not but come out true.

There is one point in his later view of the sciences, which appears to
us a decided improvement on his earlier. He adds to the six fundamental
sciences Edition: current; Page: [361] of his original scale, a seventh
under the name of Morals, forming the highest step of the ladder,
immediately after Sociology: remarking that it might, with still greater
propriety, be termed Anthropology, being the science of individual human
nature, a study, when rightly understood, more special and complicated
than even that of Society. For it is obliged to take into consideration
the diversities of constitution and temperament (la réaction cérébrale
des viscères végétatifs) the effects of which, still very imperfectly
understood, are highly important in the individual, but in the theory of
society may be neglected, because, differing in different persons, they
neutralize one another on the large scale.[*] This is a remark worthy of
M. Comte in his best days; and the science thus conceived is, as he
says, the true scientific foundation of the art of Morals (and indeed of
the art of human life), which, therefore, may, both philosophically and
didactically, be properly combined with it.

His philosophy of general history is recast, and in many respects
changed; we cannot but say, greatly for the worse. He gives much greater
development than before to the Fetishistic, and to what he terms the
Theocratic, periods.[†] To the Fetishistic view of nature he evinces a
partiality, which appears strange in a Positive philosopher. But the
reason is that Fetish-worship is a religion of the feelings, and not at
all of the intelligence. He regards it as cultivating universal love: as
a practical fact it cultivates much rather universal fear. He looks upon
Fetishism as much more akin to Positivism than any of the forms of
Theology, inasmuch as these consider matter as inert, and moved only by
forces, natural and supernatural, exterior to itself: while Fetishism
resembles Positivism in conceiving matter as spontaneously active, and
errs only by not distinguishing activity from life. As if the
superstition of the Fetishist consisted only in believing that the
objects which produce the phænomena of nature involuntarily, produce
them voluntarily. The Fetishist thinks not merely that his Fetish is
alive, but that it can help him in war, can cure him of diseases, can
grant him prosperity, or afflict him with all the contrary evils.
Therein consists the lamentable effect of Fetishism—its degrading and
prostrating influence on the feelings and conduct, its conflict with all
genuine experience, and antagonism to all real knowledge of nature.

M. Comte had also no small sympathy with the Oriental theocracies, as he
calls the sacerdotal castes, who indeed often deserved it by their early
services to intellect and civilization; by the aid they gave to the
establishment of regular government, the valuable though empirical
knowledge they accumulated, and the height to which they helped to carry
some of the useful arts. M. Comte admits that they became oppressive,
and that the prolongation of Edition: current; Page: [362] their
ascendancy came to be incompatible with further improvement. But he
ascribes this to their having arrogated to themselves the temporal
government, which, so far as we have any authentic information, they
never did. The reason why the sacerdotal corporations became oppressive,
was because they were organized: because they attempted the “unity” and
“systematization” so dear to M. Comte, and allowed no science and no
speculation, except with their leave and under their direction. M.
Comte’s sacerdotal order, which, in his system, has all the power that
ever they had, would be oppressive in the same manner; with no variation
but that which arises from the altered state of society and of the human
mind.

M. Comte’s partiality to the theocracies is strikingly contrasted with
his dislike of the Greeks, whom as a people he thoroughly detests, for
their undue addiction to intellectual speculation, and considers to have
been, by an inevitable fatality, morally sacrificed to the formation of
a few great scientific intellects,—principally Aristotle, Archimedes,
Apollonius, and Hipparchus. Any one who knows Grecian history as it can
now be known, will be amazed at M. Comte’s travestie of it, in which the
vulgarest historical prejudices are accepted and exaggerated, to
illustrate the mischiefs of intellectual culture left to its own
guidance.

There is no need to analyze further M. Comte’s second view of universal
history. The best chaptert, to our mind,t is that on the Romans,[*] to
whom, because they were greater in practice than in theory, and for
centuries worked together in obedience to a social sentiment (though
only that of their country’s aggrandizement), M. Comte is as favourably
affected, as he is inimical to all but a small selection of eminent
thinkers among the Greeks. The greatest blemish in this chapter is the
uprodigious over-estimationu of Julius Cæsar, whom M. Comte regards as
one of the most illustrious characters in history, and of the greatest
practical benefactors of mankind. Cæsar had many eminent qualities, but
what he did to deserve such praise we are at a loss to discover, except
subverting a free government: that merit, however, with M. Comte, goes a
great way. It did not, in his former days, suffice to rehabilitate
Napoleon, whose name and memory he regarded with a bitterness highly
honourable to himself, and whose career he deemed one of the greatest
calamities in modern history. But in his later writings these sentiments
are considerably mitigated: he regards Napoleon as a more estimable
“dictator” than Louis Philippe, and thinks that his greatest error was
re-establishing the Academy of Sciences![†] That this should be said by
M. Comte, and said of Napoleon, measures the depth to which his moral
standard had fallen.

Edition: current; Page: [363]
The last volume which he published, that on the Philosophy of
Mathematics,[*] is in some respects a still sadder picture of
intellectual degeneracy than those which preceded it. After the
admirable résumé of the subject in the first volume of his first great
work, we expected something of the very highest order when he returned
to the subject for a more thorough treatment of it. But, being the
commencement of a Synthèse Subjective, it contains, as might be
expected, a great deal that is much more subjective than mathematical.
Nor of this do we complain: but we little imagined of what nature this
subjective matter was to be. M. Comte here joins together the two ideas,
which, of all that he has put forth, are the most repugnant to the
fundamental principles of Positive Philosophy. One of them is that on
which we have just commented, the assimilation between Positivism and
Fetishism. The other, of which we took notice in a former article, was
the “liberté facultative” of shaping our scientific conceptions to
gratify the demands not solely of objective truth, but of intellectual
and æsthetic suitability.[†] It would be an excellent thing, M. Comte
thinks, if science could be deprived of its sécheresse, and directly
associated with sentiment. Now it is impossible to prove that the
external world, and the bodies composing it, are not endowed with
feeling, and voluntary agency. It is therefore highly desirable that we
should educate ourselves into imagining that they are. Intelligence it
will not do to invest them with, for some distinction must be maintained
between simple activity and life. But we may suppose that they feel what
is done to them, and desire and will what they themselves do. Even
intelligence, which we must deny to them in the present, may be
attributed to them in the past. Before man existed, the earth, at that
time an intelligent being, may have exerted

its physico-chemical activity so as to improve the astronomical order by
changing its principal coefficients. Our planet may be supposed to have
rendered its orbit less excentric, and thereby more habitable, by
planning a long series of explosions, analogous to those from which,
according to the best hypotheses, comets proceed. Judiciously
reproduced, similar shocks may have rendered the inclination of the
earth’s axis better adapted to the future wants of the Grand Etre. A
fortiori the Earth may have modified its own figure, which is only
beyond our intervention because our spiritual ascendancy has not at its
disposal a sufficient material force.

The like may be conceived as having been done by each of the other
planets, in concert, possibly, with the Earth and with one another.

In proportion as each planet improved its own condition, its life
exhausted itself by excess of innervation; but with the consolation of
rendering its self-devotion more efficacious, when the extinction of its
special functions, first animal, and finally vegetative, reduced it to
the universal attributes of feeling and activity.*

Edition: current; Page: [364]
This stuff, though he calls it fiction, he soon after speaks of as
belief (croyance), to be greatly recommended, as at once satisfying our
natural curiosity, and “perfecting our unity” (again unity!) v“by
supplyingv the gaps in our scientific notions with poetic fictions, and
developing sympathetic emotions and æsthetic inspirations: the world
being conceived as aspiring to second mankind in ameliorating the
universal order under the impulse of the Grand Etre.”[*] And he
obviously intends that we should be trained to make these fantastical
inventions permeate all our associations, until we are incapable of
conceiving the world and Nature apart from them, and they become
equivalent to, and are in fact transformed into, real beliefs.

Wretched as this is, it is singularly characteristic of M. Comte’s later
mode of thought. A writer might be excused for introducing into an
avowed work of fancy this dance of the planets, and conception of an
animated Earth. If finely executed, he might even be admired for it. No
one blames a poet for ascribing feelings, purposes, and human
propensities to flowers. Because a conception might be interesting, and
perhaps edifying, in a poem, M. Comte would have it imprinted on the
inmost texture of every human mind in ordinary prose. If the imagination
were not taught its prescribed lesson equally with the reason, where
would be Unity? “It is important that the domain of fiction should
become as systematic as that of demonstration, in order that their
mutual harmony may be conformable to their respective destinations, both
equally directed towards the continual increase of unity, personal and
social.”*

Nor is it enough to have created the Grand Fétiche (so he actually
proposes to call the Earth),[†] and to be able to include it and all
concrete existence in our adoration along with the Grand Etre. It is
necessary also to extend Positivist Fetishism to purely abstract
existence; to “animate” the laws as well as the facts of nature. It is
not sufficient to have made physics sentimental, mathematics must be
made so too. This does not at first seem easy; but M. Comte finds the
means of accomplishing it. His plan is, to make Space also an object of
adoration, under the name of the Grand Milieu, and consider it as the
representative of Fatality in general. “The final unity disposes us to
cultivate sympathy by developing our gratitude to whatever serves the
Grand Etre. It must dispose us to venerate the Fatality on which reposes
the whole aggregate of our existence.”[‡] We should conceive this
Fatality as having a fixed seat, and that seat must be considered to be
Space, which should be conceived as possessing feeling, but not activity
or intelligence. And in our abstract speculations we should imagine all
our conceptions as located in free Space. Our images of all sorts, down
to our geometrical Edition: current; Page: [365] diagrams, and even our
ciphers and algebraic symbols, should always be figured to ourselves as
written in space, and not on paper or any other material substance. M.
Comte adds that they should be conceived as green on a white ground.[*]

We cannot go on any longer with thisw. In spite of it all, the volume on
mathematics is full of profound thoughts, and will be very suggestive to
those who take up the subject after M. Comte. What deep meaning there
is, for example, in the idea that the infinitesimal calculus is a
conception analogous to the corpuscular hypothesis in physics; which
last M. Comte has always considered as a logical artifice; not an
opinion respecting matters of fact. The assimilation, as it seems to us,
throws a flood of light on both conceptions; on the physical one still
more than the mathematical. We might extract many ideas of similar,
though none perhaps of equal, suggestiveness. But mixed with these, what
pitiable niaiseries! One of his great points is the importance of the
“moral and intellectual properties of numbers.”[†] He cultivates a
superstitious reverence for some of them. The first three are sacred,
les nombres sacrés: One being the type of all Synthesis, Two of all
Combination, which he now says is always binary (in his first treatise
he only said that we may usefully represent it to ourselves as being
so), and Three of all Progression, which not only requires three terms,
but, as he now maintains, never ought to have any more.[‡] To these
sacred numbers all our mental operations must be made, as far as
possible, to adjust themselves. Next to them, he has a great partiality
for the number seven; for these whimsical reasons: “Composed of two
progressions followed by a synthesis, or of one progression between two
couples, the number seven, coming next after the sum of the three sacred
numbers, determines the largest group which we can distinctly imagine.
Reciprocally, it marks the limit of the divisions which we can directly
conceive in a magnitude of any kind.”[§] The number seven, therefore,
must be foisted in wherever possible, and among other things, is to be
made the basis of numeration, which is hereafter to be septimal instead
of decimal: producing all the inconvenience of a change of system, not
only without getting rid of, but greatly aggravating, the disadvantages
of the existing one. But then, he says, it is absolutely necessary that
the basis of numeration should be a prime number. All other people think
it absolutely necessary that it should not, and regard the present basis
as only objectionable in not being divisible enough. But M. Comte’s
puerile predilection for prime numbers almost passes belief. His reason
is that they are the type of irreductibility: each of them is a kind of
ultimate arithmetical fact. This, to any one who knows M. Comte in his
later aspects, is amply sufficient. Nothing can exceed Edition: current;
Page: [366] his delight in anything which says to the human mind, Thus
far shalt thou go and no farther. If prime numbers are precious, doubly
prime numbers are doubly so; meaning those which are not only themselves
prime numbers, but the number which marks their place in the series of
prime numbers is a prime number. Still greater is the dignity of trebly
prime numbers; when the number marking the place of this second number
is also prime. The number thirteen fulfils these conditions: it is a
prime number, it is the seventh prime number, and seven is the fifth
prime number.[*] Accordingly he has an outrageous partiality to the
number thirteen. Though one of the most inconvenient of all small
numbers, he insists on introducing it everywhere.

These strange conceits are connected with a highly characteristic
example of M. Comte’s frenzy for regulation. He cannot bear that
anything should be left unregulated: there ought to be no such thing as
hesitation; nothing should remain arbitrary, for l’arbitraire[†] is
always favourable to egoism. Submission to artificial prescriptions is
as indispensable as to natural laws, and he boasts that under the reign
of sentiment, human life may be made equally, and even more, regular
than the courses of the stars. But the great instrument of exact
regulation for the details of life is numbers: fixed numbers, therefore,
should be introduced into all our conduct. M. Comte’s first application
of this system was to the correction of his own literary style.
Complaint had been made, not undeservedly, that in his first great work,
especially in the latter part of it, the sentences and paragraphs were
long, clumsy, and involved. To correct this fault, of which he was
aware, he imposed on himself the following rules. No sentence was to
exceed two lines of his manuscript, equivalent to five of print. No
paragraph was to consist of more than seven sentences. He further
applied to his prose writing the rule of French versification which
forbids a hiatus (the concourse of two vowels), not allowing it to
himself even at the break between two sentences or two paragraphs; nor
did he permit himself ever to use the same word twice, either in the
same sentence or in two consecutive sentences, though belonging to
different paragraphs: with the exception of the monosyllabic
auxiliaries.* All this is well enough, especially the first two
precepts, and a good way of breaking through a bad habit. But M. Comte
persuaded himself that any arbitrary restriction, though in no way
emanating from, and therefore necessarily disturbing, the natural order
and proportion of the thoughts, is a benefit in itself, and tends to
improve style. If it renders composition vastly more difficult, he
rejoices at it, as tending to confine writing to superior minds.
Accordingly, in the Synthèse Subjective, he institutes the following
“plan for all compositions of importance.” “Every volume really capable
of forming Edition: current; Page: [367] a distinct treatise” should
consist of “seven chapters, besides the introduction and the conclusion;
and each of these should be composed of three parts.” Each third part of
a chapter should be divided into

seven sections, each composed of seven groups of sentences, separated by
the usual break of line. Normally formed, the section offers a central
group of seven sentences, preceded and followed by three groups of five:
the first section of each part reduces to three sentences three of its
groups, symmetrically placed; the last section gives seven sentences to
each of its extreme groups. These rules of composition make prose
approach to the regularity of poetry, when combined with my previous
reduction of the maximum length of a sentence to two manuscript or five
printed lines, that is, 250 letters.

Normally constructed, great poems consist of thirteen cantos, decomposed
into parts, sections, and groups like my chapters, saving the complete
equality of the groups and of the sections.

“This difference of structure between volumes of poetry and of
philosophy is more apparent than real, for the introduction and the
conclusion of a poem should comprehend six of its thirteen cantos,”
leaving, therefore, the cabalistic number seven for the body of the
poem. And all this regulation not being sufficiently meaningless,
fantastic, and oppressive, he invents an elaborate system for compelling
each of his sections and groups to begin with a letter of the alphabet,
determined beforehand, the letters being selected so as to compose words
having “a synthetic or sympathetic signification,” and as close a
relation as possible to the section or part to which they are
appropriated.[*]

Others may laugh, but we could far rather weep at this melancholy
decadence of a great intellect. M. Comte used to reproach his early
English admirers with maintaining the “conspiracy of silence”[†]
concerning his later performances. The reader can now judge whether such
reticence is not more than sufficiently explained by tenderness for his
fame, and a conscientious fear of bringing undeserved discredit on the
noble speculations of his earlier career.

M. Comte was accustomed to consider Descartes and Leibnitz as his
principal precursors, and the only great philosophers (among many
thinkers of high philosophic capacity) in modern times. It was to their
minds that he considered his own to bear the nearest resemblance. Though
we have not so lofty an opinion of any of the three as M. Comte had, we
think the assimilation just: these were, of all recorded thinkers, the
two who bore most resemblance to M. Comte. They were like him in
earnestness, like him, though scarcely equal to him, in confidence in
themselves; they had the same extraordinary power of concatenation and
co-ordination; they enriched human knowledge with great truths and great
conceptions of method; they Edition: current; Page: [368] were, of all
great scientific thinkers, the most consistent, and for that reason
often the most absurd, because they xshrankx from no consequences,
however contrary to common sense, to which their premises appeared to
lead. Accordingly their names have come down to us associated with grand
thoughts, with most important discoveries, and also with some of the
most extravagantly wild and ludicrously absurd conceptions and theories
which ever were solemnly propounded by thoughtful men. We think M. Comte
as great as either of these philosophers, and hardly more extravagant.
Were we to speak our whole mind, we should call him superior to them:
ythoughy not intrinsically, zyetz by the exertion of equal intellectual
power in a more advanced state of human preparation; but also in an age
less tolerant of palpable absurdities, and to which those he has
committed, if not in themselves greater, at least appear more
ridiculous.

Edition: current; Page: [369]


THREE ESSAYS ON RELIGION
 1874

Edition: current; Page: [370]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1874. As this volume was
posthumously published, edited by Helen Taylor, there is no entry in
JSM’s bibliography, and the essays are not mentioned in his
Autobiography. For comment on the writing of the essays, and their
relation to the other essays in this volume, see the Textual
Introduction, cxxii-cxix above.

There are no corrections or alterations in the Somerville College
copies, although Helen Taylor has written “1st Ed.” on the title page of
the 1874 ed., probably when the 2nd ed. was in preparation. The 2nd ed.
(1874) and 3rd ed. (1885) are simply reprints of the 1st, without
changes.

Edition: current; Page: [371]


Introductory Notice

the three following Essays on Religion were written at considerable
intervals of time, without any intention of forming a consecutive
series, and must not therefore be regarded as a connected body of
thought, excepting in so far as they exhibit the Author’s deliberate and
exhaustive treatment of the topics under consideration.

The two first of these three Essays were written between the years 1850
and 1858, during the period which intervened between the publication of
the Principles of Political Economy, and that of the work on Liberty;
during which interval three other Essays—on Justice, on Utility, and on
Liberty—were also composed. Of the five Essays written at that time,
three have already been given to the public by the Author. That on
Liberty was expanded into the now well-known work bearing the same
title. Those on Justice and Utility were afterwards incorporated, with
some alterations and additions, into one, and published under the name
of Utilitarianism. The remaining two—on Nature and on the Utility of
Religion—are now given to the public, with the addition of a third—on
Theism—which was produced at a much later period. In these two first
Essays indications may easily be found of the date at which they were
composed; among which indications may be noted the absence of any
mention of the works of Mr. Darwin and Sir Henry Maine in passages where
there is coincidence of thought with those writers, or where subjects
are treated which they have since discussed in a manner to which the
Author of these Essays would certainly have referred had their works
been published before these were written.

The last Essay in the present volume belongs to a different epoch; it
was written between the years 1868 and 1870, but it was not designed as
a sequel to the two Essays which now appear along with it, nor were they
intended to appear all together. On the other hand it is certain that
the Author considered the opinions expressed in these different Essays,
as fundamentally consistent. The evidence of this lies in the fact that
in the year 1873, after he had completed his Essay on Theism, it was his
intention to have published the Essay on Nature at once, with only such
slight revision as might be judged necessary in preparing it for the
press, but substantially in its present form. From this it is apparent
that his manner of thinking had undergone no Edition: current; Page:
[372] substantial change. Whatever discrepancies, therefore, may seem to
remain after a really careful comparison between different passages, may
be set down either to the fact that the last Essay had not undergone the
many revisions which it was the Author’s habit to make peculiarly
searching and thorough; or to that difference of tone, and of apparent
estimate of the relative weight of different considerations, which
results from taking a wider view and including a larger number of
considerations in the estimate of the subject as a whole, than in
dealing with parts of it only.

The fact that the Author intended to publish the Essay on Nature in 1873
is sufficient evidence, if any is needed, that the volume now given to
the public was not withheld by him on account of reluctance to encounter
whatever odium might result from the free expression of his opinions on
religion. That he did not purpose to publish the other two Essays at the
same time, was in accord with the Author’s habit in regard to the public
utterance of his religious opinions. For at the same time that he was
peculiarly deliberate and slow in forming opinions, he had a special
dislike to the utterance of half-formed opinions. He declined altogether
to be hurried into premature decision on any point to which he did not
think he had given sufficient time and labour to have exhausted it to
the utmost limit of his own thinking powers. And, in the same way, even
after he had arrived at definite conclusions, he refused to allow the
curiosity of others to force him to the expression of them before he had
bestowed all the elaboration in his power upon their adequate
expression, and before, therefore, he had subjected to the test of time,
not only the conclusions themselves, but also the form into which he had
thrown them. The same reasons, therefore, that made him cautious in the
spoken utterance of his opinion in proportion as it was necessary to be
at once precise and comprehensive in order to be properly understood,
which in his judgment was pre-eminently the case in religious
speculation, were the reasons that made him abstain from publishing his
Essay on Nature for upwards of fifteen years, and might have led him
still to withhold the others which now appear in the same volume.

From this point of view it will be seen that the Essay on Theism has
both greater value and less than any other of the Author’s works. The
last considerable work which he completed, it shows the latest state of
the Author’s mind, the carefully balanced result of the deliberations of
a lifetime. On the other hand, there had not been time for it to undergo
the revision to which from time to time he subjected most of his
writings before making them public. Not only therefore is the style less
polished than that of any other of his published works, but even the
matter itself, at least in the exact shape it here assumes, has never
undergone the repeated examination which it certainly would have passed
through before he would himself have given it to the world.

HELEN TAYLOR

Edition: current; Page: [373]


Nature

nature, natural, and the group of words derived from them, or allied to
them in etymology, have at all times filled a great place in the
thoughts and taken a strong hold on the feelings of mankind. That they
should have done so is not surprising, when we consider what the words,
in their primitive and most obvious signification, represent; but it is
unfortunate that a set of terms which play so great a part in moral and
metaphysical speculation, should have acquired many meanings different
from the primary one, yet sufficiently allied to it to admit of
confusion. The words have thus become entangled in so many foreign
associations, mostly of a very powerful and tenacious character, that
they have come to excite, and to be the symbols of, feelings which their
original meaning will by no means justify; and which have made them one
of the most copious sources of false taste, false philosophy, false
morality, and even bad law.

The most important application of the Socratic Elenchus, as exhibited
and improved by Plato, consists in dissecting large abstractions of this
description; fixing down to a precise definition the meaning which as
popularly used they merely shadow forth, and questioning and testing the
common maxims and opinions in which they bear a part. It is to be
regretted that among the instructive specimens of this kind of
investigation which Plato has left, and to which subsequent times have
been so much indebted for whatever intellectual clearness they have
attained, he has not enriched posterity with a dialogue περὶ ϕύσεως. If
the idea denoted by the word had been subjected to his searching
analysis, and the popular commonplaces in which it figures had been
submitted to the ordeal of his powerful dialectics, his successors
probably would not have rushed, as they speedily did, into modes of
thinking and reasoning of which the fallacious use of that word formed
the corner stone; a kind of fallacy from which he was himself singularly
free.

According to the Platonic method which is still the best type of such
investigations, the first thing to be done with so vague a term is to
ascertain precisely what it means. It is also a rule of the same method,
that the meaning of an abstraction is best sought for in the concrete—of
an universal in the particular. Adopting this course with the word
Nature, the first question must be, what is meant by the “nature” of a
particular object? as of fire, of Edition: current; Page: [374] water,
or of some individual plant or animal? Evidently the ensemble or
aggregate of its powers or properties: the modes in which it acts on
other things (counting among those things the senses of the observer)
and the modes in which other things act upon it; to which, in the case
of a sentient being, must be added, its own capacities of feeling, or
being conscious. The Nature of the thing means all this; means its
entire capacity of exhibiting phenomena. And since the phenomena which a
thing exhibits, however much they vary in different circumstances, are
always the same in the same circumstances, they admit of being described
in general forms of words, which are called the laws of the thing’s
nature. Thus it is a law of the nature of water that under the mean
pressure of the atmosphere at the level of the sea, it boils at 212°
Fahrenheit.

As the nature of any given thing is the aggregate of its powers and
properties, so Nature in the abstract is the aggregate of the powers and
properties of all things. Nature means the sum of all phenomena,
together with the causes which produce them; including not only all that
happens, but all that is capable of happening; the unused capabilities
of causes being as much a part of the idea of Nature, as those which
take effect. Since all phenomena which have been sufficiently examined
are found to take place with regularity, each having certain fixed
conditions, positive and negative, on the occurrence of which it
invariably happens; mankind have been able to ascertain, either by
direct observation or by reasoning processes grounded on it, the
conditions of the occurrence of many phenomena; and the progress of
science mainly consists in ascertaining those conditions. When
discovered they can be expressed in general propositions, which are
called laws of the particular phenomenon, and also, more generally, Laws
of Nature. Thus, the truth that all material objects tend towards one
another with a force directly as their masses and inversely as the
square of their distance, is a law of Nature. The proposition that air
and food are necessary to animal life, if it be as we have good reason
to believe, true without exception, is also a law of nature, though the
phenomenon of which it is the law is special, and not, like gravitation,
universal.

Nature, then, in this its simplest acceptation, is a collective name for
all facts, actual and possible: or (to speak more accurately) a name for
the mode, partly known to us and partly unknown, in which all things
take place. For the word suggests, not so much the multitudinous detail
of the phenomena, as the conception which might be formed of their
manner of existence as a mental whole, by a mind possessing a complete
knowledge of them: to which conception it is the aim of science to raise
itself, by successive steps of generalization from experience.

Such, then, is a correct definition of the word Nature. But this
definition corresponds only to one of the senses of that ambiguous term.
It is evidently Edition: current; Page: [375] inapplicable to some of
the modes in which the word is familiarly employed. For example, it
entirely conflicts with the common form of speech by which Nature is
opposed to Art, and natural to artificial. For in the sense of the word
Nature which has just been defined, and which is the true scientific
sense, Art is as much Nature as anything else; and everything which is
artificial is natural—Art has no independent powers of its own: Art is
but the employment of the powers of Nature for an end. Phenomena
produced by human agency, no less than those which as far as we are
concerned are spontaneous, depend on the properties of the elementary
forces, or of the elementary substances and their compounds. The united
powers of the whole human race could not create a new property of matter
in general, or of any one of its species. We can only take advantage for
our purposes of the properties which we find. A ship floats by the same
laws of specific gravity and equilibrium, as a tree uprooted by the wind
and blown into the water. The corn which men raise for food, grows and
produces its grain by the same laws of vegetation by which the wild rose
and the mountain strawberry bring forth their flowers and fruit. A house
stands and holds together by the natural properties, the weight and
cohesion of the materials which compose it: a steam engine works by the
natural expansive force of steam, exerting a pressure upon one part of a
system of arrangements, which pressure, by the mechanical properties of
the lever, is transferred from that to another part where it raises the
weight or removes the obstacle brought into connexion with it. In these
and all other artificial operations the office of man is, as has often
been remarked, a very limited one; it consists in moving things into
certain places. We move objects, and by doing this, bring some things
into contact which were separate, or separate others which were in
contact: and by this simple change of place, natural forces previously
dormant are called into action, and produce the desired effect. Even the
volition which designs, the intelligence which contrives, and the
muscular force which executes these movements, are themselves powers of
Nature.

It thus appears that we must recognize at least two principal meanings
in the word Nature. In one sense, it means all the powers existing in
either the outer or the inner world and everything which takes place by
means of those powers. In another sense, it means, not everything which
happens, but only what takes place without the agency, or without the
voluntary and intentional agency, of man. This distinction is far from
exhausting the ambiguities of the word; but it is the key to most of
those on which important consequences depend.

Such, then, being the two principal senses of the word Nature; in which
of these is it taken, or is it taken in either, when the word and its
derivatives are used to convey ideas of commendation, approval, and even
moral obligation?

It has conveyed such ideas in all ages. Naturam sequi was the
fundamental Edition: current; Page: [376] principle of morals in many of
the most admired schools of philosophy. Among the ancients, especially
in the declining period of ancient intellect and thought, it was the
test to which all ethical doctrines were brought. The Stoics and the
Epicureans, however irreconcilable in the rest of their systems, agreed
in holding themselves bound to prove that their respective maxims of
conduct were the dictates of nature. Under their influence the Roman
jurists, when attempting to systematize jurisprudence, placed in the
front of their exposition a certain Jus Naturale, “quod natura”, as
Justinian declares in the Institutes, “omnia animalia docuit”:[*] and as
the modern systematic writers not only on law but on moral philosophy,
have generally taken the Roman jurists for their models, treatises on
the so-called Law of Nature have abounded; and references to this Law as
a supreme rule and ultimate standard have pervaded literature. The
writers on International Law have done more than any others to give
currency to this style of ethical speculation; inasmuch as having no
positive law to write about, and yet being anxious to invest the most
approved opinions respecting international morality with as much as they
could of the authority of law, they endeavoured to find such an
authority in Nature’s imaginary code. The Christian theology during the
period of its greatest ascendancy, opposed some, though not a complete,
hindrance to the modes of thought which erected Nature into the
criterion of morals, inasmuch as, according to the creed of most
denominations of Christians (though assuredly not of Christ) man is by
nature wicked. But this very doctrine, by the reaction which it
provoked, has made the deistical moralists almost unanimous in
proclaiming the divinity of Nature, and setting up its fancied dictates
as an authoritative rule of action. A reference to that supposed
standard is the predominant ingredient in the vein of thought and
feeling which was opened by Rousseau, and which has infiltrated itself
most widely into the modern mind, not excepting that portion of it which
calls itself Christian. The doctrines of Christianity have in every age
been largely accommodated to the philosophy which happened to be
prevalent, and the Christianity of our day has borrowed a considerable
part of its colour and flavour from sentimental deism. At the present
time it cannot be said that Nature, or any other standard, is applied as
it was wont to be, to deduce rules of action with juridical precision,
and with an attempt to make its application co-extensive with all human
agency. The people of this generation do not commonly apply principles
with any such studious exactness, nor own such binding allegiance to any
standard, but live in a kind of confusion of many standards; a condition
not propitious to the formation of steady moral convictions, but
convenient enough to those whose moral opinions sit lightly on them,
since it gives them a much wider range of arguments for defending the
doctrine of the moment. But though perhaps no one could now be found
Edition: current; Page: [377] who like the institutional writers of
former times, adopts the so-called Law of Nature as the foundation of
ethics, and endeavours consistently to reason from it, the word and its
cognates must still be counted among those which carry great weight in
moral argumentation. That any mode of thinking, feeling, or acting, is
“according to nature” is usually accepted as a strong argument for its
goodness. If it can be said with any plausibility that “nature enjoins”
anything, the propriety of obeying the injunction is by most people
considered to be made out: and conversely, the imputation of being
contrary to nature, is thought to bar the door against any pretension on
the part of the thing so designated, to be tolerated or excused; and the
word unnatural has not ceased to be one of the most vituperative
epithets in the language. Those who deal in these expressions, may avoid
making themselves responsible for any fundamental theorem respecting the
standard of moral obligation, but they do not the less imply such a
theorem, and one which must be the same in substance with that on which
the more logical thinkers of a more laborious age grounded their
systematic treatises on Natural Law.

Is it necessary to recognize in these forms of speech, another distinct
meaning of the word Nature? Or can they be connected, by any rational
bond of union, with either of the two meanings already treated of? At
first it may seem that we have no option but to admit another ambiguity
in the term. All inquiries are either into what is, or into what ought
to be: science and history belonging to the first division, art, morals
and politics to the second. But the two senses of the word Nature first
pointed out, agree in referring only to what is. In the first meaning,
Nature is a collective name for everything which is. In the second, it
is a name for everything which is of itself, without voluntary human
intervention. But the employment of the word Nature as a term of ethics
seems to disclose a third meaning, in which Nature does not stand for
what is, but for what ought to be; or for the rule or standard of what
ought to be. A little consideration, however, will show that this is not
a case of ambiguity; there is not here a third sense of the word. Those
who set up Nature as a standard of action do not intend a merely verbal
proposition; they do not mean that the standard, whatever it be, should
be called Nature; they think they are giving some information as to what
the standard of action really is. Those who say that we ought to act
according to Nature do not mean the mere identical proposition that we
ought to do what we ought to do. They think that the word Nature affords
some external criterion of what we should do; and if they lay down as a
rule for what ought to be, a word which in its proper signification
denotes what is, they do so because they have a notion, either clearly
or confusedly, that what is, constitutes the rule and standard of what
ought to be.

The examination of this notion, is the object of the present Essay. It
is proposed to inquire into the truth of the doctrines which make Nature
a test Edition: current; Page: [378] of right and wrong, good and evil,
or which in any mode or degree attach merit or approval to following,
imitating, or obeying Nature. To this inquiry the foregoing discussion
respecting the meaning of terms, was an indispensable introduction.
Language is as it were the atmosphere of philosophical investigation,
which must be made transparent before anything can be seen through it in
the true figure and position. In the present case it is necessary to
guard against a further ambiguity, which though abundantly obvious, has
sometimes misled even sagacious minds, and of which it is well to take
distinct note before proceeding further. No word is more commonly
associated with the word Nature, than Law; and this last word has
distinctly two meanings, in one of which it denotes some definite
portion of what is, in the other, of what ought to be. We speak of the
law of gravitation, the three laws of motion, the law of definite
proportions in chemical combination, the vital laws of organized beings.
All these are portions of what is. We also speak of the criminal law,
the civil law, the law of honour, the law of veracity, the law of
justice; all of which are portions of what ought to be, or of somebody’s
suppositions, feelings, or commands respecting what ought to be. The
first kind of laws, such as the laws of motion, and of gravitation, are
neither more nor less than the observed uniformities in the occurrence
of phenomena: partly uniformities of antecedence and sequence, partly of
concomitance. These are what, in science, and even in ordinary parlance,
are meant by laws of nature. Laws in the other sense are the laws of the
land, the law of nations, or moral laws; among which, as already
noticed, is dragged in, by jurists and publicists, something which they
think proper to call the Law of Nature. Of the liability of these two
meanings of the word to be confounded there can be no better example
than the first chapter of Montesquieu;[*] where he remarks, that the
material world has its laws, the inferior animals have their laws, and
man has his laws; and calls attention to the much greater strictness
with which the first two sets of laws are observed, than the last; as if
it were an inconsistency, and a paradox, that things always are what
they are, but men not always what they ought to be. A similar confusion
of ideas pervades the writings of Mr. George Combe, from whence it has
overflowed into a large region of popular literature, and we are now
continually reading injunctions to obey the physical laws of the
universe, as being obligatory in the same sense and manner as the moral.
The conception which the ethical use of the word Nature implies, of a
close relation if not absolute identity between what is and what ought
to be, certainly derives part of its hold on the mind from the custom of
designating what is, by the expression “laws of nature,” while the same
word Law is also used, and even more familiarly and emphatically, to
express what ought to be.

When it is asserted, or implied, that Nature, or the laws of Nature,
should Edition: current; Page: [379] be conformed to, is the Nature
which is meant, Nature in the first sense of the term, meaning all which
is—the powers and properties of all things? But in this signification,
there is no need of a recommendation to act according to nature, since
it is what nobody can possibly help doing, and equally whether he acts
well or ill. There is no mode of acting which is not conformable to
Nature in this sense of the term, and all modes of acting are so in
exactly the same degree. Every action is the exertion of some natural
power, and its effects of all sorts are so many phenomena of nature,
produced by the powers and properties of some of the objects of nature,
in exact obedience to some law or laws of nature. When I voluntarily use
my organs to take in food, the act, and its consequences, take place
according to laws of nature: if instead of food I swallow poison, the
case is exactly the same. To bid people conform to the laws of nature
when they have no power but what the laws of nature give them—when it is
a physical impossibility for them to do the smallest thing otherwise
than through some law of nature, is an absurdity. The thing they need to
be told is, what particular law of nature they should make use of in a
particular case. When, for example, a person is crossing a river by a
narrow bridge to which there is no parapet, he will do well to regulate
his proceedings by the laws of equilibrium in moving bodies, instead of
conforming only to the law of gravitation, and falling into the river.

Yet, idle as it is to exhort people to do what they cannot avoid doing,
and absurd as it is to prescribe as a rule of right conduct what agrees
exactly as well with wrong; nevertheless a rational rule of conduct may
be constructed out of the relation which it ought to bear to the laws of
nature in this widest acceptation of the term. Man necessarily obeys the
laws of nature, or in other words the properties of things, but he does
not necessarily guide himself by them. Though all conduct is in
conformity to laws of nature, all conduct is not grounded on knowledge
of them, and intelligently directed to the attainment of purposes by
means of them. Though we cannot emancipate ourselves from the laws of
nature as a whole, we can escape from any particular law of nature, if
we are able to withdraw ourselves from the circumstances in which it
acts. Though we can do nothing except through laws of nature, we can use
one law to counteract another. According to Bacon’s maxim, we can obey
nature in such a manner as to command it.[*] Every alteration of
circumstances alters more or less the laws of nature under which we act;
and by every choice which we make either of ends or of means, we place
ourselves to a greater or less extent under one set of laws of nature
instead of another. If, therefore, the useless precept to follow nature
were changed into a precept to study nature; to know and take heed of
the properties of the things we have to deal with, so far as these
properties are capable of forwarding or obstructing any given purpose;
we should have arrived at the first principle of all Edition: current;
Page: [380] intelligent action, or rather at the definition of
intelligent action itself. And a confused notion of this true principle,
is, I doubt not, in the minds of many of those who set up the unmeaning
doctrine which superficially resembles it. They perceive that the
essential difference between wise and foolish conduct consists in
attending, or not attending, to the particular laws of nature on which
some important result depends. And they think, that a person who attends
to a law of nature in order to shape his conduct by it, may be said to
obey it, while a person who practically disregards it, and acts as if no
such law existed, may be said to disobey it: the circumstance being
overlooked, that what is thus called disobedience to a law of nature is
obedience to some other or perhaps to the very law itself. For example,
a person who goes into a powder magazine either not knowing, or
carelessly omitting to think of, the explosive force of gunpowder, is
likely to do some act which will cause him to be blown to atoms in
obedience to the very law which he has disregarded.

But however much of its authority the “Naturam sequi” doctrine may owe
to its being confounded with the rational precept “Naturam observare,”
its favourers and promoters unquestionably intend much more by it than
that precept. To acquire knowledge of the properties of things, and make
use of the knowledge for guidance, is a rule of prudence, for the
adaptation of means to ends; for giving effect to our wishes and
intentions whatever they may be. But the maxim of obedience to Nature,
or conformity to Nature, is held up not as a simply prudential but as an
ethical maxim; and by those who talk of jus naturæ, even as a law, fit
to be administered by tribunals and enforced by sanctions. Right action,
must mean something more and other than merely intelligent action: yet
no precept beyond this last, can be connected with the word Nature in
the wider and more philosophical of its acceptations. We must try it
therefore in the other sense, that in which Nature stands distinguished
from Art, and denotes, not the whole course of the phenomena which come
under our observation, but only their spontaneous course.

Let us then consider whether we can attach any meaning to the supposed
practical maxim of following Nature, in this second sense of the word,
in which Nature stands for that which takes place without human
intervention. In Nature as thus understood, is the spontaneous course of
things when left to themselves, the rule to be followed in endeavouring
to adapt things to our use? But it is evident at once that the maxim,
taken in this sense, is not merely, as it is in the other sense,
superfluous and unmeaning, but palpably absurd and self-contradictory.
For while human action cannot help conforming to Nature in the one
meaning of the term, the very aim and object of action is to alter and
improve Nature in the other meaning. If the natural course of things
were perfectly right and satisfactory, to act at all would be a
gratuitous Edition: current; Page: [381] meddling, which as it could not
make things better, must make them worse. Or if action at all could be
justified, it would only be when in direct obedience to instincts, since
these might perhaps be accounted part of the spontaneous order of
Nature; but to do anything with forethought and purpose, would be a
violation of that perfect order. If the artificial is not better than
the natural, to what end are all the arts of life? To dig, to plough, to
build, to wear clothes, are direct infringements of the injunction to
follow nature.

Accordingly it would be said by every one, even of those most under the
influence of the feelings which prompt the injunction, that to apply it
to such cases as those just spoken of, would be to push it too far.
Everybody professes to approve and admire many great triumphs of Art
over Nature: the junction by bridges of shores which Nature had made
separate, the draining of Nature’s marshes, the excavation of her wells,
the dragging to light of what she has buried at immense depths in the
earth; the turning away of her thunderbolts by lightning rods, of her
inundations by embankments, of her ocean by breakwaters. But to commend
these and similar feats, is to acknowledge that the ways of Nature are
to be conquered, not obeyed: that her powers are often towards man in
the position of enemies, from whom he must wrest, by force and
ingenuity, what little he can for his own use, and deserves to be
applauded when that little is rather more than might be expected from
his physical weakness in comparison to those gigantic powers. All praise
of Civilization, or Art, or Contrivance, is so much dispraise of Nature;
an admission of imperfection, which it is man’s business, and merit, to
be always endeavouring to correct or mitigate.

The consciousness that whatever man does to improve his condition is in
so much a censure and a thwarting of the spontaneous order of Nature,
has in all ages caused new and unprecedented attempts at improvement to
be generally at first under a shade of religious suspicion; as being in
any case uncomplimentary, and very probably offensive to the powerful
beings (or, when polytheism gave place to monotheism, to the
all-powerful Being) supposed to govern the various phenomena of the
universe, and of whose will the course of nature was conceived to be the
expression. Any attempt to mould natural phenomena to the convenience of
mankind might easily appear an interference with the government of those
superior beings: and though life could not have been maintained, much
less made pleasant, without perpetual interferences of the kind, each
new one was doubtless made with fear and trembling, until experience had
shown that it could be ventured on without drawing down the vengeance of
the Gods. The sagacity of priests showed them a way to reconcile the
impunity of particular infringements with the maintenance of the general
dread of encroaching on the divine administration. This was effected by
representing each of the principal human inventions as the gift and
favour of some God. The old religions also afforded Edition: current;
Page: [382] many resources for consulting the Gods, and obtaining their
express permission for what would otherwise have appeared a breach of
their prerogative. When oracles had ceased, any religion which
recognized a revelation afforded expedients for the same purpose. The
Catholic religion had the resource of an infallible Church, authorized
to declare what exertions of human spontaneity were permitted or
forbidden; and in default of this, the case was always open to argument
from the Bible whether any particular practice had expressly or by
implication been sanctioned. The notion remained that this liberty to
control Nature was conceded to man only by special indulgence, and as
far as required by his necessities; and there was always a tendency,
though a diminishing one, to regard any attempt to exercise power over
nature, beyond a certain degree, and a certain admitted range, as an
impious effort to usurp divine power, and dare more than was permitted
to man. The lines of Horace in which the familiar arts of shipbuilding
and navigation are reprobated as vetitum nefas,[*] indicate even in that
sceptical age a still unexhausted vein of the old sentiment. The
intensity of the corresponding feeling in the middle ages is not a
precise parallel, on account of the superstition about dealing with evil
spirits with which it was complicated: but the imputation of prying into
the secrets of the Almighty long remained a powerful weapon of attack
against unpopular inquirers into nature; and the charge of
presumptuously attempting to defeat the designs of Providence, still
retains enough of its original force to be thrown in as a make-weight
along with other objections when there is a desire to find fault with
any new exertion of human forethought and contrivance. No one, indeed,
asserts it to be the intention of the Creator that the spontaneous order
of the creation should not be altered, or even that it should not be
altered in any new way. But there still exists a vague notion that
though it is very proper to control this or the other natural
phenomenon, the general scheme of nature is a model for us to imitate:
that with more or less liberty in details, we should on the whole be
guided by the spirit and general conception of nature’s own ways: that
they are God’s work, and as such perfect; that man cannot rival their
unapproachable excellence, and can best show his skill and piety by
attempting, in however imperfect a way, to reproduce their likeness; and
that if not the whole, yet some particular parts of the spontaneous
order of nature, selected according to the speaker’s predilections, are
in a peculiar sense, manifestations of the Creator’s will; a sort of
finger posts pointing out the direction which things in general, and
therefore our voluntary actions, are intended to take. Feelings of this
sort, though repressed on ordinary occasions by the contrary current of
life, are ready to break out whenever custom is silent, and the native
promptings of the mind have nothing opposed to them but reason: and
appeals are continually made to them by rhetoricians, with the effect,
if not Edition: current; Page: [383] of convincing opponents, at least
of making those who already hold the opinion which the rhetorician
desires to recommend, better satisfied with it. For in the present day
it probably seldom happens that any one is persuaded to approve any
course of action because it appears to him to bear an analogy to the
divine government of the world, though the argument tells on him with
great force, and is felt by him to be a great support, in behalf of
anything which he is already inclined to approve.

If this notion of imitating the ways of Providence as manifested in
Nature, is seldom expressed plainly and downrightly as a maxim of
general application, it also is seldom directly contradicted. Those who
find it on their path, prefer to turn the obstacle rather than to attack
it, being often themselves not free from the feeling, and in any case
afraid of incurring the charge of impiety by saying anything which might
be held to disparage the works of the Creator’s power. They therefore,
for the most part, rather endeavour to show, that they have as much
right to the religious argument as their opponents, and that if the
course they recommend seems to conflict with some part of the ways of
Providence, there is some other part with which it agrees better than
what is contended for on the other side. In this mode of dealing with
the great à priori fallacies, the progress of improvement clears away
particular errors while the causes of errors are still left standing,
and very little weakened by each conflict: yet by a long series of such
partial victories precedents are accumulated, to which an appeal may be
made against these powerful prepossessions, and which afford a growing
hope that the misplaced feeling, after having so often learnt to recede,
may some day be compelled to an unconditional surrender. For however
offensive the proposition may appear to many religious persons, they
should be willing to look in the face the undeniable fact, that the
order of nature, in so far as unmodified by man, is such as no being,
whose attributes are justice and benevolence, would have made, with the
intention that his rational creatures should follow it as an example. If
made wholly by such a Being, and not partly by beings of very different
qualities, it could only be as a designedly imperfect work, which man,
in his limited sphere, is to exercise justice and benevolence in
amending. The best persons have always held it to be the essence of
religion, that the paramount duty of man upon earth is to amend himself:
but all except monkish quietists have annexed to this in their inmost
minds (though seldom willing to enunciate the obligation with the same
clearness) the additional religious duty of amending the world, and not
solely the human part of it but the material; the order of physical
nature.

In considering this subject it is necessary to divest ourselves of
certain preconceptions which may justly be called natural prejudices,
being grounded on feelings which, in themselves natural and inevitable,
intrude into matters with which they ought to have no concern. One of
these feelings Edition: current; Page: [384] is the astonishment, rising
into awe, which is inspired (even independently of all religious
sentiment) by any of the greater natural phenomena. A hurricane; a
mountain precipice; the desert; the ocean, either agitated or at rest;
the solar system, and the great cosmic forces which hold it together;
the boundless firmament, and to an educated mind any single star; excite
feelings which make all human enterprises and powers appear so
insignificant, that to a mind thus occupied it seems insufferable
presumption in so puny a creature as man to look critically on things so
far above him, or dare to measure himself against the grandeur of the
universe. But a little interrogation of our own consciousness will
suffice to convince us, that what makes these phenomena so impressive is
simply their vastness. The enormous extension in space and time, or the
enormous power they exemplify, constitutes their sublimity; a feeling in
all cases, more allied to terror than to any moral emotion. And though
the vast scale of these phenomena may well excite wonder, and sets at
defiance all idea of rivalry, the feeling it inspires is of a totally
different character from admiration of excellence. Those in whom awe
produces admiration may be æsthetically developed, but they are morally
uncultivated. It is one of the endowments of the imaginative part of our
mental nature that conceptions of greatness and power, vividly realized,
produce a feeling which though in its higher degrees closely bordering
on pain, we prefer to most of what are accounted pleasures. But we are
quite equally capable of experiencing this feeling towards maleficent
power; and we never experience it so strongly towards most of the powers
of the universe, as when we have most present to our consciousness a
vivid sense of their capacity of inflicting evil. Because these natural
powers have what we cannot imitate, enormous might, and overawe us by
that one attribute, it would be a great error to infer that their other
attributes are such as we ought to emulate, or that we should be
justified in using our small powers after the example which Nature sets
us with her vast forces.

For, how stands the fact? That next to the greatness of these cosmic
forces, the quality which most forcibly strikes every one who does not
avert his eyes from it, is their perfect and absolute recklessness. They
go straight to their end, without regarding what or whom they crush on
the road. Optimists, in their attempts to prove that “whatever is, is
right,”[*] are obliged to maintain, not that Nature ever turns one step
from her path to avoid trampling us into destruction, but that it would
be very unreasonable in us to expect that she should. Pope’s “Shall
gravitation cease when you go by?”[†] may be a just rebuke to any one
who should be so silly as to expect common human morality from nature.
But if the question were between two men, instead of Edition: current;
Page: [385] between a man and a natural phenomenon, that triumphant
apostrophe would be thought a rare piece of impudence. A man who should
persist in hurling stones or firing cannon when another man “goes by,”
and having killed him should urge a similar plea in exculpation, would
very deservedly be found guilty of murder.

In sober truth, nearly all the things which men are hanged or imprisoned
for doing to one another, are nature’s every day performances. Killing,
the most criminal act recognized by human laws, Nature does once to
every being that lives; and in a large proportion of cases, after
protracted tortures such as only the greatest monsters whom we read of
ever purposely inflicted on their living fellow-creatures. If, by an
arbitrary reservation, we refuse to account anything murder but what
abridges a certain term supposed to be allotted to human life, nature
also does this to all but a small percentage of lives, and does it in
all the modes, violent or insidious, in which the worst human beings
take the lives of one another. Nature impales men, breaks them as if on
the wheel, casts them to be devoured by wild beasts, burns them to
death, crushes them with stones like the first christian martyr, starves
them with hunger, freezes them with cold, poisons them by the quick or
slow venom of her exhalations, and has hundreds of other hideous deaths
in reserve, such as the ingenious cruelty of a Nabis or a Domitian never
surpassed. All this, Nature does with the most supercilious disregard
both of mercy and of justice, emptying her shafts upon the best and
noblest indifferently with the meanest and worst; upon those who are
engaged in the highest and worthiest enterprises, and often as the
direct consequence of the noblest acts; and it might almost be imagined
as a punishment for them. She mows down those on whose existence hangs
the well-being of a whole people, perhaps the prospects of the human
race for generations to come, with as little compunction as those whose
death is a relief to themselves, or a blessing to those under their
noxious influence. Such are Nature’s dealings with life. Even when she
does not intend to kill, she inflicts the same tortures in apparent
wantonness. In the clumsy provision which she has made for that
perpetual renewal of animal life, rendered necessary by the prompt
termination she puts to it in every individual instance, no human being
ever comes into the world but another human being is literally stretched
on the rack for hours or days, not unfrequently issuing in death. Next
to taking life (equal to it according to a high authority) is taking the
means by which we live; and Nature does this too on the largest scale
and with the most callous indifference. A single hurricane destroys the
hopes of a season; a flight of locusts, or an inundation, desolates a
district; a trifling chemical change in an edible root, starves a
million of people. The waves of the sea, like banditti seize and
appropriate the wealth of the rich and the little all of the poor with
the same accompaniments of stripping, wounding, and killing as their
human antitypes. Everything in Edition: current; Page: [386] short,
which the worst men commit either against life or property is
perpetrated on a larger scale by natural agents. Nature has Noyades more
fatal than those of Carrier; her explosions of fire damp are as
destructive as human artillery; her plague and cholera far surpass the
poison cups of the Borgias. Even the love of “order” which is thought to
be a following of the ways of Nature, is in fact a contradiction of
them. All which people are accustomed to deprecate as “disorder” and its
consequences, is precisely a counterpart of Nature’s ways. Anarchy and
the Reign of Terror are overmatched in injustice, ruin, and death, by a
hurricane and a pestilence.

But, it is said, all these things are for wise and good ends. On this I
must first remark that whether they are so or not, is altogether beside
the point. Supposing it true that contrary to appearances these horrors
when perpetrated by Nature, promote good ends, still as no one believes
that good ends would be promoted by our following the example, the
course of Nature cannot be a proper model for us to imitate. Either it
is right that we should kill because nature kills; torture because
nature tortures; ruin and devastate because nature does the like; or we
ought not to consider at all what nature does, but what it is good to
do. If there is such a thing as a reductio ad absurdum, this surely
amounts to one. If it is a sufficient reason for doing one thing, that
nature does it, why not another thing? If not all things, why anything?
The physical government of the world being full of the things which when
done by men are deemed the greatest enormities, it cannot be religious
or moral in us to guide our actions by the analogy of the course of
nature. This proposition remains true, whatever occult quality of
producing good may reside in those facts of nature which to our
perceptions are most noxious, and which no one considers it other than a
crime to produce artificially.

But, in reality, no one consistently believes in any such occult
quality. The phrases which ascribe perfection to the course of nature
can only be considered as the exaggerations of poetic or devotional
feeling, not intended to stand the test of a sober examination. No one,
either religious or irreligious, believes that the hurtful agencies of
nature, considered as a whole, promote good purposes, in any other way
than by inciting human rational creatures to rise up and struggle
against them. If we believed that those agencies were appointed by a
benevolent Providence as the means of accomplishing wise purposes which
could not be compassed if they did not exist, then everything done by
mankind which tends to chain up these natural agencies or to restrict
their mischievous operation, from draining a pestilential marsh down to
curing the toothache, or putting up an umbrella, ought to be accounted
impious; which assuredly nobody does account them, notwithstanding an
undercurrent of sentiment setting in that direction which is
occasionally perceptible. On the contrary, the improvements on which the
civilized part of mankind most pride themselves, consist in more
successfully warding off Edition: current; Page: [387] those natural
calamities which if we really believed what most people profess to
believe, we should cherish as medicines provided for our earthly state
by infinite wisdom. Inasmuch too as each generation greatly surpasses
its predecessors in the amount of natural evil which it succeeds in
averting, our condition, if the theory were true, ought by this time to
have become a terrible manifestation of some tremendous calamity,
against which the physical evils we have learnt to overmaster, had
previously operated as a preservative. Any one, however, who acted as if
he supposed this to be the case, would be more likely, I think, to be
confined as a lunatic, than reverenced as a saint.

It is undoubtedly a very common fact that good comes out of evil, and
when it does occur, it is far too agreeable not to find people eager to
dilate on it. But in the first place, it is quite as often true of human
crimes, as of natural calamities. The fire of London, which is believed
to have had so salutary an effect on the healthiness of the city, would
have produced that effect just as much if it had been really the work of
the “furor papisticus” so long commemorated on the Monument. The deaths
of those whom tyrants or persecutors have made martyrs in any noble
cause, have done a service to mankind which would not have been obtained
if they had died by accident or disease. Yet whatever incidental and
unexpected benefits may result from crimes, they are crimes
nevertheless. In the second place, if good frequently comes out of evil,
the converse fact, evil coming out of good, is equally common. Every
event public or private, which, regretted on its occurrence, was
declared providential at a later period on account of some unforeseen
good consequence, might be matched by some other event, deemed fortunate
at the time, but which proved calamitous or fatal to those whom it
appeared to benefit. Such conflicts between the beginning and the end,
or between the event and the expectation, are not only as frequent, but
as often held up to notice, in the painful cases as in the agreeable;
but there is not the same inclination to generalize on them; or at all
events they are not regarded by the moderns (though they were by the
ancients) as similarly an indication of the divine purposes: men satisfy
themselves with moralizing on the imperfect nature of our foresight, the
uncertainty of events, and the vanity of human expectations. The simple
fact is, human interests are so complicated, and the effects of any
incident whatever so multitudinous, that if it touches mankind at all,
its influence on them is, in the great majority of cases, both good and
bad. If the greater number of personal misfortunes have their good side,
hardly any good fortune ever befel any one which did not give either to
the same or to some other person, something to regret: and unhappily
there are many misfortunes so overwhelming that their favourable side,
if it exist, is entirely overshadowed and made insignificant; while the
corresponding statement can seldom be made concerning blessings. The
effects too of every cause depend so much on the circumstances which
accidentally accompany Edition: current; Page: [388] it, that many cases
are sure to occur in which even the total result is markedly opposed to
the predominant tendency: and thus not only evil has its good and good
its evil side, but good often produces an overbalance of evil and evil
an overbalance of good. This, however, is by no means the general
tendency of either phenomenon. On the contrary, both good and evil
naturally tend to fructify, each in its own kind, good producing good,
and evil, evil. It is one of Nature’s general rules, and part of her
habitual injustice, that “to him that hath shall be given, but from him
that hath not, shall be taken even that which he hath.”[*] The ordinary
and predominant tendency of good is towards more good. Health, strength,
wealth, knowledge, virtue, are not only good in themselves but
facilitate and promote the acquisition of good, both of the same and of
other kinds. The person who can learn easily, is he who already knows
much: it is the strong and not the sickly person who can do everything
which most conduces to health; those who find it easy to gain money are
not the poor but the rich; while health, strength, knowledge, talents,
are all means of acquiring riches, and riches are often an indispensable
means of acquiring these. Again, e converso, whatever may be said of
evil turning into good, the general tendency of evil is towards further
evil. Bodily illness renders the body more susceptible of disease; it
produces incapacity of exertion, sometimes debility of mind, and often
the loss of means of subsistence. All severe pain, either bodily or
mental, tends to increase the susceptibilities of pain for ever after.
Poverty is the parent of a thousand mental and moral evils. What is
still worse, to be injured or oppressed, when habitual, lowers the whole
tone of the character. One bad action leads to others, both in the agent
himself, in the bystanders, and in the sufferers. All bad qualities are
strengthened by habit, and all vices and follies tend to spread.
Intellectual defects generate moral, and moral, intellectual; and every
intellectual or moral defect generates others, and so on without end.

That much applauded class of authors, the writers on natural theology,
have, I venture to think, entirely lost their way, and missed the sole
line of argument which could have made their speculations acceptable to
any one who can perceive when two propositions contradict one another.
They have exhausted the resources of sophistry to make it appear that
all the suffering in the world exists to prevent greater—that misery
exists, for fear lest there should be misery: a thesis which if ever so
well maintained, could only avail to explain and justify the works of
limited beings, compelled to labour under conditions independent of
their own will; but can have no application to a Creator assumed to be
omnipotent, who, if he bends to a supposed necessity, himself makes the
necessity which he bends to. If the maker of the world can all that he
will, he wills misery, and there is no escape from the conclusion. The
more consistent of those who have deemed themselves qualified to
“vindicate Edition: current; Page: [389] the ways of God to man”[*] have
endeavoured to avoid the alternative by hardening their hearts, and
denying that misery is an evil. The goodness of God, they say, does not
consist in willing the happiness of his creatures, but their virtue; and
the universe, if not a happy, is a just, universe. But waving the
objections to this scheme of ethics, it does not at all get rid of the
difficulty. If the Creator of mankind willed that they should all be
virtuous, his designs are as completely baffled as if he had willed that
they should all be happy: and the order of nature is constructed with
even less regard to the requirements of justice than to those of
benevolence. If the law of all creation were justice and the Creator
omnipotent, then in whatever amount suffering and happiness might be
dispensed to the world, each person’s share of them would be exactly
proportioned to that person’s good or evil deeds; no human being would
have a worse lot than another, without worse deserts; accident or
favouritism would have no part in such a world, but every human life
would be the playing out of a drama constructed like a perfect moral
tale. No one is able to blind himself to the fact that the world we live
in is totally different from this; insomuch that the necessity of
redressing the balance has been demed one of the strongest arguments for
another life after death, which amounts to an admission that the order
of things in this life is often an example of injustice, not justice. If
it be said that God does not take sufficient account of pleasure and
pain to make them the reward or punishment of the good or the wicked,
but that virtue is itself the greatest good and vice the greatest evil,
then these at least ought to be dispensed to all according to what they
have done to deserve them; instead of which, every kind of moral
depravity is entailed upon multitudes by the fatality of their birth;
through the fault of their parents, of society, or of uncontrollable
circumstances, certainly through no fault of their own. Not even on the
most distorted and contracted theory of good which ever was framed by
religious or philosophical fanaticism, can the government of Nature be
made to resemble the work of a being at once good and omnipotent.

The only admissible moral theory of Creation is that the Principle of
Good cannot at once and altogether subdue the powers of evil, either
physical or moral; could not place mankind in a world free from the
necessity of an incessant struggle with the maleficent powers, or make
them always victorious in that struggle, but could and did make them
capable of carrying on the fight with vigour and with progressively
increasing success. Of all the religious explanations of the order of
nature, this alone is neither contradictory to itself, nor to the facts
for which it attempts to account. According to it, man’s duty would
consist, not in simply taking care of his own interests by obeying
irresistible power, but in standing forward a not ineffectual auxiliary
to a Being of perfect beneficence; a faith which seems much better
Edition: current; Page: [390] adapted for nerving him to exertion than a
vague and inconsistent reliance on an Author of Good who is supposed to
be also the author of evil. And I venture to assert that such has really
been, though often unconsciously, the faith of all who have drawn
strength and support of any worthy kind from trust in a superintending
Providence. There is no subject on which men’s practical belief is more
incorrectly indicated by the words they use to express it, than
religion. Many have derived a base confidence from imagining themselves
to be favourites of an omnipotent but capricious and despotic Deity. But
those who have been strengthened in goodness by relying on the
sympathizing support of a powerful and good Governor of the world, have,
I am satisfied, never really believed that Governor to be, in the strict
sense of the term, omnipotent. They have always saved his goodness at
the expense of his power. They have believed, perhaps, that he could, if
he willed, remove all the thorns from their individual path, but not
without causing greater harm to some one else, or frustrating some
purpose of greater importance to the general well-being. They have
believed that he could do any one thing, but not any combination of
things: that his government, like human government, was a system of
adjustments and compromises; that the world is inevitably imperfect,
contrary to his intention.* And since the exertion of all his power to
make it as little imperfect as possible, leaves it no better than it is,
they cannot but regard that power, though vastly beyond human estimate,
yet as in itself not merely finite, but extremely limited. They are
bound, for example, to suppose that the best he could do for his human
creatures was to make an immense majority of all who have yet existed,
be born (without any fault of their own) Patagonians, or Esquimaux, or
something nearly as brutal and degraded, but to give them capacities
which by being cultivated for very many centuries in toil and suffering,
and after many of the best specimens of the race have sacrificed their
lives for the purpose, have at last enabled some chosen portions of the
species to grow into something better, capable of being improved in
centuries more into something really good, of which Edition: current;
Page: [391] hitherto there are only to be found individual instances. It
may be possible to believe with Plato that perfect goodness, limited and
thwarted in every direction by the intractableness of the material, has
done this because it could do no better.[*] But that the same perfectly
wise and good Being had absolute power over the material, and made it,
by voluntary choice, what it is; to admit this might have been supposed
impossible to any one who has the simplest notions of moral good and
evil. Nor can any such person, whatever kind of religious phrases he may
use, fail to believe, that if Nature and Man are both the works of a
Being of perfect goodness, that Being intended Nature as a scheme to be
amended, not imitated, by Man.

But even though unable to believe that Nature, as a whole, is a
realization of the designs of perfect wisdom and benevolence, men do not
willingly renounce the idea that some part of Nature, at least, must be
intended as an exemplar, or type; that on some portion or other of the
Creator’s works, the image of the moral qualities which they are
accustomed to ascribe to him, must be impressed; that if not all which
is, yet something which is, must not only be a faultless model of what
ought to be, but must be intended to be our guide and standard in
rectifying the rest. It does not suffice them to believe, that what
tends to good is to be imitated and perfected, and what tends to evil is
to be corrected: they are anxious for some more definite indication of
the Creator’s designs; and being persuaded that this must somewhere be
met with in his works, undertake the dangerous responsibility of picking
and choosing among them in quest of it. A choice which except so far as
directed by the general maxim that he intends all the good and none of
the evil, must of necessity be perfectly arbitrary; and if it leads to
any conclusions other than such as can be deduced from that maxim, must
be, exactly in that proportion, pernicious.

It has never been settled by any accredited doctrine, what particular
departments of the order of nature shall be reputed to be designed for
our moral instruction and guidance; and accordingly each person’s
individual predilections, or momentary convenience, have decided to what
parts of the divine government the practical conclusions that he was
desirous of establishing, should be recommended to approval as being
analogous. One such recommendation must be as fallacious as another, for
it is impossible to decide that certain of the Creator’s works are more
truly expressions of his character than the rest; and the only selection
which does not lead to immoral results, is the selection of those which
most conduce to the general good, in other words, of those which point
to an end which if the entire scheme is the expression of a single
omnipotent and consistent will, is evidently not the end intended by it.

There is however one particular element in the construction of the
world, Edition: current; Page: [392] which to minds on the look-out for
special indication of the Creator’s will, has appeared, not without
plausibility, peculiarly fitted to afford them; viz. the active impulses
of human and other animated beings. One can imagine such persons arguing
that when the Author of Nature only made circumstances, he may not have
meant to indicate the manner in which his rational creatures were to
adjust themselves to those circumstances; but that when he implanted
positive stimuli in the creatures themselves, stirring them up to a
particular kind of action, it is impossible to doubt that he intended
that sort of action to be practised by them. This reasoning, followed
out consistently, would lead to the conclusion that the Deity intended,
and approves, whatever human beings do; since all that they do being the
consequence of some of the impulses with which their Creator must have
endowed them, all must equally be considered as done in obedience to his
will. As this practical conclusion was shrunk from, it was necessary to
draw a distinction, and to pronounce that not the whole, but only parts
of the active nature of mankind point to a special intention of the
Creator in respect to their conduct. These parts it seemed natural to
suppose, must be those in which the Creator’s hand is manifested rather
than the man’s own: and hence the frequent antithesis between man as God
made him, and man as he has made himself. Since what is done with
deliberation seems more the man’s own act, and he is held more
completely responsible for it than for what he does from sudden impulse,
the considerate part of human conduct is apt to be set down as man’s
share in the business, and the inconsiderate as God’s. The result is the
vein of sentiment so common in the modern world (though unknown to the
philosophic ancients) which exalts instinct at the expense of reason; an
aberration rendered still more mischievous by the opinion commonly held
in conjunction with it, that every, or almost every, feeling or impulse
which acts promptly without waiting to ask questions, is an instinct.
Thus almost every variety of unreflecting and uncalculating impulse
receives a kind of consecration, except those which, though unreflecting
at the moment, owe their origin to previous habits of reflection: these,
being evidently not instinctive, do not meet with the favour accorded to
the rest; so that all unreflecting impulses are invested with authority
over reason, except the only ones which are most probably right. I do
not mean, of course, that this mode of judgment is even pretended to be
consistently carried out: life could not go on if it were not admitted
that impulses must be controlled, and that reason ought to govern our
actions. The pretension is not to drive Reason from the helm but rather
to bind her by articles to steer only in a particular way. Instinct is
not to govern, but reason is to practise some vague and unassignable
amount of deference to Instinct. Though the impression in favour of
instinct as being a peculiar manifestation of the divine purposes, has
not been cast into the form of a consistent general theory, it remains a
standing prejudice, capable of Edition: current; Page: [393] being
stirred up into hostility to reason in any case in which the dictate of
the rational faculty has not acquired the authority of prescription.

I shall not here enter into the difficult psychological question, what
are, or are not instincts: the subject would require a volume to itself.
Without touching upon any disputed theoretical points, it is possible to
judge how little worthy is the instinctive part of human nature to be
held up as its chief excellence—as the part in which the hand of
infinite goodness and wisdom is peculiarly visible. Allowing everything
to be an instinct which anybody has ever asserted to be one, it remains
true that nearly every respectable attribute of humanity is the result
not of instinct, but of a victory over instinct; and that there is
hardly anything valuable in the natural man except capacities—a whole
world of possibilities, all of them dependent upon eminently artificial
discipline for being realized.

It is only in a highly artificialized condition of human nature that the
notion grew up, or, I believe, ever could have grown up, that goodness
was natural: because only after a long course of artificial education
did good sentiments become so habitual, and so predominant over bad, as
to arise unprompted when occasion called for them. In the times when
mankind were nearer to their natural state, cultivated observers
regarded the natural man as a sort of wild animal, distinguished chiefly
by being craftier than the other beasts of the field; and all worth of
character was deemed the result of a sort of taming; a phrase often
applied by the ancient philosophers to the appropriate discipline of
human beings. The truth is that there is hardly a single point of
excellence belonging to human character, which is not decidedly
repugnant to the untutored feelings of human nature.

If there be a virtue which more than any other we expect to find, and
really do find, in an uncivilized state, it is the virtue of courage.
Yet this is from first to last a victory achieved over one of the most
powerful emotions of human nature. If there is any one feeling or
attribute more natural than all others to human beings, it is fear; and
no greater proof can be given of the power of artificial discipline than
the conquest which it has at all times and places shown itself capable
of achieving over so mighty and so universal a sentiment. The widest
difference no doubt exists between one human being and another in the
facility or difficulty with which they acquire this virtue. There is
hardly any department of human excellence in which difference of
original temperament goes so far. But it may fairly be questioned if any
human being is naturally courageous. Many are naturally pugnacious, or
irascible, or enthusiastic, and these passions when strongly excited may
render them insensible to fear. But take away the conflicting emotion,
and fear reasserts its dominion: consistent courage is always the effect
of cultivation. The courage which is occasionally though by no means
generally found among tribes of savages, is as much the result of
education as that of the Edition: current; Page: [394] Spartans or
Romans. In all such tribes there is a most emphatic direction of the
public sentiment into every channel of expression through which honour
can be paid to courage and cowardice held up to contempt and derision.
It will perhaps be said, that as the expression of a sentiment implies
the sentiment itself, the training of the young to courage presupposes
an originally courageous people. It presupposes only what all good
customs presuppose—that there must have been individuals better than the
rest, who set the customs going. Some individuals, who like other people
had fears to conquer, must have had strength of mind and will to conquer
them for themselves. These would obtain the influence belonging to
heroes, for that which is at once astonishing and obviously useful never
fails to be admired: and partly through this admiration, partly through
the fear they themselves excite, they would obtain the power of
legislators, and could establish whatever customs they pleased.

Let us next consider a quality which forms the most visible, and one of
the most radical of the moral distinctions between human beings and most
of the lower animals; that of which the absence, more than of anything
else, renders men bestial; the quality of cleanliness. Can anything be
more entirely artificial? Children, and the lower classes of most
countries, seem to be actually fond of dirt: the vast majority of the
human race are indifferent to it: whole nations of otherwise civilized
and cultivated human beings tolerate it in some of its worst forms, and
only a very small minority are consistently offended by it. Indeed the
universal law of the subject appears to be, that uncleanliness offends
only those to whom it is unfamiliar, so that those who have lived in so
artificial a state as to be unused to it in any form, are the sole
persons whom it disgusts in all forms. Of all virtues this is the most
evidently not instinctive, but a triumph over instinct. Assuredly
neither cleanliness nor the love of cleanliness is natural to man, but
only the capacity of acquiring a love of cleanliness.

Our examples have thus far been taken from the personal, or as they are
called by Bentham, the self regarding virtues, because these, if any,
might be supposed to be congenial even to the uncultivated mind. Of the
social virtues it is almost superfluous to speak; so completely is it
the verdict of all experience that selfishness is natural. By this I do
not in any wise mean to deny that sympathy is natural also; I believe on
the contrary that on that important fact rests the possibility of any
cultivation of goodness and nobleness, and the hope of their ultimate
entire ascendancy. But sympathetic characters, left uncultivated, and
given up to their sympathetic instincts, are as selfish as others. The
difference is in the kind of selfishness: theirs is not solitary but
sympathetic selfishness; l’egoïsme à deux, à trois, or à quatre; and
they may be very amiable and delightful to those with whom they
sympathize, and grossly unjust and unfeeling to the rest of the world.
Indeed Edition: current; Page: [395] the finer nervous organizations
which are most capable of and most require sympathy, have, from their
fineness, so much stronger impulses of all sorts, that they often
furnish the most striking examples of selfishness, though of a less
repulsive kind than that of colder natures. Whether there ever was a
person in whom, apart from all teaching of instructors, friends or
books, and from all intentional self-modelling according to an ideal,
natural benevolence was a more powerful attribute than selfishness in
any of its forms, may remain undecided. That such cases are extremely
rare, every one must admit, and this is enough for the argument.

But (to speak no further of self-control for the benefit of others) the
commonest self-control for one’s own benefit—that power of sacrificing a
present desire to a distant object or a general purpose which is
indispensable for making the actions of the individual accord with his
own notions of his individual good; even this is most unnatural to the
undisciplined human being: as may be seen by the long apprenticeship
which children serve to it; the very imperfect manner in which it is
acquired by persons born to power, whose will is seldom resisted, and by
all who have been early and much indulged; and the marked absence of the
quality in savages, in soldiers and sailors, and in a somewhat less
degree in nearly the whole of the poorer classes in this and many other
countries. The principal difference, on the point under consideration,
between this virtue and others, is that although, like them, it requires
a course of teaching, it is more susceptible than most of them of being
self-taught. The axiom is trite that self-control is only learnt by
experience: and this endowment is only thus much nearer to being natural
than the others we have spoken of, inasmuch as personal experience,
without external inculcation, has a certain tendency to engender it.
Nature does not of herself bestow this, any more than other virtues; but
nature often administers the rewards and punishments which cultivate it,
and which in other cases have to be created artificially for the express
purpose.

Veracity might seem, of all virtues, to have the most plausible claim to
being natural, since in the absence of motives to the contrary, speech
usually conforms to, or at least does not intentionally deviate from,
fact. Accordingly this is the virtue with which writers like Rousseau
delight in decorating savage life, and setting it in advantageous
contrast with the treachery and trickery of civilization. Unfortunately
this is a mere fancy picture, contradicted by all the realities of
savage life. Savages are always liars. They have not the faintest notion
of truth as a virtue. They have a notion of not betraying to their hurt,
as of not hurting in any other way, persons to whom they are bound by
some special tie of obligation; their chief, their guest, perhaps, or
their friend: these feelings of obligation being the taught morality of
the savage state, growing out of its characteristic circumstances. But
of any point of honour respecting truth for truth’s sake, they have not
the remotest idea; Edition: current; Page: [396] no more than the whole
East, and the greater part of Europe: and in the few countries which are
sufficiently improved to have such a point of honour, it is confined to
a small minority, who alone, under any circumstances of real temptation
practise it.

From the general use of the expression “natural justice,” it must be
presumed that justice is a virtue generally thought to be directly
implanted by nature. I believe, however, that the sentiment of justice
is entirely of artificial origin; the idea of natural justice not
preceding but following that of conventional justice. The farther we
look back into the early modes of thinking of the human race, whether we
consider ancient times (including those of the Old Testament) or the
portions of mankind who are still in no more advanced a condition than
that of ancient times, the more completely do we find men’s notions of
justice defined and bounded by the express appointment of law. A man’s
just rights, meant the rights which the law gave him: a just man, was he
who never infringed, nor sought to infringe, the legal property or other
legal rights of others. The notion of a higher justice, to which laws
themselves are amenable, and by which the conscience is bound without a
positive prescription of law, is a later extension of the idea,
suggested by, and following the analogy of, legal justice, to which it
maintains a parallel direction through all the shades and varieties of
the sentiment, and from which it borrows nearly the whole of its
phraseology. The very words justus and justitia are derived from jus,
law. Courts of justice, administration of justice, always mean the
tribunals.

If it be said, that there must be the germs of all these virtues in
human nature, otherwise mankind would be incapable of acquiring them, I
am ready, with a certain amount of explanation, to admit the fact. But
the weeds that dispute the ground with these beneficent germs, are
themselves not germs but rankly luxuriant growths, and would, in all but
some one case in a thousand, entirely stifle and destroy the former,
were it not so strongly the interest of mankind to cherish the good
germs in one another, that they always do so, in as far as their degree
of intelligence (in this as in other respects still very imperfect)
allows. It is through such fostering, commenced early, and not
counteracted by unfavourable influences, that, in some happily
circumstanced specimens of the human race, the most elevated sentiments
on which humanity is capable become a second nature, stronger than the
first, and not so much subduing the original nature as merging it into
itself. Even those gifted organizations which have attained the like
excellence by self-culture, owe it essentially to the same cause; for
what self-culture would be possible without aid from the general
sentiment of mankind delivered through books, and from the contemplation
of exalted characters real or ideal? This artificially created or at
least artificially perfected nature Edition: current; Page: [397] of the
best and noblest human beings, is the only nature which it is ever
commendable to follow. It is almost superfluous to say that even this
cannot be erected into a standard of conduct, since it is itself the
fruit of a training and culture the choice of which, if rational and not
accidental, must have been determined by a standard already chosen.

This brief survey is amply sufficient to prove that the duty of man is
the same in respect to his own nature as in respect to the nature of all
other things, namely not to follow but to amend it. Some people however
who do not attempt to deny that instinct ought to be subordinate to
reason, pay deference to nature so far as to maintain that every natural
inclination must have some sphere of action granted to it, some opening
left for its gratification. All natural wishes, they say, must have been
implanted for a purpose: and this argument is carried so far, that we
often hear it maintained that every wish, which it is supposed to be
natural to entertain, must have a corresponding provision in the order
of the universe for its gratification: insomuch (for instance) that the
desire of an indefinite prolongation of existence, is believed by many
to be in itself a sufficient proof of the reality of a future life.

I conceive that there is a radical absurdity in all these attempts to
discover, in detail, what are the designs of Providence, in order when
they are discovered to help Providence in bringing them about. Those who
argue, from particular indications, that Providence intends this or
that, either believe that the Creator can do all that he will or that he
cannot. If the first supposition is adopted—if Providence is omnipotent,
Providence intends whatever happens, and the fact of its happening
proves that Providence intended it. If so, everything which a human
being can do, is predestined by Providence and is a fulfilment of its
designs. But if as is the more religious theory, Providence intends not
all which happens, but only what is good, then indeed man has it in his
power, by his voluntary actions, to aid the intentions of Providence;
but he can only learn those intentions by considering what tends to
promote the general good, and not what man has a natural inclination to;
for, limited as, on this showing, the divine power must be, by
inscrutable but insurmountable obstacles, who knows that man could have
been created without desires which never are to be, and even which never
ought to be, fulfilled? The inclinations with which man has been
endowed, as well as any of the other contrivances which we observe in
Nature, may be the expression not of the divine will, but of the fetters
which impede its free action; and to take hints from these for the
guidance of our own conduct may be falling into a trap laid by the
enemy. The assumption that everything which infinite goodness can
desire, actually comes to pass in this universe, or at least that we
must never say or suppose that it does not, is worthy only of those
whose Edition: current; Page: [398] slavish fears make them offer the
homage of lies to a Being who, they profess to think, is incapable of
being deceived and holds all falsehood in abomination.

With regard to this particular hypothesis, that all natural impulses,
all propensities sufficiently universal and sufficiently spontaneous to
be capable of passing for instincts, must exist for good ends, and ought
to be only regulated, not repressed; this is of course true of the
majority of them, for the species could not have continued to exist
unless most of its inclinations had been directed to things needful or
useful for its preservation. But unless the instincts can be reduced to
a very small number indeed, it must be allowed that we have also bad
instincts which it should be the aim of education not simply to regulate
but to extirpate, or rather (what can be done even to an instinct) to
starve them by disuse. Those who are inclined to multiply the number of
instincts, usually include among them one which they call
destructiveness: an instinct to destroy for destruction’s sake. I can
conceive no good reason for preserving this, no more than another
propensity which if not an instinct is very like one, what has been
called the instinct of domination; a delight in exercising despotism, in
holding other beings in subjection to our will. The man who takes
pleasure in the mere exertion of authority, apart from the purpose for
which it is to be employed, is the last person in whose hands one would
willingly entrust it. Again, there are persons who are cruel by
character, or, as the phrase is, naturally cruel; who have a real
pleasure in inflicting, or seeing the infliction of pain. This kind of
cruelty is not mere hardheartedness, absence of pity or remorse; it is a
positive thing; a particular kind of voluptuous excitement. The East,
and Southern Europe, have afforded, and probably still afford, abundant
examples of this hateful propensity. I suppose it will be granted that
this is not one of the natural inclinations which it would be wrong to
suppress. The only question would be whether it is not a duty to
suppress the man himself along with it.

But even if it were true that every one of the elementary impulses of
human nature has its good side, and may by a sufficient amount of
artificial training be made more useful than hurtful; how little would
this amount to, when it must in any case be admitted that without such
training all of them, even those which are necessary to our
preservation, would fill the world with misery, making human life an
exaggerated likeness of the odious scene of violence and tyranny which
is exhibited by the rest of the animal kingdom, except in so far as
tamed and disciplined by man. There, indeed, those who flatter
themselves with the notion of reading the purposes of the Creator in his
works, ought in consistency to have seen grounds for inferences from
which they have shrunk. If there are any marks at all of special design
in creation, one of the things most evidently designed is that a large
proportion Edition: current; Page: [399] of all animals should pass
their existence in tormenting and devouring other animals. They have
been lavishly fitted out with the instruments necessary for that
purpose; their strongest instincts impel them to it, and many of them
seem to have been constructed incapable of supporting themselves by any
other food. If a tenth part of the pains which have been expended in
finding benevolent adaptations in all nature, had been employed in
collecting evidence to blacken the character of the Creator, what scope
for comment would not have been found in the entire existence of the
lower animals, divided, with scarcely an exception, into devourers and
devoured, and a prey to a thousand ills from which they are denied the
faculties necessary for protecting themselves! If we are not obliged to
believe the animal creation to be the work of a demon, it is because we
need not suppose it to have been made by a Being of infinite power. But
if imitation of the Creator’s will as revealed in nature, were applied
as a rule of action in this case, the most atrocious enormities of the
worst men would be more than justified by the apparent intention of
Providence that throughout all animated nature the strong should prey
upon the weak.

The preceding observations are far from having exhausted the almost
infinite variety of modes and occasions in which the idea of conformity
to nature is introduced as an element into the ethical appreciation of
actions and dispositions. The same favourable prejudgment follows the
word nature through the numerous acceptations, in which it is employed
as a distinctive term for certain parts of the constitution of humanity
as contrasted with other parts. We have hitherto confined ourselves to
one of these acceptations, in which it stands as a general designation
for those parts of our mental and moral constitution which are supposed
to be innate, in contradistinction to those which are acquired; as when
nature is contrasted with education; or when a savage state, without
laws, arts, or knowledge, is called a state of nature; or when the
question is asked whether benevolence, or the moral sentiment, is
natural or acquired; or whether some persons are poets or orators by
nature and others not. But in another and a more lax sense, any
manifestations by human beings are often termed natural, when it is
merely intended to say that they are not studied or designedly assumed
in the particular case; as when a person is said to move or speak with
natural grace; or when it is said that a person’s natural manner or
character is so and so; meaning that it is so when he does not attempt
to control or disguise it. In a still looser acceptation, a person is
said to be naturally, that which he was until some special cause had
acted upon him, or which it is supposed he would be if some such cause
were withdrawn. Thus a person is said to be naturally dull, but to have
made himself intelligent by study and perseverance; to be naturally
cheerful, but soured by misfortune; naturally ambitious, but kept down
by want of opportunity. Finally, the word natural, applied to Edition:
current; Page: [400] feelings or conduct, often seems to mean no more
than that they are such as are ordinarily found in human beings; as when
it is said that a person acted, on some particular occasion, as it was
natural to do; or that to be affected in a particular way by some sight,
or sound, or thought, or incident in life, is perfectly natural.

In all these senses of the term, the quality called natural is very
often confessedly a worse quality than the one contrasted with it; but
whenever its being so is not too obvious to be questioned, the idea
seems to be entertained that by describing it as natural, something has
been said amounting to a considerable presumption in its favour. For my
part I can perceive only one sense in which nature, or naturalness, in a
human being, are really terms of praise; and then the praise is only
negative: namely when used to denote the absence of affectation.
Affectation may be defined, the effort to appear what one is not, when
the motive or the occasion is not such as either to excuse the attempt,
or to stamp it with the more odious name of hypocrisy. It must be added
that the deception is often attempted to be practised on the deceiver
himself as well as on others; he imitates the external signs of
qualities which he would like to have, in hopes to persuade himself that
he has them. Whether in the form of deception or of self-deception, or
of something hovering between the two, affectation is very rightly
accounted a reproach, and naturalness, understood as the reverse of
affectation, a merit. But a more proper term by which to express this
estimable quality would be sincerity; a term which has fallen from its
original elevated meaning, and popularly denotes only a subordinate
branch of the cardinal virtue it once designated as a whole.

Sometimes also, in cases where the term affectation would be
inappropriate, since the conduct or demeanour spoken of is really
praiseworthy, people say in disparagement of the person concerned, that
such conduct or demeanour is not natural to him; and make
uncomplimentary comparisons between him and some other person, to whom
it is natural: meaning that what in the one seemed excellent was the
effect of temporary excitement, or of a great victory over himself,
while in the other it is the result to be expected from the habitual
character. This mode of speech is not open to censure, since nature is
here simply a term for the person’s ordinary disposition, and if he is
praised it is not for being natural, but for being naturally good.

Conformity to nature, has no connection whatever with right and wrong.
The idea can never be fitly introduced into ethical discussions at all,
except, occasionally and partially, into the question of degrees of
culpability. To illustrate this point, let us consider the phrase by
which the greatest intensity of condemnatory feeling is conveyed in
connection with the idea of nature—the word unnatural. That a thing is
unnatural, in any precise meaning which Edition: current; Page: [401]
can be attached to the word, is no argument for its being blamable;
since the most criminal actions are to a being like man, not more
unnatural than most of the virtues. The acquisition of virtue has in all
ages been accounted a work of labour and difficulty, while the descensus
Averni on the contrary is of proverbial facility: and it assuredly
requires in most persons a greater conquest over a greater number of
natural inclinations to become eminently virtuous than transcendently
vicious. But if an action, or an inclination, has been decided on other
grounds to be blamable, it may be a circumstance in aggravation that it
is unnatural, that is, repugnant to some strong feeling usually found in
human beings; since the bad propensity, whatever it be, has afforded
evidence of being both strong and deeply rooted, by having overcome that
repugnance. This presumption of course fails if the individual never had
the repugnance: and the argument, therefore, is not fit to be urged
unless the feeling which is violated by the act, is not only justifiable
and reasonable, but is one which it is blamable to be without.

The corresponding plea in extenuation of a culpable act because it was
natural, or because it was prompted by a natural feeling, never, I
think, ought to be admitted. There is hardly a bad action ever
perpetrated which is not perfectly natural, and the motives to which are
not perfectly natural feelings. In the eye of reason, therefore, this is
no excuse, but it is quite “natural” that it should be so in the eyes of
the multitude; because the meaning of the expression is, that they have
a fellow feeling with the offender. When they say that something which
they cannot help admitting to be blamable, is nevertheless natural, they
mean that they can imagine the possibility of their being themselves
tempted to commit it. Most people have a considerable amount of
indulgence towards all acts of which they feel a possible source within
themselves, reserving their rigour for those which, though perhaps
really less bad, they cannot in any way understand how it is possible to
commit. If an action convinces them (which it often does on very
inadequate grounds) that the person who does it must be a being totally
unlike themselves, they are seldom particular in examining the precise
degree of blame due to it, or even if blame is properly due to it at
all. They measure the degree of guilt by the strength of their
antipathy; and hence differences of opinion, and even differences of
taste, have been objects of as intense moral abhorrence as the most
atrocious crimes.

It will be useful to sum up in a few words the leading conclusions of
this Essay.

The word Nature has two principal meanings: it either denotes the entire
system of things, with the aggregate of all their properties, or it
denotes things as they would be, apart from human intervention.

In the first of these senses, the doctrine that man ought to follow
nature Edition: current; Page: [402] is unmeaning; since man has no
power to do anything else than follow nature; all his actions are done
through, and in obedience to, some one or many of nature’s physical or
mental laws.

In the other sense of the term, the doctrine that man ought to follow
nature, or in other words, ought to make the spontaneous course of
things the model of his voluntary actions, is equally irrational and
immoral.

Irrational, because all human action whatever, consists in altering, and
all useful action in improving, the spontaneous course of nature:

Immoral, because the course of natural phenomena being replete with
everything which when committed by human beings is most worthy of
abhorrence, any one who endeavoured in his actions to imitate the
natural course of things would be universally seen and acknowledged to
be the wickedest of men.

The scheme of Nature regarded in its whole extent, cannot have had, for
its sole or even principal object, the good of human or other sentient
beings. What good it brings to them, is mostly the result of their own
exertions. Whatsoever, in nature, gives indication of beneficent design,
proves this beneficence to be armed only with limited power; and the
duty of man is to co-operate with the beneficent powers, not by
imitating but by perpetually striving to amend the course of nature—and
bringing that part of it over which we can exercise control, more nearly
into conformity with a high standard of justice and goodness.

Edition: current; Page: [403]


Utility of Religion

it has sometimes been remarked how much has been written, both by
friends and enemies, concerning the truth of religion, and how little,
at least in the way of discussion or controversy, concerning its
usefulness. This, however, might have been expected; for the truth, in
matters which so deeply affect us, is our first concernment. If
religion, or any particular form of it, is true, its usefulness follows
without other proof. If to know authentically in what order of things,
under what government of the universe it is our destiny to live, were
not useful, it is difficult to imagine what could be considered so.
Whether a person is in a pleasant or in an unpleasant place, a palace or
a prison, it cannot be otherwise than useful to him to know where he is.
So long, therefore, as men accepted the teachings of their religion as
positive facts, no more a matter of doubt than their own existence or
the existence of the objects around them, to ask the use of believing it
could not possibly occur to them. The utility of religion did not need
to be asserted until the arguments for its truth had in a great measure
ceased to convince. People must either have ceased to believe, or have
ceased to rely on the belief of others, before they could take that
inferior ground of defence without a consciousness of lowering what they
were endeavouring to raise. An argument for the utility of religion is
an appeal to unbelievers, to induce them to practise a well meant
hypocrisy, or to semi-believers to make them avert their eyes from what
might possibly shake their unstable belief, or finally to persons in
general to abstain from expressing any doubts they may feel, since a
fabric of immense importance to mankind is so insecure at its
foundations, that men must hold their breath in its neighbourhood for
fear of blowing it down.

In the present period of history, however, we seem to have arrived at a
time when, among the arguments for and against religion, those which
relate to its usefulness assume an important place. We are in an age of
weak beliefs, and in which such belief as men have is much more
determined by their wish to believe than by any mental appreciation of
evidence. The wish to believe does not arise only from selfish but often
from the most disinterested feelings; and though it cannot produce the
unwavering and perfect reliance which Edition: current; Page: [404] once
existed, it fences round all that remains of the impressions of early
education; it often causes direct misgivings to fade away by disuse; and
above all, it induces people to continue laying out their lives
according to doctrines which have lost part of their hold on the mind,
and to maintain towards the world the same, or a rather more
demonstrative attitude of belief, than they thought it necessary to
exhibit when their personal conviction was more complete.

If religious belief be indeed so necessary to mankind, as we are
continually assured that it is, there is great reason to lament, that
the intellectual grounds of it should require to be backed by moral
bribery or subornation of the understanding. Such a state of things is
most uncomfortable even for those who may, without actual insincerity,
describe themselves as believers; and still worse as regards those who,
having consciously ceased to find the evidences of religion convincing,
are withheld from saying so lest they should aid in doing an irreparable
injury to mankind. It is a most painful position to a conscientious and
cultivated mind, to be drawn in contrary directions by the two noblest
of all objects of pursuit, truth, and the general good. Such a conflict
must inevitably produce a growing indifference to one or other of these
objects, most probably to both. Many who could render giant’s service
both to truth and to mankind if they believed that they could serve the
one without loss to the other, are either totally paralysed, or led to
confine their exertions to matters of minor detail, by the apprehension
that any real freedom of speculation, or any considerable strengthening
or enlargement of the thinking faculties of mankind at large, might, by
making them unbelievers, be the surest way to render them vicious and
miserable. Many, again, having observed in others or experienced in
themselves elevated feelings which they imagine incapable of emanating
from any other source than religion, have an honest aversion to anything
tending, as they think, to dry up the fountain of such feelings. They,
therefore, either dislike and disparage all philosophy, or addict
themselves with intolerant zeal to those forms of it in which intuition
usurps the place of evidence, and internal feeling is made the test of
objective truth. The whole of the prevalent metaphysics of the present
century is one tissue of suborned evidence in favour of religion; often
of Deism only, but in any case involving a misapplication of noble
impulses and speculative capacities, among the most deplorable of those
wretched wastes of human faculties which make us wonder that enough is
left to keep mankind progressive, at however slow a pace. It is time to
consider, more impartially and therefore more deliberately than is
usually done, whether all this straining to prop up beliefs which
require so great an expense of intellectual toil and ingenuity to keep
them standing, yields any sufficient return in human well being; and
whether that end would not be better served Edition: current; Page:
[405] by a frank recognition that certain subjects are inaccessible to
our faculties, and by the application of the same mental powers to the
strengthening and enlargement of those other sources of virtue and
happiness which stand in no need of the support or sanction of
supernatural beliefs and inducements.

Neither, on the other hand, can the difficulties of the question be so
promptly disposed of, as sceptical philosophers are sometimes inclined
to believe. It is not enough to aver, in general terms, that there never
can be any conflict between truth and utility; that if religion be
false, nothing but good can be the consequence of rejecting it. For,
though the knowledge of every positive truth is an useful acquisition,
this doctrine cannot without reservation be applied to negative truth.
When the only truth ascertainable is that nothing can be known, we do
not, by this knowledge, gain any new fact by which to guide ourselves;
we are, at best, only disabused of our trust in some former guide-mark,
which, though itself fallacious, may have pointed in the same direction
with the best indications we have, and if it happens to be more
conspicuous and legible, may have kept us right when they might have
been overlooked. It is, in short, perfectly conceivable that religion
may be morally useful without being intellectually sustainable: and it
would be a proof of great prejudice in any unbeliever to deny, that
there have been ages, and that there are still both nations and
individuals, with regard to whom this is actually the case. Whether it
is the case generally, and with reference to the future, it is the
object of this paper to examine. We propose to inquire whether the
belief in religion, considered as a mere persuasion, apart from the
question of its truth, is really indispensable to the temporal welfare
of mankind; whether the usefulness of the belief is intrinsic and
universal, or local, temporary, and, in some sense, accidental; and
whether the benefits which it yields might not be obtained otherwise,
without the very large alloy of evil, by which, even in the best form of
the belief, those benefits are qualified.

With the arguments on one side of the question we all are familiar:
religious writers have not neglected to celebrate to the utmost the
advantages both of religion in general and of their own religious faith
in particular. But those who have held the contrary opinion have
generally contented themselves with insisting on the more obvious and
flagrant of the positive evils which have been engendered by past and
present forms of religious belief. And, in truth, mankind have been so
unremittingly occupied in doing evil to one another in the name of
religion, from the sacrifice of Iphigenia to the Dragonnades of Louis
XIV (not to descend lower), that for any immediate purpose there was
little need to seek arguments further off. These odious consequences,
however, do not belong to religion in itself, but to particular forms of
it, and afford no argument against the usefulness of any religions
Edition: current; Page: [406] except those by which such enormities are
encouraged. Moreover, the worst of these evils are already in a great
measure extirpated from the more improved forms of religion; and as
mankind advance in ideas and in feelings, this process of extirpation
continually goes on: the immoral, or otherwise mischievous consequences
which have been drawn from religion, are, one by one, abandoned, and,
after having been long fought for as of its very essence, are discovered
to be easily separable from it. These mischiefs, indeed, after they are
past, though no longer arguments against religion, remain valid as large
abatements from its beneficial influence, by showing that some of the
greatest improvements ever made in the moral sentiments of mankind have
taken place without it and in spite of it, and that what we are taught
to regard as the chief of all improving influences, has in practice
fallen so far short of such a character, that one of the hardest burdens
laid upon the other good influences of human nature has been that of
improving religion itself. The improvement, however, has taken place; it
is still proceeding, and for the sake of fairness it should be assumed
to be complete. We ought to suppose religion to have accepted the best
human morality which reason and goodness can work out, from
philosophical, christian, or any other elements. When it has thus freed
itself from the pernicious consequences which result from its
identification with any bad moral doctrine, the ground is clear for
considering whether its useful properties are exclusively inherent in
it, or their benefits can be obtained without it.

This essential portion of the inquiry into the temporal usefulness of
religion, is the subject of the present Essay. It is a part which has
been little treated of by sceptical writers. The only direct discussion
of it with which I am acquainted, is in a short treatise, understood to
have been partly compiled from manuscripts of Mr. Bentham,* and
abounding in just and profound views; but which, as it appears to me,
presses many parts of the argument too hard. This treatise, and the
incidental remarks scattered through the writings of M. Comte, are the
only sources known to me from which anything very pertinent to the
subject can be made available for the sceptical side of the argument. I
shall use both of them freely in the sequel of the present discourse.

The inquiry divides itself into two parts, corresponding to the double
aspect of the subject; its social, and its individual aspect. What does
religion do for society, and what for the individual? What amount of
benefit to social interests, in the ordinary sense of the phrase, arises
from religious belief? And what influence has it in improving and
ennobling individual human nature?

The first question is interesting to everybody; the latter only to the
best; Edition: current; Page: [407] but to them it is, if there be any
difference, the more important of the two. We shall begin with the
former, as being that which best admits of being easily brought to a
precise issue.

To speak first, then, of religious belief as an instrument of social
good. We must commence by drawing a distinction most commonly
overlooked. It is usual to credit religion as such with the whole of the
power inherent in any system of moral duties inculcated by education and
enforced by opinion. Undoubtedly mankind would be in a deplorable state
if no principles or precepts of justice, veracity, beneficence, were
taught publicly or privately, and if these virtues were not encouraged,
and the opposite vices repressed, by the praise and blame, the
favourable and unfavourable sentiments, of mankind. And since nearly
everything of this sort which does take place, takes place in the name
of religion; since almost all who are taught any morality whatever, have
it taught to them as religion, and inculcated on them through life
principally in that character; the effect which the teaching produces as
teaching, it is supposed to produce as religious teaching, and religion
receives the credit of all the influence in human affairs which belongs
to any generally accepted system of rules for the guidance and
government of human life.

Few persons have sufficiently considered how great an influence this is;
what vast efficacy belongs naturally to any doctrine received with
tolerable unanimity as true, and impressed on the mind from the earliest
childhood as duty. A little reflection will, I think, lead us to the
conclusion that it is this which is the great moral power in human
affairs, and that religion only seems so powerful because this mighty
power has been under its command.

Consider first, the enormous influence of authority on the human mind. I
am now speaking of involuntary influence; effect on men’s conviction, on
their persuasion, on their involuntary sentiments. Authority is the
evidence on which the mass of mankind believe everything which they are
said to know, except facts of which their own senses have taken
cognizance. It is the evidence on which even the wisest receive all
those truths of science, or facts in history or in life, of which they
have not personally examined the proofs. Over the immense majority of
human beings, the general concurrence of mankind, in any matter of
opinion, is all powerful. Whatever is thus certified to them, they
believe with a fulness of assurance which they do not accord even to the
evidence of their senses when the general opinion of mankind stands in
opposition to it. When, therefore, any rule of life and duty, whether
grounded or not on religion, has conspicuously received the general
assent, it obtains a hold on the belief of every individual, stronger
than it would have even if he had arrived at it by the inherent force of
his own understanding. If Novalis could say, not without a real meaning,
“My belief has gained infinitely to me from the moment when one other
human being has Edition: current; Page: [408] begun to believe the
same,”[*] how much more when it is not one other person, but all the
human beings whom one knows of. Some may urge it as an objection, that
no scheme of morality has this universal assent, and that none,
therefore, can be indebted to this source for whatever power it
possesses over the mind. So far as relates to the present age, the
assertion is true, and strengthens the argument which it might at first
seem to controvert; for exactly in proportion as the received systems of
belief have been contested, and it has become known that they have many
dissentients, their hold on the general belief has been loosened, and
their practical influence on conduct has declined: and since this has
happened to them notwithstanding the religious sanction which attached
to them, there can be no stronger evidence that they were powerful not
as religion, but as beliefs generally accepted by mankind. To find
people who believe their religion as a person believes that fire will
burn his hand when thrust into it, we must seek them in those Oriental
countries where Europeans do not yet predominate, or in the European
world when it was still universally Catholic. Men often disobeyed their
religion in those times, because their human passions and appetites were
too strong for it, or because the religion itself afforded means of
indulgence to breaches of its obligations; but though they disobeyed,
they, for the most part, did not doubt. There was in those days an
absolute and unquestioning completeness of belief, never since general
in Europe.

Such being the empire exercised over mankind by simple authority, the
mere belief and testimony of their fellow creatures; consider next how
tremendous is the power of education; how unspeakable is the effect of
bringing people up from infancy in a belief, and in habits founded on
it. Consider also that in all countries, and from the earliest ages down
to the present, not merely those who are called, in a restricted sense
of the term, the educated, but all or nearly all who have been brought
up by parents, or by any one interested in them, have been taught from
their earliest years some kind of religious belief, and some precepts as
the commands of the heavenly powers to them and to mankind. And as it
cannot be imagined that the commands of God are to young children
anything more than the commands of their parents, it is reasonable to
think that any system of social duty which mankind might adopt, even
though divorced from religion, would have the same advantage of being
inculcated from childhood, and would have it hereafter much more
perfectly than any doctrine has it at present, society being far more
disposed than formerly to take pains for the moral tuition of those
numerous classes whose education it has hitherto left very much to
chance. Now it is especially characteristic of the impressions of early
education, that they possess what it is so much more difficult for later
convictions to obtain—command over the Edition: current; Page: [409]
feelings. We see daily how powerful a hold these first impressions
retain over the feelings even of those, who have given up the opinions
which they were early taught. While on the other hand, it is only
persons of a much higher degree of natural sensibility and intellect
combined than it is at all common to meet with, whose feelings entwine
themselves with anything like the same force round opinions which they
have adopted from their own investigations later in life; and even when
they do, we may say with truth that it is because the strong sense of
moral duty, the sincerity, courage and self-devotion which enabled them
to do so, were themselves the fruits of early impressions.

The power of education is almost boundless: there is not one natural
inclination which it is not strong enough to coerce, and, if needful, to
destroy by disuse. In the greatest recorded victory which education has
ever achieved over a whole host of natural inclinations in an entire
people—the maintenance through centuries of the institutions of
Lycurgus,—it was very little, if even at all, indebted to religion: for
the Gods of the Spartans were the same as those of other Greek states;
and though, no doubt, every state of Greece believed that its particular
polity had at its first establishment, some sort of divine sanction
(mostly that of the Delphian oracle), there was seldom any difficulty in
obtaining the same or an equally powerful sanction for a change. It was
not religion which formed the strength of the Spartan institutions: the
root of the system was devotion to Sparta, to the ideal of the country
or State: which transformed into ideal devotion to a greater country,
the world, would be equal to that and far nobler achievements. Among the
Greeks generally, social morality was extremely independent of religion.
The inverse relation was rather that which existed between them; the
worship of the Gods was inculcated chiefly as a social duty, inasmuch as
if they were neglected or insulted, it was believed that their
displeasure would fall not more upon the offending individual than upon
the state or community which bred and tolerated him. Such moral teaching
as existed in Greece had very little to do with religion. The Gods were
not supposed to concern themselves much with men’s conduct to one
another, except when men had contrived to make the Gods themselves an
interested party, by placing an assertion or an engagement under the
sanction of a solemn appeal to them, by oath or vow. I grant that the
sophists and philosophers, and even popular orators, did their best to
press religion into the service of their special objects, and to make it
be thought that the sentiments of whatever kind, which they were engaged
in inculcating, were particularly acceptable to the Gods, but this never
seems the primary consideration in any case save those of direct offence
to the dignity of the Gods themselves. For the enforcement of human
moralities secular inducements were almost exclusively relied on. The
case of Greece is, I believe, the only one in which any teaching, other
than religious, has Edition: current; Page: [410] had the unspeakable
advantage of forming the basis of education: and though much may be said
against the quality of some part of the teaching, very little can be
said against its effectiveness. The most memorable example of the power
of education over conduct, is afforded (as I have just remarked) by this
exceptional case; constituting a strong presumption that in other cases,
early religious teaching has owed its power over mankind rather to its
being early than to its being religious.

We have now considered two powers, that of authority, and that of early
education, which operate through men’s involuntary beliefs, feelings and
desires, and which religion has hitherto held as its almost exclusive
appanage. Let us now consider a third power which operates directly on
their actions, whether their involuntary sentiments are carried with it
or not. This is the power of public opinion; of the praise and blame,
the favour and disfavour, of their fellow creatures; and is a source of
strength inherent in any system of moral belief which is generally
adopted, whether connected with religion or not.

Men are so much accustomed to give to the motives that decide their
actions, more flattering names than justly belong to them, that they are
generally quite unconscious how much those parts of their conduct which
they most pride themselves on (as well as some which they are ashamed
of), are determined by the motive of public opinion. Of course public
opinion for the most part enjoins the same things which are enjoined by
the received social morality; that morality being, in truth, the summary
of the conduct which each one of the multitude, whether he himself
observes it with any strictness or not, desires that others should
observe towards him. People are therefore easily able to flatter
themselves that they are acting from the motive of conscience when they
are doing in obedience to the inferior motive, things which their
conscience approves. We continually see how great is the power of
opinion in opposition to conscience; how men “follow a multitude to do
evil;”[*] how often opinion induces them to do what their conscience
disapproves, and still oftener prevents them from doing what it
commands. But when the motive of public opinion acts in the same
direction with conscience, which, since it has usually itself made the
conscience in the first instance, it for the most part naturally does;
it is then, of all motives which operate on the bulk of mankind, the
most overpowering.

The names of all the strongest passions (except the merely animal ones)
manifested by human nature, are each of them a name for some one part
only of the motive derived from what I here call public opinion. The
love of glory; the love of praise; the love of admiration; the love of
respect and deference; even the love of sympathy, are portions of its
attractive power. Vanity is a vituperative name for its attractive
influence generally, when considered excessive in degree. The fear of
shame, the dread of ill repute, or of being disliked Edition: current;
Page: [411] or hated, are the direct and simple forms of its deterring
power. But the deterring force of the unfavourable sentiments of mankind
does not consist solely in the painfulness of knowing oneself to be the
object of those sentiments; it includes all the penalties which they can
inflict: exclusion from social intercourse and from the innumerable good
offices which human beings require from one another; the forfeiture of
all that is called success in life; often the great diminution or total
loss of means of subsistence; positive ill offices of various kinds,
sufficient to render life miserable, and reaching in some states of
society as far as actual persecution to death. And again the attractive,
or impelling influence of public opinion, includes the whole range of
what is commonly meant by ambition: for, except in times of lawless
military violence, the objects of social ambition can only be attained
by means of the good opinion and favourable disposition of our
fellow-creatures; nor, in nine cases out of ten, would those objects be
even desired, were it not for the power they confer over the sentiments
of mankind. Even the pleasure of self-approbation, in the great
majority, is mainly dependent on the opinion of others. Such is the
involuntary influence of authority on ordinary minds, that persons must
be of a better than ordinary mould to be capable of a full assurance
that they are in the right, when the world, that is, when their world,
thinks them wrong: nor is there, to most men, any proof so demonstrative
of their own virtue or talent as that people in general seem to believe
in it. Through all departments of human affairs, regard for the
sentiments of our fellow-creatures is in one shape or other, in nearly
all characters, the pervading motive. And we ought to note that this
motive is naturally strongest in the most sensitive natures, which are
the most promising material for the formation of great virtues. How far
its power reaches is known by too familiar experience to require either
proof or illustration here. When once the means of living have been
obtained, the far greater part of the remaining labour and effort which
takes place on the earth, has for its object to acquire the respect or
the favourable regard of mankind; to be looked up to, or at all events,
not to be looked down upon by them. The industrial and commercial
activity which advance civilization, the frivolity, prodigality, and
selfish thirst of aggrandizement which retard it, flow equally from that
source. While as an instance of the power exercised by the terrors
derived from public opinion, we know how many murders have been
committed merely to remove a witness who knew and was likely to disclose
some secret that would bring disgrace upon his murderer.

Any one who fairly and impartially considers the subject, will see
reason to believe that those great effects on human conduct, which are
commonly ascribed to motives derived directly from religion, have mostly
for their proximate cause the influence of human opinion. Religion has
been powerful not by its intrinsic force, but because it has wielded
that additional and more mighty power. The effect of religion has been
immense in giving a Edition: current; Page: [412] direction to public
opinion: which has, in many most important respects, been wholly
determined by it. But without the sanctions superadded by public
opinion, its own proper sanctions have never, save in exceptional
characters, or in peculiar moods of mind, exercised a very potent
influence, after the times had gone by, in which divine agency was
supposed habitually to employ temporal rewards and punishments. When a
man firmly believed that if he violated the sacredness of a particular
sanctuary he would be struck dead on the spot, or smitten suddenly with
a mortal disease, he doubtless took care not to incur the penalty: but
when any one had had the courage to defy the danger, and escaped with
impunity, the spell was broken. If ever any people were taught that they
were under a divine government, and that unfaithfulness to their
religion and law would be visited from above with temporal
chastisements, the Jews were so. Yet their history was a mere succession
of lapses into Paganism. Their prophets and historians, who held fast to
the ancient beliefs (though they gave them so liberal an interpretation
as to think it a sufficient manifestation of God’s displeasure towards a
king if any evil happened to his great grandson), never ceased to
complain that their countrymen turned a deaf ear to their vaticinations;
and hence, with the faith they held in a divine government operating by
temporal penalties, they could not fail to anticipate (as Mirabeau’s
father without such prompting, was able to do on the eve of the French
Revolution) la culbute générale;[*] an expectation which, luckily for
the credit of their prophetic powers, was fulfilled; unlike that of the
Apostle John, who in the only intelligible prophecy in the Revelations,
foretold to the city of the seven hills a fate like that of Nineveh and
Babylon;[†] which prediction remains to this hour unaccomplished.
Unquestionably the conviction which experience in time forced on all but
the very ignorant, that divine punishments were not to be confidently
expected in a temporal form, contributed much to the downfall of the old
religions, and the general adoption of one which without absolutely
excluding providential interferences in this life for the punishment of
guilt or the reward of merit, removed the principal scene of divine
retribution to a world after death. But rewards and punishments
postponed to that distance of time, and never seen by the eye, are not
calculated, even when infinite and eternal, to have, on ordinary minds,
a very powerful effect in opposition to strong temptation. Their
remoteness alone is a prodigious deduction from their efficacy, on such
minds as those which most require the restraint of punishment. A still
greater abatement is their uncertainty, which belongs to them from the
very nature of the case: for rewards and punishments administered after
death, must be awarded not definitely to particular actions, but on a
general survey of the person’s whole life, and he easily persuades
himself that Edition: current; Page: [413] whatever may have been his
peccadilloes, there will be a balance in his favour at the last. All
positive religions aid this self-delusion. Bad religions teach that
divine vengeance may be bought off, by offerings, or personal abasement;
the better religions, not to drive sinners to despair, dwell so much on
the divine mercy, that hardly any one is compelled to think himself
irrevocably condemned. The sole quality in these punishments which might
seem calculated to make them efficacious, their over-powering magnitude,
is itself a reason why nobody (except a hypochondriac here and there)
ever really believes that he is in any very serious danger of incurring
them. Even the worst malefactor is hardly able to think that any crime
he has had it in his power to commit, any evil he can have inflicted in
this short space of existence, can have deserved torture extending
through an eternity. Accordingly religious writers and preachers are
never tired of complaining how little effect religious motives have on
men’s lives and conduct, notwithstanding the tremendous penalties
denounced.

Mr. Bentham, whom I have already mentioned as one of the few authors who
have written anything to the purpose on the efficacy of the religious
sanction, adduces several cases to prove that religious obligation, when
not enforced by public opinion, produces scarcely any effect on
conduct.[*] His first example is that of oaths. The oaths taken in
courts of justice, and any others which from the manifest importance to
society of their being kept, public opinion rigidly enforces, are felt
as real and binding obligations. But university oaths and custom-house
oaths, though in a religious point of view equally obligatory, are in
practice utterly disregarded even by men in other respects honourable.
The university oath to obey the statutes has been for centuries, with
universal acquiescence, set at nought: and utterly false statements are
(or used to be) daily and unblushingly sworn to at the Custom-house, by
persons as attentive as other people to all the ordinary obligations of
life. The explanation being, that veracity in these cases was not
enforced by public opinion. The second case which Bentham cites is
duelling; a practice now, in this country, obsolete, but in full vigour
in several other christian countries; deemed and admitted to be a sin by
almost all who, nevertheless, in obedience to opinion, and to escape
from personal humiliation, are guilty of it. The third case is that of
illicit sexual intercourse; which in both sexes, stands in the very
highest rank of religious sins, yet not being severely censured by
opinion in the male sex, they have in general very little scruple in
committing it; while in the case of women, though the religious
obligation is not stronger, yet being backed in real ernest by public
opinion, it is commonly effectual.

Some objection may doubtless be taken to Bentham’s instances, considered
Edition: current; Page: [414] as crucial experiments on the power of the
religious sanction; for (it may be said) people do not really believe
that in these cases they shall be punished by God, any more than by man.
And this is certainly true in the case of those university and other
oaths, which are habitually taken without any intention of keeping them.
The oath, in these cases, is regarded as a mere formality, destitute of
any serious meaning in the sight of the Deity; and the most scrupulous
person, even if he does reproach himself for having taken an oath which
nobody deems fit to be kept, does not in his conscience tax himself with
the guilt of perjury, but only with the profanation of a ceremony. This,
therefore, is not a good example of the weakness of the religious motive
when divorced from that of human opinion. The point which it illustrates
is rather the tendency of the one motive to come and go with the other,
so that where the penalties of public opinion cease, the religious
motive ceases also. The same criticism, however, is not equally
applicable to Bentham’s other examples, duelling, and sexual
irregularities. Those who do these acts, the first by the command of
public opinion, the latter with its indulgence, really do, in most
cases, believe that they are offending God. Doubtless, they do not think
that they are offending him in such a degree as very seriously to
endanger their salvation. Their reliance on his mercy prevails over
their dread of his resentment; affording an exemplification of the
remark already made, that the unavoidable uncertainty of religious
penalties makes them feeble as a deterring motive. They are so, even in
the case of acts which human opinion condemns: much more, with those to
which it is indulgent. What mankind think venial, it is hardly ever
supposed that God looks upon in a serious light: at least by those who
feel in themselves any inclination to practise it.

I do not for a moment think of denying that there are states of mind in
which the idea of religious punishment acts with the most overwhelming
force. In hypochondriacal disease, and in those with whom, from great
disappointments or other moral causes, the thoughts and imagination have
assumed an habitually melancholy complexion, that topic, falling in with
the pre-existing tendency of the mind, supplies images well fitted to
drive the unfortunate sufferer even to madness. Often, during a
temporary state of depression, these ideas take such a hold of the mind
as to give a permanent turn to the character; being the most common case
of what, in sectarian phraseology, is called conversion. But if the
depressed state ceases after the conversion, as it commonly does, and
the convert does not relapse, but perseveres in his new course of life,
the principal difference between it and the old is usually found to be,
that the man now guides his life by the public opinion of his religious
associates, as he before guided it by that of the profane world. At all
events, there is one clear proof how little the generality of mankind,
either religious or worldly, really dread eternal punishments, when we
see how, even at the approach of death, when the remoteness Edition:
current; Page: [415] which took so much from their effect has been
exchanged for the closest proximity, almost all persons who have not
been guilty of some enormous crime (and many who have) are quite free
from uneasiness as to their prospects in another world, and never for a
moment seem to think themselves in any real danger of eternal
punishment.

With regard to the cruel deaths and bodily tortures, which confessors
and martyrs have so often undergone for the sake of religion, I would
not depreciate them by attributing any part of this admirable courage
and constancy to the influence of human opinion. Human opinion indeed
has shown itself quite equal to the production of similar firmness in
persons not otherwise distinguished by moral excellence; such as the
North American Indian at the stake. But if it was not the thought of
glory in the eyes of their fellow-religionists, which upheld these
heroic sufferers in their agony, as little do I believe that it was,
generally speaking, that of the pleasures of heaven or the pains of
hell. Their impulse was a divine enthusiasm—a self-forgetting devotion
to an idea: a state of exalted feeling, by no means peculiar to
religion, but which it is the privilege of every great cause to inspire;
a phenomenon belonging to the critical moments of existence, not to the
ordinary play of human motives, and from which nothing can be inferred
as to the efficacy of the ideas which it sprung from, whether religious
or any other, in overcoming ordinary temptations, and regulating the
course of daily life.

We may now have done with this branch of the subject, which is, after
all, the vulgarest part of it. The value of religion as a supplement to
human laws, a more cunning sort of police, an auxiliary to the
thief-catcher and the hangman, is not that part of its claims which the
more highminded of its votaries are fondest of insisting on: and they
would probably be as ready as any one to admit, that if the nobler
offices of religion in the soul could be dispensed with, a substitute
might be found for so coarse and selfish a social instrument as the fear
of hell. In their view of the matter, the best of mankind absolutely
require religion for the perfection of their own character, even though
the coercion of the worst might possibly be accomplished without its
aid.

Even in the social point of view, however, under its most elevated
aspect, these nobler spirits generally assert the necessity of religion,
as a teacher, if not as an enforcer, of social morality. They say, that
religion alone can teach us what morality is; that all the high morality
ever recognized by mankind, was learnt from religion; that the greatest
uninspired philosophers in their sublimest flights, stopt far short of
the christian morality, and whatever inferior morality they may have
attained to (by the assistance, as many think, of dim traditions derived
from the Hebrew books, or from a primæval revelation) they never could
induce the common mass of their fellow citizens to accept it from them.
That, only when a morality is understood to come Edition: current; Page:
[416] from the Gods, do men in general adopt it, rally round it, and
lend their human sanctions for its enforcement. That granting the
sufficiency of human motives to make the rule obeyed, were it not for
the religious idea we should not have had the rule itself.

There is truth in much of this, considered as matter of history. Ancient
peoples have generally, if not always, received their morals, their
laws, their intellectual beliefs, and even their practical arts of life,
all in short which tended either to guide or to discipline them, as
revelations from the superior powers, and in any other way could not
easily have been induced to accept them. This was partly the effect of
their hopes and fears from those powers, which were of much greater and
more universal potency in early times, when the agency of the Gods was
seen in the daily events of life, experience not having yet disclosed
the fixed laws according to which physical phenomena succeed one
another. Independently, too, of personal hopes and fears, the
involuntary deference felt by these rude minds for power superior to
their own, and the tendency to suppose that beings of superhuman power
must also be of superhuman knowledge and wisdom, made them
disinterestedly desire to conform their conduct to the presumed
preferences of these powerful beings, and to adopt no new practice
without their authorization either spontaneously given, or solicited and
obtained.

But because, when men were still savages, they would not have received
either moral or scientific truths unless they had supposed them to be
supernaturally imparted, does it follow that they would now give up
moral truths any more than scientific, because they believed them to
have no higher origin than wise and noble human hearts? Are not moral
truths strong enough in their own evidence, at all events to retain the
belief of mankind when once they have acquired it? I grant that some of
the precents of Christ as exhibited in the Gospels—rising far above the
Paulism which is the foundation of ordinary Christianity—carry some
kinds of moral goodness to a greater height than had ever been attained
before, though much even of what is supposed to be peculiar to them is
equalled in the Meditations of Marcus Antoninus, which we have no ground
for believing to have been in any way indebted to Christianity. But this
benefit, whatever it amounts to, has been gained. Mankind have entered
into the possession of it. It has become the property of humanity, and
cannot now be lost by anything short of a return to primæval barbarism.
The “new commandment to love one another;”* the recognition that the
greatest are those who serve, not who are served by, others; the
reverence for the weak and humble, which is the foundation of Edition:
current; Page: [417] chivalry, they and not the strong being pointed out
as having the first place in God’s regard, and the first claim on their
fellow men; the lesson of the parable of the Good Samaritan;[*] that of
“he that is without sin let him throw the first stone;”[†] the precept
of doing as we would be done by;[‡] and such other noble moralities as
are to be found, mixed with some poetical exaggerations, and some maxims
of which it is difficult to ascertain the precise object; in the
authentic sayings of Jesus of Nazareth; these are surely in sufficient
harmony with the intellect and feelings of every good man or woman, to
be in no danger of being let go, after having been once acknowledged as
the creed of the best and foremost portion of our species. There will
be, as there have been, shortcomings enough for a long time to come in
acting on them; but that they should be forgotten, or cease to be
operative on the human conscience, while human beings remain cultivated
or civilized, may be pronounced, once for all, impossible.

On the other hand, there is a very real evil consequent on ascribing a
supernatural origin to the received maxims of morality. That origin
consecrates the whole of them, and protects them from being discussed or
criticized. So that if among the moral doctrines received as a part of
religion, there be any which are imperfect—which were either erroneous
from the first, or not properly limited and guarded in the expression,
or which, unexceptionable once, are no longer suited to the changes that
have taken place in human relations (and it is my firm belief that in
so-called christian morality, instances of all these kinds are to be
found) these doctrines are considered equally binding on the conscience
with the noblest, most permanent and most universal precepts of Christ.
Wherever morality is supposed to be of supernatural origin, morality is
stereotyped; as law is, for the same reason, among believers in the
Koran.

Belief, then, in the supernatural, great as are the services which it
rendered in the early stages of human development, cannot be considered
to be any longer required, either for enabling us to know what is right
and wrong in social morality, or for supplying us with motives to do
right and to abstain from wrong. Such belief, therefore, is not
necessary for social purposes, at least in the coarse way in which these
can be considered apart from the character of the individual human
being. That more elevated branch of the subject now remains to be
considered. If supernatural beliefs are indeed necessary to the
perfection of the individual character, they are necessary also to the
highest excellence in social conduct: necessary in a far higher sense
than that vulgar one, which constitutes it the great support of morality
in common eyes.

Edition: current; Page: [418]
Let us then consider, what it is in human nature which causes it to
require a religion; what wants of the human mind religion supplies, and
what qualities it developes. When we have understood this, we shall be
better able to judge, how far these wants can be otherwise supplied and
those qualities, or qualities equivalent to them, unfolded and brought
to perfection by other means.

The old saying, Primus in orbe Deos fecit timor,[*] I hold to be untrue,
or to contain, at most, only a small amount of truth. Belief in Gods
had, I conceive, even in the rudest minds, a more honourable origin. Its
universality has been very rationally explained from the spontaneous
tendency of the mind to attribute life and volition, similar to what it
feels in itself, to all natural objects and phenomena which appear to be
self-moving. This was a plausible fancy, and no better theory could be
formed at first. It was naturally persisted in so long as the motions
and operations of these objects seemed to be arbitrary, and incapable of
being accounted for but by the free choice of the Power itself. At
first, no doubt, the objects themselves were supposed to be alive; and
this belief still subsists among African fetish-worshippers. But as it
must soon have appeared absurd that things which could do so much more
than man, could not or would not do what man does, as for example to
speak, the transition was made to supposing that the object present to
the senses was inanimate, but was the creature and instrument of an
invisible being with a form and organs similar to the human.

These beings having first been believed in, fear of them necessarily
followed; since they were thought able to inflict at pleasure on human
beings great evils, which the sufferers neither knew how to avert nor to
foresee, but were left dependent, for their chances of doing either,
upon solicitations addressed to the deities themselves. It is true,
therefore, that fear had much to do with religion: but belief in the
Gods evidently preceded, and did not arise from, fear: though the fear,
when established, was a strong support to the belief, nothing being
conceived to be so great an offence to the divinities as any doubt of
their existence.

It is unnecessary to prosecute further the natural history of religion,
as we have not here to account for its origin in rude minds, but for its
persistency in the cultivated. A sufficient explanation of this will, I
conceive, be found in the small limits of man’s certain knowledge, and
the boundlessness of his desire to know. Human existence is girt round
with mystery: the narrow region of our experience is a small island in
the midst of a boundless sea, which at once awes our feelings and
stimulates our imagination by its vastness and its obscurity. To add to
the mystery, the domain of our earthly existence is not only an island
in infinite space, but also in infinite time. The past and the future
are alike shrouded from us: we neither know the origin Edition: current;
Page: [419] of anything which is, nor its final destination. If we feel
deeply interested in knowing that there are myriads of worlds at an
immeasurable, and to our faculties inconceivable, distance from us in
space; if we are eager to discover what little we can about these
worlds, and when we cannot know what they are, can never satiate
ourselves with speculating on what they may be; is it not a matter of
far deeper interest to us to learn, or even to conjecture, from whence
came this nearer world which we inhabit; what cause or agency made it
what it is, and on what powers depend its future fate? Who would not
desire this more ardently than any other conceivable knowledge, so long
as there appeared the slightest hope of attaining it? What would not one
give for any credible tidings from that mysterious region, any glimpse
into it which might enable us to see the smallest light through its
darkness, especially any theory of it which we could believe, and which
represented it as tenanted by a benignant and not a hostile influence?
But since we are able to penetrate into that region with the imagination
only, assisted by specious but inconclusive analogies derived from human
agency and design, imagination is free to fill up the vacancy with the
imagery most congenial to itself; sublime and elevating if it be a lofty
imagination, low and mean if it be a grovelling one.

Religion and poetry address themselves, at least in one of their
aspects, to the same part of the human constitution: they both supply
the same want, that of ideal conceptions grander and more beautiful than
we see realized in the prose of human life. Religion, as distinguished
from poetry, is the product of the craving to know whether these
imaginative conceptions have realities answering to them in some other
world than ours. The mind, in this state, eagerly catches at any rumours
respecting other worlds, especially when delivered by persons whom it
deems wiser than itself. To the poetry of the supernatural, comes to be
thus added a positive belief and expectation, which unpoetical minds can
share with the poetical. Belief in a God or Gods, and in a life after
death, becomes the canvas which every mind, according to its capacity,
covers with such ideal pictures as it can either invent or copy. In that
other life each hopes to find the good which he has failed to find on
earth, or the better which is suggested to him by the good which on
earth he has partially seen and known. More especially, this belief
supplies the finer minds with material for conceptions of beings more
awful than they can have known on earth, and more excellent than they
probably have known. So long as human life is insufficient to satisfy
human aspirations, so long there will be a craving for higher things,
which finds its most obvious satisfaction in religion. So long as
earthly life is full of sufferings, so long there will be need of
consolations, which the hope of heaven affords to the selfish, the love
of God to the tender and grateful.

The value, therefore, of religion to the individual, both in the past
and Edition: current; Page: [420] present, as a source of personal
satisfaction and of elevated feelings, is not to be disputed. But it has
still to be considered, whether in order to obtain this good, it is
necessary to travel beyond the boundaries of the world which we inhabit;
or whether the idealization of our earthly life, the cultivation of a
high conception of what it may be made, is not capable of supplying a
poetry, and, in the best sense of the word, a religion, equally fitted
to exalt the feelings, and (with the same aid from education) still
better calculated to ennoble the conduct, than any belief respecting the
unseen powers.

At the bare suggestion of such a possibility, many will exclaim, that
the short duration, the smallness and insignificance of life, if there
is no prolongation of it beyond what we see, makes it impossible that
great and elevated feelings can connect themselves with anything laid
out on so small a scale: that such a conception of life can match with
nothing higher than Epicurean feelings, and the Epicurean doctrine “Let
us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”[*]

Unquestionably, within certain limits, the maxim of the Epicureans is
sound, and applicable to much higher things than eating and drinking. To
make the most of the present for all good purposes, those of enjoyment
among the rest; to keep under control those mental dispositions which
lead to undue sacrifice of present good for a future which may never
arrive; to cultivate the habit of deriving pleasure from things within
our reach, rather than from the too eager pursuit of objects at a
distance; to think all time wasted which is not spent either in personal
pleasure or in doing things useful to oneself or others; these are wise
maxims, and the “carpe diem” doctrine, carried thus far, is a rational
and legitimate corollary from the shortness of life. But that because
life is short we should care for nothing beyond it, is not a legitimate
conclusion; and the supposition, that human beings in general are not
capable of feeling deep and even the deepest interest in things which
they will never live to see, is a view of human nature as false as it is
abject. Let it be remembered that if individual life is short, the life
of the human species is not short; its indefinite duration is
practically equivalent to endlessness; and being combined with
indefinite capability of improvement, it offers to the imagination and
sympathies a large enough object to satisfy any reasonable demand for
grandeur of aspiration. If such an object appears small to a mind
accustomed to dream of infinite and eternal beatitudes, it will expand
into far other dimensions when those baseless fancies shall have receded
into the past.

Nor let it be thought that only the more eminent of our species, in mind
and heart, are capable of identifying their feelings with the entire
life of the human race. This noble capability implies indeed a certain
cultivation, but not superior to that which might be, and certainly will
be if human improvement Edition: current; Page: [421] continues, the lot
of all. Objects far smaller than this, and equally confined within the
limits of the earth (though not within those of a single human life),
have been found sufficient to inspire large masses and long successions
of mankind with an enthusiasm capable of ruling the conduct, and
colouring the whole life. Rome was to the entire Roman people, for many
generations as much a religion as Jehovah was to the Jews; nay, much
more, for they never fell off from their worship as the Jews did from
theirs. And the Romans, otherwise a selfish people, with no very
remarkable faculties of any kind except the purely practical, derived
nevertheless from this one idea a certain greatness of soul, which
manifests itself in all their history where that idea is concerned and
nowhere else, and has earned for them the large share of admiration, in
other respects not at all deserved, which has been felt for them by most
noble-minded persons from that time to this.

When we consider how ardent a sentiment, in favourable circumstances of
education, the love of country has become, we cannot judge it impossible
that the love of that larger country, the world, may be nursed into
similar strength, both as a source of elevated emotion and as a
principle of duty. He who needs any other lesson on this subject than
the whole course of ancient history affords, let him read Cicero de
Officiis. It cannot be said that the standard of morals laid down in
that celebrated treatise is a high standard. To our notions it is on
many points unduly lax, and admits capitulations of conscience. But on
the subject of duty to our country there is no compromise. That any man,
with the smallest pretensions to virtue, could hesitate to sacrifice
life, reputation, family, everything valuable to him, to the love of
country is a supposition which this eminent interpreter of Greek and
Roman morality cannot entertain for a moment. If, then, persons could be
trained, as we see they were, not only to believe in theory that the
good of their country was an object to which all others ought to yield,
but to feel this practically as the grand duty of life, so also may they
be made to feel the same absolute obligation towards the universal good.
A morality grounded on large and wise views of the good of the whole,
neither sacrificing the individual to the aggregate nor the aggregate to
the individual, but giving to duty on the one hand and to freedom and
spontaneity on the other their proper province, would derive its power
in the superior natures from sympathy and benevolence and the passion
for ideal excellence: in the inferior, from the same feelings cultivated
up to the measure of their capacity, with the superadded force of shame.
This exalted morality would not depend for its ascendancy on any hope of
reward; but the reward which might be looked for, and the thought of
which would be a consolation in suffering, and a support in moments of
weakness, would not be a problematical future existence, but the
approbation, in this, of those whom we respect, and ideally of all
those, dead or living, whom we admire or venerate. For, the thought that
our dead parents or friends would have Edition: current; Page: [422]
approved our conduct is a scarcely less powerful motive than the
knowledge that our living ones do approve it: and the idea that
Socrates, or Howard or Washington, or Antoninus, or Christ, would have
sympathized with us, or that we are attempting to do our part in the
spirit in which they did theirs, has operated on the very best minds, as
a strong incentive to act up to their highest feelings and convictions.

To call these sentiments by the name morality, exclusively of any other
title, is claiming too little for them. They are a real religion; of
which, as of other religions, outward good works (the utmost meaning
usually suggested by the word morality) are only a part, and are indeed
rather the fruits of the religion than the religion itself. The essence
of religion is the strong and earnest direction of the emotions and
desires towards an ideal object, recognized as of the highest
excellence, and as rightfully paramount over all selfish objects of
desire. This condition is fulfilled by the Religion of Humanity in as
eminent a degree, and in as high a sense, as by the supernatural
religions even in their best manifestations, and far more so than in any
of their others.

Much more might be added on this topic; but enough has been said to
convince any one, who can distinguish between the intrinsic capacities
of human nature and the forms in which those capacities happen to have
been historically developed, that the sense of unity with mankind, and a
deep feeling for the general good, may be cultivated into a sentiment
and a principle capable of fulfilling every important function of
religion and itself justly entitled to the name. I will now further
maintain, that it is not only capable of fulfilling these functions, but
would fulfil them better than any form whatever of supernaturalism. It
is not only entitled to be called a religion: it is a better religion
than any of those which are ordinarily called by that title.

For, in the first place, it is disinterested. It carries the thoughts
and feelings out of self, and fixes them on an unselfish object, loved
and pursued as an end for its own sake. The religions which deal in
promises and threats regarding a future life, do exactly the contrary:
they fasten down the thoughts to the person’s own posthumous interests;
they tempt him to regard the performance of his duties to others mainly
as a means to his own personal salvation; and are one of the most
serious obstacles to the great purpose of moral culture, the
strengthening of the unselfish and weakening of the selfish element in
our nature; since they hold out to the imagination selfish good and evil
of such tremendous magnitude, that it is difficult for any one who fully
believes in their reality, to have feeling or interest to spare for any
other distant and ideal object. It is true, many of the most unselfish
of mankind have been believers in supernaturalism, because their minds
have not dwelt on the threats and promises of their religion, but
chiefly on the idea of a Being to whom they looked up with a confiding
love, and in whose hands they willingly left all that related especially
to themselves. But in its effect on Edition: current; Page: [423] common
minds, what now goes by the name of religion operates mainly through the
feelings of self-interest. Even the Christ of the Gospels holds out the
direct promise of reward from heaven as a primary inducement to the
noble and beautiful beneficence towards our fellow-creatures which he so
impressively inculcates. This is a radical inferiority of the best
supernatural religions, compared with the Religion of Humanity; since
the greatest thing which moral influences can do for the amelioration of
human nature, is to cultivate the unselfish feelings in the only mode in
which any active principle in human nature can be effectually
cultivated, namely by habitual exercise: but the habit of expecting to
be rewarded in another life for our conduct in this, makes even virtue
itself no longer an exercise of the unselfish feelings.

Secondly, it is an immense abatement from the worth of the old religions
as means of elevating and improving human character, that it is nearly,
if not quite impossible for them to produce their best moral effects,
unless we suppose a certain torpidity, if not positive twist in the
intellectual faculties. For it is impossible that any one who habitually
thinks, and who is unable to blunt his inquiring intellect by sophistry,
should be able without misgiving to go on ascribing absolute perfection
to the author and ruler of so clumsily made and capriciously governed a
creation as this planet and the life of its inhabitants. The adoration
of such a being cannot be with the whole heart, unless the heart is
first considerably sophisticated. The worship must either be greatly
overclouded by doubt, and occasionally quite darkened by it, or the
moral sentiments must sink to the low level of the ordinances of Nature:
the worshipper must learn to think blind partiality, atrocious cruelty,
and reckless injustice, not blemishes in an object of worship, since all
these abound to excess in the commonest phenomena of Nature. It is true,
the God who is worshipped is not, generally speaking, the God of Nature
only, but also the God of some revelation; and the character of the
revelation will greatly modify and, it may be, improve the moral
influences of the religion. This is emphatically true of Christianity;
since the Author of the Sermon on the Mount is assuredly a far more
benignant Being than the Author of Nature. But unfortunately, the
believer in the christian revelation is obliged to believe that the same
being is the author of both. This, unless he resolutely averts his mind
from the subject, or practises the act of quieting his conscience by
sophistry, involves him in moral perplexities without end; since the
ways of his Deity in Nature are on many occasions totally at variance
with the precepts, as he believes, of the same Deity in the Gospel. He
who comes out with least moral damage from this embarrassment, is
probably the one who never attempts to reconcile the two standards with
one another, but confesses to himself that the purposes of Providence
are mysterious, that its ways are not our ways,[*] that its justice and
goodness are not the justice Edition: current; Page: [424] and goodness
which we can conceive and which it befits us to practise. When, however,
this is the feeling of the believer, the worship of the Deity ceases to
be the adoration of abstract moral perfection. It becomes the bowing
down to a gigantic image of something not fit for us to imitate. It is
the worship of power only.

I say nothing of the moral difficulties and perversions involved in
revelation itself; though even in the Christianity of the Gospels, at
least in its ordinary interpretation, there are some of so flagrant a
character as almost to outweigh all the beauty and benignity and moral
greatness which so eminently distinguish the sayings and character of
Christ. The recognition, for example, of the object of highest worship,
in a being who could make a Hell; and who could create countless
generations of human beings with the certain foreknowledge that he was
creating them for this fate. Is there any moral enormity which might not
be justified by imitation of such a Deity? And is it possible to adore
such a one without a frightful distortion of the standard of right and
wrong? Any other of the outrages to the most ordinary justice and
humanity involved in the common christian conception of the moral
character of God, sinks into insignificance beside this dreadful
idealization of wickedness. Most of them too, are happily not so
unequivocally deducible from the very words of Christ as to be
indisputably a part of christian doctrine. It may be doubted, for
instance, whether Christianity is really responsible for atonement and
redemption, original sin and vicarious punishment: and the same may be
said respecting the doctrine which makes belief in the divine mission of
Christ a necessary condition of salvation. It is nowhere represented
that Christ himself made this statement, except in the huddled-up
account of the Resurrection contained in the concluding verses of St.
Mark, which some critics (I believe the best), consider to be an
interpolation. Again, the proposition that “the powers that be are
ordained of God”[*] and the whole series of corollaries deduced from it
in the Epistles, belong to St. Paul, and must stand or fall with
Paulism, not with Christianity. But there is one moral contradiction
inseparable from every form of Christianity, which no ingenuity can
resolve, and no sophistry explain away. It is, that so precious a gift,
bestowed on a few, should have been withheld from the many: that
countless millions of human beings should have been allowed to live and
die, to sin and suffer, without the one thing needful, the divine remedy
for sin and suffering, which it would have cost the Divine Giver as
little to have vouchsafed to all, as to have bestowed by special grace
upon a favoured minority. Add to this, that the divine message, assuming
it to be such, has been authenticated by credentials so insufficient,
that they fail to convince a large proportion of the strongest and most
cultivated minds, and the tendency to disbelieve them appears to grow
with the growth of scientific Edition: current; Page: [425] knowledge
and critical discrimination. He who can believe these to be the
intentional shortcomings of a perfectly good Being, must impose silence
on every prompting of the sense of goodness and justice as received
among men.

It is, no doubt, possible (and there are many instances of it) to
worship with the intensest devotion either Deity, that of Nature or of
the Gospel, without any perversion of the moral sentiments: but this
must be by fixing the attention exclusively on what is beautiful and
beneficent in the precepts and spirit of the Gospel and in the
dispensations of Nature, and putting all that is the reverse as entirely
aside as if it did not exist. Accordingly, this simple and innocent
faith can only, as I have said, co-exist with a torpid and inactive
state of the speculative faculties. For a person of exercised intellect,
there is no way of attaining anything equivalent to it, save by
sophistication and perversion, either of the understanding or of the
conscience. It may almost always be said both of sects and of
individuals, who derive their morality from religion, that the better
logicians they are, the worse moralists.

One only form of belief in the supernatural—one only theory respecting
the origin and government of the universe—stands wholly clear both of
intellectual contradiction and of moral obliquity. It is that which,
resigning irrevocably the idea of an omnipotent creator, regards Nature
and Life not as the expression throughout of the moral character and
purpose of the Deity, but as the product of a struggle between
contriving goodness and an intractable material, as was believed by
Plato,[*] or a Principle of Evil, as was the doctrine of the Manicheans.
A creed like this, which I have known to be devoutly held by at least
one cultivated and conscientious person of our own day, allows it to be
believed that all the mass of evil which exists was undesigned by, and
exists not by the appointment of, but in spite of the Being whom we are
called upon to worship. A virtuous human being assumes in this theory
the exalted character of a fellow-labourer with the Highest, a
fellow-combatant in the great strife; contributing his little, which by
the aggregation of many like himself becomes much, towards that
progressive ascendancy, and ultimately complete triumph of good over
evil, which history points to, and which this doctrine teaches us to
regard as planned by the Being to whom we owe all the benevolent
contrivance we behold in Nature. Against the moral tendency of this
creed no possible objection can lie: it can produce on whoever can
succeed in believing it, no other than an ennobling effect. The evidence
for it, indeed, if evidence it can be called, is too shadowy and
unsubstantial, and the promises it holds out too distant and uncertain,
to admit of its being a permanent substitute for the religion of
humanity; but the two may be held in conjunction: and he to whom ideal
good, and the progress of the world towards it, are already a religion,
even though that other creed may seem to him a belief not grounded on
evidence, Edition: current; Page: [426] is at liberty to indulge the
pleasing and encouraging thought, that its truth is possible. Apart from
all dogmatic belief, there is for those who need it, an ample domain in
the region of the imagination which may be planted with possibilities,
with hypotheses which cannot be known to be false; and when there is
anything in the appearances of nature to favour them, as in this case
there is (for whatever force we attach to the analogies of Nature with
the effects of human contrivance, there is no disputing the remark of
Paley, that what is good in nature exhibits those analogies much oftener
than what is evil),[*] the contemplation of these possibilities is a
legitimate indulgence, capable of bearing its part, with other
influences, in feeding and animating the tendency of the feelings and
impulses towards good.

One advantage, such as it is, the supernatural religions must always
possess over the Religion of Humanity; the prospect they hold out to the
individual of a life after death. For, though the scepticism of the
understanding does not necessarily exclude the Theism of the imagination
and feelings, and this, again, gives opportunity for a hope that the
power which has done so much for us may be able and willing to do this
also, such vague possibility must ever stop far short of a conviction.
It remains then to estimate the value of this element—the prospect of a
world to come—as a constituent of earthly happiness. I cannot but think
that as the condition of mankind becomes improved, as they grow happier
in their lives, and more capable of deriving happiness from unselfish
sources, they will care less and less for this flattering expectation.
It is not, naturally or generally, the happy who are the most anxious
either for a prolongation of the present life, or for a life hereafter:
it is those who never have been happy. They who have had their happiness
can bear to part with existence: but it is hard to die without ever
having lived. When mankind cease to need a future existence as a
consolation for the sufferings of the present, it will have lost its
chief value to them, for themselves. I am now speaking of the unselfish.
Those who are so wrapped up in self that they are unable to identify
their feelings with anything which will survive them, or to feel their
life prolonged in their younger contemporaries and in all who help to
carry on the progressive movement of human affairs, require the notion
of another selfish life beyond the grave, to enable them to keep up any
interest in existence, since the present life, as its termination
approaches, dwindles into something too insignificant to be worth caring
about. But if the Religion of Humanity were as sedulously cultivated as
the supernatural religions are (and there is no difficulty in conceiving
that it might be much more so), all who had received the customary
amount of moral cultivation would up to the hour of death live ideally
in the life of those who are to follow them: and though doubtless they
would often willingly Edition: current; Page: [427] survive as
individuals for a much longer period than the present duration of life,
it appears to me probable that after a length of time different in
different persons, they would have had enough of existence, and would
gladly lie down and take their eternal rest. Meanwhile and without
looking so far forward, we may remark, that those who believe the
immortality of the soul, generally quit life with fully as much, if not
more, reluctance, as those who have no such expectation. The mere
cessation of existence is no evil to any one: the idea is only
formidable through the illusion of imagination which makes one conceive
oneself as if one were alive and feeling oneself dead. What is odious in
death is not death itself, but the act of dying, and its lugubrious
accompaniments: all of which must be equally undergone by the believer
in immortality. Nor can I perceive that the sceptic loses by his
scepticism any real and valuable consolation except one; the hope of
reunion with those dear to him who have ended their earthly life before
him. That loss, indeed, is neither to be denied nor extenuated. In many
cases it is beyond the reach of comparison or estimate; and will always
suffice to keep alive, in the more sensitive natures, the imaginative
hope of a futurity which, if there is nothing to prove, there is as
little in our knowledge and experience to contradict.

History, so far as we know it, bears out the opinion, that mankind can
perfectly well do without the belief in a heaven. The Greeks had
anything but a tempting idea of a future state. Their Elysian fields
held out very little attraction to their feelings and imagination.
Achilles in the Odyssey expressed a very natural, and no doubt a very
common sentiment, when he said that he would rather be on earth the serf
of a needy master, than reign over the whole kingdom of the dead.[*] And
the pensive character so striking in the address of the dying emperor
Hadrian to his soul, gives evidence that the popular conception had not
undergone much variation during that long interval. Yet we neither find
that the Greeks enjoyed life less, nor feared death more, than other
people. The Buddhist religion counts probably at this day a greater
number of votaries than either the Christian or the Mahomedan. The
Buddhist creed recognises many modes of punishment in a future life, or
rather lives, by the transmigration of the soul into new bodies of men
or animals. But the blessing from Heaven which it proposes as a reward,
to be earned by perseverance in the highest order of virtuous life, is
annihilation; the cessation, at least, of all conscious or separate
existence. It is impossible to mistake in this religion, the work of
legislators and moralists endeavouring to supply supernatural motives
for the conduct which they were anxious to encourage; and they could
find nothing more transcendant to hold out as the capital prize to be
won by the mightiest efforts of labour and self-denial, Edition:
current; Page: [428] than what we are so often told is the terrible idea
of annihilation. Surely this is a proof that the idea is not really or
naturally terrible; that not philosophers only, but the common order of
mankind, can easily reconcile themselves to it, and even consider it as
a good; and that it is no unnatural part of the idea of a happy life,
that life itself be laid down, after the best that it can give has been
fully enjoyed through a long lapse of time; when all its pleasures, even
those of benevolence, are familiar, and nothing untasted and unknown is
left to stimulate curiosity and keep up the desire of prolonged
existence. It seems to me not only possible but probable, that in a
higher, and, above all, a happier condition of human life, not
annihilation but immortality may be the burdensome idea; and that human
nature, though pleased with the present, and by no means impatient to
quit it, would find comfort and not sadness in the thought that it is
not chained through eternity to a conscious existence which it cannot be
assured that it will always wish to preserve.

Edition: current; Page: [429]


Theism


PART I


INTRODUCTION

the contest which subsists from of old between believers and unbelievers
in natural and revealed religion, has, like other permanent contests,
varied materially in its character from age to age; and the present
generation, at least in the higher regions of controversy, shows, as
compared with the 18th and the beginning of the 19th century, a marked
alteration in the aspect of the dispute. One feature of this change is
so apparent as to be generally acknowledged; the more softened temper in
which the debate is conducted on the part of unbelievers. The
reactionary violence, provoked by the intolerance of the other side, has
in a great measure exhausted itself. Experience has abated the ardent
hopes once entertained of the regeneration of the human race by merely
negative doctrine—by the destruction of superstition. The philosophical
study of history, one of the most important creations of recent times,
has rendered possible an impartial estimate of the doctrines and
institutions of the past, from a relative instead of an absolute point
of view—as incidents of human development at which it is useless to
grumble, and which may deserve admiration and gratitude for their
effects in the past, even though they may be thought incapable of
rendering similar services to the future. And the position assigned to
Christianity or Theism by the more instructed of those who reject the
supernatural, is that of things once of great value but which can now be
done without; rather than, as formerly, of things misleading and noxious
ab initio.

Along with this change in the moral attitude of thoughtful unbelievers
towards the religious ideas of mankind, a corresponding difference has
manifested itself in their intellectual attitude. The war against
religious beliefs, in the last century was carried on principally on the
ground of common sense or of logic; in the present age, on the ground of
science. The progress of the physical sciences is considered to have
established, by conclusive evidence, Edition: current; Page: [430]
matters of fact with which the religious traditions of mankind are not
reconcileable; while the science of human nature and history, is
considered to show that the creeds of the past are natural growths of
the human mind, in particular stages of its career, destined to
disappear and give place to other convictions in a more advanced stage.
In the progress of discussion this last class of considerations seems
even to be superseding those which address themselves directly to the
question of truth. Religions tend to be discussed, at least by those who
reject them, less as intrinsically true or false than as products thrown
up by certain states of civilization, and which, like the animal and
vegetable productions of a geological period perish in those which
succeed it from the cessation of the conditions necessary to their
continued existence.

This tendency of recent speculation to look upon human opinions
preeminently from an historical point of view, as facts obeying laws of
their own, and requiring, like other observed facts, an historical or a
scientific explanation (a tendency not confined to religious subjects),
is by no means to be blamed, but to be applauded; not solely as drawing
attention to an important and previously neglected aspect of human
opinions, but because it has a real though indirect bearing upon the
question of their truth. For, whatever opinion a person may adopt on any
subject that admits of controversy, his assurance if he be a cautious
thinker cannot be complete unless he is able to account for the
existence of the opposite opinion. To ascribe it to the weakness of the
human understanding is an explanation which cannot be sufficient for
such a thinker, for he will be slow to assume that he has himself a less
share of that infirmity than the rest of mankind and that error is more
likely to be on the other side than on his own. In his examination of
evidence, the persuasion of others, perhaps of mankind in general, is
one of the data of the case—one of the phenomena to be accounted for. As
the human intellect though weak is not essentially perverted, there is a
certain presumption of the truth of any opinion held by many human
minds, requiring to be rebutted by assigning some other real or possible
cause for its prevalence. And this consideration has a special relevancy
to the inquiry concerning the foundations of theism, inasmuch as no
argument for the truth of theism is more commonly invoked or more
confidently relied on, than the general assent of mankind.

But while giving its full value to this historical treatment of the
religious question, we ought not therefore to let it supersede the
dogmatic. The most important quality of an opinion on any momentous
subject is its truth or falsity, which to us resolves itself into the
sufficiency of the evidence on which it rests. It is indispensable that
the subject of religion should from time to time be reviewed as a
strictly scientific question, and that its evidences should be tested by
the same scientific methods, and on the same principles Edition:
current; Page: [431] as those of any of the speculative conclusions
drawn by physical science. It being granted then that the legitimate
conclusions of science are entitled to prevail over all opinions,
however widely held, which conflict with them, and that the canons of
scientific evidence which the successes and failures of two thousand
years have established, are applicable to all subjects on which
knowledge is attainable, let us proceed to consider what place there is
for religious beliefs on the platform of science; what evidences they
can appeal to, such as science can recognize, and what foundation there
is for the doctrines of religion, considered as scientific theorems.

In this inquiry we of course begin with Natural Religion, the doctrine
of the existence and attributes of God.


THEISM

Though I have defined the problem of Natural Theology, to be that of the
existence of God or of a God, rather than of Gods, there is the amplest
historical evidence that the belief in Gods is immeasurably more natural
to the human mind than the belief in one author and ruler of nature; and
that this more elevated belief is, compared with the former, an
artificial product, requiring (except when impressed by early education)
a considerable amount of intellectual culture before it can be reached.
For a long time, the supposition appeared forced and unnatural that the
diversity we see in the operations of nature can all be the work of a
single will. To the untaught mind, and to all minds in pre-scientific
times, the phenomena of nature seem to be the result of forces
altogether heterogeneous, each taking its course quite independently of
the others; and though to attribute them to conscious wills is eminently
natural, the natural tendency is to suppose as many such independent
wills as there are distinguishable forces of sufficient importance and
interest to have been remarked and named. There is no tendency in
polytheism as such to transform itself spontaneously into monotheism. It
is true that in polytheistic systems generally the deity whose special
attributes inspire the greatest degree of awe, is usually supposed to
have a power of controlling the other deities; and even in the most
degraded perhaps of all such systems, the Hindoo, adulation heaps upon
the divinity who is the immediate object of adoration, epithets like
those habitual to believers in a single God. But there is no real
acknowledgment of one Governor. Every God normally rules his particular
department though there may be a still stronger God whose power when he
chooses to exert it can frustrate the purposes of the inferior divinity.
There could be no real belief in one Creator and Governor until mankind
had begun to see in the apparently confused phenomena which surrounded
them, a system capable of being viewed as the Edition: current; Page:
[432] possible working out of a single plan. This conception of the
world was perhaps anticipated (though less frequently than is often
supposed) by individuals of exceptional genius, but it could only become
common after a rather long cultivation of scientific thought.

The special mode in which scientific study operates to instil Monotheism
in place of the more natural Polytheism, is in no way mysterious. The
specific effect of science is to show by accumulating evidence, that
every event in nature is connected by laws with some fact or facts which
preceded it, or in other words, depends for its existence on some
antecedent; but yet not so strictly on one, as not to be liable to
frustration or modification from others: for these distinct chains of
causation are so entangled with one another; the action of each cause is
so interfered with by other causes, though each acts according to its
own fixed law; that every effect is truly the result rather of the
aggregate of all causes in existence than of any one only; and nothing
takes place in the world of our experience without spreading a
perceptible influence of some sort through a greater or less portion of
Nature, and making perhaps every portion of it slightly different from
what it would have been if that event had not taken place. Now, when
once the double conviction has found entry into the mind—that every
event depends on antecedents; and at the same time that to bring it
about many antecedents must concur, perhaps all the antecedents in
Nature, insomuch that a slight difference in any one of them might have
prevented the phenomenon, or materially altered its character—the
conviction follows that no one event, certainly no one kind of events,
can be absolutely preordained or governed by any Being but one who holds
in his hand the reins of all Nature and not of some department only. At
least if a plurality be supposed, it is necessary to assume so complete
a concert of action and unity of will among them that the difference is
for most purposes immaterial between such a theory and that of the
absolute unity of the Godhead.

The reason, then, why Monotheism may be accepted as the representative
of Theism in the abstract, is not so much because it is the Theism of
all the more improved portions of the human race, as because it is the
only Theism which can claim for itself any footing on scientific ground.
Every other theory of the government of the universe by supernatural
beings, is inconsistent either with the carrying on of that government
through a continual series of natural antecedents according to fixed
laws, or with the interdependence of each of these series upon all the
rest, which are the two most general results of science.

Setting out therefore from the scientific view of nature as one
connected system, or united whole, united not like a web composed of
separate threads in passive juxtaposition with one another, but rather
like the human or animal frame, an apparatus kept going by perpetual
action and reaction Edition: current; Page: [433] among all its parts;
it must be acknowledged that the question, to which Theism is an answer,
is at least a very natural one, and issues from an obvious want of the
human mind. Accustomed as we are to find, in proportion to our means of
observation, a definite beginning to each individual fact; and since
wherever there is a beginning we find that there was an antecedent fact
(called by us a cause), a fact but for which, the phenomenon which thus
commences would not have been; it was impossible that the human mind
should not ask itself whether the whole, of which these particular
phenomena are a part, had not also a beginning, and if so, whether that
beginning was not an origin; whether there was not something antecedent
to the whole series of causes and effects that we term Nature, and but
for which Nature itself would not have been. From the first recorded
speculation this question has never remained without an hypothetical
answer. The only answer which has long continued to afford satisfaction
is Theism.

Looking at the problem, as it is our business to do, merely as a
scientific inquiry, it resolves itself into two questions. First: Is the
theory, which refers the origin of all the phenomena of nature to the
will of a Creator, consistent or not with the ascertained results of
science? Secondly, assuming it to be consistent, will its proofs bear to
be tested by the principles of evidence and canons of belief by which
our long experience of scientific inquiry has proved the necessity of
being guided?

First, then: there is one conception of Theism which is consistent,
another which is radically inconsistent, with the most general truths
that have been made known to us by scientific investigation.

The one which is inconsistent is the conception of a God governing the
world by acts of variable will. The one which is consistent, is the
conception of a God governing the world by invariable laws.

The primitive, and even in our own day the vulgar, conception of the
divine rule, is that the one God, like the many Gods of antiquity,
carries on the government of the world by special decrees, made pro hac
vice. Although supposed to be omniscient as well as omnipotent, he is
thought not to make up his mind until the moment of action; or at least
not so conclusively, but that his intentions may be altered up to the
very last moment by appropriate solicitation. Without entering into the
difficulties of reconciling this view of the divine government with the
prescience and the perfect wisdom ascribed to the Deity, we may content
ourselves with the fact that it contradicts what experience has taught
us of the manner in which things actually take place. The phenomena of
Nature do take place according to general laws. They do originate from
definite natural antecedents. Therefore if their ultimate origin is
derived from a will, that will must have established the general laws
and willed the antecedents. If there be a Creator, his intention must
have been that events should depend upon antecedents and be produced
according to Edition: current; Page: [434] fixed laws. But this being
conceded, there is nothing in scientific experience inconsistent with
the belief that those laws and sequences are themselves due to a divine
will. Neither are we obliged to suppose that the divine will exerted
itself once for all, and after putting a power into the system which
enabled it to go on of itself, has ever since let it alone. Science
contains nothing repugnant to the supposition that every event which
takes place results from a specific volition of the presiding Power,
provided that this Power adheres in its particular volitions to general
laws laid down by itself. The common opinion is that this hypothesis
tends more to the glory of the Deity than the supposition that the
universe was made so that it could go on of itself. There have been
thinkers however—of no ordinary eminence (of whom Leibnitz was one)—who
thought the last the only supposition worthy of the Deity, and protested
against likening God to a clockmaker whose clock will not go unless he
puts his hand to the machinery and keeps it going. With such
considerations we have no concern in this place. We are looking at the
subject not from the point of view of reverence but from that of
science; and with science both these suppositions as to the mode of the
divine action are equally consistent.

We must now, however, pass to the next question. There is nothing to
disprove the creation and government of Nature by a sovereign will; but
is there anything to prove it? Of what nature are its evidences; and
weighed in the scientific balance, what is their value?


THE EVIDENCES OF THEISM

The evidences of a Creator are not only of several distinct kinds but of
such diverse characters, that they are adapted to minds of very
different descriptions, and it is hardly possible for any mind to be
equally impressed by them all. The familiar classification of them into
proofs à priori and à posteriori, marks that when looked at in a purely
scientific view they belong to different schools of thought. Accordingly
though the unthoughtful believer whose creed really rests on authority
gives an equal welcome to all plausible arguments in support of the
belief in which he has been brought up, philosophers who have had to
make a choice between the à priori and the à posteriori methods in
general science seldom fail, while insisting on one of these modes of
support for religion, to speak with more or less of disparagement of the
other. It is our duty in the present inquiry to maintain complete
impartiality and to give a fair examination to both. At the same time I
entertain a strong conviction that one of the two modes of argument is
in its nature scientific, the other not only unscientific but condemned
by science. The scientific argument is that which reasons from the facts
and analogies of human experience as a geologist does when he infers the
past states of our terrestrial globe, Edition: current; Page: [435] or
an astronomical observer when he draws conclusions respecting the
physical composition of the heavenly bodies. This is the à posteriori
method, the principal application of which to Theism is the argument (as
it is called) of design. The mode of reasoning which I call
unscientific, though in the opinion of some thinkers it is also a
legitimate mode of scientific procedure, is that which infers external
objective facts from ideas or convictions of our minds. I say this
independently of any opinion of my own respecting the origin of our
ideas or convictions; for even if we were unable to point out any manner
in which the idea of God, for example, can have grown up from the
impressions of experience, still the idea can only prove the idea, and
not the objective fact, unless indeed the fact is supposed (agreeably to
the book of Genesis) to have been handed down by tradition from a time
when there was direct personal intercourse with the Divine Being; in
which case the argument is no longer à priori. The supposition that an
idea, or a wish, or a need, even if native to the mind proves the
reality of a corresponding object, derives all its plausibility from the
belief already in our minds that we were made by a benignant Being who
would not have implanted in us a groundless belief, or a want which he
did not afford us the means of satisfying; and is therefore a palpable
petitio principii if adduced as an argument to support the very belief
which it presupposes.

At the same time, it must be admitted that all à priori systems whether
in philosophy or religion, do, in some sense profess to be founded on
experience, since though they affirm the possibility of arriving at
truths which transcend experience, they yet make the facts of experience
their starting point (as what other starting point is possible?). They
are entitled to consideration in so far as it can be shown that
experience gives any countenance either to them or to their method of
inquiry. Professedly à priori arguments are not unfrequently of a mixed
nature, partaking in some degree of the à posteriori character, and may
often be said to be à posteriori arguments in disguise; the à priori
considerations acting chiefly in the way of making some particular à
posteriori argument tell for more than its worth. This is emphatically
true of the argument for Theism which I shall first examine, the
necessity of a First Cause. For this has in truth a wide basis of
experience in the universality of the relation of Cause and Effect among
the phenomena of nature; while at the same time, theological
philosophers have not been content to let it rest upon this basis, but
have affirmed Causation as a truth of reason apprehended intuitively by
its own light.


ARGUMENT FOR A FIRST CAUSE

The argument for a First Cause admits of being, and is, presented as a
conclusion from the whole of human experience. Everything that we know
(it Edition: current; Page: [436] is argued) had a cause, and owed its
existence to that cause. How then can it be but that the world, which is
but a name for the aggregate of all that we know, has a cause to which
it is indebted for its existence?

The fact of experience however, when correctly expressed, turns out to
be, not that everything which we know derives its existence from a
cause, but only every event or change. There is in Nature a permanent
element, and also a changeable: the changes are always the effects of
previous changes; the permanent existences, so far as we know, are not
effects at all. It is true we are accustomed to say not only of events,
but of objects, that they are produced by causes, as water by the union
of hydrogen and oxygen. But by this we only mean that when they begin to
exist, their beginning is the effect of a cause. But their beginning to
exist is not an object, it is an event. If it be objected that the cause
of a thing’s beginning to exist may be said with propriety to be the
cause of the thing itself, I shall not quarrel with the expression. But
that which in an object begins to exist, is that in it which belongs to
the changeable element in nature; the outward form and the properties
depending on mechanical or chemical combinations of its component parts.
There is in every object another and a permanent element, viz., the
specific elementary substance or substances of which it consists and
their inherent properties. These are not known to us as beginning to
exist: within the range of human knowledge they had no beginning,
consequently no cause; though they themselves are causes or con-causes
of everything that takes place. Experience therefore, affords no
evidences, not even analogies, to justify our extending to the
apparently immutable, a generalization grounded only on our observation
of the changeable.

As a fact of experience, then, causation cannot legitimately be extended
to the material universe itself, but only to its changeable phenomena;
of these, indeed, causes may be affirmed without any exception. But what
causes? The cause of every change is a prior change; and such it cannot
but be; for if there were no new antecedent, there would not be a new
consequent. If the state of facts which brings the phenomenon into
existence, had existed always or for an indefinite duration, the effect
also would have existed always or been produced an indefinite time ago.
It is thus a necessary part of the fact of causation, within the sphere
of our experience, that the causes as well as the effects had a
beginning in time, and were themselves caused. It would seem therefore
that our experience, instead of furnishing an argument for a first
cause, is repugnant to it; and that the very essence of causation as it
exists within the limits of our knowledge, is incompatible with a First
Cause.

But it is necessary to look more particularly into the matter, and
analyse more closely the nature of the causes of which mankind have
experience. For if it should turn out that though all causes have a
beginning, there is in all of them a permanent element which had no
beginning, this permanent element may with some justice be termed a
first or universal cause, inasmuch as Edition: current; Page: [437]
though not sufficient of itself to cause anything, it enters as a
con-cause into all causation. Now it happens that the last result of
physical inquiry, derived from the converging evidences of all branches
of physical science, does, if it holds good, land us so far as the
material world is concerned, in a result of this sort. Whenever a
physical phenomenon is traced to its cause, that cause when analysed is
found to be a certain quantum of Force, combined with certain
collocations. And the last great generalization of science, the
Conservation of Force, teaches us that the variety in the effects
depends partly upon the amount of the force, and partly upon the
diversity of the collocations. The force itself is essentially one and
the same; and there exists of it in nature a fixed quantity, which (if
the theory be true) is never increased or diminished. Here then we find,
even in the changes of material nature, a permanent element; to all
appearance the very one of which we were in quest. This it is apparently
to which if to anything we must assign the character of First Cause, the
cause of the material universe. For all effects may be traced up to it,
while it cannot be traced up, by our experience, to anything beyond: its
transformations alone can be so traced, and of them the cause always
includes the force itself: the same quantity of force, in some previous
form. It would seem then that in the only sense in which experience
supports in any shape the doctrine of a First Cause, viz., as the
primæval and universal element in all causes, the First Cause can be no
other than Force.

We are, however, by no means at the end of the question. On the
contrary, the greatest stress of the argument is exactly at the point
which we have now reached. For it is maintained that Mind is the only
possible cause of Force; or rather perhaps, that Mind is a Force, and
that all other force must be derived from it inasmuch as mind is the
only thing which is capable of originating change. This is said to be
the lesson of human experience. In the phenomena of inanimate nature the
force which works is always a pre-existing force, not originated, but
transferred. One physical object moves another by giving out to it the
force by which it has first been itself moved. The wind communicates to
the waves, or to a windmill, or a ship, part of the motion which has
been given to itself by some other agent. In voluntary action alone we
see a commencement, an origination of motion; since all other causes
appear incapable of this origination experience is in favour of the
conclusion that all the motion in existence owed its beginning to this
one cause, voluntary agency, if not that of man, then of a more powerful
Being.

This argument is a very old one. It is to be found in Plato; not as
might have been expected, in the Phædon, where the arguments are not
such as would now be deemed of any weight, but in his latest production,
the Leges.[*] And it is still one of the most telling arguments with the
more metaphysical class of defenders of Natural Theology.

Edition: current; Page: [438]
Now, in the first place, if there be truth in the doctrine of the
Conservation of Force, in other words the constancy of the total amount
of Force in existence, this doctrine does not change from true to false
when it reaches the field of voluntary agency. The will does not, any
more than other causes, create Force: granting that it originates
motion, it has no means of doing so but by converting into that
particular manifestation a portion of Force which already existed in
other forms. It is known that the source from which this portion of
Force is derived, is chiefly, or entirely, the Force evolved in the
processes of chemical composition and decomposition which constitute the
body of nutrition: the force so liberated becomes a fund upon which
every muscular and even every merely nervous action, as of the brain in
thought, is a draft. It is in this sense only that, according to the
best lights of science, volition is an originating cause. Volition,
therefore, does not answer to the idea of a First Cause; since Force
must in every instance be assumed as prior to it; and there is not the
slightest colour, derived from experience, for supposing Force itself to
have been created by a volition. As far as anything can be concluded
from human experience Force has all the attributes of a thing eternal
and uncreated.

This, however, does not close the discussion. For though whatever
verdict experience can give in the case is against the possibility that
will ever originates Force, yet if we can be assured that neither does
Force originate Will, Will must be held to be an agency, if not prior to
Force yet coeternal with it: and if it be true that Will can originate,
not indeed Force but the transformation of Force from some other of its
manifestations into that of mechanical motion, and that there is within
human experience no other agency capable of doing so, the argument for a
Will as the originator, though not of the universe, yet of the kosmos,
or order of the universe, remains unanswered.

But the case thus stated is not conformable to fact. Whatever volition
can do in the way of creating motion out of other forms of force, and
generally of evolving force from a latent into a visible state, can be
done by many other causes. Chemical action, for instance; electricity;
heat; the mere presence of a gravitating body; all these are causes of
mechanical motion on a far larger scale than any volitions which
experience presents to us: and in most of the effects thus produced the
motion given by one body to another, is not, as in the ordinary cases of
mechanical action, motion that has first been given to that other by
some third body. The phenomenon is not a mere passing on of mechanical
motion, but a creation of it out of a force previously latent or
manifesting itself in some other form. Volition, therefore, regarded as
an agent in the material universe, has no exclusive privilege of
origination: all that it can originate is also originated by other
transforming agents. If it be said that those other agents must have had
the force they give out put into them from elsewhere, I answer, that
this is no less true of the force which Edition: current; Page: [439]
volition disposes of. We know that this force comes from an external
source, the chemical action of the food and air. The force by which the
phenomena of the material world are produced, circulates through all
physical agencies in a never ending though sometimes intermitting
stream. I am, of course, speaking of volition only in its action on the
material world. We have nothing to do here with the freedom of the will
itself as a mental phenomenon—with the vexata questio whether volition
is self-determining or determined by causes. To the question now in hand
it is only the effects of volition that are relevant, not its origin.
The assertion is that physical nature must have been produced by a Will,
because nothing but Will is known to us as having the power of
originating the production of phenomena. We have seen that, on the
contrary, all the power that Will possesses over phenomena is shared, as
far as we have the means of judging, by other and much more powerful
agents, and that in the only sense in which those agents do not
originate, neither does Will originate. No prerogative, therefore, can,
on the ground of experience, be assigned to volition above other natural
agents, as a producing cause of phenomena. All that can be affirmed by
the strongest assertor of the Freedom of the Will, is that volitions are
themselves uncaused and are therefore alone fit to be the first or
universal Cause. But, even assuming volitions to be uncaused, the
properties of matter, so far as experience discloses, are uncaused also,
and have the advantage over any particular volition, in being so far as
experience can show, eternal. Theism, therefore, in so far as it rests
on the necessity of a First Cause, has no support from experience.

To those who, in default of Experience, consider the necessity of a
first cause as matter of intuition, I would say that it is needless, in
this discussion, to contest their premises; since admitting that there
is and must be a First Cause, it has now been shown that several other
agencies than Will can lay equal claim to that character. One thing only
may be said which requires notice here. Among the facts of the universe
to be accounted for, it may be said, is Mind; and it is self-evident
that nothing can have produced Mind but Mind.

The special indications that Mind is deemed to give, pointing to
intelligent contrivance, belong to a different portion of this inquiry.
But if the mere existence of Mind is supposed to require, as a necessary
antecedent, another Mind greater and more powerful, the difficulty is
not removed by going one step back: the creating mind stands as much in
need of another mind to be the source of its existence, as the created
mind. Be it remembered that we have no direct knowledge (at least apart
from Revelation) of a Mind which is even apparently eternal, as Force
and Matter are: an eternal mind is, as far as the present argument is
concerned, a simple hypothesis to account for the minds which we know to
exist. Now it is essential to an hypothesis that if admitted it should
at least remove the difficulty and account for the facts. Edition:
current; Page: [440] But it does not account for Mind to refer one mind
to a prior mind for its origin. The problem remains unsolved, the
difficulty undiminished, nay, rather increased.

To this it may be objected that the causation of every human mind is
matter of fact, since we know that it had a beginning in time. We even
know, or have the strongest grounds for believing that the human species
itself had a beginning in time. For there is a vast amount of evidence
that the state of our planet was once such as to be incompatible with
animal life, and that human life is of very much more modern origin than
animal life. In any case, therefore, the fact must be faced that there
must have been a cause which called the first human mind, nay the very
first germ of organic life, into existence. No such difficulty exists in
the supposition of an Eternal Mind. If we did not know that Mind on our
earth began to exist, we might suppose it to be uncaused; and we may
still suppose this of the mind to which we ascribe its existence.

To take this ground is to return into the field of human experience, and
to become subject to its canons, and we are then entitled to ask where
is the proof that nothing can have caused a mind except another mind.
From what, except from experience, can we know what can produce
what—what causes are adequate to what effects? That nothing can
consciously produce Mind but Mind, is self-evident, being involved in
the meaning of the words; but that there cannot be unconscious
production must not be assumed, for it is the very point to be proved.
Apart from experience, and arguing on what is called reason, that is on
supposed self-evidence, the notion seems to be, that no causes can give
rise to products of a more precious or elevated kind than themselves.
But this is at variance with the known analogies of Nature. How vastly
nobler and more precious, for instance, are the higher vegetables and
animals than the soil and manure out of which, and by the properties of
which they are raised up! The tendency of all recent speculation is
towards the opinion that the development of inferior orders of existence
into superior, the substitution of greater elaboration and higher
organization for lower, is the general rule of Nature. Whether it is so
or not, there are at least in Nature a multitude of facts bearing that
character, and this is sufficient for the argument.

Here, then, this part of the discussion may stop. The result it leads to
is that the First Cause argument is in itself of no value for the
establishment of Theism: because no cause is needed for the existence of
that which has no beginning; and both Matter and Force (whatever
metaphysical theory we may give of the one or the other) have had, so
far as our experience can teach us, no beginning—which cannot be said of
Mind. The phenomena or changes in the universe have indeed each of them
a beginning and a cause, but their Edition: current; Page: [441] cause
is always a prior change; nor do the analogies of experience give us any
reason to expect, from the mere occurrence of changes, that if we could
trace back the series far enough we should arrive at a Primæval
Volition. The world does not, by its mere existence, bear witness to a
God: if it gives indications of one, these must be given by the special
nature of the phenomena, by what they present that resembles adaptation
to an end: of which hereafter. If, in default of evidence from
experience, the evidence of intuition is relied upon, it may be answered
that if Mind, as Mind, presents intuitive evidence of having been
created, the Creative Mind must do the same, and we are no nearer to the
First Cause than before. But if there be nothing in the nature of mind
which in itself implies a Creator, the minds which have a beginning in
time, as all minds have which are known to our experience, must indeed
have been caused, but it is not necessary that their cause should have
been a prior Intelligence.


ARGUMENT FROM THE GENERAL CONSENT OF MANKIND

Before proceeding to the argument from Marks of Design, which, as it
seems to me, must always be the main strength of Natural Theism, we may
dispose briefly of some other arguments which are of little scientific
weight but which have greater influence on the human mind than much
better arguments, because they are appeals to authority, and it is by
authority that the opinions of the bulk of mankind are principally and
not unnaturally governed. The authority invoked is that of mankind
generally, and specially of some of its wisest men; particularly such as
were in other respects conspicuous examples of breaking loose from
received prejudices. Socrates and Plato, Bacon, Locke, and Newton,
Descartes and Leibnitz, are common examples.

It may doubtless be good advice to persons who in point of knowledge and
cultivation are not entitled to think themselves competent judges of
difficult questions, to bid them content themselves with holding that
true which mankind generally believe, and so long as they believe it; or
that which has been believed by those who pass for the most eminent
among the minds of the past. But to a thinker the argument from other
people’s opinions has little weight. It is but second-hand evidence; and
merely admonishes us to look out for and weigh the reasons on which this
conviction of mankind or of wise men was founded. Accordingly, those who
make any claim to philosophic treatment of the subject, employ this
general consent chiefly as evidence that there is in the mind of man an
intuitive perception, or an instinctive sense, of Deity. From the
generality of the belief, they infer that it is Edition: current; Page:
[442] inherent in our constitution; from which they draw the conclusion,
a precarious one indeed, but conformable to the general mode of
proceeding of the intuitive philosophy, that the belief must be true;
though as applied to Theism this argument begs the question, since it
has itself nothing to rest upon but the belief that the human mind was
made by a God, who would not deceive his creatures.

But, indeed, what ground does the general prevalence of the belief in
Deity afford us for inferring that this belief is native to the human
mind, and independent of evidence? Is it then so very devoid of
evidence, even apparent? Has it so little semblance of foundation in
fact, that it can only be accounted for by the supposition of its being
innate? We should not expect to find Theists believing that the
appearances in Nature of a contriving Intelligence are not only
insufficient but are not even plausible, and cannot be supposed to have
carried conviction either to the general or to the wiser mind. If there
are external evidences of theism, even if not perfectly conclusive, why
need we suppose that the belief of its truth was the result of anything
else? The superior minds to whom an appeal is made, from Socrates
downwards, when they professed to give the grounds of their opinion, did
not say that they found the belief in themselves without knowing from
whence it came, but ascribed it, if not to revelation, either to some
metaphysical argument, or to those very external evidences which are the
basis of the argument from Design.

If it be said that the belief in Deity is universal among barbarous
tribes, and among the ignorant portion of civilized populations, who
cannot be supposed to have been impressed by the marvellous adaptations
of Nature most of which are unknown to them; I answer, that the ignorant
in civilized countries take their opinions from the educated, and that
in the case of savages, if the evidence is insufficient, so is the
belief. The religious belief of savages is not belief in the God of
Natural Theology, but a mere modification of the crude generalization
which ascribes life, consciousness and will to all natural powers of
which they cannot perceive the source or control the operation. And the
divinities believed in are as numerous as those powers. Each river,
fountain or tree has a divinity of its own. To see in this blunder of
primitive ignorance the hand of the Supreme Being implanting in his
creatures an instinctive knowledge of his existence, is a poor
compliment to the Deity. The religion of savages is Fetichism of the
grossest kind, ascribing animation and will to individual objects, and
seeking to propitiate them by prayer and sacrifice. That this should be
the case is the less surprising when we remember that there is not a
definite boundary line, broadly separating the conscious human being
from inanimate objects. Between these and man there is an intermediate
class of objects, sometimes much more powerful than man, which do
possess life and will, viz. the brute animals, which in an early stage
Edition: current; Page: [443] of existence play a very great part in
human life; making it the less surprising that the line should not at
first be quite distinguishable between the animate and the inanimate
part of Nature. As observation advances, it is perceived that the
majority of outward objects have all their important qualities in common
with entire classes or groups of objects which comport themselves
exactly alike in the same circumstances, and in these cases the worship
of visible objects is exchanged for that of an invisible Being supposed
to preside over the whole class. This step in generalization is slowly
made, with hesitation and even terror; as we still see in the case of
ignorant populations with what difficulty experience disabuses them of
belief in the supernatural powers and terrible resentment of a
particular idol. Chiefly by these terrors the religious impressions of
barbarians are kept alive, with only slight modifications, until the
Theism of cultivated minds is ready to take their place. And the Theism
of cultivated minds, if we take their own word for it, is always a
conclusion either from arguments called rational, or from the
appearances in Nature.

It is needless here to dwell upon the difficulty of the hypothesis of a
natural belief not common to all human beings, an instinct not
universal. It is conceivable, doubtless, that some men might be born
without a particular natural faculty, as some are born without a
particular sense. But when this is the case we ought to be much more
particular as to the proof that it really is a natural faculty. If it
were not a matter of observation but of speculation that men can see; if
they had no apparent organ of sight, and no perceptions or knowledge but
such as they might conceivably have acquired by some circuitous process
through their other senses, the fact that men exist who do not even
suppose themselves to see, would be a considerable argument against the
theory of a visual sense. But it would carry us too far to press, for
the purposes of this discussion, an argument which applies so largely to
the whole of the intuitional philosophy. The strongest Intuitionist will
not maintain that a belief should be held for instinctive when evidence
(real or apparent), sufficient to engender it, is universally admitted
to exist. To the force of the evidence must be, in this case, added all
the emotional or moral causes which incline men to the belief; the
satisfaction which it gives to the obstinate questionings with which men
torment themselves respecting the past; the hopes which it opens for the
future; the fears also, since fear as well as hope predisposes to
belief; and to these in the case of the more active spirits must always
have been added a perception of the power which belief in the
supernatural affords for governing mankind, either for their own good,
or for the selfish purposes of the governors.

The general consent of mankind does not, therefore, afford ground for
admitting, even as an hypothesis, the origin in an inherent law of the
human mind, of a fact otherwise so more than sufficiently, so amply,
accounted for.

Edition: current; Page: [444]


THE ARGUMENT FROM CONSCIOUSNESS

There have been numerous arguments, indeed almost every religious
metaphysician has one of his own, to prove the existence and attributes
of God from what are called truths of reason, supposed to be independent
of experience. Descartes, who is the real founder of the intuitional
metaphysics, draws the conclusion immediately from the first premise of
his philosophy, the celebrated assumption that whatever he could very
clearly and distinctly apprehend, must be true. The idea of a God,
perfect in power, wisdom, and goodness, is a clear and distinct idea,
and must therefore, on this principle correspond to a real object. This
bold generalization, however, that a conception of the human mind proves
its own objective reality, Descartes is obliged to limit by the
qualification—“if the idea includes existence.”[*] Now the idea of God
implying the union of all perfections, and existence being a perfection,
the idea of God proves his existence. This very simple argument, which
denies to man one of his most familiar and most precious attributes,
that of idealizing as it is called—of constructing from the materials of
experience a conception more perfect than experience itself affords—is
not likely to satisfy any one in the present day. More elaborate, though
scarcely more successful efforts, have been made by many of Descartes’
successors, to derive knowledge of the Deity from an inward light: to
make it a truth not dependent on external evidence, a fact of direct
perception, or, as they are accustomed to call it, of consciousness. The
philosophical world is familiar with the attempt of Cousin to make out
that whenever we perceive a particular object, we perceive along with
it, or are conscious of, God; and also with the celebrated refutation of
this doctrine by Sir William Hamilton. It would be waste of time to
examine any of these theories in detail. While each has its own
particular logical fallacies, they labour under the common infirmity,
that one man cannot by proclaiming with ever so much confidence that he
perceives an object, convince other people that they see it too. If,
indeed, he laid claim to a divine faculty of vision, vouchsafed to him
alone, and making him cognizant of things which men not thus assisted
have not the capacity to see, the case might be different. Men have been
able to get such claims admitted; and other people can only require of
them to show their credentials. But when no claim is set up to any
peculiar gift, but we are told that all of us are as capable as the
prophet of seeing what he sees, feeling what he feels, nay, that we
actually do so, and when the utmost effort of which we are Edition:
current; Page: [445] capable fails to make us aware of what we are told
we perceive, this supposed universal faculty of intuition is but

-   

    The dark lantern of the Spirit
-   

    Which none see by but those who bear it:[*]

and the bearers may fairly be asked to consider whether it is not more
likely that they are mistaken as to the origin of an impression in their
minds, than that others are ignorant of the very existence of an
impression in theirs.

The inconclusiveness, in a speculative point of view, of all arguments
from the subjective notion of Deity to its objective reality, was well
seen by Kant, the most discriminating of the à priori metaphysicians,
who always kept the two questions, the origin and composition of our
ideas, and the reality of the corresponding objects, perfectly distinct.
According to Kant the idea of the Deity is native to the mind, in the
sense that it is constructed by the mind’s own laws and not derived from
without: but this Idea of Speculative Reason cannot be shown by any
logical process or perceived by direct apprehension, to have a
corresponding Reality outside the human mind. To Kant, God is neither an
object of direct consciousness nor a conclusion of reasoning, but a
Necessary Assumption; necessary, not by a logical, but a practical
necessity, imposed by the reality of the Moral Law. Duty is a fact of
consciousness: “Thou shalt” is a command issuing from the recesses of
our being, and not to be accounted for by any impressions derived from
experience; and this command requires a commander, though it is not
perfectly clear whether Kant’s meaning is that conviction of a law
includes conviction of a lawgiver, or only that a Being of whose will
the law is an expression, is eminently desirable. If the former be
intended, the argument is founded on a double meaning of the word Law. A
rule to which we feel it a duty to conform has in common with laws
commonly so called, the fact of claiming our obedience; but it does not
follow that the rule must originate, like the laws of the land, in the
will of a legislator or legislators external to the mind. We may even
say that a feeling of obligation which is merely the result of a command
is not what is meant by moral obligation, which, on the contrary,
supposes something that the internal conscience bears witness to as
binding in its own nature; and which God, in superadding his command,
conforms to and perhaps declares, but does not create. Conceding, then,
for the sake of the argument, that the moral sentiment is as purely of
the mind’s own growth, the obligation of duty as entirely independent of
experience and acquired impressions, as Kant or any other metaphysician
ever contended, it may yet be maintained that this feeling of obligation
rather excludes, than Edition: current; Page: [446] compels, the belief
in a Divine legislator merely as the source of the obligation: and as a
matter of fact, the obligation of duty is both theoretically
acknowledged and practically felt in the fullest manner by many who have
no positive belief in God, though seldom, probably, without habitual and
familiar reference to him as an ideal conception. But if the existence
of God as a wise and just lawgiver, is not a necessary part of the
feelings of morality, it may still be maintained that those feelings
make his existence eminently desirable. No doubt they do, and that is
the great reason why we find that good men and women cling to the
belief, and are pained by its being questioned. But surely it is not
legitimate to assume that in the order of the Universe, whatever is
desirable is true. Optimism, even when a God is already believed in, is
a thorny doctrine to maintain, and had to be taken by Leibnitz in the
limited sense, that the universe being made by a good being, is the best
universe possible, not the best absolutely: that the Divine power, in
short, was not equal to making it more free from imperfections than it
is. But optimism prior to belief in a God, and as the ground of that
belief, seems one of the oddest of all speculative delusions. Nothing,
however, I believe, contributes more to keep up the belief in the
general mind of humanity than this feeling of its desirableness, which,
when clothed, as it very often is, in the forms of an argument, is a
naïf expression of the tendency of the human mind to believe what is
agreeable to it. Positive value the argument of course has none.

Without dwelling further on these or on any other of the à priori
arguments for Theism, we will no longer delay passing to the far more
important argument of the appearances of Contrivance in Nature.


THE ARGUMENT FROM MARKS OF DESIGN IN NATURE

We now at last reach an argument of a really scientific character, which
does not shrink from scientific tests, but claims to be judged by the
established canons of Induction. The Design argument is wholly grounded
on experience. Certain qualities, it is alleged, are found to be
characteristic of such things as are made by an intelligent mind for a
purpose. The order of Nature, or some considerable parts of it, exhibit
these qualities in a remarkable degree. We are entitled, from this great
similarity in the effects, to infer similarity in the cause, and to
believe that things which it is beyond the power of man to make, but
which resemble the works of man in all but power, must also have been
made by Intelligence, armed with a power greater than human.

I have stated this argument in its fullest strength, as it is stated by
its most thoroughgoing assertors. A very little consideration, however,
suffices to show that though it has some force, its force is very
generally overrated. Edition: current; Page: [447] Paley’s illustration
of a watch puts the case much too strongly.[*] If I found a watch on an
apparently desolate island, I should indeed infer that it had been left
there by a human being; but the inference would not be from marks of
design, but because I already knew by direct experience that watches are
made by men. I should draw the inference no less confidently from a foot
print, or from any relic however insignificant which experience has
taught me to attribute to man: as geologists infer the past existence of
animals from coprolites, though no one sees marks of design in a
coprolite. The evidence of design in creation can never reach the height
of direct induction; it amounts only to the inferior kind of inductive
evidence called analogy. Analogy agrees with induction in this, that
they both argue that a thing known to resemble another in certain
circumstances (call those circumstances A and B) will resemble it in
another circumstance (call it C). But the difference is that in
induction, A and B are known, by a previous comparison of many
instances, to be the very circumstances on which C depends, or with
which it is in some way connected. When this has not been ascertained,
the argument amounts only to this, that since it is not known with which
of the circumstances existing in the known case C is connected, they may
as well be A and B as any others; and therefore there is a greater
probability of C in cases where we know that A and B exist, than in
cases of which we know nothing at all. This argument is of a weight very
difficult to estimate at all, and impossible to estimate precisely. It
may be very strong, when the known points of agreement, A and B &c. are
numerous and the known points of difference few; or very weak, when the
reverse is the case: but it can never be equal in validity to a real
induction. The resemblances between some of the arrangements in nature
and some of those made by man are considerable, and even as mere
resemblances afford a certain presumption of similarity of cause: but
how great that presumption is, it is hard to say. All that can be said
with certainty is that these likenesses make creation by intelligence
considerably more probable than if the likenesses had been less, or than
if there had been no likenesses at all.

This mode, however, of stating the case does not do full justice to the
evidence of Theism. The Design argument is not drawn from mere
resemblances in Nature to the works of human intelligence, but from the
special character of those resemblances. The circumstances in which it
is alleged that the world resembles the works of man are not
circumstances taken at random, but are particular instances of a
circumstance which experience shows to have a real connection with an
intelligent origin, the fact of conspiring to an end. The argument
therefore is not one of mere analogy. As mere analogy it has its weight,
but it is more than analogy. It surpasses analogy exactly as induction
surpasses it. It is an inductive argument.

Edition: current; Page: [448]
This, I think, is undeniable, and it remains to test the argument by the
logical principles applicable to Induction. For this purpose it will be
convenient to handle, not the argument as a whole, but some one of the
most impressive cases of it, such as the structure of the eye, or of the
ear. It is maintained that the structure of the eye proves a designing
mind. To what class of inductive arguments does this belong? and what is
its degree of force?

The species of inductive arguments are four in number, corresponding to
the four Inductive Methods; the Methods of Agreement, of Difference, of
Residues, and of Concomitant Variations. The argument under
consideration falls within the first of these divisions, the Method of
Agreement. This is, for reasons known to inductive logicians, the
weakest of the four, but the particular argument is a strong one of the
kind. It may be logically analysed as follows:

The parts of which the eye is composed, and the collocations which
constitute the arrangement of those parts, resemble one another in this
very remarkable property, that they all conduce to enabling the animal
to see. These things being as they are, the animal sees: if any one of
them were different from what it is, the animal, for the most part,
would either not see, or would not see equally well. And this is the
only marked resemblance that we can trace among the different parts of
this structure, beyond the general likeness of composition and
organization which exists among all other parts of the animal. Now the
particular combination of organic elements called an eye had, in every
instance, a beginning in time and must therefore have been brought
together by a cause or causes. The number of instances is immeasurably
greater than is, by the principles of inductive logic, required for the
exclusion of a random concurrence of independent causes, or speaking
technically, for the elimination of chance. We are therefore warranted
by the canons of induction in concluding that what brought all these
elements together was some cause common to them all; and inasmuch as the
elements agree in the single circumstance of conspiring to produce
sight, there must be some connection by way of causation between the
cause which brought those elements together, and the fact of sight.

This I conceive to be a legitimate inductive inference, and the sum and
substance of what Induction can do for Theism. The natural sequel of the
argument would be this. Sight, being a fact not precedent but subsequent
to the putting together of the organic structure of the eye, can only be
connected with the production of that structure in the character of a
final, not an efficient cause; that is, it is not Sight itself but an
antecedent Idea of it, that must be the efficient cause. But this at
once marks the origin as proceeding from an intelligent will.

I regret to say, however, that this latter half of the argument is not
so inexpugnable Edition: current; Page: [449] as the former half.
Creative forethought is not absolutely the only link by which the origin
of the wonderful mechanism of the eye may be connected with the fact of
sight. There is another connecting link on which attention has been
greatly fixed by recent speculations, and the reality of which cannot be
called in question, though its adequacy to account for such truly
admirable combinations as some of those in Nature, is still and will
probably long remain problematical. This is the principle of “the
survival of the fittest.”

This principle does not pretend to account for the commencement of
sensation or of animal or vegetable life. But assuming the existence of
some one or more very low forms of organic life, in which there are no
complex adaptations nor any marked appearances of contrivance, and
supposing, as experience warrants us in doing, that many small
variations from those simple types would be thrown out in all
directions, which would be transmissible by inheritance, and of which
some would be advantageous to the creature in its struggle for existence
and others disadvantageous, the forms which are advantageous would
always tend to survive and those which are disadvantageous to perish.
And thus there would be a constant though slow general improvement of
the type as it branched out into many different varieties, adapting it
to different media and modes of existence, until it might possibly, in
countless ages, attain to the most advanced examples which now exist.

It must be acknowledged that there is something very startling, and
prima facie improbable in this hypothetical history of Nature. It would
require us, for example, to suppose that the primæval animal of whatever
nature it may have been, could not see, and had at most such slight
preparation for seeing as might be constituted by some chemical action
of light upon its cellular structure. One of the accidental variations
which are liable to take place in all organic beings would at some time
or other produce a variety that could see, in some imperfect manner, and
this peculiarity being transmitted by inheritance, while other
variations continued to take place in other directions, a number of
races would be produced who, by the power of even imperfect sight, would
have a great advantage over all other creatures which could not see and
would in time extirpate them from all places, except, perhaps, a few
very peculiar situations underground. Fresh variations supervening would
give rise to races with better and better seeing powers until we might
at last reach as extraordinary a combination of structures and functions
as are seen in the eye of man and of the more important animals. Of this
theory when pushed to this extreme point, all that can now be said is
that it is not so absurd as it looks, and that the analogies which have
been discovered in experience, favourable to its possibility, far exceed
what any one could have supposed beforehand. Whether it will ever be
possible to say more Edition: current; Page: [450] than this, is at
present uncertain. The theory if admitted would be in no way whatever
inconsistent with Creation. But it must be acknowledged that it would
greatly attenuate the evidence for it.

Leaving this remarkable speculation to whatever fate the progress of
discovery may have in store for it, I think it must be allowed that, in
the present state of our knowledge, the adaptations in Nature afford a
large balance of probability in favour of creation by intelligence. It
is equally certain that this is no more than a probability; and that the
various other arguments of Natural Theology which we have considered,
add nothing to its force. Whatever ground there is, revelation apart, to
believe in an Author of Nature, is derived from the appearances in the
universe. Their mere resemblance to the works of man, or to what man
could do if he had the same power over the materials of organized bodies
which he has over the materials of a watch, is of some value as an
argument of analogy: but the argument is greatly strengthened by the
properly inductive considerations which establish that there is some
connection through causation between the origin of the arrangements of
nature and the ends they fulfil; an argument which is in many cases
slight, but in others, and chiefly in the nice and intricate
combinations of vegetable and animal life, is of considerable strength.

Edition: current; Page: [451]


PART II


ATTRIBUTES

the question of the existence of a Deity, in its purely scientific
aspect, standing as is shown in the First Part, it is next to be
considered, given the indications of a Deity, what sort of a Deity do
they point to? What attributes are we warranted, by the evidence which
Nature affords of a creative mind, in assigning to that mind?

It needs no showing that the power if not the intelligence, must be so
far superior to that of Man, as to surpass all human estimate. But from
this to Omnipotence and Omniscience there is a wide interval. And the
distinction is of immense practical importance.

It is not too much to say that every indication of Design in the Kosmos
is so much evidence against the Omnipotence of the Designer. For what is
meant by Design? Contrivance: the adaptation of means to an end. But the
necessity for contrivance—the need of employing means—is a consequence
of the limitation of power. Who would have recourse to means if to
attain his end his mere word was sufficient? The very idea of means
implies that the means have an efficacy which the direct action of the
being who employs them has not. Otherwise they are not means, but an
incumbrance. A man does not use machinery to move his arms. If he did,
it could only be when paralysis had deprived him of the power of moving
them by volition. But if the employment of contrivance is in itself a
sign of limited power, how much more so is the careful and skilful
choice of contrivances? Can any wisdom be shown in the selection of
means, when the means have no efficacy but what is given them by the
will of him who employs them, and when his will could have bestowed the
same efficacy on any other means? Wisdom and contrivance are shown in
overcoming difficulties, and there is no room for them in a Being for
whom no difficulties exist. The evidences, therefore, of Natural
Theology distinctly imply that the author of the Kosmos worked under
limitations; that he was obliged to adapt himself to conditions
independent of his will, and to attain his ends by such arrangements as
those conditions admitted of.

And this hypothesis agrees with what we have seen to be the tendency of
the evidences in another respect. We found that the appearances in
Nature point indeed to an origin of the Kosmos, or order in Nature, and
indicate Edition: current; Page: [452] that origin to be Design but do
not point to any commencement, still less creation, of the two great
elements of the Universe, the passive element and the active element,
Matter and Force. There is in Nature no reason whatever to suppose that
either Matter or Force, or any of their properties, were made by the
Being who was the author of the collocations by which the world is
adapted to what we consider as its purposes; or that he has power to
alter any of those properties. It is only when we consent to entertain
this negative supposition that there arises a need for wisdom and
contrivance in the order of the universe. The Deity had on this
hypothesis to work out his ends by combining materials of a given nature
and properties. Out of these materials he had to construct a world in
which his designs should be carried into effect through given properties
of Matter and Force, working together and fitting into one another. This
did require skill and contrivance, and the means by which it is effected
are often such as justly excite our wonder and admiration: but exactly
because it requires wisdom, it implies limitation of power, or rather
the two phrases express different sides of the same fact.

If it be said, that an Omnipotent Creator, though under no necessity of
employing contrivances such as man must use, thought fit to do so in
order to leave traces by which man might recognize his creative hand,
the answer is that this equally supposes a limit to his omnipotence. For
if it was his will that men should know that they themselves and the
world are his work, he, being omnipotent, had only to will that they
should be aware of it. Ingenious men have sought for reasons why God
might choose to leave his existence so far a matter of doubt that men
should not be under an absolute necessity of knowing it, as they are of
knowing that three and two make five. These imagined reasons are very
unfortunate specimens of casuistry; but even did we admit their
validity, they are of no avail on the supposition of omnipotence, since
if it did not please God to implant in man a complete conviction of his
existence, nothing hindered him from making the conviction fall short of
completeness by any margin he chose to leave. It is usual to dispose of
arguments of this description by the easy answer, that we do not know
what wise reasons the Omniscient may have had for leaving undone things
which he had the power to do. It is not perceived that this plea itself
implies a limit to Omnipotence. When a thing is obviously good and
obviously in accordance with what all the evidences of creation imply to
have been the Creator’s design, and we say we do not know what good
reason he may have had for not doing it, we mean that we do not know to
what other, still better object—to what object still more completely in
the line of his purposes, he may have seen fit to postpone it. But the
necessity of postponing one thing to another belongs only to limited
power. Omnipotence could have made the objects compatible. Omnipotence
does not need to weigh one consideration against another. If the
Creator, like a human ruler, had to adapt himself to a set of Edition:
current; Page: [453] conditions which he did not make, it is as
unphilosophical as presumptuous in us to call him to account for any
imperfections in his work; to complain that he left anything in it
contrary to what, if the indications of design prove anything, he must
have intended. He must at least know more than we know, and we cannot
judge what greater good would have had to be sacrificed, or what greater
evil incurred, if he had decided to remove this particular blot. Not so
if he be omnipotent. If he be that, he must himself have willed that the
two desirable objects should be incompatible; he must himself have
willed that the obstacle to his supposed design should be insuperable.
It cannot therefore be his design. It will not do to say that it was,
but that he had other designs which interfered with it; for no one
purpose imposes necessary limitations on another in the case of a Being
not restricted by conditions of possibility.

Omnipotence, therefore, cannot be predicated of the Creator on grounds
of natural theology. The fundamental principles of natural religion as
deduced from the facts of the universe, negative his omnipotence. They
do not, in the same manner, exclude omniscience: if we suppose
limitation of power, there is nothing to contradict the supposition of
perfect knowledge and absolute wisdom. But neither is there anything to
prove it. The knowledge of the powers and properties of things necessary
for planning and executing the arrangements of the Kosmos, is no doubt
as much in excess of human knowledge as the power implied in creation is
in excess of human power. And the skill, the subtlety of contrivance,
the ingenuity as it would be called in the case of a human work, is
often marvellous. But nothing obliges us to suppose that either the
knowledge or the skill is infinite. We are not even compelled to suppose
that the contrivances were always the best possible. If we venture to
judge them as we judge the works of human artificers, we find abundant
defects. The human body, for example, is one of the most striking
instances of artful and ingenious contrivance which nature offers, but
we may well ask whether so complicated a machine could not have been
made to last longer, and not to get so easily and frequently out of
order. We may ask why the human race should have been so constituted as
to grovel in wretchedness and degradation for countless ages before a
small portion of it was enabled to lift itself into the very imperfect
state of intelligence, goodness and happiness which we enjoy. The divine
power may not have been equal to doing more; the obstacles to a better
arrangement of things may have been insuperable. But it is also possible
that they were not. The skill of the Demiourgos was sufficient to
produce what we see; but we cannot tell that this skill reached the
extreme limit of perfection compatible with the material it employed and
the forces it had to work with. I know not how we can even satisfy
ourselves on grounds of natural theology, that the Creator foresees all
the future; that he foreknows all the effects that will issue from his
own contrivances. There Edition: current; Page: [454] may be great
wisdom without the power of foreseeing and calculating everything: and
human workmanship teaches us the possibility that the workman’s
knowledge of the properties of the things he works on may enable him to
make arrangements admirably fitted to produce a given result, while he
may have very little power of foreseeing the agencies of another kind
which may modify or counteract the operation of the machinery he has
made. Perhaps a knowledge of the laws of nature on which organic life
depends, not much more perfect than the knowledge which man even now
possesses of some other natural laws, would enable man, if he had the
same power over the materials and the forces concerned which he has over
some of those of inanimate nature, to create organized beings not less
wonderful nor less adapted to their conditions of existence than those
in Nature.

Assuming then that while we confine ourselves to Natural Religion we
must rest content with a Creator less than Almighty; the question
presents itself, of what nature is the limitation of his power? Does the
obstacle at which the power of the Creator stops, which says to it: Thus
far shalt thou go and no further, lie in the power of other Intelligent
Beings; or in the insufficiency and refractoriness of the materials of
the universe; or must we resign ourselves to admitting the hypothesis
that the author of the Kosmos, though wise and knowing, was not all-wise
and all-knowing, and may not always have done the best that was possible
under the conditions of the problem?

The first of these suppositions has until a very recent period been and
in many quarters still is, the prevalent theory even of Christianity.
Though attributing, and in a certain sense sincerely, omnipotence to the
Creator, the received religion represents him as for some inscrutable
reason tolerating the perpetual counteraction of his purposes by the
will of another Being of opposite character and of great though inferior
power, the Devil. The only difference on this matter between popular
Christianity and the religion of Ormuzd and Ahriman, is that the former
pays its good Creator the bad compliment of having been the maker of the
Devil and of being at all times able to crush and annihilate him and his
evil deeds and counsels, which nevertheless he does not do. But, as I
have already remarked, all forms of polytheism, and this among the rest,
are with difficulty reconcileable with an universe governed by general
laws. Obedience to law is the note of a settled government, and not of a
conflict always going on. When powers are at war with one another for
the rule of the world, the boundary between them is not fixed but
constantly fluctuating. This may seem to be the case on our planet as
between the powers of good and evil when we look only at the results;
but when we consider the inner springs, we find that both the good and
the evil take place in the common course of nature, by virtue of the
same general laws originally impressed—the same machinery turning out
now good, now evil things, and oftener still, the two combined. The
division of power is only Edition: current; Page: [455] apparently
variable, but really so regular that, were we speaking of human
potentates, we should declare without hesitation that the share of each
must have been fixed by previous consent. Upon that supposition indeed,
the result of the combination of antagonist forces might be much the
same as on that of a single creator with divided purposes.

But when we come to consider, not what hypothesis may be conceived, and
possibly reconciled with known facts, but what supposition is pointed to
by the evidences of natural religion; the case is different. The
indications of design point strongly in one direction, the preservation
of the creatures in whose structure the indications are found. Along
with the preserving agencies there are destroying agencies, which we
might be tempted to ascribe to the will of a different Creator: but
there are rarely appearances of the recondite contrivance of means of
destruction, except when the destruction of one creature is the means of
preservation to others. Nor can it be supposed that the preserving
agencies are wielded by one Being, the destroying agencies by another.
The destroying agencies are a necessary part of the preserving agencies:
the chemical compositions by which life is carried on could not take
place without a parallel series of decompositions. The great agent of
decay in both organic and inorganic substances is oxidation, and it is
only by oxidation that life is continued for even the length of a
minute. The imperfections in the attainment of the purposes which the
appearances indicate, have not the air of having been designed. They are
like the unintended results of accidents insufficiently guarded against,
or of a little excess or deficiency in the quantity of some of the
agencies by which the good purpose is carried on, or else they are
consequences of the wearing out of a machinery not made to last for
ever: they point either to shortcomings in the workmanship as regards
its intended purpose, or to external forces not under the control of the
workman, but which forces bear no mark of being wielded and aimed by any
other and rival Intelligence.

We may conclude, then, that there is no ground in Natural Theology for
attributing intelligence or personality to the obstacles which partially
thwart what seem the purposes of the Creator. The limitation of his
power more probably results either from the qualities of the
material—the substances and forces of which the universe is composed not
admitting of any arrangements by which his purposes could be more
completely fulfilled; or else, the purposes might have been more fully
attained, but the Creator did not know how to do it; creative skill,
wonderful as it is, was not sufficiently perfect to accomplish his
purposes more thoroughly.

We now pass to the moral attributes of the Deity, so far as indicated in
the Creation; or (stating the problem in the broadest manner) to the
question, what indications Nature gives of the purposes of its author.
This question bears a very different aspect to us from what it bears to
those teachers Edition: current; Page: [456] of Natural Theology who are
incumbered with the necessity of admitting the omnipotence of the
Creator. We have not to attempt the impossible problem of reconciling
infinite benevolence and justice with infinite power in the Creator of
such a world as this. The attempt to do so not only involves absolute
contradiction in an intellectual point of view but exhibits to excess
the revolting spectacle of a jesuitical defence of moral enormities.

On this topic I need not add to the illustrations given of this portion
of the subject in my Essay on Nature.[*] At the stage which our argument
has reached there is none of this moral perplexity. Grant that creative
power was limited by conditions the nature and extent of which are
wholly unknown to us, and the goodness and justice of the Creator may be
all that the most pious believe; and all in the work that conflicts with
those moral attributes may be the fault of the conditions which left to
the Creator only a choice of evils.

It is, however, one question whether any given conclusion is consistent
with known facts, and another whether there is evidence to prove it: and
if we have no means for judging of the design but from the work actually
produced, it is a somewhat hazardous speculation to suppose that the
work designed was of a different quality from the result realized.
Still, though the ground is unsafe we may, with due caution, journey a
certain distance on it. Some parts of the order of nature give much more
indication of contrivance than others; many, it is not too much to say,
give no sign of it at all. The signs of contrivance are most conspicuous
in the structure and processes of vegetable and animal life. But for
these, it is probable that the appearances in nature would never have
seemed to the thinking part of mankind to afford any proofs of a God.
But when a God had been inferred from the organization of living beings,
other parts of Nature, such as the structure of the solar system, seemed
to afford evidences, more or less strong, in confirmation of the belief:
granting, then, a design in Nature, we can best hope to be enlightened
as to what that design was, by examining it in the parts of Nature in
which its traces are the most conspicuous.

To what purpose, then, do the expedients in the construction of animals
and vegetables, which excite the admiration of naturalists, appear to
tend? There is no blinking the fact that they tend principally to no
more exalted object than to make the structure remain in life and in
working order for a certain time: the individual for a few years, the
species or race for a longer but still a limited period. And the similar
though less conspicuous marks of creation which are recognized in
inorganic Nature, are generally of the same character. The adaptations,
for instance, which appear in the solar system consist in placing it
under conditions which enable the mutual action of its parts to maintain
instead of destroying its stability, and even that only for a time, vast
indeed if measured against our short span of animated existence,
Edition: current; Page: [457] but which can be perceived even by us to
be limited: for even the feeble means which we possess of exploring the
past, are believed by those who have examined the subject by the most
recent lights, to yield evidence that the solar system was once a vast
sphere of nebula or vapour, and is going through a process which in the
course of ages will reduce it to a single and not very large mass of
solid matter frozen up with more than arctic cold. If the machinery of
the system is adapted to keep itself at work only for a time, still less
perfect is the adaptation of it for the abode of living beings since it
is only adapted to them during the relatively short portion of its total
duration which intervenes between the time when each planet was too hot
and the time when it became or will become too cold to admit of life
under the only conditions in which we have experience of its
possibility. Or we should perhaps reverse the statement, and say that
organization and life are only adapted to the conditions of the solar
system during a relatively short portion of the system’s existence.

The greater part, therefore, of the design of which there is indication
in Nature, however wonderful its mechanism, is no evidence of any moral
attributes, because the end to which it is directed, and its adaptation
to which end is the evidence of its being directed to an end at all, is
not a moral end: it is not the good of any sentient creature, it is but
the qualified permanence, for a limited period, of the work itself,
whether animate or inanimate. The only inference that can be drawn from
most of it, respecting the character of the Creator, is that he does not
wish his works to perish as soon as created; he wills them to have a
certain duration. From this alone nothing can be justly inferred as to
the manner in which he is affected towards his animate or rational
creatures.

After deduction of the great number of adaptations which have no
apparent object but to keep the machine going, there remain a certain
number of provisions for giving pleasure to living beings, and a certain
number of provisions for giving them pain. There is no positive
certainty that the whole of these ought not to take their place among
the contrivances for keeping the creature or its species in existence;
for both the pleasures and the pains have a conservative tendency; the
pleasures being generally so disposed as to attract to the things which
maintain individual or collective existence, the pains so as to deter
from such as would destroy it.

When all these things are considered it is evident that a vast deduction
must be made from the evidences of a Creator before they can be counted
as evidences of a benevolent purpose: so vast indeed that some may doubt
whether after such a deduction there remains any balance. Yet
endeavouring to look at the question without partiality or prejudice and
without allowing wishes to have any influence over judgment, it does
appear that granting the existence of design, there is a preponderance
of evidence that the Creator Edition: current; Page: [458] desired the
pleasure of his creatures. This is indicated by the fact that pleasure
of one description or another is afforded by almost everything, the mere
play of the faculties, physical and mental, being a never-ending source
of pleasure, and even painful things giving pleasure by the satisfaction
of curiosity and the agreeable sense of acquiring knowledge; and also
that pleasure, when experienced, seems to result from the normal working
of the machinery, while pain usually arises from some external
interference with it, and resembles in each particular case the result
of an accident. Even in cases when pain results, like pleasure, from the
machinery itself, the appearances do not indicate that contrivance was
brought into play purposely to produce pain: what is indicated is rather
a clumsiness in the contrivance employed for some other purpose. The
author of the machinery is no doubt accountable for having made it
susceptible of pain; but this may have been a necessary condition of its
susceptibility to pleasure; a supposition which avails nothing on the
theory of an Omnipotent Creator but is an extremely probable one in the
case of a contriver working under the limitation of inexorable laws and
indestructible properties of matter. The susceptibility being conceded
as a thing which did enter into design, the pain itself usually seems
like a thing undesigned; a casual result of the collision of the
organism with some outward force to which it was not intended to be
exposed, and which, in many cases, provision is even made to hinder it
from being exposed to. There is, therefore, much appearance that
pleasure is agreeable to the Creator, while there is very little if any
appearance that pain is so: and there is a certain amount of
justification for inferring, on grounds of Natural Theology alone, that
benevolence is one of the attributes of the Creator. But to jump from
this to the inference that his sole or chief purposes are those of
benevolence, and that the single end and aim of Creation was the
happiness of his creatures, is not only not justified by any evidence
but is a conclusion in opposition to such evidence as we have. If the
motive of the Deity for creating sentient beings was the happiness of
the beings he created, his purpose, in our corner of the universe at
least, must be pronounced, taking past ages and all countries and races
into account, to have been thus far an ignominious failure; and if God
had no purpose but our happiness and that of other living creatures it
is not credible that he would have called them into existence with the
prospect of being so completely baffled. If man had not the power by the
exercise of his own energies for the improvement both of himself and of
his outward circumstances, to do for himself and other creatures vastly
more than God had in the first instance done, the Being who called him
into existence would deserve something very different from thanks at his
hands. Of course it may be said that this very capacity of improving
himself and the world was given to him by God, and that the change which
he will be thereby enabled ultimately to effect in human existence
Edition: current; Page: [459] will be worth purchasing by the sufferings
and wasted lives of entire geological periods. This may be so; but to
suppose that God could not have given him these blessings at a less
frightful cost, is to make a very strange supposition concerning the
Deity. It is to suppose that God could not, in the first instance,
create anything better than a Bosjesman or an Andaman islander, or
something still lower; and yet was able to endow the Bosjesman or the
Andaman islander with the power of raising himself into a Newton or a
Fénelon. We certainly do not know the nature of the barriers which limit
the divine omnipotence; but it is a very odd notion of them that they
enable the Deity to confer on an almost bestial creature the power of
producing by a succession of efforts what God himself had no other means
of creating.

Such are the indications of Natural Religion in respect to the divine
benevolence. If we look for any other of the moral attributes which a
certain class of philosophers are accustomed to distinguish from
benevolence, as for example Justice, we find a total blank. There is no
evidence whatever in Nature for divine justice, whatever standard of
justice our ethical opinions may lead us to recognize. There is no
shadow of justice in the general arrangements of Nature; and what
imperfect realization it obtains in any human society (a most imperfect
realization as yet) is the work of man himself, struggling upwards
against immense natural difficulties, into civilization, and making to
himself a second nature, far better and more unselfish than he was
created with. But on this point enough has been said in another Essay,
already referred to, on Nature.[*]

These, then, are the net results of Natural Theology on the question of
the divine attributes. A Being of great but limited power, how or by
what limited we cannot even conjecture; of great, and perhaps unlimited
intelligence, but perhaps, also, more narrowly limited than his power:
who desires, and pays some regard to, the happiness of his creatures,
but who seems to have other motives of action which he cares more for,
and who can hardly be supposed to have created the universe for that
purpose alone. Such is the Deity whom Natural Religion points to; and
any idea of God more captivating than this comes only from human wishes,
or from the teaching of either real or imaginary Revelation.

We shall next examine whether the light of nature gives any indications
concerning the immortality of the soul, and a future life.

Edition: current; Page: [460]


PART III


IMMORTALITY

the indications of immortality may be considered in two divisions: those
which are independent of any theory respecting the Creator and his
intentions, and those which depend upon an antecedent belief on that
subject.

Of the former class of arguments speculative men have in different ages
put forward a considerable variety, of which those in the Phædon of
Plato are an example; but they are for the most part such as have no
adherents, and need not be seriously refuted, now. They are generally
founded upon preconceived theories as to the nature of the thinking
principle in man, considered as distinct and separable from the body,
and on other preconceived theories respecting death. As, for example,
that death, or dissolution, is always a separation of parts; and the
soul being without parts, being simple and indivisible, is not
susceptible of this separation. Curiously enough, one of the
interlocutors in the Phædon anticipates the answer by which an objector
of the present day would meet this argument: namely, that thought and
consciousness, though mentally distinguishable from the body, may not be
a substance separable from it, but a result of it, standing in a
relation to it (the illustration is Plato’s) like that of a tune to the
musical instrument on which it is played; and that the arguments used to
prove that the soul does not die with the body, would equally prove that
the tune does not die with the instrument, but survives its destruction
and continues to exist apart.[*] In fact, those moderns who dispute the
evidences of the immortality of the soul, do not, in general, believe
the soul to be a substance per se, but regard it as the name of a bundle
of attributes, the attributes of feeling, thinking, reasoning,
believing, willing, &c., and these attributes they regard as a
consequence of the bodily organization, which therefore, they argue, it
is as unreasonable to suppose surviving when that organization is
dispersed, as to suppose the colour or odour of a rose surviving when
the rose itself has perished. Those, therefore, who would deduce the
immortality of the soul from its own nature have first to prove that the
attributes in question are not attributes of the body but of a separate
substance. Now what is the verdict of science on this point? It is not
perfectly conclusive either way. In the first place, it does not prove,
experimentally, that any mode of organization has the power of producing
Edition: current; Page: [461] feeling or thought. To make that proof
good it would be necessary that we should be able to produce an
organism, and try whether it would feel; which we cannot do; organisms
cannot by any human means be produced, they can only be developed out of
a previous organism. On the other hand, the evidence is well nigh
complete that all thought and feeling has some action of the bodily
organism for its immediate antecedent or accompaniment; that the
specific variations and especially the different degrees of complication
of the nervous and cerebral organization, correspond to differences in
the development of the mental faculties; and though we have no evidence,
except negative, that the mental consciousness ceases for ever when the
functions of the brain are at an end, we do know that diseases of the
brain disturb the mental functions and that decay or weakness of the
brain enfeebles them. We have therefore sufficient evidence that
cerebral action is, if not the cause, at least, in our present state of
existence, a condition sine quâ non of mental operations; and that
assuming the mind to be a distinct substance, its separation from the
body would not be, as some have vainly flattered themselves, a
liberation from trammels and restoration to freedom, but would simply
put a stop to its functions and remand it to unconsciousness, unless and
until some other set of conditions supervenes, capable of recalling it
into activity, but of the existence of which experience does not give us
the smallest indication.

At the same time it is of importance to remark that these considerations
only amount to defect of evidence; they afford no positive argument
against immortality. We must beware of giving à priori validity to the
conclusions of an à posteriori philosophy. The root of all à priori
thinking is the tendency to transfer to outward things a strong
association between the corresponding ideas in our own minds; and the
thinkers who most sincerely attempt to limit their beliefs by
experience, and honestly believe that they do so, are not always
sufficiently on their guard against this mistake. There are thinkers who
regard it as a truth of reason that miracles are impossible; and in like
manner there are others who because the phenomena of life and
consciousness are associated in their minds by undeviating experience
with the action of material organs, think it an absurdity per se to
imagine it possible that those phenomena can exist under any other
conditions. But they should remember that the uniform coexistence of one
fact with another does not make the one fact a part of the other, or the
same with it. The relation of thought to a material brain is no
metaphysical necessity; but simply a constant coexistence within the
limits of observation. And when analysed to the bottom on the principles
of the Associative Psychology, the brain, just as much as the mental
functions is, like matter itself, merely a set of human sensations
either actual or inferred as possible, namely those which the anatomist
has when he opens the skull, and the impressions which we suppose we
should receive of molecular or some other movements when the Edition:
current; Page: [462] cerebral action was going on, if there were no bony
envelope and our senses or our instruments were sufficiently delicate.
Experience furnishes us with no example of any series of states of
consciousness, without this group of contingent sensations attached to
it; but it is as easy to imagine such a series of states without, as
with, this accompaniment, and we know of no reason in the nature of
things against the possibility of its being thus disjoined. We may
suppose that the same thoughts, emotions, volitions and even sensations
which we have here, may persist or recommence somewhere else under other
conditions, just as we may suppose that other thoughts and sensations
may exist under other conditions in other parts of the universe. And in
entertaining this supposition we need not be embarrassed by any
metaphysical difficulties about a thinking substance. Substance is but a
general name for the perdurability of attributes: wherever there is a
series of thoughts connected together by memories, that constitutes a
thinking substance. This absolute distinction in thought and
separability in representation of our states of consciousness from the
set of conditions with which they are united only by constancy of
concomitance, is equivalent in a practical point of view to the old
distinction of the two substances, Matter and Mind.

There is, therefore, in science, no evidence against the immortality of
the soul but that negative evidence, which consists in the absence of
evidence in its favour. And even the negative evidence is not so strong
as negative evidence often is. In the case of witchcraft, for instance,
the fact that there is no proof which will stand examination of its
having ever existed, is as conclusive as the most positive evidence of
its non-existence would be; for it exists, if it does exist, on this
earth, where if it had existed the evidence of fact would certainly have
been available to prove it. But it is not so as to the soul’s existence
after death. That it does not remain on earth and go about visibly or
interfere in the events of life, is proved by the same weight of
evidence which disproves witchcraft. But that it does not exist
elsewhere, there is absolutely no proof. A very faint, if any,
presumption, is all that is afforded by its disappearance from the
surface of this planet.

Some may think that there is an additional and very strong presumption
against the immortality of the thinking and conscious principle, from
the analysis of all the other objects of Nature. All things in Nature
perish, the most beautiful and perfect being, as philosophers and poets
alike complain, the most perishable. A flower of the most exquisite form
and colouring grows up from a root, comes to perfection in weeks or
months, and lasts only a few hours or days. Why should it be otherwise
with man? Why indeed. But why, also, should it not be otherwise? Feeling
and thought are not merely different from what we call inanimate matter,
but are at the opposite pole of existence, and analogical inference has
little or no validity from the one to the other. Feeling and thought are
much more real than anything else; they Edition: current; Page: [463]
are the only things which we directly know to be real, all things else
being merely the unknown conditions on which these, in our present state
of existence or in some other, depend. All matter apart from the
feelings of sentient beings has but an hypothetical and unsubstantial
existence: it is a mere assumption to account for our sensations; itself
we do not perceive, we are not conscious of it, but only of the
sensations which we are said to receive from it: in reality it is a mere
name for our expectation of sensations, or for our belief that we can
have certain sensations when certain other sensations give indication of
them. Because these contingent possibilities of sensation sooner or
later come to an end and give place to others, is it implied in this,
that the series of our feelings must itself be broken off? This would
not be to reason from one kind of substantive reality to another, but to
draw from something which has no reality except in reference to
something else, conclusions applicable to that which is the only
substantive reality. Mind, (or whatever name we give to what is implied
in consciousness of a continued series of feelings) is in a
philosophical point of view the only reality of which we have any
evidence; and no analogy can be recognized or comparison made between it
and other realities because there are no other known realities to
compare it with. That is quite consistent with its being perishable; but
the question whether it is so or not is res integra, untouched by any of
the results of human knowledge and experience. The case is one of those
very rare cases in which there is really a total absence of evidence on
either side, and in which the absence of evidence for the affirmative
does not, as in so many cases it does, create a strong presumption in
favour of the negative.

The belief, however, in human immortality, in the minds of mankind
generally, is probably not grounded on any scientific arguments either
physical or metaphysical, but on foundations with most minds much
stronger, namely on one hand the disagreeableness of giving up
existence, (to those at least to whom it has hitherto been pleasant) and
on the other the general traditions of mankind. The natural tendency of
belief to follow these two inducements, our own wishes and the general
assent of other people, has been in this instance reinforced by the
utmost exertion of the power of public and private teaching; rulers and
instructors having at all times, with the view of giving greater effect
to their mandates whether from selfish or from public motives,
encouraged to the utmost of their power the belief that there is a life
after death, in which pleasures and sufferings far greater than on
earth, depend on our doing or leaving undone while alive, what we are
commanded to do in the name of the unseen powers. As causes of belief
these various circumstances are most powerful. As rational grounds of it
they carry no weight at all.

That what is called the consoling nature of an opinion, that is, the
pleasure we should have in believing it to be true, can be a ground for
believing it, is Edition: current; Page: [464] a doctrine irrational in
itself and which would sanction half the mischievous illusions recorded
in history or which mislead individual life. It is sometimes, in the
case now under consideration, wrapt up in a quasi-scientific language.
We are told that the desire of immortality is one of our instincts, and
that there is no instinct which has not corresponding to it a real
object fitted to satisfy it. Where there is hunger there is somewhere
food, where there is sexual feeling there is somewhere sex, where there
is love there is somewhere something to be loved, and so forth: in like
manner since there is the instinctive desire of eternal life, eternal
life there must be. The answer to this is patent on the very surface of
the subject. It is unnecessary to go into any recondite considerations
concerning instincts, or to discuss whether the desire in question is an
instinct or not. Granting that wherever there is an instinct there
exists something such as that instinct demands, can it be affirmed that
this something exists in boundless quantity, or sufficient to satisfy
the infinite craving of human desires? What is called the desire of
eternal life is simply the desire of life; and does there not exist that
which this desire calls for? Is there not life? And is not the instinct,
if it be an instinct, gratified by the possession and preservation of
life? To suppose that the desire of life guarantees to us personally the
reality of life through all eternity, is like supposing that the desire
of food assures us that we shall always have as much as we can eat
through our whole lives and as much longer as we can conceive our lives
to be protracted to.

The argument from tradition or the general belief of the human race, if
we accept it as a guide to our own belief, must be accepted entire: if
so we are bound to believe that the souls of human beings not only
survive after death but show themselves as ghosts to the living; for we
find no people who have had the one belief without the other. Indeed it
is probable that the former belief originated in the latter, and that
primitive men would never have supposed that the soul did not die with
the body if they had not fancied that it visited them after death.
Nothing could be more natural than such a fancy; it is, in appearance,
completely realized in dreams, which in Homer and in all ages like
Homer’s, are supposed to be real apparitions. To dreams we have to add
not merely waking hallucinations but the delusions, however baseless, of
sight and hearing, or rather the misinterpretations of those senses,
sight or hearing supplying mere hints from which imagination paints a
complete picture and invests it with reality. These delusions are not to
be judged of by a modern standard: in early times the line between
imagination and perception was by no means clearly defined; there was
little or none of the knowledge we now possess of the actual course of
nature, which makes us distrust or disbelieve any appearance which is at
variance with known laws. In the ignorance of men as to what were the
limits of nature and what was or was not compatible with it, no one
thing seemed, as far as physical considerations Edition: current; Page:
[465] went, to be much more improbable than another. In rejecting,
therefore, as we do, and as we have the best reason to do, the tales and
legends of the actual appearance of disembodied spirits, we take from
under the general belief of mankind in a life after death, what in all
probability was its chief ground and support, and deprive it of even the
very little value which the opinion of rude ages can ever have as
evidence of truth. If it be said that this belief has maintained itself
in ages which have ceased to be rude and which reject the superstitions
with which it once was accompanied, the same may be said of many other
opinions of rude ages, and especially on the most important and
interesting subjects, because it is on those subjects that the reigning
opinion, whatever it may be, is the most sedulously inculcated upon all
who are born into the world. This particular opinion, moreover, if it
has on the whole kept its ground, has done so with a constantly
increasing number of dissentients, and those especially among cultivated
minds. Finally, those cultivated minds which adhere to the belief ground
it, we may reasonably suppose, not on the belief of others, but on
arguments and evidences; and those arguments and evidences, therefore,
are what it concerns us to estimate and judge.

The preceding are a sufficient sample of the arguments for a future life
which do not suppose an antecedent belief in the existence, or any
theory respecting the attributes of the Godhead. It remains to consider
what arguments are supplied by such lights, or such grounds of
conjecture, as natural theology affords, on those great questions.

We have seen that these lights are but faint; that of the existence of a
Creator they afford no more than a preponderance of probability; of his
benevolence a considerably less preponderance; that there is, however,
some reason to think that he cares for the pleasures of his creatures,
but by no means that this is his sole care, or that other purposes do
not often take precedence of it. His intelligence must be adequate to
the contrivances apparent in the universe, but need not be more than
adequate to them, and his power is not only not proved to be infinite,
but the only real evidences in natural theology tend to show that it is
limited, contrivance being a mode of overcoming difficulties, and always
supposing difficulties to be overcome.

We have now to consider what inference can legitimately be drawn from
these premises, in favour of a future life. It seems to me, apart from
express revelation, none at all.

The common arguments are, the goodness of God; the improbability that he
would ordain the annihilation of his noblest and richest work, after the
greater part of its few years of life had been spent in the acquisition
of faculties which time is not allowed him to turn to fruit; and the
special improbability that he would have implanted in us an instinctive
desire of eternal life, and doomed that desire to complete
disappointment.

Edition: current; Page: [466]
These might be arguments in a world the constitution of which made it
possible without contradiction to hold it for the work of a Being at
once omnipotent and benevolent. But they are not arguments in a world
like that in which we live. The benevolence of the divine Being may be
perfect, but his power being subject to unknown limitations, we know not
that he could have given us what we so confidently assert that he must
have given; could (that is) without sacrificing something more
important. Even his benevolence, however justly inferred, is by no means
indicated as the interpretation of his whole purpose, and since we
cannot tell how far other purposes may have interfered with the exercise
of his benevolence, we know not that he would, even if he could have
granted us eternal life. With regard to the supposed improbability of
his having given the wish without its gratification, the same answer may
be made; the scheme which either limitation of power, or conflict of
purposes, compelled him to adopt, may have required that we should have
the wish although it were not destined to be gratified. One thing,
however, is quite certain in respect to God’s government of the world;
that he either could not, or would not, grant to us every thing we wish.
We wish for life, and he has granted some life: that we wish (or some of
us wish) for a boundless extent of life and that it is not granted, is
no exception to the ordinary modes of his government. Many a man would
like to be a Crœsus or an Augustus Cæsar, but has his wishes gratified
only to the moderate extent of a pound a week or the Secretaryship of
his Trades Union. There is, therefore, no assurance whatever of a life
after death, on grounds of natural religion. But to any one who feels it
conducive either to his satisfaction or to his usefulness to hope for a
future state as a possibility, there is no hindrance to his indulging
that hope. Appearances point to the existence of a Being who has great
power over us—all the power implied in the creation of the Kosmos, or of
its organized beings at least—and of whose goodness we have evidence
though not of its being his predominant attribute: and as we do not know
the limits either of his power or of his goodness, there is room to hope
that both the one and the other may extend to granting us this gift
provided that it would really be beneficial to us. The same ground which
permits the hope warrants us in expecting that if there be a future life
it will be at least as good as the present, and will not be wanting in
the best feature of the present life, improvability by our own efforts.
Nothing can be more opposed to every estimate we can form of
probability, than the common idea of the future life as a state of
rewards and punishments in any other sense than that the consequences of
our actions upon our own character and susceptibilities will follow us
in the future as they have done in the past and present. Whatever be the
probabilities of a future life, all the probabilities in case of a
future life are that such as we have been made or have made ourselves
before the change, such we shall enter into the life hereafter; and that
the fact of death Edition: current; Page: [467] will make no sudden
break in our spiritual life, nor influence our character any otherwise
than as any important change in our mode of existence may always be
expected to modify it. Our thinking principle has its laws which in this
life are invariable, and any analogies drawn from this life must assume
that the same laws will continue. To imagine that a miracle will be
wrought at death by the act of God making perfect every one whom it is
his will to include among his elect, might be justified by an express
revelation duly authenticated, but is utterly opposed to every
presumption that can be deduced from the light of Nature.

Edition: current; Page: [468]


PART IV


REVELATION

the discussion in the preceding pages respecting the evidences of Theism
has been strictly confined to those which are derived from the light of
Nature. It is a different question what addition has been made to those
evidences, and to what extent the conclusions obtainable from them have
been amplified or modified, by the establishment of a direct
communication with the Supreme Being. It would be beyond the purpose of
this Essay, to take into consideration the positive evidences of the
Christian, or any other belief, which claims to be a revelation from
Heaven. But such general considerations as are applicable not to a
particular system, but to Revelation generally, may properly find a
place here, and are indeed necessary to give a sufficiently practical
bearing to the results of the preceding investigation.

In the first place, then, the indications of a Creator and of his
attributes which we have been able to find in Nature, though so much
slighter and less conclusive even as to his existence than the pious
mind would wish to consider them, and still more unsatisfactory in the
information they afford as to his attributes, are yet sufficient to give
to the supposition of a Revelation a standing point which it would not
otherwise have had. The alleged Revelation is not obliged to build up
its case from the foundation; it has not to prove the very existence of
the Being from whom it professes to come. It claims to be a message from
a Being whose existence, whose power, and to a certain extent whose
wisdom and goodness, are, if not proved, at least indicated with more or
less of probability by the phenomena of Nature. The sender of the
alleged message is not a sheer invention; there are grounds independent
of the message itself for belief in his reality; grounds which, though
insufficient for proof, are sufficient to take away all antecedent
improbability from the supposition that a message may really have been
received from him. It is, moreover, much to the purpose to take notice,
that the very imperfection of the evidences which Natural Theology can
produce of the Divine attributes, removes some of the chief stumbling
blocks to the belief of a Revelation; since the objections grounded on
imperfections in the Revelation itself, however conclusive against it if
it is considered as a record of the acts or an expression of the wisdom
of a Being of infinite power combined with infinite wisdom and goodness,
are no reason whatever against its having come from Edition: current;
Page: [469] a Being such as the course of nature points to, whose wisdom
is possibly, his power certainly, limited, and whose goodness, though
real, is not likely to have been the only motive which actuated him in
the work of Creation. The argument of Butler’s Analogy, is, from its own
point of view, conclusive: the Christian religion is open to no
objections, either moral or intellectual, which do not apply at least
equally to the common theory of Deism; the morality of the Gospels is
far higher and better than that which shows itself in the order of
Nature; and what is morally objectionable in the Christian theory of the
world, is objectionable only when taken in conjunction with the doctrine
of an omnipotent God: and (at least as understood by the most
enlightened Christians) by no means imports any moral obliquity in a
Being whose power is supposed to be restricted by real, though unknown
obstacles, which prevented him from fully carrying out his design. The
grave error of Butler was that he shrank from admitting the hypothesis
of limited powers; and his appeal consequently amounts to this: The
belief of Christians is neither more absurd nor more immoral than the
belief of Deists who acknowledge an Omnipotent Creator, let us,
therefore, in spite of the absurdity and immorality, believe both. He
ought to have said, let us cut down our belief of either to what does
not involve absurdity or immorality; to what is neither intellectually
self-contradictory nor morally perverted.

To return, however, to the main subject: on the hypothesis of a God, who
made the world, and in making it had regard, however that regard may
have been limited by other considerations, to the happiness of his
sentient creatures, there is no antecedent improbability in the
supposition that his concern for their good would continue, and that he
might once or oftener give proof of it by communicating to them some
knowledge of himself beyond what they were able to make out by their
unassisted faculties, and some knowledge or precepts useful for guiding
them through the difficulties of life. Neither on the only tenable
hypothesis, that of limited power, is it open to us to object that these
helps ought to have been greater, or in any way other than they are. The
only question to be entertained, and which we cannot dispense ourselves
from entertaining, is that of evidence. Can any evidence suffice to
prove a Divine Revelation? And of what nature, and what amount, must
that evidence be? Whether the special evidences of Christianity, or of
any other alleged revelation, do or do not come up to the mark, is a
different question, into which I do not propose directly to enter. The
question I intend to consider, is, what evidence is required; what
general conditions it ought to satisfy; and whether they are such as,
according to the known constitution of things, can be satisfied.

The evidences of Revelation are commonly distinguished as external or
internal. External evidences are the testimony of the senses or of
witnesses. By the internal evidences are meant the indications which the
Revelation Edition: current; Page: [470] itself is thought to furnish of
its divine origin; indications supposed to consist chiefly in the
excellence of its precepts, and its general suitability to the
circumstances and needs of human nature.

The consideration of these internal evidences is very important, but
their importance is principally negative; they may be conclusive grounds
for rejecting a Revelation, but cannot of themselves warrant the
acceptance of it as divine. If the moral character of the doctrines of
an alleged Revelation is bad and perverting, we ought to reject it from
whomsoever it comes; for it cannot come from a good and wise Being. But
the excellence of their morality can never entitle us to ascribe to them
a supernatural origin: for we cannot have conclusive reason for
believing that the human faculties were incompetent to find out moral
doctrines of which the human faculties can perceive and recognize the
excellence. A Revelation, therefore, cannot be proved divine unless by
external evidence; that is, by the exhibition of supernatural facts. And
we have to consider, whether it is possible to prove supernatural facts,
and if it is, what evidence is required to prove them.

This question has only, so far as I know, been seriously raised on the
sceptical side, by Hume. It is the question involved in his famous
argument against Miracles:[*] an argument which goes down to the depths
of the subject, but the exact scope and effect of which, (perhaps not
conceived with perfect correctness by that great thinker himself), have
in general been utterly misconceived by those who have attempted to
answer him. Dr. Campbell, for example, one of the acutest of his
antagonists, has thought himself obliged, in order to support the
credibility of miracles, to lay down doctrines which virtually go the
length of maintaining that antecedent improbability is never a
sufficient ground for refusing credence to a statement, if it is well
attested.[†] Dr. Campbell’s fallacy lay in overlooking a double meaning
of the word improbability; as I have pointed out in my Logic, and, still
earlier, in an editorial note to Bentham’s treatise on Evidence.[‡]

Taking the question from the very beginning; it is evidently impossible
to maintain that if a supernatural fact really occurs, proof of its
occurrence cannot be accessible to the human faculties. The evidence of
our senses could prove this as it can prove other things. To put the
most extreme case: suppose that I actually saw and heard a Being, either
of the human form, or of some form previously unknown to me, commanding
a world to exist, and a new world actually starting into existence and
commencing a movement Edition: current; Page: [471] through space, at
his command. There can be no doubt that this evidence would convert the
creation of worlds from a speculation into a fact of experience. It may
be said, I could not know that so singular an appearance was anything
more than a hallucination of my senses. True; but the same doubt exists
at first respecting every unsuspected and surprising fact which comes to
light in our physical researches. That our senses have been deceived, is
a possibility which has to be met and dealt with, and we do deal with it
by several means. If we repeat the experiment, and again with the same
result; if at the time of the observation the impressions of our senses
are in all other respects the same as usual, rendering the supposition
of their being morbidly affected in this one particular, extremely
improbable; above all, if other people’s senses confirm the testimony of
our own; we conclude, with reason, that we may trust our senses. Indeed
our senses are all that we have to trust to. We depend on them for the
ultimate premises even of our reasonings. There is no other appeal
against their decision than an appeal from the senses without
precautions to the senses with all due precautions. When the evidence,
on which an opinion rests, is equal to that upon which the whole conduct
and safety of our lives is founded, we need ask no further. Objections
which apply equally to all evidence are valid against none. They only
prove abstract fallibility.

But the evidence of miracles, at least to Protestant Christians, is not,
in our own day, of this cogent description. It is not the evidence of
our senses, but of witnesses, and even this not at first hand, but
resting on the attestation of books and traditions. And even in the case
of the original eye-witnesses, the supernatural facts asserted on their
alleged testimony, are not of the transcendant character supposed in our
example, about the nature of which, or the impossibility of their having
had a natural origin, there could be little room for doubt. On the
contrary, the recorded miracles are, in the first place, generally such
as it would have been extremely difficult to verify as matters of fact,
and in the next place, are hardly ever beyond the possibility of having
been brought about by human means or by the spontaneous agencies of
nature. It is to cases of this kind that Hume’s argument against the
credibility of miracles was meant to apply.

His argument is: The evidence of miracles consists of testimony. The
ground of our reliance on testimony is our experience that certain
conditions being supposed, testimony is generally veracious. But the
same experience tells us that even under the best conditions testimony
is frequently either intentionally or unintentionally, false. When,
therefore, the fact to which testimony is produced is one the happening
of which would be more at variance with experience than the falsehood of
testimony, we ought not to believe it. And this rule all prudent persons
observe in the conduct of life. Those who do not, are sure to suffer for
their credulity.

Edition: current; Page: [472]
Now a miracle (the argument goes on to say) is, in the highest possible
degree, contradictory to experience: for if it were not contradictory to
experience it would not be a miracle. The very reason for its being
regarded as a miracle is that it is a breach of a law of nature, that
is, of an otherwise invariable and inviolable uniformity in the
succession of natural events. There is, therefore, the very strongest
reason for disbelieving it, that experience can give for disbelieving
anything. But the mendacity or error of witnesses, even though numerous
and of fair character, is quite within the bounds of even common
experience. That supposition, therefore, ought to be preferred.

There are two apparently weak points in this argument. One is, that the
evidence of experience to which its appeal is made is only negative
evidence, which is not so conclusive as positive; since facts of which
there had been no previous experience are often discovered, and proved
by positive experience to be true. The other seemingly vulnerable point
is this. The argument has the appearance of assuming that the testimony
of experience against miracles is undeviating and indubitable, as it
would be if the whole question was about the probability of future
miracles, none having taken place in the past; whereas the very thing
asserted on the other side is that there have been miracles, and that
the testimony of experience is not wholly on the negative side. All the
evidence alleged in favour of any miracle ought to be reckoned as
counter evidence in refutation of the ground on which it is asserted
that miracles ought to be disbelieved. The question can only be stated
fairly as depending on a balance of evidence: a certain amount of
positive evidence in favour of miracles, and a negative presumption from
the general course of human experience against them.

In order to support the argument under this double correction, it has to
be shown that the negative presumption against a miracle is very much
stronger than that against a merely new and surprising fact. This,
however, is evidently the case. A new physical discovery even if it
consists in the defeating of a well established law of nature, is but
the discovery of another law previously unknown. There is nothing in
this but what is familiar to our experience: we were aware that we did
not know all the laws of nature, and we were aware that one such law is
liable to be counteracted by others. The new phenomenon, when brought to
light, is found still to depend on law; it is always exactly reproduced
when the same circumstances are repeated. Its occurrence, therefore, is
within the limits of variation in experience, which experience itself
discloses. But a miracle, in the very fact of being a miracle, declares
itself to be a supersession not of one natural law by another, but of
the law which includes all others, which experience shows to be
universal for all phenomena, viz., that they depend on some law; that
they are always the same when there are the same phenomenal antecedents,
and neither take Edition: current; Page: [473] place in the absence of
their phenomenal causes, nor ever fail to take place when the phenomenal
conditions are all present.

It is evident that this argument against belief in miracles had very
little to rest upon until a comparatively modern stage in the progress
of science. A few generations ago the universal dependence of phenomena
on invariable laws was not only not recognized by mankind in general but
could not be regarded by the instructed as a scientifically established
truth. There were many phenomena which seemed quite irregular in their
course, without dependence on any known antecedents: and though, no
doubt, a certain regularity in the occurrence of the most familiar
phenomena must always have been recognized, yet, even in these, the
exceptions which were constantly occurring had not yet, by an
investigation and generalization of the circumstances of their
occurrence, been reconciled with the general rule. The heavenly bodies
were from of old the most conspicuous types of regular and unvarying
order: yet even among them comets were a phenomenon apparently
originating without any law, and eclipses, one which seemed to take
place in violation of law. Accordingly both comets and eclipses long
continued to be regarded as of a miraculous nature, intended as signs
and omens of human fortunes. It would have been impossible in those days
to prove to any one that this supposition was antecedently improbable.
It seemed more conformable to appearances than the hypothesis of an
unknown law.

Now, however, when, in the progress of science, all phenomena have been
shown, by indisputable evidence, to be amenable to law, and even in the
cases in which those laws have not yet been exactly ascertained, delay
in ascertaining them is fully accounted for by the special difficulties
of the subject; the defenders of miracles have adapted their argument to
this altered state of things, by maintaining that a miracle need not
necessarily be a violation of law. It may, they say, take place in
fulfilment of a more recondite law, to us unknown.

If by this it be only meant that the Divine Being, in the exercise of
his power of interfering with and suspending his own laws, guides
himself by some general principle or rule of action, this, of course,
cannot be disproved, and is in itself the most probable supposition. But
if the argument means that a miracle may be the fulfilment of a law in
the same sense in which the ordinary events of Nature are fulfilments of
laws, it seems to indicate an imperfect conception of what is meant by a
law, and of what constitutes a miracle.

When we say that an ordinary physical fact always takes place according
to some invariable law, we mean that it is connected by uniform sequence
or coexistence with some definite set of physical antecedents; that
whenever that set is exactly reproduced the same phenomenon will take
place, unless counteracted by the similar laws of some other physical
antecedents; and Edition: current; Page: [474] that whenever it does
take place, it would always be found that its special set of antecedents
(or one of its sets if it has more than one) has pre-existed. Now, an
event which takes place in this manner, is not a miracle. To make it a
miracle it must be produced by a direct volition, without the use of
means; or at least, of any means which if simply repeated would produce
it. To constitute a miracle a phenomenon must take place without having
been preceded by any antecedent phenomenal conditions sufficient again
to reproduce it; or a phenomenon for the production of which the
antecedent conditions existed, must be arrested or prevented without the
intervention of any phenomenal antecedents which would arrest or prevent
it in a future case. The test of a miracle is: Were there present in the
case such external conditions, such second causes we may call them, that
whenever these conditions or causes reappear the event will be
reproduced? If there were, it is not a miracle; if there were not, it is
a miracle, but it is not according to law: it is an event produced,
without, or in spite of law.

It will perhaps be said that a miracle does not necessarily exclude the
intervention of second causes. If it were the will of God to raise a
thunderstorm by miracle, he might do it by means of winds and clouds.
Undoubtedly; but the winds and clouds were either sufficient when
produced to excite the thunderstorm without other divine assistance, or
they were not. If they were not, the storm is not a fulfilment of law,
but a violation of it. If they were sufficient, there is a miracle, but
it is not the storm; it is the production of the winds and clouds, or
whatever link in the chain of causation it was at which the influence of
physical antecedents was dispensed with. If that influence was never
dispensed with, but the event called miraculous was produced by natural
means, and those again by others, and so on from the beginning of
things; if the event is no otherwise the act of God than in having been
foreseen and ordained by him as the consequence of the forces put in
action at the Creation; then there is no miracle at all, nor anything
different from the ordinary working of God’s providence.

For another example: a person professing to be divinely commissioned,
cures a sick person, by some apparently insignificant external
application. Would this application, administered by a person not
specially commissioned from above, have effected the cure? If so, there
is no miracle; if not, there is a miracle, but there is a violation of
law.

It will be said, however, that if these be violations of law, then law
is violated every time that any outward effect is produced by a
voluntary act of a human being. Human volition is constantly modifying
natural phenomena, not by violating their laws, but by using their laws.
Why may not divine volition do the same? The power of volitions over
phenomena is itself a law, and one of the earliest known and
acknowledged laws of nature. It is true, the human will exercises power
over objects in general indirectly, Edition: current; Page: [475]
through the direct power which it possesses only over the human muscles.
God, however, has direct power not merely over one thing, but over all
the objects which he has made. There is, therefore, no more a
supposition of violation of law in supposing that events are produced,
prevented, or modified by God’s action, than in the supposition of their
being produced, prevented, or modified by man’s action. Both are equally
in the course of nature, both equally consistent with what we know of
the government of all things by law.

Those who thus argue are mostly believers in Free Will, and maintain
that every human volition originates a new chain of causation, of which
it is itself the commencing link, not connected by invariable sequence
with any anterior fact. Even, therefore, if a divine interposition did
constitute a breaking-in upon the connected chain of events, by the
introduction of a new originating cause without root in the past, this
would be no reason for discrediting it, since every human act of
volition does precisely the same. If the one is a breach of law, so are
the others. In fact, the reign of law does not extend to the origination
of volition.

Those who dispute the Free Will theory, and regard volition as no
exception to the Universal law of Cause and Effect, may answer, that
volitions do not interrupt the chain of causation, but carry it on, the
connection of cause and effect being of just the same nature between
motive and act as between a combination of physical antecedents and a
physical consequent. But this, whether true or not, does not really
affect the argument: for the interference of human will with the course
of nature is only not an exception to law when we include among laws the
relation of motive to volition; and by the same rule interference by the
Divine will would not be an exception either; since we cannot but
suppose the Deity, in every one of his acts, to be determined by
motives.

The alleged analogy therefore holds good: but what it proves is only
what I have from the first maintained—that divine interference with
nature could be proved if we had the same sort of evidence for it which
we have for human interferences. The question of antecedent
improbability only arises because divine interposition is not certified
by the direct evidence of perception, but is always matter of inference,
and more or less of speculative inference. And a little consideration
will show that in these circumstances the antecedent presumption against
the truth of the inference is extremely strong.

When the human will interferes to produce any physical phenomenon,
except the movements of the human body, it does so by the employment of
means: and is obliged to employ such means as are by their own physical
properties sufficient to bring about the effect. Divine interference, by
hypothesis, proceeds in a different manner from this: it produces its
effect without means, or with such as are in themselves insufficient. In
the first case, all the Edition: current; Page: [476] physical phenomena
except the first bodily movement are produced in strict conformity to
physical causation; while that first movement is traced by positive
observation, to the cause (the volition) which produced it. In the other
case, the event is supposed not to have been produced at all through
physical causation, while there is no direct evidence to connect it with
any volition. The ground on which it is ascribed to a volition is only
negative, because there is no other apparent way of accounting for its
existence.

But in this merely speculative explanation there is always another
hypothesis possible, viz., that the event may have been produced by
physical causes, in a manner not apparent. It may either be due to a law
of physical nature not yet known, or to the unknown presence of the
conditions necessary for producing it according to some known law.
Supposing even that the event, supposed to be miraculous, does not reach
us through the uncertain medium of human testimony but rests on the
direct evidence of our own senses; even then so long as there is no
direct evidence of its production by a divine volition, like that we
have for the production of bodily movements by human volitions—so long,
therefore, as the miraculous character of the event is but an inference
from the supposed inadequacy of the laws of physical nature to account
for it,—so long will the hypothesis of a natural origin for the
phenomenon be entitled to preference over that of a supernatural one.
The commonest principles of sound judgment forbid us to suppose for any
effect a cause of which we have absolutely no experience, unless all
those of which we have experience are ascertained to be absent. Now
there are few things of which we have more frequent experience than of
physical facts which our knowledge does not enable us to account for,
because they depend either on laws which observation, aided by science,
has not yet brought to light, or on facts the presence of which in the
particular case is unsuspected by us. Accordingly when we hear of a
prodigy we always, in these modern times, believe that if it really
occurred it was neither the work of God nor of a demon, but the
consequence of some unknown natural law or of some hidden fact. Nor is
either of these suppositions precluded when, as in the case of a miracle
properly so called, the wonderful event seemed to depend upon the will
of a human being. It is always possible that there may be at work some
undetected law of nature which the wonder-worker may have acquired,
consciously or unconsciously, the power of calling into action; or that
the wonder may have been wrought (as in the truly extraordinary feats of
jugglers) by the employment, unperceived by us, of ordinary laws: which
also need not necessarily be a case of voluntary deception; or, lastly,
the event may have had no connection with the volition at all, but the
coincidence between them may be the effect of craft or accident, the
miracle-worker having seemed or affected to produce by his will that
which was already about to take place, as if one were to command an
eclipse of the sun at the Edition: current; Page: [477] moment when one
knew by astronomy that an eclipse was on the point of taking place. In a
case of this description, the miracle might be tested by a challenge to
repeat it; but it is worthy of remark, that recorded miracles were
seldom or never put to this test. No miracle-worker seems ever to have
made a practice of raising the dead: that and the other most signal of
the miraculous operations are reported to have been performed only in
one or a few isolated cases, which may have been either cunningly
selected cases, or accidental coincidences. There is, in short, nothing
to exclude the supposition that every alleged miracle was due to natural
causes: and as long as that supposition remains possible, no scientific
observer, and no man of ordinary practical judgment, would assume by
conjecture a cause which no reason existed for supposing to be real,
save the necessity of accounting for something which is sufficiently
accounted for without it.

Were we to stop here, the case against miracles might seem to be
complete. But on further inspection it will be seen that we cannot, from
the above considerations, conclude absolutely that the miraculous theory
of the production of a phenomenon ought to be at once rejected. We can
conclude only that no extraordinary powers which have ever been alleged
to be exercised by any human being over nature, can be evidence of
miraculous gifts to any one to whom the existence of a supernatural
Being, and his interference in human affairs, is not already a vera
causa. The existence of God cannot possibly be proved by miracles, for
unless a God is already recognized, the apparent miracle can always be
accounted for on a more probable hypothesis than that of the
interference of a Being of whose very existence it is supposed to be the
sole evidence. Thus far Hume’s argument is conclusive. But it is far
from being equally so when the existence of a Being who created the
present order of Nature, and, therefore, may well be thought to have
power to modify it, is accepted as a fact, or even as a probability
resting on independent evidence. Once admit a God, and the production by
his direct volition of an effect which in any case owed its origin to
his creative will, is no longer a purely arbitrary hypothesis to account
for the fact, but must be reckoned with as a serious possibility. The
question then changes its character, and the decision of it must now
rest upon what is known or reasonably surmised as to the manner of God’s
government of the universe: whether this knowledge or surmise makes it
the more probable supposition that the event was brought about by the
agencies by which his government is ordinarily carried on, or that it is
the result of a special and extraordinary interposition of his will in
supersession of those ordinary agencies.

In the first place, then, assuming as a fact the existence and
providence of God, the whole of our observation of Nature proves to us
by incontrovertible evidence that the rule of his government is by means
of second causes; that all facts, or at least all physical facts, follow
uniformly upon given physical Edition: current; Page: [478] conditions,
and never occur but when the appropriate collection of physical
conditions is realized. I limit the assertion to physical facts, in
order to leave the case of human volition an open question: though
indeed I need not do so, for if the human will is free, it has been left
free by the Creator, and is not controlled by him either through second
causes or directly, so that, not being governed, it is not a specimen of
his mode of government. Whatever he does govern, he governs by second
causes. This was not obvious in the infancy of science; it was more and
more recognized as the processes of nature were more carefully and
accurately examined, until there now remains no class of phenomena of
which it is not positively known, save some cases which from their
obscurity and complication our scientific processes have not yet been
able completely to clear up and disentangle, and in which, therefore,
the proof that they also are governed by natural laws could not, in the
present state of science, be more complete. The evidence, though merely
negative, which these circumstances afford that government by second
causes is universal, is admitted for all except directly religious
purposes to be conclusive. When either a man of science for scientific
or a man of the world for practical purposes inquires into an event, he
asks himself what is its cause? and not, has it any natural cause? A man
would be laughed at who set down as one of the alternative suppositions
that there is no other cause for it than the will of God.

Against this weight of negative evidence we have to set such positive
evidence as is produced in attestation of exceptions; in other words,
the positive evidences of miracles. And I have already admitted that
this evidence might conceivably have been such as to make the exception
equally certain with the rule. If we had the direct testimony of our
senses to a supernatural fact, it might be as completely authenticated
and made certain as any natural one. But we never have. The supernatural
character of the fact is always, as I have said, matter of inference and
speculation: and the mystery always admits the possibility of a solution
not supernatural. To those who already believe in supernatural power,
the supernatural hypothesis may appear more probable than the natural
one; but only if it accords with what we know or reasonably surmise
respecting the ways of the supernatural agent. Now all that we know,
from the evidence of nature, concerning his ways, is in harmony with the
natural theory and repugnant to the supernatural. There is, therefore, a
vast preponderance of probability against a miracle, to counterbalance
which would require a very extraordinary and indisputable congruity in
the supposed miracle and its circumstances with something which we
conceive ourselves to know, or to have grounds for believing, with
regard to the divine attributes.

This extraordinary congruity is supposed to exist when the purpose of
the miracle is extremely beneficial to mankind, as when it serves to
accredit Edition: current; Page: [479] some highly important belief. The
goodness of God, it is supposed, affords a high degree of antecedent
probability that he would make an exception to his general rule of
government, for so excellent a purpose. For reasons, however, which have
already been entered into, any inference drawn by us from the goodness
of God to what he has or has not actually done, is to the last degree
precarious. If we reason directly from God’s goodness to positive facts,
no misery, nor vice nor crime ought to exist in the world. We can see no
reason in God’s goodness why if he deviated once from the ordinary
system of his government in order to do good to man, he should not have
done so on a hundred other occasions; nor why, if the benefit aimed at
by some given deviation, such as the revelation of Christianity, was
transcendent and unique, that precious gift should only have been
vouchsafed after the lapse of many ages; or why, when it was at last
given, the evidence of it should have been left open to so much doubt
and difficulty. Let it be remembered also that the goodness of God
affords no presumption in favour of a deviation from his general system
of government unless the good purpose could not have been attained
without deviation. If God intended that mankind should receive
Christianity or any other gift, it would have agreed better with all
that we know of his government to have made provision in the scheme of
creation for its arising at the appointed time by natural development;
which, let it be added, all the knowledge we now possess concerning the
history of the human mind, tends to the conclusion that it actually did.

To all these considerations ought to be added the extremely imperfect
nature of the testimony itself which we possess for the miracles, real
or supposed, which accompanied the foundation of Christianity and of
every other revealed religion. Take it at the best, it is the
uncross-examined testimony of extremely ignorant people, credulous as
such usually are, honourably credulous when the excellence of the
doctrine or just reverence for the teacher makes them eager to believe;
unaccustomed to draw the line between the perceptions of sense, and what
is superinduced upon them by the suggestions of a lively imagination;
unversed in the difficult art of deciding between appearance and
reality, and between the natural and the supernatural; in times,
moreover, when no one thought it worth while to contradict any alleged
miracle, because it was the belief of the age that miracles in
themselves proved nothing, since they could be worked by a lying spirit
as well as by the spirit of God. Such were the witnesses; and even of
them we do not possess the direct testimony; the documents, of date long
subsequent, even on the orthodox theory, which contain the only history
of these events, very often do not even name the supposed eye-witnesses.
They put down (it is but just to admit), the best and least absurd of
the wonderful stories such multitudes of which were current among the
early Christians; but when they do, exceptionally, name any of the
persons who were the subjects or spectators Edition: current; Page:
[480] of the miracle, they doubtless draw from tradition, and mention
those names with which the story was in the popular mind, (perhaps
accidentally) connected: for whoever has observed the way in which even
now a story grows up from some small foundation, taking on additional
details at every step, knows well how from being at first anonymous it
gets names attached to it; the name of some one by whom perhaps the
story has been told, being brought into the story itself first as a
witness, and still later as a party concerned.

It is also noticeable and is a very important consideration, that
stories of miracles only grow up among the ignorant and are adopted, if
ever, by the educated when they have already become the belief of
multitudes. Those which are believed by Protestants all originate in
ages and nations in which there was hardly any canon of probability, and
miracles were thought to be among the commonest of all phenomena. The
Catholic Church, indeed, holds as an article of faith that miracles have
never ceased, and new ones continue to be now and then brought forth and
believed, even in the present incredulous age—yet if in an incredulous
generation certainly not among the incredulous portion of it, but always
among people who, in addition to the most childish ignorance, have grown
up (as all do who are educated by the Catholic clergy) trained in the
persuasion that it is a duty to believe and a sin to doubt; that it is
dangerous to be sceptical about anything which is tendered for belief in
the name of the true religion; and that nothing is so contrary to piety
as incredulity. But these miracles which no one but a Roman Catholic,
and by no means every Roman Catholic believes, rest frequently upon an
amount of testimony greatly surpassing that which we possess for any of
the early miracles; and superior especially in one of the most essential
points, that in many cases the alleged eye-witnesses are known, and we
have their story at first hand.

Thus, then, stands the balance of evidence in respect to the reality of
miracles, assuming the existence and government of God to be proved by
other evidence. On the one side, the great negative presumption arising
from the whole of what the course of nature discloses to us of the
divine government, as carried on through second causes and by invariable
sequences of physical effects upon constant antecedents. On the other
side, a few exceptional instances, attested by evidence not of a
character to warrant belief in any facts in the smallest degree unusual
or improbable; the eye-witnesses in most cases unknown, in none
competent by character or education to scrutinize the real nature of the
appearances which they may have seen,* and Edition: current; Page: [481]
moved moreover by a union of the strongest motives which can inspire
human beings to persuade, first themselves, and then others, that what
they had seen was a miracle. The facts, too, even if faithfully
reported, are never incompatible with the supposition that they were
either mere coincidences, or were produced by natural means; even when
no specific conjecture can be made as to those means, which in general
it can. The conclusion I draw is that miracles have no claim whatever to
the character of historical facts and are wholly invalid as evidences of
any revelation.

What can be said with truth on the side of miracles amounts only to
this: Considering that the order of nature affords some evidence of the
reality of a Creator, and of his bearing good will to his creatures
though not of its being the sole prompter of his conduct towards them:
considering, again, that all the evidence of his existence is evidence
also that he is not all-powerful, and considering that in our ignorance
of the limits of his power we cannot positively decide that he was able
to provide for us by the original plan of Creation all the good which it
entered into his intentions to bestow upon us, or even to bestow any
part of it at any earlier period than that at which we actually received
it—considering these things, when we consider further that a gift,
extremely precious, came to us which though facilitated was not
apparently necessitated by what had gone before, but was due, as far as
appearances go, to the peculiar mental and moral endowments of one man,
and that man openly proclaimed that it did not come from himself but
from God through him, then we are entitled to say that there is nothing
so inherently impossible or absolutely incredible in this supposition as
to preclude any one from hoping that it may perhaps be true. I say from
hoping; I go no further; for I cannot attach any evidentiary value to
the testimony even of Christ on such a subject, since he is never said
to have declared any evidence of his mission (unless his own
interpretations of the Prophecies be so considered) except internal
conviction; and everybody knows that in prescientific times men always
supposed that any unusual faculties which came to them they knew not
how, were an inspiration from God; the best men always being the
readiest to ascribe any honourable peculiarity in themselves to that
higher source, rather than to their own merits.

Edition: current; Page: [482]


PART V


GENERAL RESULT

from the result of the preceding examination of the evidences of Theism,
and (Theism being presupposed) of the evidences of any Revelation, it
follows that the rational attitude of a thinking mind towards the
supernatural, whether in natural or in revealed religion, is that of
scepticism as distinguished from belief on the one hand, and from
atheism on the other: including, in the present case, under atheism, the
negative as well as the positive form of disbelief in a God, viz., not
only the dogmatic denial of his existence, but the denial that there is
any evidence on either side, which for most practical purposes amounts
to the same thing as if the existence of a God had been disproved. If we
are right in the conclusions to which we have been led by the preceding
inquiry there is evidence, but insufficient for proof, and amounting
only to one of the lower degrees of probability. The indication given by
such evidence as there is, points to the creation, not indeed of the
universe, but of the present order of it by an Intelligent Mind, whose
power over the materials was not absolute, whose love for his creatures
was not his sole actuating inducement, but who nevertheless desired
their good. The notion of a providential government by an omnipotent
Being for the good of his creatures must be entirely dismissed. Even of
the continued existence of the Creator we have no other guarantee than
that he cannot be subject to the law of death which affects terrestrial
beings, since the conditions that produce this liability wherever it is
known to exist are of his creating. That this Being, not being
omnipotent, may have produced a machinery falling short of his
intentions, and which may require the occasional interposition of the
Maker’s hand, is a supposition not in itself absurd nor impossible,
though in none of the cases in which such interposition is believed to
have occurred is the evidence such as could possibly prove it; it
remains a simple possibility, which those may dwell on to whom it yields
comfort to suppose that blessings which ordinary human power is
inadequate to attain, may come not from extraordinary human power, but
from the bounty of an intelligence beyond the human, and which
continuously cares for man. The possibility of a life after death rests
on the same footing—of a boon which this powerful Being who wishes well
to man, may have the power to grant, and which if the message alleged to
have been sent by him was really sent, he has actually promised.
Edition: current; Page: [483] The whole domain of the supernatural is
thus removed from the region of Belief into that of simple Hope; and in
that, for anything we can see, it is likely always to remain; for we can
hardly anticipate either that any positive evidence will be acquired of
the direct agency of Divine Benevolence in human destiny, or that any
reason will be discovered for considering the realization of human hopes
on that subject as beyond the pale of possibility.

It is now to be considered whether the indulgence of hope, in a region
of imagination merely, in which there is no prospect that any probable
grounds of expectation will ever be obtained, is irrational, and ought
to be discouraged as a departure from the rational principle of
regulating our feelings as well as opinions strictly by evidence.

This is a point which different thinkers are likely, for a long time at
least, to decide differently, according to their individual temperament.
The principles which ought to govern the cultivation and the regulation
of the imagination—with a view on the one hand of preventing it from
disturbing the rectitude of the intellect and the right direction of the
actions and will, and on the other hand of employing it as a power for
increasing the happiness of life and giving elevation to the
character—are a subject which has never yet engaged the serious
consideration of philosophers, though some opinion on it is implied in
almost all modes of thinking on human character and education. And, I
expect, that this will hereafter be regarded as a very important branch
of study for practical purposes, and the more, in proportion as the
weakening of positive beliefs respecting states of existence superior to
the human, leaves the imagination of higher things less provided with
material from the domain of supposed reality. To me it seems that human
life, small and confined as it is, and as, considered merely in the
present, it is likely to remain even when the progress of material and
moral improvement may have freed it from the greater part of its present
calamities, stands greatly in need of any wider range and greater height
of aspiration for itself and its destination, which the exercise of
imagination can yield to it without running counter to the evidence of
fact; and that it is a part of wisdom to make the most of any, even
small, probabilities on this subject, which furnish imagination with any
footing to support itself upon. And I am satisfied that the cultivation
of such a tendency in the imagination, provided it goes on pari passu
with the cultivation of severe reason, has no necessary tendency to
pervert the judgment; but that it is possible to form a perfectly sober
estimate of the evidences on both sides of a question and yet to let the
imagination dwell by preference on those possibilities, which are at
once the most comforting and the most improving, without in the least
degree overrating the solidity of the grounds for expecting that these
rather than any others will be the possibilities actually realized.

Though this is not in the number of the practical maxims handed down by
Edition: current; Page: [484] tradition and recognized as rules for the
conduct of life, a great part of the happiness of life depends upon the
tacit observance of it. What, for instance, is the meaning of that which
is always accounted one of the chief blessings of life, a cheerful
disposition? What but the tendency, either from constitution or habit,
to dwell chiefly on the brighter side both of the present and of the
future? If every aspect, whether agreeable or odious of every thing,
ought to occupy exactly the same place in our imagination which it fills
in fact, and therefore ought to fill in our deliberate reason, what we
call a cheerful disposition would be but one of the forms of folly, on a
par except in agreeableness with the opposite disposition in which the
gloomy and painful view of all things is habitually predominant. But it
is not found in practice that those who take life cheerfully are less
alive to rational prospects of evil or danger and more careless of
making due provision against them, than other people. The tendency is
rather the other way, for a hopeful disposition gives a spur to the
faculties and keeps all the active energies in good working order. When
imagination and reason receive each its appropriate culture they do not
succeed in usurping each other’s prerogatives. It is not necessary for
keeping up our conviction that we must die, that we should be always
brooding over death. It is far better that we should think no further
about what we cannot possibly avert, than is required for observing the
rules of prudence in regard to our own life and that of others, and
fulfilling whatever duties devolve upon us in contemplation of the
inevitable event. The way to secure this is not to think perpetually of
death, but to think perpetually of our duties, and of the rule of life.
The true rule of practical wisdom is not that of making all the aspects
of things equally prominent in our habitual contemplations, but of
giving the greatest prominence to those of their aspects which depend
on, or can be modified by, our own conduct. In things which do not
depend on us, it is not solely for the sake of a more enjoyable life
that the habit is desirable of looking at things and at mankind by
preference on their pleasant side; it is also in order that we may be
able to love them better and work with more heart for their improvement.
To what purpose, indeed, should we feed our imagination with the
unlovely aspect of persons and things? All unnecessary dwelling upon the
evils of life is at best a useless expenditure of nervous force: and
when I say unnecessary I mean all that is not necessary either in the
sense of being unavoidable, or in that of being needed for the
performance of our duties and for preventing our sense of the reality of
those evils from becoming speculative and dim. But if it is often waste
of strength to dwell on the evils of life, it is worse than waste to
dwell habitually on its meannesses and basenesses. It is necessary to be
aware of them; but to live in their contemplation makes it scarcely
possible to keep up in oneself a high tone of mind. The imagination and
feelings become tuned to a lower pitch; degrading instead of elevating
associations become connected Edition: current; Page: [485] with the
daily objects and incidents of life, and give their colour to the
thoughts, just as associations of sensuality do in those who indulge
freely in that sort of contemplations. Men have often felt what it is to
have had their imaginations corrupted by one class of ideas, and I think
they must have felt with the same kind of pain how the poetry is taken
out of the things fullest of it, by mean associations, as when a
beautiful air that had been associated with highly poetical words is
heard sung with trivial and vulgar ones. All these things are said in
mere illustration of the principle that in the regulation of the
imagination literal truth of facts is not the only thing to be
considered. Truth is the province of reason, and it is by the
cultivation of the rational faculty that provision is made for its being
known always, and thought of as often as is required by duty and the
circumstances of human life. But when the reason is strongly cultivated,
the imagination may safely follow its own end, and do its best to make
life pleasant and lovely inside the castle, in reliance on the
fortifications raised and maintained by Reason round the outward bounds.

On these principles it appears to me that the indulgence of hope with
regard to the government of the universe and the destiny of man after
death, while we recognize as a clear truth that we have no ground for
more than a hope, is legitimate and philosophically defensible. The
beneficial effect of such a hope is far from trifling. It makes life and
human nature a far greater thing to the feelings, and gives greater
strength as well as greater solemnity to all the sentiments which are
awakened in us by our fellow-creatures and by mankind at large. It
allays the sense of that irony of Nature which is so painfully felt when
we see the exertions and sacrifices of a life culminating in the
formation of a wise and noble mind, only to disappear from the world
when the time has just arrived at which the world seems about to begin
reaping the benefit of it. The truth that life is short and art is
long[*] is from of old one of the most discouraging parts of our
condition; this hope admits the possibility that the art employed in
improving and beautifying the soul itself may avail for good in some
other life, even when seemingly useless for this. But the benefit
consists less in the presence of any specific hope than in the
enlargement of the general scale of the feelings; the loftier
aspirations being no longer in the same degree checked and kept down by
a sense of the insignificance of human life—by the disastrous feeling of
“not worth while.” The gain obtained in the increased inducement to
cultivate the improvement of character up to the end of life, is obvious
without being specified.

There is another and a most important exercise of imagination which, in
the past and present, has been kept up principally by means of religious
belief and which is infinitely precious to mankind, so much so that
human excellence greatly depends upon the sufficiency of the provision
made for it. This Edition: current; Page: [486] consists of the
familiarity of the imagination with the conception of a morally perfect
Being, and the habit of taking the approbation of such a Being as the
norma or standard to which to refer and by which to regulate our own
characters and lives. This idealization of our standard of excellence in
a Person is quite possible, even when that Person is conceived as merely
imaginary. But religion, since the birth of Christianity, has inculcated
the belief that our highest conceptions of combined wisdom and goodness
exist in the concerete in a living Being who has his eyes on us and
cares for our good. Through the darkest and most corrupt periods
Christianity has raised this torch on high—has kept this object of
veneration and imitation before the eyes of man. True, the image of
perfection has been a most imperfect, and, in many respects a perverting
and corrupting one, not only from the low moral ideas of the times, but
from the mass of moral contradictions which the deluded worshipper was
compelled to swallow by the supposed necessity of complimenting the Good
Principle with the possession of infinite power. But it is one of the
most universal as well as of the most surprising characteristics of
human nature, and one of the most speaking proofs of the low stage to
which the reason of mankind at large has ever yet advanced, that they
are capable of overlooking any amount of either moral or intellectual
contradictions and receiving into their minds propositions utterly
inconsistent with one another, not only without being shocked by the
contradiction, but without preventing both the contradictory beliefs
from producing a part at least of their natural consequences in the
mind. Pious men and women have gone on ascribing to God particular acts
and a general course of will and conduct incompatible with even the most
ordinary and limited conception of moral goodness, and have had their
own ideas of morality, in many important particulars, totally warped and
distorted, and notwithstanding this have continued to conceive their God
as clothed with all the attributes of the highest ideal goodness which
their state of mind enabled them to conceive, and have had their
aspirations towards goodness stimulated and encouraged by that
conception. And, it cannot be questioned that the undoubting belief of
the real existence of a Being who realizes our own best ideas of
perfection, and of our being in the hands of that Being as the ruler of
the universe, gives an increase of force to these feelings beyond what
they can receive from reference to a merely ideal conception.

This particular advantage it is not possible for those to enjoy, who
take a rational view of the nature and amount of the evidence for the
existence and attributes of the Creator. On the other hand, they are not
encumbered with the moral contradictions which beset every form of
religion which aims at justifying in a moral point of view the whole
government of the world. They are, therefore, enabled to form a far
truer and more consistent Edition: current; Page: [487] conception of
Ideal Goodness, than is possible to any one who thinks it necessary to
find ideal goodness in an omnipotent ruler of the world. The power of
the Creator once recognized as limited, there is nothing to disprove the
supposition that his goodness is complete and that the ideally perfect
character in whose likeness we should wish to form ourselves and to
whose supposed approbation we refer our actions, may have a real
existence in a Being to whom we owe all such good as we enjoy.

Above all, the most valuable part of the effect on the character which
Christianity has produced by holding up in a Divine Person a standard of
excellence and a model for imitation, is available even to the absolute
unbeliever and can never more be lost to humanity. For it is Christ,
rather than God, whom Christianity has held up to believers as the
pattern of perfection for humanity. It is the God incarnate, more than
the God of the Jews or of Nature, who being idealized has taken so great
and salutary a hold on the modern mind. And whatever else may be taken
away from us by rational criticism, Christ is still left; a unique
figure, not more unlike all his precursors than all his followers, even
those who had the direct benefit of his personal teaching. It is of no
use to say that Christ as exhibited in the Gospels is not historical and
that we know not how much of what is admirable has been superadded by
the tradition of his followers. The tradition of followers suffices to
insert any number of marvels, and may have inserted all the miracles
which he is reputed to have wrought. But who among his disciples or
among their proselytes was capable of inventing the sayings ascribed to
Jesus or of imagining the life and character revealed in the Gospels?
Certainly not the fishermen of Galilee; as certainly not St. Paul, whose
character and idiosyncrasies were of a totally different sort; still
less the early Christian writers in whom nothing is more evident than
that the good which was in them was all derived, as they always
professed that it was derived, from the higher source. What could be
added and interpolated by a disciple we may see in the mystical parts of
the Gospel of St. John, matter imported from Philo and the Alexandrian
Platonists and put into the mouth of the Saviour in long speeches about
himself such as the other Gospels contain not the slightest vestige of,
though pretended to have been delivered on occasions of the deepest
interest and when his principal followers were all present; most
prominently at the last supper. The East was full of men who could have
stolen any quantity of this poor stuff, as the multitudinous Oriental
sects of Gnostics afterwards did. But about the life and sayings of
Jesus there is a stamp of personal originality combined with profundity
of insight, which if we abandon the idle expectation of finding
scientific precision where something very different was aimed at, must
place the Prophet of Nazareth, even in the estimation of those who have
no belief in his inspiration, in the very Edition: current; Page: [488]
first rank of the men of sublime genius of whom our species can boast.
When this pre-eminent genius is combined with the qualities of probably
the greatest moral reformer, and martyr to that mission, who ever
existed upon earth, religion cannot be said to have made a bad choice in
pitching on this man as the ideal representative and guide of humanity;
nor, even now, would it be easy, even for an unbeliever, to find a
better translation of the rule of virtue from the abstract into the
concrete, than to endeavour so to live that Christ would approve our
life. When to this we add that, to the conception of the rational
sceptic, it remains a possibility that Christ actually was what he
supposed himself to be—not God, for he never made the smallest
pretension to that character and would probably have thought such a
pretension as blasphemous as it seemed to the men who condemned him—but
a man charged with a special, express and unique commission from God to
lead mankind to truth and virtue; we may well conclude that the
influences of religion on the character which will remain after rational
criticism has done its utmost against the evidences of religion, are
well worth preserving, and that what they lack in direct strength as
compared with those of a firmer belief, is more than compensated by the
greater truth and rectitude of the morality they sanction.

Impressions such as these, though not in themselves amounting to what
can properly be called a religion, seem to me excellently fitted to aid
and fortify that real, though purely human religion, which sometimes
calls itself the Religion of Humanity and sometimes that of Duty. To the
other inducements for cultivating a religious devotion to the welfare of
our fellow-creatures as an obligatory limit to every selfish aim, and an
end for the direct promotion of which no sacrifice can be too great, it
superadds the feeling that in making this the rule of our life, we may
be co-operating with the unseen Being to whom we owe all that is
enjoyable in life. One elevated feeling this form of religious idea
admits of, which is not open to those who believe in the omnipotence of
the good principle in the universe, the feeling of helping God—of
requiting the good he has given by a voluntary co-operation which he,
not being omnipotent, really needs, and by which a somewhat nearer
approach may be made to the fulfilment of his purposes. The conditions
of human existence are highly favourable to the growth of such a feeling
inasmuch as a battle is constantly going on, in which the humblest human
creature is not incapable of taking some part, between the powers of
good and those of evil, and in which every even the smallest help to the
right side has its value in promoting the very slow and often almost
insensible progress by which good is gradually gaining ground from evil,
yet gaining it so visibly at considerable intervals as to promise the
very distant but not uncertain final victory of Good. To do something
during life, on even the humblest scale if nothing more is within reach,
towards bringing this consummation Edition: current; Page: [489] ever so
little nearer, is the most animating and invigorating thought which can
inspire a human creature; and that it is destined, with or without
supernatural sanctions, to be the religion of the Future I cannot
entertain a doubt. But it appears to me that supernatural hopes, in the
degree and kind in which what I have called rational scepticism does not
refuse to sanction them, may still contribute not a little to give to
this religion its due ascendancy over the human mind.

Edition: current; Page: [490] Edition: current; Page: [491]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [492] Edition: current; Page: [493]


Appendix A


Preface to Dissertations and Discussions (1859)

Dissertations and Discussions, I, iii-vi. For a discussion of this
Preface (unaltered in the 2nd ed. of D&D) see the Textual Introduction,
cxviff. above. JSM’s views on republication of his essays is discussed
in the Textual Introduction to Essays on Economics and Society, in
Collected Works, IV, xliv-xlv.

the republication in a more durable form, of papers originally
contributed to periodicals, has grown into so common a practice as
scarcely to need an apology; and I follow this practice the more
willingly, as I hold it to be decidedly a beneficial one. It would be
well if all frequent writers in periodicals looked forward, as far as
the case admitted, to this reappearance of their productions. The
prospect might be some guarantee against the crudity in the formation of
opinions, and carelessness in their expression, which are the besetting
sins of writings put forth under the screen of anonymousness, to be read
only during the next few weeks or months, if so long, and the defects of
which it is seldom probable that any one will think it worth while to
expose.

The following papers, selected from a much greater number, include all
of the writer’s miscellaneous productions which he considers it in any
way desirable to preserve. The remainder were either of too little value
at any time, or what value they might have was too exclusively
temporary, or the thoughts they contained were inextricably mixed up
with comments, now totally uninteresting, on passing events, or on some
book not generally known; or lastly, any utility they may have possessed
has since been superseded by other and more mature writings of the
author.

Every one whose mind is progressive, or even whose opinions keep up with
the changing facts that surround him, must necessarily, in looking back
to his own writings during a series of years, find many things which, if
they were to be written again, he would write differently, and some,
even, which he has altogether ceased to think true. From these last I
have endeavoured to clear the present pages. Beyond this, I have not
attempted to render papers written at so many different, and some of
them at such distant, times, a faithful representation of my present
state of opinion and feeling. I leave them in all their imperfection, as
memorials of the states of mind in which they were written, Edition:
current; Page: [494] in the hope that they may possibly be useful to
such readers as are in a corresponding stage of their own mental
progress. Where what I had written appears a fair statement of part of
the truth, but defective inasmuch as there exists another part
respecting which nothing, or too little, is said, I leave the deficiency
to be supplied by the reader’s own thoughts; the rather, as he will, in
many cases, find the balance restored in some other part of this
collection. Thus, the review of Mr. Sedgwick’s Discourse,[*] taken by
itself, might give an impression of more complete adhesion to the
philosophy of Locke, Bentham, and the eighteenth century, than is really
the case, and of an inadequate sense of its deficiencies; but that
notion will be rectified by the subsequent essays on Bentham and on
Coleridge.[†] These, again, if they stood alone, would give just as much
too strong an impression of the writer’s sympathy with the reaction of
the nineteenth century against the eighteenth: but this exaggeration
will be corrected by the more recent defence of the “greatest happiness”
ethics against Dr. Whewell.[‡]

Only a small number of these papers are controversial, and in but two am
I aware of anything like asperity of tone. In both these cases some
degree of it was justifiable, as I was defending maligned doctrines or
individuals, against unmerited onslaughts by persons who, on the
evidence afforded by themselves, were in no respect entitled to sit in
judgment on them: and the same misrepresentations have been and still
are so incessantly reiterated by a crowd of writers, that emphatic
protests against them are as needful now as when the papers in question
were first written. My adversaries, too, were men not themselves
remarkable for mild treatment of opponents, and quite capable of holding
their own in any form of reviewing or pamphleteering polemics. I believe
that I have in no case fought with other than fair weapons, and any
strong expressions which I have used were extorted from me by my
subject, not prompted by the smallest feeling of personal ill-will
towards my antagonists. In the revision, I have endeavoured to retain
only as much of this strength of expression, as could not be foregone
without weakening the force of the protest.

Edition: current; Page: [495]


Appendix B


Obituary of Bentham (1832)

Examiner, 10 June, 1832, 370-2. This, JSM’s first published commentary
on Bentham, is described in his bibliography as “An obituary notice of
Jeremy Bentham in the Examiner of 10th June 1832” (MacMinn, 21). The
passage reprinted here is the central part of the obituary; the full
text will be found in the volume of this edition given to newspaper
writings. While the tone is more eulogistic, many of the remarks are
paralleled in the more critical account in the Appendix to Bulwer (3-18
above) and in the passage from Bulwer’s text given below in Appendix C.
See also my “John Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham,” 259.

Let it be remembered what was the state of jurisprudence and
legislation, and of the philosophy of jurisprudence and legislation,
when he [Bentham] began his career. A labyrinth without a clue—a jungle,
through which no path had ever been cut. All systems of law then
established, but most of all that in which he himself was nurtured, were
masses of deformity, in the construction of which reason in any shape
whatever had had little to do, a comprehensive consideration of ends and
means nothing at all: their foundation the rude contrivances of a
barbarous age, even more deeply barbarous in this than in aught else;
the superstructure an infinite series of patches, some larger, some
smaller, stuck on in succession wherever a hole appeared, and plastered
one over another until the monstrous mass exceeded all measurable bulk,
and went beyond the reach of the strongest understanding and the finest
memory. Such was the practice of law: was its theory in any better
state? And how could it be so? for of what did that theory consist, but
either of purely technical principles, got at by abstraction from these
established systems, (or rather, constructed, generally in utter
defiance of logic, with the sole view of giving something like coherence
and consistency in appearance to provisions which in reality were
utterly heterogeneous); or of vague cloudy generalities arbitrarily
assumed à priori, and called laws of nature, or principles of natural
law.

Such was existing jurisprudence; and that it should be such, was less
surprising than the superstition by which, being such, it was protected.
The English people had contrived to persuade themselves, and had to a
great degree persuaded the rest of the world, that the English law, as
it was when Edition: current; Page: [496] Mr. Bentham found it, was the
perfection of reason. That it was otherwise, was the only political
heresy, which no one had been found hardy enough to avow; even the
English constitution you might (if you did it very gently) speak ill
of,—but not the English law: Whig, Tory, and Democrat joined in one
chorus of clamorous admiration, whenever the law or the courts of
justice were the subject of discourse: and to doubt the merits of either
appeared a greater stretch of absurdity than to question the doctrine of
gravitation.

This superstition was at its height, when Mr. Bentham betook himself to
the study of English law, with no other object than the ordinary one of
gaining his living by practising a liberal profession. But he soon found
that it would not do for him, and that he could have no dealing or
concern with it in an honest way, except to destroy it. And there is a
deep interest now, at the close of his life, in looking back to his very
first publication, the Fragment on Government, which appeared
considerably more than half a century ago, and which exhibits, at that
remote period, a no less strong and steady conviction than appears in
his very latest production, that the worship of the English law was a
degrading idolatry—that instead of being the perfection of reason, it
was a disgrace to the human understanding—and that a task worthy of him,
or any other wise and brave man, to devote a life to, was that of
utterly eradicating it and sweeping it away. This accordingly became the
task of his own existence: glory to him! for he has successfully
accomplished it. The monster has received from him its death wound.
After losing many a limb, it still drags on, and will drag on for a few
years more, a feeble and exanimate existence; but it never will recover.
It is going down rapidly to the grave.

Mr. Bentham has fought this battle for now almost sixty years; the
greater part of that time without assistance from any human being,
except latterly what M. Dumont gave him in putting his ideas into
French; and for a long time almost without making one human being a
convert to his opinions. He exhausted every mode of attack; he assailed
the enemy with every weapon, and at all points; now he fell upon the
generalities, now upon the details; now he combatted evil by stripping
it naked, and showing that it was evil; and now by contrasting it with
good. At length his energy and perseverance triumphed. Some of the most
potent leaders of the public became convinced; and they, in their turn,
convinced or persuaded others: until at last the English law, as a
systematic whole, is given up by every body, and the question, with all
thinking minds even among lawyers, is no longer about keeping it as it
is, but only whether, in rebuilding, there be a possibility of using any
of the old materials.*

Edition: current; Page: [497]
Mr. Bentham was the original mover in this mighty change. His hand gave
the impulse which set all the others at work. To him the debt is due, as
much as any other great work has ever been owing to the man who first
guided other men to the accomplishment of it. The man who has achieved
this, can afford to die. He has done enough to render his name for ever
illustrious.

But Mr. Bentham has been much more than merely a destroyer. Like all who
discredit erroneous systems by arguments drawn from principles, and not
from mere results, he could not fail, even while destroying the old
edifice, to lay a solid foundation for the new. Indeed he considered it
a positive duty never to assail what is established, without having a
clear view of what ought to be substituted. It is to the intrinsic value
of his speculations on the philosophy of law in general, that he owes
the greater part of his existing reputation; for by these alone is he
known to his continental readers, who are far the most numerous, and by
whom, in general, he is far more justly appreciated than in England.
There are some most important branches of the science of law, which were
in a more wretched state than almost any of the others when he took them
in hand, and which he has so exhausted, that he seems to have left
nothing to be sought by future enquirers; we mean the departments of
Procedure, Evidence, and the Judicial Establishment. He has done almost
all that remained to perfect the theory of punishment. It is with regard
to (what is the foundation of all) the civil code, that he has done
least, and left most to be done. Yet even here his services have been
invaluable, by making far clearer and more familiar than they were
before, both the ultimate and the immediate ends of civil law; the
essential characteristics of a good law; the expediency of codification,
that is, of law written and systematic; by exposing the viciousness of
the existing language of jurisprudence, guarding the student against the
fallacies which lurk in it, and accustoming him to demand a more precise
and logically-constructed nomenclature.

Mr. Bentham’s exertions have not been limited to the field of
jurisprudence, or even to that of general politics, in which he ranks as
the first name among the philosophic radicals. He has extended his
speculations to morals, though never (at least in his published works)
in any great detail; and on this, as on every other subject which he
touched, he cannot be read without great benefit.

Some of his admirers have claimed for him the title of founder of the
science of morals, as well as of the science of legislation; on the
score of his having been the first person who established the principle
of general utility, as the philosophic foundation of morality and law.
But Mr. Bentham’s originality does not stand in need of any such
exaggerations. The doctrine of utility, as the foundation of virtue, he
himself professes to have derived from Hume: he applied it more
consistently and in greater detail, than his predecessors; but the idea
itself is as old as the earliest Greek philosophers, and Edition:
current; Page: [498] has divided the philosophic world, in every age of
philosophy, since their time. Mr. Bentham’s real merit, in respect to
the foundation of morals, consists in his having cleared it more
thoroughly than any of his predecessors, from the rubbish of pretended
natural law, natural justice, and the like, by which men were wont to
consecrate as a rule of morality, whatever they felt inclined to approve
of without knowing why.

The most prominent moral qualities which appear in Mr. Bentham’s
writings, are love of justice, and hatred of imposture: his most
remarkable intellectual endowments, a penetrating deep-sighted
acuteness, precision in the use of scientific language, and sagacity and
inventiveness in matters of detail. There have been few minds so
perfectly original. He has often, we think, been surpassed in powers of
metaphysical analysis, as well as in comprehensiveness and
many-sidedness of mind. He frequently contemplates a subject only from
one or a few of its aspects; though he very often sees further into it,
from the one side on which he looks at it, than was seen before even by
those who had gone all round it. There is something very striking,
occasionally, in the minute elaborateness with which he works out, into
its smallest details, one half-view of a question, contrasted with his
entire neglect of the remaining half-view, though equally indispensable
to a correct judgment of the whole. To this occasional one-sidedness, he
failed to apply the natural cure; for, from the time when he embarked in
original speculation, he occupied himself very little in studying the
ideas of others. This, in almost any other than himself, would have been
a fault; in him, we shall only say, that, but for it, he would have been
a greater man.

Mr. Bentham’s style has been much criticised; and undoubtedly, in his
latter writings, the complicated structure of his sentences renders it
impossible, without some familiarity, to read them with rapidity and
ease. But his earlier, among which are some of his most valuable
productions, are not only free from this defect, but may even, in point
of ease and elegance, be ranked among the best English compositions.
Felicity of expression abounds even in those of his works which are
generally unreadable; and volumes might be filled with passages selected
from his later as well as his earlier publications, which, for wit and
eloquence, have seldom been surpassed.

Edition: current; Page: [499]


Appendix C


Comment on Bentham in Bulwer’s England and the English (1833)

edward lytton bulwer (later Bulwer-Lytton, later 1st Baron Lytton),
England and the English (London: Bentley, 1833), II, 163-70. JSM
comments in his Autobiography (139) that, in addition to the Appendix on
Bentham (the first essay printed above), Bulwer also “incorporated” in
his text “a small part” of JSM’s critique of Bentham. (See Textual
Introduction, cxvi-cxvii above). It cannot be determined which part of
the following passage is JSM’s, but the images of Bentham as destroyer
and reconstructor, the description of Bentham as the great questioner
(cf. 78), the reference to an age of transition, and the suggestion of
Bentham’s seminality, are all typical of his attitude at the time; and
both in wording and idea the fourth paragraph closely approximates
comments on Bentham known to be his.

[In] legislative and moral philosophy, Bentham must assuredly be
considered the most celebrated and influential teacher of the age—a
master, indeed, whom few have acknowledged, but from whom thousands
have, mediately and unconsciously, imbibed their opinions.

The same causes which gave so great a fertility to the school of the
Economists, had their effect upon the philosophy of Bentham; they drew
his genius mainly towards examinations of men rather than of man—of the
defects of Law, and of the hypocrisies and fallacies of our Social
System; they contributed to the material form and genus of his code, and
to those notions of Utility which he considered his own invention, but
which had been incorporated with half the systems that had risen in
Europe since the sensualism of Condillac had been grafted upon the
reflection of Locke. But causes far more latent, and perhaps more
powerful, contributed also to form the mind and philosophy of Bentham.
He had preceded the great French Revolution—the materials of his
thoughts had been compounded from the same foundations of opinion as
those on which the more enlightened advocates of the Revolution would
have built up that edifice which was to defy a second deluge, and which
is but a record of the confusion of the workmen. With the philosophy of
the eighteenth century, which first adopted what the French reasoners
term the Principle of Humanity—(that is, the principle of philanthropy—a
paramount regard for multitudes rather than for sectarian
interests,)—with Edition: current; Page: [500] this philosophy, I say,
the whole mind of Bentham was imbued and saturate. He had no mercy, no
toleration for the knots and companies of men whom he considered
interrupters or monopolists of the power of the many—to his mind they
were invariably actuated by base and designing motives, and such
motives, according to his philosophy, they were even compelled to
entertain. His intellect was as the aqueduct which bore aloft, and over
the wastes and wrecks below, the stream of the philosophy of one century
to the generations of the other. His code of morals, original in its
results, is in many parts (unconsciously to himself) an eclecticism of
nearly all the best parts of the various theories of a century. “The
system of Condillac required its ‘moral’ code, and Helvetius supplied
it.” The moral code of Helvetius required its legislative, and in
Bentham it obtained it. I consider, then, that two series of causes
conspired to produce Bentham—the one national, the other belonging to
all Europe; the same causes on the one hand which produced with us the
Economists—the same causes on the other hand which produced in France,
Helvetius and Diderot, Volney, Condorcet, and Voltaire. He combined what
had not been yet done, the spirit of the Philanthropic with that of the
Practical. He did not declaim about abuses; he went at once to their
root: he did not idly penetrate the sophistries of Corruption; he smote
Corruption herself. He was the very Theseus of legislative reform,—he
not only pierced the labyrinth—he destroyed the monster.

As he drew his vigour from the stream of Change, all his writings tended
to their original source. He collected from the Past the scattered
remnants of a defeated innovation, and led them on against the Future.
Every age may be called an age of transition—the passing on, as it were,
from one state to another never ceases; but in our age the transition is
visible, and Bentham’s philosophy is the philosophy of a visible
transition. Much has already happened, much is already happening every
instant, in his country—throughout Europe—throughout the world, which
might not have occurred if Bentham had not been; yet of all his works,
none have been read by great numbers; and most of them, from their
difficulties of style and subject, have little chance of ever being
generally popular. He acted upon the destinies of his race by
influencing the thoughts of a minute fraction of the few who think—from
them the broad principles travelled onward—became known—(their source
unknown)—became familiar and successful. I have said that we live in an
age of visible transition—an age of disquietude and doubt—of the removal
of time-worn landmarks, and the breaking up of the hereditary elements
of society—old opinions, feelings—ancestral customs and institutions are
crumbling away, and both the spiritual and temporal worlds are darkened
by the shadow of change. The commencement of one of these
epochs—periodical in the history of mankind—is hailed by the sanguine as
the coming of a new Millennium—a great inconoclastic reformation, by
which all false gods Edition: current; Page: [501] shall be overthrown.
To me such epochs appear but as the dark passages in the appointed
progress of mankind—the times of greatest unhappiness to our
species—passages into which we have no reason to rejoice at our
entrance, save from the hope of being sooner landed on the opposite
side. Uncertainty is the greatest of all our evils. And I know of no
happiness where there is not a firm unwavering belief in its duration.

The age then is one of destruction! disguise it as we will, it must be
so characterized; miserable would be our lot were it not also an age of
preparation for reconstructing. What has been the influence of Bentham
upon his age?—it has been twofold—he has helped to destroy and also to
rebuild. No one has done so much to forward, at least in this country,
the work of destruction, as Mr. Bentham. The spirit of examination and
questioning has become through him, more than through any one person
besides, the prevailing spirit of the age. For he questioned all things.
The tendencies of a mind at once sceptical and systematic, (and both in
the utmost possible degree,) made him endeavour to trace all speculative
phenomena back to their primitive elements, and to reconsider not only
the received conclusions, but the received premises. He treated all
subjects as if they were virgin subjects, never before embraced or
approached by man. He never set up an established doctrine as a thesis
to be disputed about, but put it aside altogether, commenced from first
principles, and deliberately tasked himself systematically to discover
the truth, or to re-discover it if it were already known. By this
process, if he ever annihilated a received opinion, he was sure of
having something either good or bad to offer as a substitute for it; and
in this he was most favourably distinguished from those French
philosophers who preceded and even surpassed him, as destroyers of
established institutions on the continent of Europe. And we shall owe
largely to one who reconstructed while he destroyed, if our country is
destined to pass more smoothly through this crisis of transition than
the nations of the continent, and to lose less of the good it already
enjoys in working itself free from the evil;—his be the merit, if while
the wreck of the old vessel is still navigable, the masts of the new
one, which brings relief, are dimly showing themselves above the
horizon! For it is certain, and will be seen every day more clearly,
that the initiation of all the changes which are now making in opinions
and in institutions, may be claimed chiefly by men who have been
indebted to his writings, and to the spirit of his philosophy, for the
most important part of their intellectual cultivation.

I had originally proposed in this part of my work to give a slight
sketch of the principal tenets of Bentham, with an exposition of what I
conceive to be his errors; pointing out at once the benefits he has
conferred, and also the mischief he has effected. But slight as would be
that sketch, it must necessarily be somewhat abstract; and I have
therefore, for the sake of the general Edition: current; Page: [502]
reader, added it to the volume in the form of an appendix.* I have
there, regarding him as a legislator and a moralist, ventured to
estimate him much more highly in the former capacity than the latter;
endeavouring to combat the infallibility of his application of the
principle of Utility, and to show the dangerous and debasing theories,
which may be, and are, deduced from it. Even, however, in legislation,
his greatest happiness principle is not so clear and undeniable as it is
usually conceded to be. “The greatest happiness of the greatest number”
is to be our invariable guide! Is it so?—the greatest happiness of the
greatest number of men living, I suppose, not of men to come; for if of
all posterity, what legislator can be our guide? who can prejudge the
future? Of men living, then?—well—how often would their greatest
happiness consist in concession to their greatest errors.

In the dark ages, (said once to me very happily the wittiest writer of
the day, and one who has perhaps done more to familiarize Bentham’s
general doctrines to the public than any other individual,) in the dark
ages, it would have been for the greatest happiness of the greatest
number of burn the witches; it must have made the greatest number, (all
credulous of wizardry,) very uncomfortable to refuse their request for
so reasonable a conflagration; they would have been given up to fear and
disquietude—they would have imagined their safety disregarded and their
cattle despised—if witches were to live with impunity, riding on
broomsticks, and sailing in oyster-shells;—their happiness demanded a
bonfire of old women. To grant such a bonfire would have been really to
consult the greatest happiness of the greatest number, yet ought it to
have been the principle of wise, nay, of perfect, (for so the dogma
states,) of unimpugnable legislation? In fact, the greatest happiness
principle, is an excellent general rule, but it is not an undeniable
axiom.

Edition: current; Page: [503]


Appendix D


Quotation from “Coleridge” in Mill’s System of Logic (8th ed., 1872), 519-23 (VI, x, 5)

As indicated in the Textual Introduction, there is little evidence
concerning the dating of the revisions of the essays in Dissertations
and Discussions between their first periodical publication and their
republication in 1859. However, Mill’s inclusion in his Logic of the
long passage from “Coleridge” printed below supplies some interesting
internal evidence.

The variant notes give all the substantive changes in the three versions
of “Coleridge” and the nine versions of the Logic. The “Coleridge”
versions are indicated by italic numerals: 40 = the periodical version,
1840; 59 = Dissertations and Discussions, 1st ed., 1859; 67 =
Dissertations and Discussions, 2nd ed., 1867. The Logic versions are
indicated by numerals in roman type: MS = manuscript (1840, with
revisions through 1842); 43 = 1st ed., 1843; 46 = 2nd ed., 1846; 51 =
3rd ed., 1851; 56 = 4th ed., 1856; 62 = 5th ed., 1862; 65 = 6th ed.,
1865; 68 = 7th ed., 1868; 72 = 8th ed., 1872 (the last in Mill’s
lifetime).

An examination of the variants, substantive and accidental (the latter
not here recorded), shows that there are two main groups: in the first
and larger group, 59 and 67 (the 1st and 2nd eds. of D&D) agree with 51
and subsequent eds. of the Logic, but not with 40 (the periodical
version) or MS, 43, 46 (the manuscript and first two eds. of the Logic);
in the second, 59 and 67 agree with 40 and MS, 43, 46, but not with 51
and subsequent eds. of the Logic. Changes in the Logic that appear only
prior to or subsequent to 1851 did not affect the text of 59 and 67;
similarly, changes in 59 and 67 that do not appear in 51 do not appear
in subsequent eds. of the Logic. In the absence of external evidence, of
marked proof, and of all copy-texts except the manuscript of the Logic,
the most likely explanation of these phenomena is that Mill, after
having copied the passage into the Logic MS, revised the “Coleridge”
with a view to republication (which did not occur until 1859); these
revisions he transferred to the Logic when making the most extensive
rewriting of that work, that is, for the 3rd ed. (1851). The revised
“Coleridge,” with no further changes except a few accidentals, became
the copy-text for 59. Further, it appears that when the time came for
printing the 3rd ed. of the Logic, Mill made a few further changes,
probably in proof, changes that are retained in subsequent eds. of the
Logic, but do not appear in the reprinted “Coleridge” of 59 and 67.

The terminus ab quo for the revision of “Coleridge” is, therefore, some
time after the writing of the MS of Book VI of the Logic (1840-42); the
terminus ad quem is between the beginning of the revision of the 3rd ed.
of the Logic and its printing (1851). This conclusion is not very
startling, as it narrows the possible time, that is, the time between
printings (1840 and 1859), by less than half; still, it places the
revision before Mill’s marriage, and bears out the contention in the
Edition: current; Page: [504] Textual Introduction. Some slight evidence
suggests a date near the beginning of the possible period. The final
variant in the passage, the earlier form of which appears only in 40 and
MS, would by itself seem to upset the argument above and, even in the
context of the other changes, is inconclusive as to the transmission of
text; one can tentatively infer, however, that if the change was made
first in the proof of the Logic, the “Coleridge” was revised not later
than 1843, whereas if it was first made in the revision of the
“Coleridge,” that revision was not later than 1842. Also, when John
Parker agreed, in the spring of 1842, to publish the Logic, he turned
down the suggestion that he publish the collection that later appeared
as Dissertations and Discussions; Mill then proposed to publish the
collection himself (see Earlier Letters, XIII, 514, 520-1). Again,
therefore, it would appear likely that the revisions were made in
1842-43.

Mill prefaces the passage in the Logic with the comment that it is
“extracted, with some alterations, from a criticism on the negative
philosophy of the eighteenth century” (in MS, 43, 46 the reading is
“forming part of a criticism on the negative philosophy of the
eighteenth century”); actually the major alterations, as already
indicated, were probably made in that criticism (i.e., in “Coleridge”),
and not for the Logic. Only one change, the deletion in the Logic of a
long footnote (508o), was made in the interests of the new context.

The passage is introduced in the Logic as an example of results that,
although they “amount in themselves only to empirical laws . . . are
found to follow with so much probability from general laws of human
nature, that the consilience of the two processes raises the evidence to
proof [MS,43,46 to complete proof], and the generalizations to the rank
of scientific truths.” In a typical phrase, he apologizes for the
quotation, saying: “. . . I quote, though (as in some former instances)
from myself, because I have no better way of illustrating the conception
I have formed of the kind of theorems of which sociological statics
would consist.”

aThe very first element of the social union, obedience to a government
of some sort, has not been found so easy a thing to establish in the
world. Among a timid and spiritless race like the inhabitants of the
vast plains of tropical countries, passive obedience may be of natural
growth; though even there we doubt whether it has ever been found among
any people with whom fatalism, or in other words, submission to the
pressure of circumstances as ba divine decreeb, did not prevail as a
religious doctrine. But the difficulty of inducing a brave and warlike
race to submit their individual arbitrium to any common umpire, has
always been felt to be so great, that nothing short of supernatural
power has been deemed adequate to overcome it; and such tribes have
always assigned to the first institution of civil society a divine
origin. So differently did those judge who knew savage cmenc by actual
experience, from those who had no acquaintance with dthemd except in the
civilized state. In modern Europe itself, after the fall of the Roman
empire, to subdue the feudal Edition: current; Page: [505] anarchy and
bring the whole people of any European nation into subjection to
government (though Christianity in ethee most concentrated form fof its
influencef was co-operatingg in the work) required thrice as many
centuries as have elapsed since that time.

Now if these philosophers had known human nature under any other type
than that of their own age, and of the particular classes of society
among whom they hlivedh, it would have occurred to them, that wherever
this habitual submission to law and government has been firmly and
durably established, and yet the vigour and manliness of character which
resisted its establishment have been in any degree preserved, certain
requisites have existed, certain conditions have been fulfilled, of
which the following may be regarded as the principal.

First: there has existed, for all who were accounted citizens,—for all
who were not slaves, kept down by brute force,—a system of education,
beginning with infancy and continued through life, of which whatever
else it might include, one main and incessant ingredient was restraining
discipline. To train the human being in the habit, and thence the power,
of subordinating his personal impulses and aims, to what were considered
the ends of society; of adhering, against all temptation, to the course
of conduct which those ends prescribed; of controlling in himself alli
feelings which were liable to militate against those ends, and
encouraging all such as tended towards them; this was the purpose, to
which every outward motive that the authority directing the system could
command, and every inward power or principle which its knowledge of
human nature enabled it to evoke, were endeavoured to be rendered
instrumental. jThe entire civil and military policy of the ancient
commonwealths was such a system of training; in modern nations its place
has been attempted to be supplied, principally, by religious teaching.j
And whenever and in proportion as the strictness of kthe restrainingk
discipline was relaxed, the natural tendency of mankind to anarchy
re-asserted itself; the state became disorganized from within; mutual
conflict for selfish ends, neutralized the energies which were required
to keep up the contest against natural causes of evil; and the nation,
after a longer or briefer interval of progressive decline, became either
the slave of a despotism, or the prey of a foreign invader.

Edition: current; Page: [506]
The second condition of permanent political society has been found to
be, the existence, in some form or other, of the feeling of allegiance
or loyalty. This feeling may vary in its objects, and is not confined to
any particular form of government; but whether in a democracy or in a
monarchy, its essence is always the same; viz. that there be in the
constitution of the state something which is settled, something
permanent, and not to be called in question; something which, by general
agreement, has a right to be where it is, and to be secure against
disturbance, whatever else may change. This feeling may attach itself,
as among the Jews (andl in most of the commonwealths of antiquity), to a
common God or gods, the protectors and guardians of their state. Or it
may attach itself to certain persons, who are deemed to be, whether by
divine appointment, by long prescription, or by the general recognition
of their superior capacity and worthiness, the rightful guides and
guardians of the rest. Or it may mconnect itself with laws; with ancient
liberties or ordinances. Or, finally, (and this is the only shape in
which the feeling is likely to exist hereafter), it may attach itself to
the principles of individual freedom and political and social equality,
as realized in institutions which as yet exist nowhere, or exist only in
a rudimentary state.m But in all political societies which have had a
durable existence, there has been some fixed point: something which
npeoplen oagreedo in holding sacred; whichp, wherever freedom of
discussion was a recognised principle, it was of coursep lawful to
contest in theory, but which no one could either fear or hope to see
shaken in practice; which, in short (except perhaps during some
temporary crisis) was in the common estimation placed qbeyondq
discussion. And the necessity of this may easily be made evident. A
state never is, nor until mankind are vastly improved, can hope to be,
for any long time exempt from internal dissension; for there neither is
nor has ever been any state of society in which collisions did not occur
between the immediate interests and passions of powerful sections of the
people. What, then, enables rnationsr to weather these storms, and pass
through turbulent times without any permanent weakening of the
ssecurities for peaceable existences? Precisely this—that however
important the interests about which men tfellt out, the conflict udidu
not affect the fundamental Edition: current; Page: [507] vprinciplev of
the system of social union which whappenedw to exist; nor threaten large
portions of the community with the subversion of that on which they
xhadx built their calculations, and with which their hopes and aims
yhady become identified. But when the questioning of these fundamental
principles is (not zthez occasional disease, aor salutary medicine,a
but) the habitual condition of the body politic, and when all the
violent animosities are called forth, which spring naturally from such a
situation, the state is virtually in a position of civil war; and can
never long remain free from it in act and fact.

The third essential condition bof stability in political societyb, is a
strong and active principle of ccohesion among the members of the same
community or statec. We need scarcely say that we do not mean
dnationality, in the vulgar sense of the term;d a senseless antipathy to
foreigners;e findifference to the general welfare of the human race, or
an unjust preference of the supposed interests of our own country;fg a
cherishing of hbadh peculiarities because they are national, or a
refusal to adopt what has been found good by other countries.i We mean a
principle of sympathy, not of hostility; of union, not of separation. We
mean a feeling of common interest among those who live under the same
government, and are contained within the same natural or historical
boundaries. We mean, that one part of the community jdoj not consider
themselves as foreigners with regard to another part; that they kset a
value on their connexion—kfeel that they are one people, that their lot
is cast together, that evil to any of their fellow-countrymen is evil to
themselves, and ldo not desire selfishly tol free themselves from their
share of any common inconvenience by severing the connexion. How strong
this feeling was in mthosem ancient commonwealths nwhich attained any
durable greatness,n Edition: current; Page: [508] every one knows. How
happily Rome, in spite of all her tyranny, succeeded in establishing the
feeling of a common country among the provinces of her vast and divided
empire, will appear when any one who has given due attention to the
subject shall take the trouble to point it out.o In modern times the
countries which have had that feeling in the strongest degree have been
the most powerful countries; England, France, and, in proportion to
their territory and resources, Holland and Switzerland; while England in
her connexion with Ireland, is one of the most signal examples of the
consequences of its absence. Every Italian knows why Italy is under a
foreign yoke; every German knows what maintains despotism in the
Austrian empire;* the pevilsp of Spain flow as much from the absence of
nationality among the Spaniards themselves, as from the presence of it
in their relations with foreigners: while the completest illustration of
all is afforded by the republics of South America, where the parts of
one and the same state adhere so slightly together, that no sooner does
any province think itself aggrieved by the general government than it
proclaims itself a separate nation.

Edition: current; Page: [509]

